
Walking down Via Filadelfia, in the Lingotto district of Turin, eventually 
leads to the Stadio Olimpico, home ofTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> FC. Along the way is a building 
site in a residential area, which on first glance could be mistaken for any 
ordinary urban regeneration project. It is only on closer inspection that you 
can see some eerie looking parts of an old concrete football stand. The 
graffiti scribbled along one wall that reads“Vecchio Cuore Granata” provides a 
hint of the building site’s significance.

After being closed in 1963 and all but demolished in 1998, the Stadio 
Filadelfia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stadio_Filadelfia> is being 
redeveloped after numerous failed attempts. This is no ordinary undertaking, as 
the crumbling old ground is, as the poignant street art says, home to the old 
heart of this once dominant club. To this day it still carries a unique history 
that is deeply embedded in the soul of anyone who ever cheered for Torino.

To understand the emotion surrounding this current undertaking, one must 
travel up the well maintained tramline to the site of the plane crash that 
killed the entireGrande Torino team on 4 May 1949. The steep, 20-minute journey 
on a railway that has been in operation since 1884 provides a perfect 
opportunity to reflect on the sheer altitude of the crash site, some 425 metres 
above sea level.

On arrival at the summit, the location of the crash is not visible, with the 
imposing structure of the 300-year-oldBasilica di Superga dominating the 
landscape. The atmosphere is always serene and quiet, the sun often shining 
brightly over the fog that envelops the city below. There is no hint of a 
tribute, other than a sign pointing to a memorial commemorating the “Caduti di 
Superga.”

Torino: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2015/apr/16/torino-serie-a-alternative-club-guide-lentini>
Caduti is a word used by Italians to describe those lost in battle, but here 
“the fallen” are the players and club officials, journalists and flight crew of 
a crash that left no survivors. Around the back of the church, there is no 
brash, tourist centred memorial but instead a subtle and understated reminder 
of a tragedy which has not only had an immeasurable impact on Torino FC but the 
wider world of football ever since.

Mounted to the wall is a picture of the team in their Granata shirts, and a 
memorial stone which mentions all of the deceased by name. Under the headingI 
Campioni d’ Italia,the player’s names are carved into the stone, made equal by 
an alphabetical list. The only stand out name is Valentino Mazzola, who has 
(cap.) next to his name.

A symbol of the team who found unparalleled success, Mazzola often inspired 
his teammates to victory single-handedly. Mario Rigamonti, who also perished at 
Superga, once said “Valentino alone is half the squad, and the other half is 
made up of the rest of us together.” Mazzola’s importance is recognised on a 
bull shaped plaque which lists every Torino captain that has followed in his 
footsteps, right up to current skipper Kamil Glik.

In keeping with what is now a club tradition, the Poland international takes 
his turn to lead the current team on their annual pilgrimage up the hill to 
Superga on 4 May, taking a captain’s wreath in an act of remembrance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftorino-fans-home-stadium-turin-crowdfund%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b266fe9a9f32f8055c2e492405b96d77f1f04f4%2F0_73_2441_2000%2F2441.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Torino%20work%20with%20their%20fans%20to%20resurrect%20their%20old%20home%20and%20honour%20their%20greats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftorino-fans-home-stadium-turin-crowdfund%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Torino%20work%20with%20their%20fans%20to%20resurrect%20their%20old%20home%20and%20honour%20their%20greats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftorino-fans-home-stadium-turin-crowdfund%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b266fe9a9f32f8055c2e492405b96d77f1f04f4%2F0_73_2441_2000%2F2441.jpg>
 The Basilica of Superga, where the Grande Torino team crashed in 1949. 
Photograph: Chloe Beresford 
Il Grande Torino began an unbeaten streak at the Stadio Filadelfia on 17 
January 1943 that was only halted by their tragic deaths more than six years 
later. This incredible winning run at home spanned 100 games. In the five 
seasons from 1942-43 to 1948-49, the team scored 440 goals and only lost 17 of 
their 170 league matches.

These formidable players had so dominated the Italian national team that on 
one famous occasion in a friendly against Hungary 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qIMyUAuTnDo>, all 10 outfield players belonged 
to Torino. After seeing many of their best players wiped out at Superga, the
Azzurri struggled to recover and were unable to emerge from the group stages of 
the next five tournaments, before eventually finishing as runners up in the 
1970 World Cup.

It is no surprise that Torino, who lost all of their players barring three who 
had not been on the aircraft, suffered greatly after the disaster. Having been 
invincible over the course of those six years, a steady decline after the crash 
led to eventual relegation to Serie B in 1959.

Legacy of the Grande Torino puts Serie A league position in perspective, 
writes Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/may/04/serie-a-grande-great-torino-superga>
It was during the same year that Torino president Ferruccio Novo – having 
placed the stadium in the hands of the Italian football association – gave the 
go ahead for the Filadelfia to become a public space and potentially be 
demolished. The team temporarily moved to the Stadio Communale, but after 
relegation they moved back to the Filadelfia, until the last match was played 
there in 1963, after which they made the switch to what is now the Olimpico.

Intrinsically linked to the success and ultimate demise of Il Grande Torino, 
there has been a longstanding desire among the Toro fans to see their former 
home rebuilt. In its current dilapidated state, it only serves as a reminder of 
the desolation caused by Superga, and many attempts have been made to revive it 
in the past.

In 2011, a new idea was formed to resurrect the old stadium, located at No36 
via Filadelfia.Income streams for the project 
<http://toro-supporters-network.org/le-immagini-del-nuovo-stadio-filadelfia/> 
have included pulling in money from the local council, Torino FC and various 
fan groups, while financial assistance is now being sought throughcrowdfunding 
<http://www.calcioefinanza.it/2015/10/17/crowdfunding-filadelfia-torino/?lang=en>
.

After so many false dawns, a group of 10,000 fans turned out for the laying of 
the foundation stone for the new structure last autumn. It is hoped that the 
construction will take exactly a year to complete. The date carries major 
significance, with ground broken on 17 October, meaning the stadium is set to 
reopen exactly 90 years after the Filadelfia hosted its first match.

The first team will continue to play at the Olimpico, but the new facility 
will serve as a modern training centre. The home of the greatest Torino team in 
history will also be used to provide for the club’s future, with youth team 
fixtures set to be played in the 4,200-seat stadium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftorino-fans-home-stadium-turin-crowdfund%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F349ade016ba76a8aa52a9254345fee0c78db7c42%2F0_187_2513_1507%2F2513.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Torino%20work%20with%20their%20fans%20to%20resurrect%20their%20old%20home%20and%20honour%20their%20greats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftorino-fans-home-stadium-turin-crowdfund%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Torino%20work%20with%20their%20fans%20to%20resurrect%20their%20old%20home%20and%20honour%20their%20greats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftorino-fans-home-stadium-turin-crowdfund%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F349ade016ba76a8aa52a9254345fee0c78db7c42%2F0_187_2513_1507%2F2513.jpg>
 Torino supporters welcome Juventus to the Stadio Olimpico for the Turin derby 
in April 2015. Photograph: Andrea Di Marco/AP 
The plans also provide room for a museum to immortalise those players lost in 
the tragedy, but perhaps the most poignant gesture of all will be found in two 
of the four corners of the stadium. Past will meet present as the old concrete 
corners of the stand will remain and become part of the new design.

The remaining original aspects of the site currently create a similar 
atmosphere to that at Superga, providing an opportunity for quiet contemplation 
of the magnitude of what happened back in 1949. It is clear that this date is 
never far from the hearts and minds of Torino fans, as a short walk down to the 
Stadio Olimpico leads to the area outside the stadium which is appropriately 
namedPiazzale Grande Torino 
<http://torinofc.it/news-photogallery/29/11/2012/fotogallery-cerimonia-dinaugurazione-del-piazzale-grande-torino_853>
.

Superga will always remain a place to mourn the loss of that wonderful team, 
but the new stadium – complete with remnants of the old stands – will finally 
give fans a place to celebrate their greatness. Thanks to the hard work and 
dedication of their supporters, the Filadelfia will no longer serve as a 
haunting reminder of the club’s tragic past, but instead will become home to 
Torino’s future.

• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://www.thegentlemanultra.com/>
• Follow Chloe Beresford <https://twitter.com/ChloeJBeresford> and The 
Gentleman Ultra <https://twitter.com/TheGUltraSite> on Twitter
 