
"Botta e risposta," read Sunday night's top headline on Tuttosport.com – 
"Punch and counterpunch". Above it were two pictures of Carlos Tevez, looking 
understandably unimpressed as he reclined on a sofa to show off four dark red 
holes in his right ankle. There had been no literal fisticuffs involved here, 
of course; such damage could have been done only by the studs on another 
player's boot.

But the photos had been deployed by Tevez as a metaphorical jab at Torino, when
he posted them on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/carlitos3210/status/384387211443318784> earlier that 
evening. His club, Juventus, had been trading blows with their city rivals all 
afternoon.

Their bout nominally began at lunchtime, when the season's first Derby della 
Mole kicked off. The first half was devoid of footballing haymakers. Aligned in 
matching 3-5-2 formations, both teams concentrated on maintaining their shape 
and avoiding mistakes. Gazzetta dello Sport's Luigi Garlando commented that: "A 
conference about prime numbers would have been more exciting."

The only incident was the foul that caused Tevez's injury, Ciro Immobile 
crashing into the striker recklessly from behind. With his boot off the ground 
and no hope of winning the ball, theTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> forward was fortunate to receive 
only a booking, although Tevez was able to carry on after treatment.

In the second half Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> 
gradually forced the Granata on to the ropes, probing their rivals' defences. 
And in the 54th minute they found a way through, Paul Pogba nodding the ball 
home from close range after Leonardo Bonucci's header from a corner was 
diverted on to the crossbar by Tevez.

The Argentinian, though, had been in an offside position. Torino had suffered 
a low blow but the officials had missed it; the goal stood, and Juventus went 
on to win 1-0. It was the second time in as many games that the champions had 
benefited from a poor offside decision, their2-1 win over Chievo on Wednesday 
having been greatly helped by a strike being wrongly disallowed for their 
opponents. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/sep/26/roma-serie-a-wacky-wednesday>
.

Antonio Conte argued that his team had deserved their victory on Sunday 
anyway. "Sometimes decisions go against you, sometimes for you," said the 
Juventus manager. "If there had been a red card [for Immobile], then Torino 
would have played the whole game with 10 men and I don't know how it would have 
finished.

"But you also have to work from the assumption that when a team has the ball 
for 70 minutes and attacks with it, they will inevitably have more 
opportunities – including questionable ones. When your opponents don't ever get 
into your area, it's hard for such incidents to break in their favour."

Torino were not so impressed with Conte's sums. Not long after he had spoken, 
a statement was published on their club website 
<http://torinofc.it/news/29/09/2013/ma-come-conta-conte_3374> under the 
headline: But how is Conte counting?

"You have to ask yourself what abacus Conte was using to measure possession, 
given that the statistics published on the Lega Calcio's website showed 
Juventus with 52% possession compared to Torino's 48%," it read. "Juventus's 
superiority really was not all that overwhelming …

"The truth is that Juventus won the derby 1-0 and that 1-0 was coloured by a 
very obvious offside. The rest is just pointless chatter. Conte was clearly 
much better at Italian in school than he was at mathematics."

Rather than defend their manager, Juventus's media team decided to take that 
ball and run with it. "It's true we're not much good at maths,"they tweeted 
from the official team account 
<https://twitter.com/juventusfc/status/384392876890669056>, "But we can get as 
high as 0, the number of shots on goal that @TorinoFC_1906 had!" A link was 
includedto a piece on their own club site 
<http://www.juventus.com/juve/it/news/neanche+un+tiro+subito!>, which described 
Gigi Buffon as a "non-paying spectator".

Soon after, Tevez posted the photos of his injury 
<https://twitter.com/carlitos3210/status/384387211443318784>. "We always win 
because of the help we get," read his accompanying comment. "I guess that's why 
I'm now in this condition. And only a yellow card for the person who nearly 
broke my ankle."

Despite the odd wry chuckle at the respective PR departments' wit, it all 
added up to an unedifying spectacle for both teams. The debates over the 
various contentious refereeing decisions in this match will doubtless drag on 
for days, although it is certainly clear that the goal should not have stood. 
And simple dominance does not earn you the "right" to a victory, as Juventus 
have already discovered this season in Copenhagen.

On the other hand, Torino's failure to generate a shot on target certainly 
came as a disappointment to their fans. The Granata have not won this derby 
since 1995, nor even scored in one since 2002, but hopes were high that this 
was the moment to put an end to such statistics. Juventus had conceded in each 
of their previous five games across all competitions, while Alessio Cerci's 
scintillating form had helped Torino to score six goals in their last three.

Their manager, Giampiero Ventura, had given us advanced warning of his 
cautious gameplan, saying: "If I have [Mike] Tyson opposite me, then I'm going 
to try to play him at draughts, not trade punches". But even board game players 
need to know how to launch an offensive at some stage.

Nor, if the truth be told, are Juventus playing with much of a Tyson-esque 
swagger. The Bianconeri do sit joint second, alongside Napoli and just two 
points behind Roma, but four of their five victories inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> have come by a single 
goal.

Conte's rotation policy has come under scrutiny, with Andrea Pirlo substituted 
twice already this season and seeming to react badly to it – heading straight 
down the tunnel after being withdrawn against Verona. The manager promptly 
introduced a new team rule that requires substituted players to sit on the 
bench and watch the remainder of a game unless given leave to do otherwise.

Pirlo, who did not even make it off the bench on Sunday, has not made the 
brightest of starts but the speculation that he might not extend his contract 
past the end of this year is likely overblown. Conte is blessed with strong 
options in central midfield, and this has been a congested start to the 
campaign, with fixtures coming thick and fast for teams in continental 
competition.

"It's clear that without Pirlo we lose a little quality," he said on Sunday, 
"but we need to rotate; we want to carry on right to the end of every 
competition."

Pirlo is expected to start on Wednesday against Galatasaray, though it remains 
to be seen if Tevez will make it. Conte is well aware of the game's importance. 
After drawing away to Copenhagen in their opening Champions League fixture, it 
does not take to be a great mathematician to understand how valuable three 
points could be to Juve's cause.

Talking points

• Francesco Totti celebrated his 37th birthday on Friday with one of the best 
cakes you will ever see 
<https://twitter.com/Brienzina/status/383578129542811650/photo/1>. Two days 
later, Roma continued their incredible start to the campaign by hammering 
Bologna 5-0. Totti was in fine form, teeing up two of the goals, but the 
consensus was that the man of the match was Gervinho, who scored twice and 
terrorised these opponents with his direct running. Has Rudi Garcia already 
reinvigorated the career of a man who did so well for him at Lille? Maybe. 
Certainly it seems no more implausible than the notion that Roma could score 17 
goals in their first six games while conceding just the one. The Giallorossi 
had never even begun a season with five consecutive wins before Wednesday. The 
next two rounds will provide a sterner test of this team's mettle, however – 
taking them to San Siro to face Inter next Sunday, then back home to host 
Napoli after the international break.

• Fabio Liverani's first management job at the senior level lasted just six 
games, the 37-year-old getting the hook in Genoa following their 2-0 defeat at 
home toNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>. His team had 
collected four points thus far, their only win being the 3-0 rout of Sampdoria 
in the derby. In his place arrives Gian Piero Gasperini, who is expected to 
sign a three-year contract on Monday, and who managed the club between 2006 and 
2010. He is reported not to have spoken to the Genoa owner, Enrico Preziosi, 
since their somewhat acrimonious split, but both parties have seen their 
fortunes take a turn for the worse since they parted ways.

• The arrival of Valter Birsa from Genoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> did not go down all that well with 
Milan's fans this summer, the signing of a player who had failed to hold down a 
regular spot while on loan at Torino last season being considered emblematic of 
an underwhelming transfer campaign. He might just have won over one or two new 
admirers by scoring the winner against Sampdoria on Tuesday, in a game that 
otherwise might easily have finished as a goalless stalemate between uninspired 
teams.

• A note of warning for Arsenal fans before the Champions League game with 
Napoli on Tuesday: after beating Genoa this weekend, the Partenopei have now 
scored 16 goals in seven games across all competitions. No one has yet kept a 
clean sheet against them.

• Sassuolo must be wishing that they had played Inter sooner. Since being 
humiliated 7-0 by the Nerazzurri, Eusebio Di Francesco's side have drawn with 
Napoli and now Lazio. Sassuolo do still find themselves joint-last in the 
table, moving level with Sampdoria after their previous fellow 
basement-dwellers, Catania, got their first win of the campaign at home toChievo
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo>.

• Verona defeated Livorno 2-1 in a match-up between the two remaining 
newly-promoted clubs. The star of the show was the 20-year-old Argentinian 
whirlwind Juan Iturbe, who opened the scoring with a glorious free-kick from 
distance and effectively set up the winner – sending over the cross which 
prompted Pasquale Schiattarella to lean into Luca Toni and give away a 
(somewhat generous) penalty. Switching fromtrequartista out to the wings and 
back on his first senior start, Iturbe was raw and at times selfish in 
possession, but too naturally gifted to be ignored. His development will be fun 
to watch.

Results Atalanta 2-0 Udinese, Cagliari 1-1 Inter, Catania 2-0 Chievo, Genoa 
0-2 Napoli,Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> 1-0 Sampdoria, 
Roma 5-0 Bologna, Sassuolo 2-2 Lazio, Torino 0-1 Juventus, Verona 2-1 Livorno.

Latest Serie A table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>
 