
There were a few, subtle, lost-in-translation moments during Joe Hart’s 
introductory press conference forTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> this month. When the club 
president, Urbano Cairo, hailed his new signing’s physical presence, the 
interpreter swapped the word “tall” for “high”. Happily, nobody took this 
honest mistake for a comment on how the player might like to unwind.

Later on, an Italian journalist asked Hart whether he thought Torino could 
qualify for Europe. But the interpreter put the question more vaguely, asking 
simply whether he thought that theGranata could have a strong season. “Of 
course,” came the reply. “We believe heavily in what we’re doing here.”

Perhaps Hart would have answered just as emphatically even knowing the full 
context of the question. Or maybe he understood fully what he was being asked, 
using the limited Italian he has learned so far. But certainly few other people 
would have concluded that Torino looked capable of a top-five finish, as they 
laboured to a 0-0 draw at home to Empoli two days later.


Joe Hart helps Torino to win over Roma as Francesco Totti scores 250th Serie A 
goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/torino-roma-joe-hart-match-report-serie-a>
Hart did everything required of him in that match, blocking one near-post shot 
from Vincent Laurini and taking a ball off the toes of Manuel Pucciarelli when 
the latter was clean through on goal. The same could not be said for his 
team-mates up front, who barely created a single chance in 90 minutes.

Another goalless stalemate followed in Torino’s next match, at newly-promoted 
Pescara. Hart,after his debut blunder in Bergamo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/joe-hart-torino-error-on-debut-atalanta-serie-a>
, had now kept two clean sheets in two matches – a strong effort, when you 
consider that Torino sold their best two central defenders and right wing-back 
Bruno Peres over the summer – and yet still had not tasted victory in Serie A.

He could have been excused, at this point, for wondering what kind of season 
he had signed up for. Hart had confessed at the same introductory press 
conference that he did not know much about Torino’s squad before he joined. 
When pressed to name a team-mate whose technical skills had stood out during 
his first few days of training with the club, he sidestepped the question – 
praising Torino’s back-room staff instead.


Whether he realised it or not, though, Hart had been working with an 
incomplete squad. By the time he joined up properly with Torino, following the 
September international break, his new team had lost its most important player 
to injury.

In two games before Hart’s arrival, Andrea Belotti had scored four times. He 
also missed a pair of penalties, but only after winning both of them himself. 
Torino just barely lost 3-2 to Milan at San Siro, then thrashed Bologna 5-1 
back at home.


An old-fashioned No9 trapped in a 22-year-old’s body, Belotti seemed only to 
be improving in this, the most prolific year of his career. He made his debut 
for the Azzurri – now coached by his former club manager Giampiero Ventura – 
during August’s friendly against France, and might have played in the World Cup 
qualifier against Israel if he had not gone down with a strained thigh.


Belotti made his return off the bench during the draw with Pescara. To have 
him back for the start of Sunday’s appointment with Roma was vital. Even at 
full-strength, this would have looked like a daunting fixture. Torino had not 
beaten theGiallorossi at home since October 1990.

The assumption was that Hart would have his hands full. Roma had scored 13 
goals in five games, whilst Torino’s unfamiliar defence had been undermined 
further by injuries. The 21-year-old academy graduate Antonio Barreca was set 
to make his second-ever start at left-back.


It was Barreca who played Edin Dzeko onside in the fourth minute, obliging 
Hart to step out sharply and punch a bouncing ball off the toe of his former 
Manchester City team-mate. Moments later Radja Nainggolan was given space to 
rocket a shot just wide from the edge of the D. For Torino, it appeared a long 
day was in prospect.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fserie-a-torino-roma-joe-hart-andrea-belotti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b8729ff0e7480dc0cbed512caa98762be2fcf3f%2F232_0_2207_1324%2F2207.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Torino%20lay%20foundations%20for%20stab%20at%20Europe%20thanks%20to%20Joe%20Hart%20and%20the%20Rooster%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fserie-a-torino-roma-joe-hart-andrea-belotti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Torino%20lay%20foundations%20for%20stab%20at%20Europe%20thanks%20to%20Joe%20Hart%20and%20the%20Rooster%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fserie-a-torino-roma-joe-hart-andrea-belotti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b8729ff0e7480dc0cbed512caa98762be2fcf3f%2F232_0_2207_1324%2F2207.jpg>
 Joe Hart thwarts an attempt by his former team-mate Edin Dzeko. Photograph: 
Alessandro Di Marco/AP 
And then Belotti went and scored at the other end. He had laid a pass off to 
Iago Falqué on the edge of the box in the eighth minute, only to see his 
team-mate’s effort saved. But when the ball came back in from Joel Obi on the 
left, Belotti rose to thump a header beyond Wojciech Szczesny at the back post.

 The striker turned and sprinted away, hand held up in front of his face with 
palm open and fingers splayed to impersonate a rooster’s comb. As a kid, 
Belotti would often spend time down at his aunt’s poultry farm, but his 
trademark celebration actually started out life as a nod to his best friend, 
Juri Gallo – whose surname translates as “Rooster”. Nowadays, Belotti himself 
is nicknamed “Il Gallo”.

He continued to bully Roma’s defenders, teeing up Falqué to hit the post in 
the 14th minute. Szczesny had to react sharply to keep out Belotti’s near-post 
shot as half-time approached, after Hart had done the same to thwart Dzeko for 
what might have been Roma’s best chance.

Shortly after the interval, Belotti earned his side a penalty – his foot 
clipped by his former team-mate, Bruno Peres. This time, he allowed Falqué to 
take it, and to bury his shot into the bottom right corner. Roma answered 
swiftly, winning a spot-kick of their own. Francesco Totti, who will turn 40 on 
Tuesday, converted for the 250th goal of hisSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> career.

But there would be no comeback. Instead, in the 65th minute, Belotti set up 
Falqué yet again, rolling a short square ball into his path on the edge of the 
area. The Spaniard’s shot took a cruel deflection up off Federico Fazio’s boot, 
sailing over Szczesny at a trajectory that left the keeper with no chance.

The game finished 3-1, with Hart’s greatest contribution over the final half 
hour being the yellow card that he collected for time-wasting. That is not a 
criticism, but quite the opposite. Roma, despite owning almost 70% of 
possession, struggled to create clear-cut chances precisely because Hart was in 
full command of his area and his defenders.


It is early days yet, but such assuredness at the back, paired with Belotti’s 
ruthlessness up front, certainly bodes well for any European hopes. The striker 
has scored once for every 56 minutes that he has spent on the pitch this season 
in Serie A.

At full-time, Torino’s manager, Sinisa Mihajlovic, described his players as 
“11 bulls”. Perhaps something had been lost in translation here, too. Torino 
had worked and won as a team but even still, nobody could doubt that a Rooster 
was the star of the show.


Talking points

• Before we move on from Roma, let’s pause to say a quick ‘Auguri!’ for Totti 
tomorrow. Luciano Spalletti said over the weekend that he would like to buy the 
striker Dr Emmett Brown’s DeLorean for his birthday, so that Totti could choose 
for himself whether to go back to the past to revisit his greatest moments, or 
to skip ahead to the future and find out what’s coming next. A thoughtful gift, 
though one assumes it would still be insufficient to appease the player’s wife, 
Ilary Blasi, who described Spalletti as a “little man” during a scathing 
passage of her interview in Monday’s Gazzetta dello Sport. Suffice to say, she 
has not forgiven the way that the manager treated Totti after his return to 
Roma last year.

• No blockbuster goal this time around, but can I still get away with stealing 
somebody else’s joke about Quattro Pezzi Sacri 
<https://twitter.com/humyumyeah/status/778938398165786624> by (Simone) Verdi 
after the Bologna player followed up his three sumptuous strikes in as many 
games with a lovely assist during the 1-1 draw with Inter? For those who might 
have missed it,I wrote about Verdi here in midweek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/22/simone-verdis-start-at-bologna-suggests-his-talents-can-finally-blossom>
.


• I am overdue to give a nod in this column to Gregoire Defrel, whose goal on 
Sunday was already his seventh in all competitions for Sassuolo this season. 
The consistency with which Eusebio Di Francesco continues to turn up scorers 
after losing them through either through sales (Simone Zaza) or injury 
(Domenico Berardi) is astonishing.

• Are Juventus and Napoli pulling away from the pack already? The Bianconeri 
were not a pretty sight as they slogged to a 1-0 win away at Palermo, but in 
the end the result is all that matters. (Indeed, Massimiliano Allegri claimed 
that the shabby display was a good thing, as it would stop his players from 
getting complacent before their Champions League game in midweek.) Napoli can 
feel more satisfied with a 2-0 victory over Chievo – not only for the 
performance, but also the fact that Manolo Gabbiadini grabbed his first goal of 
the season.

• A first Serie A start, and a first Serie A goal for Giovanni Simeone – son 
of Atlético Madrid manager Diego.Very well taken it was, too 
<https://streamable.com/crq8>, even if Genoa were unable to parlay it into 
three points against Pescara.

Results: Torino 3-1 Roma, Genoa 1-1 Pescara, Inter 1-1 Bologna, Sassuolo 1-0 
Udinese, Lazio 2-0 Empoli, Fiorentina 0-0 Milan, Palermo 0-1 Juventus, Napoli 
2-0 Chievo.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 6 8 15 
2 Napoli 6 9 14 
3 Inter Milan 6 2 11 
4 Roma 6 6 10 
5 Lazio 6 3 10 
6 AC Milan 6 1 10 
7 Chievo 6 1 10 
8 Bologna 6 -2 10 
9 Sassuolo 6 -2 9 
10 Torino 6 4 8 
11 Genoa 5 2 8 
12 Fiorentina 5 1 8 
13 Udinese 6 -3 7 
14 Pescara 6 -1 6 
15 Sampdoria 5 -2 6 
16 Palermo 6 -4 5 
17 Cagliari 5 -4 4 
18 Empoli 6 -6 4 
19 Atalanta 5 -5 3 
20 Crotone 5 -8 1  