
Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> has retired, with 
the two-weights world champion admitting he has known for at least 12 months 
that his career was over.

The 32-year-old last fought in May 2009 when he suffered a sickening 
second-round knockout by Manny Pacquiao in Las Vegas. Two years before, Floyd 
Mayweather Jr had stopped him in the 10th round in the same arena.

Hatton cited these reverses as the factors that took him into a downward 
spiral, leading him to snort cocaine and spend four weeks being treated for 
depression last September.

"The manner of my defeat against Mayweather and certainly Manny Pacquiao was a 
bitter pill to swallow. So I went into the gym and gave myself ample 
opportunity to train and give it another go. I always loved training to get 
fit, make all those sacrifices that you do, but it just wasn't there after 
Pacquiao. I wanted to do it with all my heart but the alarm would go on the 
morning and I couldn't get up to go running, and I couldn't spar. I couldn't 
walk past the chippy when it came to dieting.

"It was heartbreaking, I knew it was over and that was a good 12 months ago. I 
wish I had made the announcement then because I've been unfair to myself having 
this: 'Oh I might do, I might not. Should I? Shouldn't I?' Instead of 
announcing my retirement and being proud of what I've done, I spent probably 
the last 12 to 18 months sulking about it."

Hatton was exposed in a Sunday newspaper snorting cocaine, an episode that is 
still hard to shake off. "It was a nightmare, words can't describe it. It still 
haunts me," he said. "Everyone knows I like a pint, and I had a few of them, 
but I didn't know what I was doing. I was going out and having blackouts and 
getting home and I wouldn't know what the hell I was doing or where I had been, 
or who I'd been drinking with. I was the big blue-eyed boy, who couldn't do 
anything wrong, the guy [for whom] butter wouldn't melt in his mouth â€“ then I 
tarnished it.

"I hit rock bottom and it was like: 'Ricky get your finger out of your arse.' 
I'd probably say it was my biggest fight. I was embarrassed about the [defeat] 
to Manny and the whole thing snowballed. I was paranoid, thinking everyone will 
be pointing the finger at me. If I'd [taken the decision to retire] 12 months 
ago I probably wouldn't have landed in all this shit."

Hatton departs the ring with two defeats on a record that shows 32 knockouts 
in 45 wins, claiming the WBU, IBO and IBF light-welterweight titles, plus the 
WBA welterweight crown.

Hatton said receiving an MBE and his 11th-round stoppage of Kostya Tszyu in 
Manchester in June 2005 as his best moments. "No1 career highlight? It would 
have to be getting the MBE from Prince Charles at Buckingham Palace. He seemed 
to know everything about all of my fights. My family came down with me and it 
was a great day. No2 was beating Kostya Tszyu. Not too many people thought I 
could beat a fighter who had been at the top for a decade and was rated one of 
the best pound-for-pound fighters in the world, but I proved everybody wrong. I 
took his heart away in that fight."

Hatton made a special mention of his fanatical following that peaked when 
35,000 fans travelled to Las Vegas for the Pacquiao fight. "The high of victory 
in the ring was bigger than the biggest party," he said. "You'd get in the ring 
and hear thousands of fans chanting your name and I'd be giving it all back for 
them."
 