
I see that there is a bit of to-do in the papers about Nicky Morgan’s 
criticism of Theresa May’s trousers. What’s going on?

Steve, by email

Tchuh, women! Can’t live with ’em, can’t return them to Asos.com either. So 
while the global political world burns, with Putin now the president of 
America, and a quasi Vichy regime creeping ever closer to the Élysée Palace, 
the big political story in Britain is Theresa May’s leather trousers versus
Nicky Morgan’s Mulberry handbag 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4023082/Nicky-Morgan-attacked-PM-995-leather-trousers-950-Mulberry-bag.html>
. And to think, some of us thought a post-Brexit Britain would become a 
political irrelevancy.

The story, as it currently stands, is that May wore some leather trousers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38287637> when she was photographed for 
a newspaper. These trousers, it later transpired, cost £995, and Nicky Morgan 
duly seized that predictable bait and snorted, “I don’t think I’ve ever spent 
that much on anything apart from my wedding dress.” After all, she added, while 
possibly patting a young local ruffian on the head, “My barometer is always, 
‘How am I going to explain this in Loughborough market?” I think this was 
Morgan’s clueless way of saying she keeps it real, but it didn’t really work 
because those trousers looked exactly like the kind of thing sold in my local 
market, which, just this weekend, alongside the £1 Christmas crackers, was 
selling leather bustiers and disgusting, studded leather jackets. Hot shopping 
tip to the leather fan at the back, Theresa! But I digress.

Nicky Morgan cut from meeting with PM after leathering £995 trousers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/morgan-cut-from-meeting-with-may-after-criticising-pms-leather-trousers>
Anyway, May’s joint chief of staff, Fiona Hill, was so outraged by Morgan’s 
fashion critique that she pettily disinvited “that woman” from 10 Downing 
Street, “so there!” The leather worm then turned further for Morgan when it was 
pointed out that her Mulberry handbag cost almost exactly the same as May’s 
trousers. Morgan insisted the bag was “a gift”, because expensive stuff is 
totally fine as long as you don’t pay for it, apparently. But this in itself 
raised several questions, not least, “Who is givingNicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan> £950 handbags?” Someone in 
Loughborough market, no doubt, out of gratitude for her longstanding policy of 
being so condescendingly real to them.

So the first thing to say, obviously, is, again, tchuh women! The sight of the 
second woman prime minister and the former secretary of state for education 
spatting away about trousers and handbags seems pretty much the right way to 
end a year marked by the resurgence of misogyny in western politics. That’s 
right, ladies: you keep behaving like the worst possible stereotypes of women, 
and don’t let all that leather slow you down. That’ll show ‘em.

The second thing is, it really is impressive how ignorant both Morgan and the 
media seem to be about how much men’s suits cost. Sure, a grand is a lot to 
spend on a pair of trousers or handbag, but a fair few male MPs own suits that 
cost at least as much, and I have never heard anyone suggest this proves those 
men are modern-day Marie Antoinettes (“Let them wear Austin Reed!”). I get that 
it’s easier to spot when a woman is wearing expensive clothes, but singling out 
women’s wardrobe expenditure while ignoring men seems a tad – oh what is the 
word? What is it? Sexist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftory-handbags-war-downing-street-nicky-morgan-misogyny-western-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7725a5a36a3da32d15e05c4fb472e41588e74981%2F216_80_735_1645%2F735.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tory%20handbags%20at%20dawn%3A%20sneering%20about%20clothes%20reveals%20the%20person%20beneath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftory-handbags-war-downing-street-nicky-morgan-misogyny-western-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tory%20handbags%20at%20dawn%3A%20sneering%20about%20clothes%20reveals%20the%20person%20beneath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftory-handbags-war-downing-street-nicky-morgan-misogyny-western-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7725a5a36a3da32d15e05c4fb472e41588e74981%2F216_80_735_1645%2F735.jpg>
 Those Amanda Wakeley £995 trousers. Photograph: Amanda Wakeley 
And let’s talk a little more about expenditure. Because no doubt it’s because 
my ladybrain is soft and can only cope with things like leather trousers, but I 
don’t understand the snottiness around money and clothes. Would it have been 
more acceptable if May had spent that money on home improvements? On a holiday? 
On taking friends to the opera? Because it’s extremely easy to spend that on 
any of those things, and I don’t see any of them as more beneficial to the 
greater good than May’s trousers, or Morgan’s handbag, for that matter. Yet 
because fashion is seen as frivolous, because it is associated with women, we 
end up with the situation we have right now, with women forced to apologise for 
spending their own money on themselves. Well done, Nicky Morgan.

And the third thing to say is, let’s please admit that no one is outraged that 
May spent so much money on trousers, we’re outraged that she spent any money on 
literally the ugliest, trousers of all time. These aren’t just leather 
trousers, which might have had a kind of racy-in-Maidenhead appeal, but LOOSE 
leather trousers. Leather palazzo trousers, for God’s sake, the most 
nonsensical garment, like a denim raincoat, or a cashmere bikini. No, it isn’t 
fair to focus on female politicians’ clothes, as I’ve written in this column 
before. But, May does not make it easy by wearing clothes that were clearly 
forged in hell, and then getting all defensive about them.

So who’s to blame? Well, May, clearly, for buying these hellish trousers, and 
for, allegedly, then being so petty. Who’d have thought a woman could be so 
loose in her trousers and so tight in her arse? Take a tip from your trousers, 
Theresa, and loosen up. But Morgan is at least as culpable for having got on 
her leather high horse and honked on about how much the trousers cost, and how 
she’s clearly the better person because she weaves her clothes out of the hair 
of Loughborough peasants, or something. To paraphrase George Michael, sometimes 
the clothes do not make the Tory MP. But sneering at and squabbling about them 
does tend to reveal the person beneath.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
 