
The original film <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/80204/total-recall> 
was one of the highest grossing movies of 1990 and a moderate hit with the 
critics. Twenty two years on it has only grown in stature and is seen as one of 
the best films in the careers of both director Paul Verhoeven and starArnold 
Schwarzenegger <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arnold-schwarzenegger>. 
Unfortunately the same cannot be said for the newly released remake of Total 
Recall, which has been rubbished by US reviewers and looks set to open poorly 
this weekend at the box office.

Starring Colin Farrell in the role of Douglas Quaid made famous by 
Schwarzenegger, and with Underworld director Len Wiseman in the hot seat, the 
new version has been described as "bland, bloodless and humourless" and 
"another remake that didn't need to be made" by reviewers. Criticism was also 
directed at a perceived lack of logic in the storyline, which like the original 
is sourced from science fiction guruPhilip K Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/philip-k-dick>'s 1966 short 
story We Can Remember It For You Wholesale.

"Soulless, bombastic and numbingly repetitive, Total Recall is easy to forget 
within a few hours of watching," writesUSA Today's Claudia Puig 
<http://www.usatoday.com/life/movies/reviews/story/2012-08-03/total-recall-colin-farrell-kate-beckinsale-jessica-biel/56720862/1?csp=34life&utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+UsatodaycomMovies-TopStories+%28Life+-+Movies+-+Top+Stori>
. "Verhoeven's R-rated original involved Martians facing off against those who 
held them in tyranny. It also engaged in more mystery surrounding what was 
reality and what was implanted memory. This humourless PG-13 remake, directed 
by Len Wiseman (Underworld), is less of a mindbender. It takes place on a 
bleakly stylised Earth, with a pair of mega-continents facing off. Mired in 
hectic, repetitive-looking special effects, it doesn't dazzle as much as look 
like a big-screen video game.

"Instead of drawing the audience in, the action scenes merely blur together. 
And the intriguing, thoughtful concepts at the story's core are glossed over. 
Total Recall is another remake that didn't need to be made."

"The original Total Recall was built from bottom to top as a vehicle for 
certified stars,"writes the Wall Street Journal's Joe Morgenstern 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10000872396390443687504577564980144670986.html>
. "Schwarzenegger filled the bill, and then some; so did Sharon Stone, in the 
role of the wife. Audiences cared about them going in, and the movie 
capitalised on their presence with sexy riffs, smart jokes (including some 
crude but shrewd ones about Arnold's physique), a few whiffs of silliness, a 
sprinkling of grace notes to punctuate the thundering action. The remake has no 
grace notes, or grace, no nuance, no humanity, no character quirks, no 
surprises in the dialogue and no humour."

"As directed by Len Wiseman from a screenplay and screen story credited to 
five different writers, this Total Recall plays more like a pop-culture 
mashup," complains theLA Times' Kenneth Turan 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/movies/moviesnow/la-et-mn-total-recall-20120803,0,7070987.story>
. "It adds elements from Blade Runner and Inception (as well as a dash of The 
Bourne Identity) to the Recall cosmos and takes off like a shot. The fun is fun 
while it lasts, it just doesn't last long enough.

"Its relentless action and its 'is it live or is it Memorex' concerns about 
what is real and what is not eventually wear you out. After too many 
hard-to-follow chases out windows and doors and up and down ultramodern 
elevator shafts, after too many people saying things like 'this is going to 
sound crazy,' 'Jesus Christ, it's hard to believe' and 'you've got to be 
kidding me,' our systems end up on overload. And there is nothing very 
futuristic – or entertaining – about that."

The film currently maintains a 30% "rotten" rating on the review aggregator 
siteRotten Tomatoes 
<http://1andonlyfilmgeek.blogspot.co.uk/2012/08/review-of-total-recall-2012.html>
, but does have the odd advocate. "As much as the inner fanboy in me wanted to 
say that they should have never remade Total Recall, the openminded critic in 
me found plenty to like here," admitsAustin Kennedy of Sin Magazine 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/total_recall_2010/reviews/?type=top_critics#>. 
"It did take me about 15-20 minutes to get into it at first. But once Kate 
Beckinsale starts kicking Farrell's ass, the pace picks up at a relentless 
speed and barely slows down until the end. The best thing about this movie is 
that it has great action set pieces. There are three or four really awesome 
chases."

Perhaps even more gallingly for studio Columbia, which has put up a $125m 
budget for the remake,Total Recall 2012 looks set to open with a relatively 
meagre $25m to $30m at the US box office 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/box-office-dark-knight-rises-total-recall-diary-wimpy-kid-357853>
, behind superhero blockbuster The Dark Knight Rises despite the latter being 
in its third week in cinemas. The original film also made $25m on debut, but 
cost less than half of its successor's budget. Total Recall opens in the UK on 
29 August.
 