
Tottenham and Leicester are among several Premier League clubs interested in 
signing Ragnar Sigurdsson after his impressive displays forIceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> in their run to the 
quarter-finals of Euro 2016, although they face competition from two German 
sides for the central defender.

Sigurdsson, who is under contract with the Russian side Krasnodar until the 
summer of 2018, has been a star performer in France and was man of the matchin 
the 2-1 victory against England in the last 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 on Monday after scoring the equaliser and producing a commanding performance 
at the heart of Iceland’s defence.

Michy Batshuayi set for Chelsea medical before £33m move from Marseille
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/michy-batshuayi-chelsea-medical-33m-marseille>
That has attracted the attention of several clubs across Europe, with Schalke 
andWolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> having already 
made contact with Krasnodar officials to lodge an interest in the 30-year-old. 
However, it is understood that Sigurdsson, who would cost around €5m (£4.1m), 
would prefer a move to the Premier League and his representatives have already 
been sounded out by Tottenham and Leicester, while Liverpool and other unnamed 
clubs have also expressed an interest.

Claudio Ranieri is pursuing defensive reinforcements before Leicester’s maiden 
Champions League campaign with Spaniard Luis Hernández set to complete his free 
transfer from Sporting Gijón on 1 July and the France Under-21 defensive 
midfielder Nampalys Mendyalso close to completing a £12m move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/leicester-nampalys-mendy-mario-lemina-signing-close>
 from Nice. Tottenham also view Sigurdsson as a good backup for current first 
choices Toby Alderweireld and Jan Vertonghen, with the Austria international 
Kevin Wimmer currently their only senior alternative.

Sigurdsson left Iceland at the age of 20 having begun his career at local side 
Fylkir. He played more than 100 games in four years at IFK Gothenburg, before 
joining Danish side Copenhagen in 2011.

Krasnodar signed him in 2014 for around £3m and Sigurdsson was a member of the 
side that has played in the Europa League for the last two seasons. The club 
went out at the last-32 stage last season, beaten 4-0 by Sparta Prague over two 
legs.
 