
Harry Kane is poised to return to the training pitch on Monday after being 
sidelined for a month andTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> are cautiously 
optimistic that there will be more encouraging injury news about Toby 
Alderweireld, who is due to undergo a scan after he was taken off on a 
stretcher on Saturday.

Although Alderweireld was in a lot of pain at the time of the injury, the 
Belgian was able to walk out of The Hawthorns after the1-1 draw with West 
Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/west-bromwich-albion-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
. Mauricio Pochettino has ruled Alderweireld out of the Champions League away 
game against Bayer Leverkusen on Tuesday, but Spurs are hopeful that the damage 
to the central defender’s knee is not too severe and that he could be looking 
at weeks, rather than months, in the treatment room.

Tottenham’s Kane on the mend and may be fit for trip to Arsenal in November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/harry-kane-injury-tottenham-arsenal>
Kane’s rehabilitation continues to progress. He has not played since injuring 
ankle ligaments against Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/harry-kane-ankle-mauricio-pochettino-tottenham>
 on 18 September, but this week should represent another step forward for the 
striker. “Hopefully as soon as possible we can recover him, and the team will 
get stronger,” Pochettino said. “The Champions League game on Tuesday is too 
soon for him but maybe Monday he will start to train on the pitch.”

Danny Rose will be restored to the starting lineup in Leverkusen after being 
rested against West Brom. “After his injury he played against Manchester City 
and then it wasn’t in the plan to play two games with the national team,” 
Pochettino said. “But because [Ryan] Bertrand was injured, he had to play two 
games.

“We don’t want to take risks. I think this is too much for a player coming 
from the injury to play two games in one week. For that [reason] we gave him a 
rest to be ready for the next two games.”

With Alderweireld out, the manager is likely to ask Eric Dier to partner Jan 
Vertonghen at centre-back. “The good thing about Eric is he can play like a 
midfielder and a centre-back, and can perform good in several positions,” 
Pochettino said. “That is important and we will see about the decision for 
Tuesday. It is one option more that we have.”
 