
Tottenham Hotspur’s Harry Kane and Mousa Dembélé have been ruled out of 
Thursday’sEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> match against 
Fiorentina. Dembélé is also likely to miss the derby against Arsenal next month.

Kane broke his nose during the FA Cup defeat to Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/tottenham-hotspur-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>
 and will sit out the second leg against Fiorentina at White Hart Lane but the 
striker is expected to return against Swansea City on Sunday. It will be the 
first time this season Kane has not been named either in the starting lineup or 
on the bench.

Dembélé came off at half-time against Palace with a groin injury and the 
midfielder is set to be out for between 10 days and two weeks. It means the 
Belgian is also facing a race to be fit to face Arsenal, who visit White Hart 
Lane a week on Saturday.

“Harry Kane will be available for Sunday,” Mauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> said. “Today he 
wasn’t here because he is seeing a specialist about his nose. On Mousa we 
expect maybe longer than Harry. Maybe 10 days, two weeks. It is not a big 
issue. A small injury but in this period we have a lot of games ahead so it 
arrives in a bad moment.”

Tottenham have the upper hand against Fiorentina, having taken an away goal 
from their1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/fiorentina-tottenham-europa-league-last-32-match-report>
 last Thursday. Pochettino has the goalkeeper Hugo Lloris available after a 
shoulder injury and Érik Lamela is in contention after illness. Tom Carroll is 
out with an achilles problem and Jan Vertonghen and Clinton Njié remain 
sidelined with knee injuries.

The match against Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina>
, who are third in Serie A, kicks off a tough run of fixtures for Spurs, who 
face West Ham, Arsenal, Liverpool and Manchester United over the next six weeks.

The defeat by Palace ended Tottenham’s eight-match unbeaten run, which 
included seven consecutive victories, and Pochettino admits his side face a 
crucial juncture in maintaining their momentum.

FA Cup: talking points from the fifth-round matches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/22/fa-cup-talking-points-fifth-round>
“We are in a key period. The period ahead is very important for us, it is a 
period where we play a lot of important games,” Pochettino said. “The loss to 
Palace has not affected the group. We played better than Crystal Palace and we 
need to keep our motivation because we have important games coming up.”

Fiorentina may afford Dele Alli some extra attention after the midfielder 
appeared to drag his foot over Nenad Tomovic during the first leg.

Pochettino said he had spoken to Alli about his conduct and has been pleased 
with the 19-year-old’s response. “We had a chat and it was very good,” the 
manager said. “He is a very nice guy and a very good person but is very 
competitive on the pitch.

“He showed very good maturity against Crystal Palace, he was calm and played 
well. That showed his character and he improved his behaviour on the pitch. It 
was a natural chat and he showed for the future he learned a lot after that.”

Tottenham Hotspur v Fiorentina, 8.05pm Thursday Tottenham (4-2-3-1, possible): 
Vorm; Trippier, Alderweireld, Wimmer, Davies; Mason, Dier; Lamela, Eriksen, 
Son; Chadli.Subs from Walker, Rose, Onomah, McGee, Carroll, Alli.

Crystal Palace and Martin Kelly ride luck to sink Tottenham Hotspur
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/tottenham-hotspur-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report> 