
Dele Alli will try to stay grounded after scoring a wonder goal on his first 
England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> start but the Tottenham 
midfielder insists goals have always been a significant part of his repertoire.​

Alli scored from 30 yards  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/17/england-france-friendly-five-talking-points>
against France at Wembley on Tuesday, despite some arguing that his selection 
in the squad had come too early in his career. It was the 19-year-old’s fourth 
international appearance and, along with Eric Dier in central​ midfield and 
John Stones at centre-half, his performance will have encouraged Roy Hodgson on 
a night when the football was of secondary importance.

Alli signed for Spurs in February from MK Dons and has been a regular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/01/dele-alli-tottenham-england-squad>
 both in the Premier League and Europa League this season. He described his 
England goal as a “dream come true”, having won possession in midfield with a 
crunching tackle. “It’s one of those crazy moments and I’m sure I’ll think 
about it a lot,” he said. “To do it at Wembley and score my first goal for 
England is a great moment for me. Words can’t describe the feeling.

“I like to get goals. I scored a few last year at MK. Goals are a big part of 
my game. Maybe in my first few games at Tottenham I didn’t show that – I wasn’t 
getting forward enough. But playing with Eric gave me the licence to get 
forward and that allowed me to get the goal.

“It’s been a crazy start to the season and it’s all happened really quickly. 
I’ve got a lot of people to thank for that. I never really started thinking 
about England. I knew if I played well for my club then the England opportunity 
would come, and thankfully it has. But my main focus was at the club and it’s a 
proud moment to represent my country.”

On the support of Mauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> and of Tottenham, 
who play West Ham on Sunday, Alli said: “He’s a great manager and he puts a lot 
of trust in young English players. It’s a great thing for English football. 
It’s a great platform for the club and it shows what we’re about.

“He’s a great guy, really passionate, and he cares about the players. If 
you’ve got any problems he’s always there for you. I can already tell that from 
the short time I’ve been there. He puts a lot of trust into youngsters which is 
obviously really good for me.”
 