
The Tottenham transfer target Vincent Janssen has admitted his frustration 
afterAZ Alkmaar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azalkmaar> rejected €18m 
(£16.5m) for the Holland striker.

Michy Batshuayi’s perfect audition paves way for £33m Chelsea move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/michy-batshuayi-chelsea-belgium-euro-2016>
Mauricio Pochettino is searching for more forward options after missing out on 
a deal for Marseille’s Michy Batshuayi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/michy-batshuayi-chelsea-belgium-euro-2016>
 and the Spurs manager has earmarked Janssen as the perfect back-up to Harry 
Kane. The 22-year-old finished as the top scorer in the Dutch league last 
season with 27 goals in 32 appearances.

Pochettino watched Janssen last month in the friendly against the Republic of 
Ireland in Dublin but was foiled in his attempts to sign him after AZ insisted 
they wanted €20m.

Now the former Feyenoord youth player has hit out at his club, saying 
Tottenham’s offer is a fair price.

“I have expressed my choice to the club. In my opinion, Spurs bid a high 
amount,”Janssen told Dutch television 
<http://www.rtvnh.nl/sport/187647/janssen-teleurgesteld-in-az-ik-wil-graag-volgende-stap-maken>
 on his first day of pre-season training with AZ. “At the moment I’m still a 
bit disappointed with AZ. I’m disappointed with how they behaved. I would like 
to make the move.”

Janssen, who has three years remaining on his contract having joined from 
Almere City for £300,00 last summer, is also wanted byWolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg>.

“I indicated I would take the next step and want to get away from the club. 
They know and are aware of,” he said. “It’s a shame, I would have wished that 
it would go a little faster. Sure it’s fine to train again. AZ is a fantastic 
club but I want to make that next step for my development. Ultimately I hope to 
shake people’s hand here and walk out of the door on good terms.”

It is understood Tottenham proposed to spread payments over a three-year 
period – a suggestion resisted by AZ. “We don’t want to let Vincent go for 
€18m. We hope he stays,” said the technical director, Max Huiberts.
 