
The Daily Mirror group, Trinity Mirror, has confirmed it is back in talks with 
Richard Desmond about a potential tie-up withExpress Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/express-newspapers>, owner of the Express 
and the Star.

Trinity Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror>, which has 
seen its share price fall by 42% in the last year, said it was in “early stage” 
talks with Desmond’s Northern & Shell, the parent company of Express 
Newspapers. The talks are also thought to involve Desmond’s OK! magazine, which 
was part of the negotiations two years ago.

“The board of Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/trinitymirror> notes the recent media 
speculation and confirms that it is at an early stage of discussions towards 
taking a minority interest in a new company comprising certain of Northern & 
Shell’s assets,” the company said in an announcement to the stock market. “No 
offer has been made and there is no certainty that any agreement will be 
reached.”

Daily Express and Daily Star price rises signal end to ‘tabloid price war’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/daily-express-and-daily-star-price-rises-signal-end-to-tabloid-price-war>
The two companies held talks about a potential deal two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/17/mirror-owner-richard-desmond-express>
. The negotiations fizzled out, however, over disagreements about price and the 
pension deficit at Desmond’s paper.

Negotiations, which are thought to have started late last year, are focused on 
a potential merger of back office and sales operations to make significant 
savings.

The talks come as UK national newspaper publishers including Trinity Mirror, 
the Telegraph, the Sun and Times owner News UK and the Guardian explore 
combining print and digital advertising sales to fight back against the growing 
dominance of Google and Facebook.

Express Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> is not 
involved in the initiative, Project Juno.

In May last year, the firm reported it had more than tripled pre-tax profits 
in 2015 to £30.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/09/express-newspapers-richard-desmond-pre-tax-profits>
 after slashing staff and printing costs.

Desmond has been thinning his media portfolio in recent years, selling Channel 
5 to MTV’s owner, Viacom, for £463m in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/01/viacom-purchase-channel-5-richard-desmond>
.


What the latest sales figures tell us about the state of newsprint
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/25/what-the-latest-sales-figures-tell-us-about-the-state-of-newsprint>
He also sold his adult TV business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/01/richard-desmond-sells-adult-tv-channels-express-star-television-x>
 in April last year, including the Television X and Red Hot channels, severing 
his last link with the industry that helped make him a billionaire. He sold his 
adult magazine titles including Asian Babes and Big Ones for about £20m in 2004.


Desmond acquired Express Newspapers in 2000 for £125m. He was seeking more 
than £100m to take full control of Express Newspapers and OK! in the talks held 
two years ago. Northern & Shell also owns the loss-making Health Lottery.

Last year, Trinity Mirror looked at buying Evgeny Lebedev’s i newspaper, the 
cut-price national newspaper originally launched to support the Independent. It 
was outbid by the regional publisher Johnston Press, which acquired i for 
£24.4m last February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/johnston-press-to-expand-i-newspaper-into-northern-ireland>
.

Lebedev closed the print editions of the Independent and Independent on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/independent-and-independent-on-sunday-closures-confirmed>
 the following month.


In a bid to drive growth in the national newspaper market – like other 
publishers, Trinity has seen consistent double-digit declines in print 
advertising – the company moved to launch its own low-cost title in May. New 
Day, which had a £5m launch with the tagline “Seize the New Day”,closed after 
just two months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/04/new-day-newspaper-shut-two-months-launch-trinity-mirror>
.

When the last talks between Desmond and Trinity Mirror broke down, the Mirror 
publisher secured a £220m deal to buy the regional newspaper publisherLocal 
World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/local-world>.

The deal added more than 100 regional newspaper titles to Trinity Mirror’s 
existing 130 local papers, spanning titles from the Nottingham Post and 
Cambridge News to the Manchester Evening News and Liverpool Echo.

Trinity Mirror and Northern & Shell declined to comment.
 