
The publisher of the Daily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> has settled damages payouts in 
relation to more than 80% of phone-hacking claims made against its titles, it 
has announced.

Shares in Trinity Mirror, which also owns the Sunday Mirror, Sunday People and 
regional titles including theManchester Evening News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/manchester-evening-news>, rose more than 6% 
as investors appeared to welcome the progress on resolving the hacking cases 
and a positive financial update.


The company’s shares had fallen by almost 50% this year, leaving it worth just 
£250m.

The publisher surprised investors by saying it expected to marginally beat 
forecasts for the year and that its reduction in net debt to £35m was 
significantly better than expectations. However, it said it needed to put a 
further £11.5m towards phone-hacking costs to “maintain momentum” in resolving 
the approximately 350 claims against it so far.


The latest top-up will mean Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/trinitymirror> has set aside £52.5m to 
date to cover costs, which include damages payouts and legal fees.


“We have made good progress on settling civil claims arising from phone 
hacking, with damages for over 80% of claims now settled,” the company said. 
“However, to maintain momentum in bringing the process to a conclusion it is 
clear that costs, in particular the claimants’ legal costs, will be higher and 
this has caused us to increase the provision for dealing with these historic 
matters by £11.5m.”


Last month, Trinity Mirror paid out more than £500,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/mirror-publisher-settle-phone-hacking-claims-les-dennis-natasha-kaplinsky>
 to settle phone-hacking claims by 29 people, including the entertainer Les 
Dennis, TV presenter Natasha Kaplinsky and EastEnders actor Steve McFadden.

Trinity Mirror said it expected to have about £22m left in its phone-hacking 
costs fund by the end of the year.

“Although there still remains uncertainty as to how these matters will 
progress, the board remains confident that the exposures arising from these 
historic events are manageable and do not undermine the delivery of the group’s 
strategy.” the company said.


Trinity Mirror reported that print advertising remained in steep decline 
despite the traditional Christmas ad spend. Its print advertising revenues 
would be down 17% in the fourth quarter, while digital display and 
transactional revenues would rise by 18%.

 