
The federal government will put Australia’s triple-zero emergency calls 
service out for tender to private operators for the first time in its 55-year 
history.

The government has called for expressions of interest in running the dialling 
service, which has been the sole domain of the country’s former public telco
Telstra <https://www.theguardian.com/business/telstra> (fully privatised in 
2006).

It follows a communications department review of the “voice-only” service, 
which last year recommended improving ways of automatically transmitting the 
location coordinates of mobile callers to the operator and police, fire and 
ambulance services as “an immediate priority”.

But the review 
<https://www.communications.gov.au/publications/review-national-triple-zero-000-operator>
 also urged the government to push back a tender as far as 2018 “while any 
coordinate-based information capability is agreed and implemented, proposed 
triple-zero governance and coordination arrangements are resolved, and there is 
greater clarity on the desired future directions of triple zero”.

A tender in 2016 “may place at risk the current successful delivery model”, it 
said. It also risked dragging out negotiations between state and territory 
governments, Telstra – which had a “firmly entrenched” advantage as the present 
operator – and any other telco that emerged as the successful bidder, the 
review found.

MP defends calling triple zero over volunteer firefighters' lack of food
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/mp-defends-calling-triple-zero-over-volunteer-firefighters-lack-of-food>
It also flagged the “merit” of exploring alternatives to emergency phone 
calls, including text messages or video calls, despite noting there were no 
known examples yet from overseas of text becoming a successful trigger for 
emergency responses.

The communications minister, Mitch Fifield, said in a statement 
<http://www.minister.communications.gov.au/mitch_fifield/news/request_for_expressions_of_interest_to_provide_enhanced_triple_zero_emergency_call_service#.V_W6Y6J95GH>
 the call for expressions of interest was “the latest step in ensuring all 
Australians have access to a world-class service which can keep pace with new 
and innovative technologies”.

It was also “an important step in ensuring triple zero remains a highly 
trusted and reliable service for all Australians when they need to request 
emergency assistance”.

“Today the majority of calls to triple zero come from mobile phones, and the 
rapid development of new technologies has enabled a range of new communications 
options,” he said.

Potential operators have separately been asked to come up with “a solution or 
solutions” for location coordinates from mobile and fixed line callers to 
either be sent to triple zero operators and emergency services, or to operators 
for passing on to police, fire and ambulance.

Successful applicants would then be invited to join a tender process next 
month.

The departmental review of triple zero, released in August 2015, found 91% of 
callers in the past two years were satisfied with the service.

But even more (93%) agreed the coordinates for their location should be 
automatically sent to triple zero.

“This is a technology that the community strongly expect to be available and 
which has clear potential to deliver improved outcomes by reducing response 
times and assisting in the cases where callers to triple zero cannot readily 
identify or may not be able to communicate their exact location,” the review 
found.

Almost three-quarters of the callers preferred voice calls as the primary 
contact method. About two-thirds of calls came from mobile phones.

However, more than half supported “other possible means of contact such as via 
SMS or video calls”, with automated alert devices and smartphone applications 
holding the most appeal.

The review noted “circumstances where using text-based communications can have 
advantages over voice”.

Putting new contact methods in place would require overcoming “key technical 
impediments” and funding commitments from “all emergency services 
organisations”, as well as state and territory consensus on managing “risks and 
implementation timeframes”, it said.

The national operator of triple zero is required to answer 85% of calls within 
five seconds and 95% within 10 seconds.

Its busiest 24-hour period in the past five years was during the January 2013 
floods across south-east Queensland and northern New South Wales, when it took 
30,028 calls.
 