
Not much has been said about Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> in the context of the outlook 
for the Hollinger empire.

But the planning revision Mr Trump submitted to the Chicago planning 
authorities last week, seeking permission to reconfigure his redevelopment of 
Hollinger's Chicago Sun-Times printworks, speaks volumes about the outlook for 
this prestigious title.

The 90-storey development, to create a Chicago Trump Tower, can now be sold as 
a purely residential property, grossing $300m (Â£164m). Yet the Chicago-Sun 
Times, the number two title in the city, America's third largest metropolis, is 
valued by the stock market at $500m.

It will be easier to sell than the Telegraph titles because there are few 
regulatory hurdles in the way. The Telegraph sale will, of course, be the 
subject of intense scrutiny by Ofcom.

The Chicago Sun-Times is already under a professional microscope. Two 
publishers have been sizing it up for months: Gannett, USA Today's publisher, 
and Media News Group, with daily titles in Denver and Los Angeles, are both 
interested in the Chicago paper.

It is a powerful brand in its own right, with a circulation of 400,000. The 
group boasts 100 weekly community and local titles, and analysts suggest it is 
worth $1bn. It represents around half the value of the Hollinger empire, and in 
purely financial terms is on an equal footing with the Telegraph Group.

Crucially, a sale of the Chicago assets would meet little resistance from Lord 
Black, the Hollinger International board and shareholders, Lazard, the 
newspaper staff and readers. When Hollinger International shareholders are 
faced with the evidence that the group can and will be broken up, their 
resistance will evaporate. And the Barclays will be a step closer to their 
objective.
 