
The casino business owned by US property tycoon Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has announced plans to file 
for bankruptcy as it seeks to restructure $1.8bn (Â£980m) of debt.

The reorganisation will strip Mr Trump of his majority control, cutting his 
56% stake to about 25%. He will also step aside as chief executive, a fact much 
enjoyed by US tabloids. Mr Trump has reached TV celebrity status through The 
Apprentice, a reality show where his catchphrase is "You're fired".

A division of the investment bank Credit Suisse First Boston will invest $345m 
in the business and Mr Trump will inject $55m to reduce the debt. Credit Suisse 
would end up with a 53% stake.

Mr Trump, aged 57, will remain as chairman. He will give up trademark rights 
to his name and likeness for use in connection with casino operations but 
retain his interest in the Miss Universe contest owned by the company.

The restructuring is a lifeline for the casino business. It includes the Taj 
Mahal, right with Mr Trump, the Plaza and Trump Castle in Atlantic City, a 
down-at-heel version of Las Vegas on the southern shore of New Jersey, which 
local business has been trying to revamp. The company also owns the Trump 
Casino Hotel, a riverboat in Gary, Indiana.

The bankruptcy plan came as little surprise. Auditors recently warned that the 
business might not be a going concern. In interviews, Mr Trump claimed that his 
holding in the publicly listed company represented only a small part of his 
wealth. He told the Wall Street Journal in May that the failure of the casinos 
business bothered him from a "psychological standpoint" but had little effect 
on him financially.

The group's bondholders have agreed to restructure their holdings for $1.25bn 
in new 10-year, publicly traded debt and a mixture of cash and shares. The 
result will be to cut the company's debt by $544m and reduce annual interest 
payments by $110m. It will enter bankruptcy next month and aims to re-emerge 
early in 2005.

Mr Trump's TV show has been more successful. It became one of the most talked 
about shows on TV when it appeared on NBC this year and two more series are in 
production.
 