 Donald Trump, the property developer, plans to make the United States home 
again to the world's highest building.
"Height really does create dollars," he said yesterday. "It costs more to 
build but you get more for it because of the views and so on."

The building in Chicago could be 457 metres (1,500ft) tall, about 15 metres 
higher than the Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, which took the 
title in 1996 from Chicago's Sears Tower, at 442 metres.

Mr Trump says people love his projects, though that was not the unanimous view 
of the world's tallest residential building, at 90 stories, which he completed 
opposite the United Nations in New York.

Top opponents including Kofi Anan, the UN secretary-general, Walter Cronkite, 
the newsman, and Alberto Vilar, the financier and arts patron, The Donald, as 
he is known, said: "Rich people don't like losing their view, that... is what 
this is all about."

His plans for Chicago would create a building for offices, shops, luxury homes 
and perhaps a hotel on what is now the site of the seven-storey Chicago 
Sun-Times newspaper building. Mr Trump and Hollinger International, the 
newspaper's parent company, have presented plans to Mayor Richard Daley, though 
no architectural design has been drawn up yet and the final height will be 
determined over the next three months.

The developer said Mr Daley had pressed three points: "He wants to see green 
space, open space and truly magnificent architecture."

The skyscraper was invented in Chicago in the decades after the great fire of 
1871 and Daniel Burnham's 1909 plan for the city guided its development for the 
next 30 years. "Make no little plans," he said, "they have no magic to stir 
men's blood and probably themselves will not be realised. Make big plans."

Mies van der Rohe introduced ideas from the Bauhaus when he arrived in Chicago 
in the 1930s and gave expression to a style that influenced international 
architecture for decades.
 