 The richest man in the US presidential race for the year 2000 yesterday cast 
himself as a 21st century American Robin Hood, proposing a new income and asset 
tax that would soak the rich - and would land him with a $725m (Â£447m) personal 
tax bill.
Donald Trump's audacious plan involves a one-off, 14.25% tax on the total net 
wealth of the top 1% of wealthy Americans. It would raise $5.7 trillion, its 
author claimed, equivalent to two-thirds of the gross domestic product of the 
United States and would erase the US national debt, enabling the federal 
government to slash income taxes for millions of middle-class families.

"I think it would be great for the country," the billionaire property and 
casino tycoon said yesterday. The comments, if nothing else, generated renewed 
media attention to a presidential bid that has so far failed to excite public 
opinion.

The publicity-hungry Mr Trump is flirting with the idea of running for the 
White House as the candidate of the Reform Party, founded by fellow billionaire 
Ross Perot.

In a radio conversation with the controversial radio talk-show host Howard 
Stern, Mr Trump said that his latest supermodel girlfriend, Melania Knauss, was 
sitting naked next to him throughout the interview. He was parodying an 
earlier, much-publicised, interview in which Mr Stern claimed the same thing. 
The interview drew fierce protests from other Reform Party leaders for its lack 
of taste.

Mr Trump's tax plan envisages a one-off asset and income tax on all 
individuals and trusts valued at more than $10m. The 14.25% tax would be levied 
once, and would be payable over a 10-year period.

"It would pay off in its entirety the national debt of $5.7 trillion, as you'd 
save $200bn a year, so taxes for the middle class would go way down. The estate 
and inheritance tax [would be] totally wiped out, and the social security 
system [the US state pension scheme] would be saved," Mr Trump said in a later 
interview.

Mr Trump said that the economists with whom he had discussed his plan have 
hailed it as "brilliant", but a panel of independent economists was less 
confident. "Even talking about it would risk capital flight out of the 
country," said Andrew Hodge, an economist. "It's pretty confiscatory in terms 
of property rights."
 