 Being turned away from the launch party for Ivana Trump's lifestyle magazine 
is like having your credit card rejected at Woolworths. Having been previously 
granted an eight-minute interview with the 'modest' divorcee (eight minutes 
more than every other journalist at the press conference), I am invited to help 
toast Ivana at a fashionable-six-months-ago restaurant in Manhattan. But when I 
get to the Upper East Side venue, Ivana's PR, Catherine Saxton, has changed her 
mind.
 Saxton is plump. Which is OK, but she is in a tomato-red muu-muu, which is 
not OK. Ivana herself is tiny, her Thierry Mugler suit so metallic and 
structured that it looks like a robot costume from Metropolis. 'Hello!' I wave 
at the voluminous PR, as a security guard blocks my entrance. Saxton squints 
her eyes, which look like raisins in a Pilsbury dough-boy face. 'Are you the 
one from The Observer?'

 'Yes,' I beam merrily.

 'Go away. You can't come in.' She shoos a hand at me, as if bothered by an 
unattractive cat with a pigeon in its jaws. I do not argue.

Ivana is giggling as a short bald man tells a joke that I cannot hear but 
which, I can tell from his suit, is not funny. Men who look like Mohammed 
al-Fayed and Taki mingle with women who look as if they once ought to have been 
married to Rod Stewart. I take one look over the security guard's shoulder and 
realise that, unlike Woody Allen, I am already on the train I want to be on. 
The party across the way looks like no fun at all.

 The day before, along with at least 50 other members of the world's press, I 
have a glimpse of life inside the Ferrero Rocher ad, when we are invited to 
attend a press conference at Ivana's beautiful home. Four or five burly 
security guards the size of her native Czechoslovakia admit us into her Park 
Avenue townhouse in groups of five. Snow kisses our cheeks in sympathy as we 
are left waiting on her doorstep. Once we are inside, a maid, despite 
protestations that we are cold, immediately removes our coats. When we leave, 
we find the coats tossed haphazardly on a sofa, contents spilling from pockets, 
hoods and belts intertwined. A few sad parkas are trampled on the floor.

 A pony-tailed PR minion leads us to the living room. Appropriately enough, it 
looks like the packaging on a Ferrero Rocher chocolate: gold and gilt, ruffles 
here and there. Yellow roses rest on the grand piano. Prominently displayed on 
the coffee table are several books: a Cartier catalogue, a Sotheby's catalogue 
and Confessions of a Window Dresser by Simon Doonan. Taking pride of place is a 
framed print of Ivana's contribution to the infamous 'Got Milk?' ad campaign. 
The copy has Ivana, wearing a ballgown and a milk moustache, murmuring, 'Rich, 
rich, rich! Milk is rich in calcium! And low in fat. You know what I say, 
Dahling? You can never be too rich or too thin.'

 A small Asian man, whom we take to be her make-up artist, hovers at the top 
of the expansive staircase leading to Ivana's boudoir. He wears a black 
polo-neck and enormous black sunglasses. Many of the English journalists have 
just read Bret Easton Ellis's novel Glamorama, and we all agree that he looks 
like the man who is castrated on page 283.

 Finally, an hour after we arrive, Ivana descends the staircase. She 
apologises for being late and thanks us graciously for coming. For a terrible 
moment, I fear she might do a Michael Jackson and squeal, 'I love you!' 
Thankfully, she leans wordlessly against the piano, turning her head this way 
and that at the photographers' requests. Ivana, who turned 50 yesterday, has 
clearly had some plastic surgery, but it is exceptionally good work. Her mouth 
is pouty, her eyes kittenish. She has one of the few nose jobs that isn't 
piggy. She looks how Brigitte Bardot might have looked at this age if she'd 
kept out of the sun.

Like Cher, she is a camp icon for whom one feels affection rather than pity. 
One feels more appalled by Marla Maples, because you can't have been married to 
and divorced fromDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
and have a sensible haircut and serious acting career (Maples has received 
kudos for her role in the acclaimed indie Happiness). It's not right. Enter 
that kind of lifestyle, and it is your duty to have a lacquered blond beehive 
every minute of every day for the rest of your life.

 Close up, Ivana's hair is as mercilessly teased as the kid in the playground 
who smelled of urine. It is canary yellow, with dark roots. For someone so 
rich, she has poor person's hair - trailer-trash hair - which, though her 
backers won't say it, is one reason they can be sure the magazine she is 
promoting will reach its desired market. Trailer-trash hair plus Thierry Mugler 
suit equals National Enquirer.

 In fact, Ivana's Living in Style is backed by the same company that owns one 
of the Enquirer's main rivals. The Globe is a tabloid so trashy it makes the 
National Enquirer look like The New Yorker. Ivana does an advice column for it 
called 'Ivana's Advice for the '90s'. If you have a question about love, money, 
fashion or fitness, she has the answer. A wife finds a pair of thong panties in 
her husband's pocket. What should she do? The letter is signed 'Panty Problem, 
Charlotte, NC'. 'Wake up and smell the coffee!' spews Ivana. 'Tell him he's got 
to 'fess up! Or the owner of the thong can do his laundry from now on!'

 This is not quite the language she uses in conversation. She speaks softly in 
a heavy accent, stumbling over certain words; she is appealing and quite 
intelligent. She is keen to point out that, as a champion athlete, she was 
famous in her country by the age of 17.

 'Thankfully, I was not bad looking. I made quite a bit of money as a model, 
so I could ski - a very expensive sport. You have to travel and sleep in 
hotels. So I supported myself and also made enough to pay for an education,' 
she says.

 She has three children from her marriage to Trump: sons Donald Jr, 19, and 
Eric, 13, and the long-legged Ivanka, 16, who has recently started modelling.

 'I don't worry about my daughter,' Ivana says, 'because she was brought up 
with my values. Don't steal, cheat or lie, or take drugs or alcohol. She is a 
straight-A student. She wants to be a lawyer. She does modelling only because 
it amuses her, but her life will be built on education.'

 Her first marriage was to Freddie Winklmayr, an Austrian industrialist, in 
1972. She married Trump in 1977 and divorced him 14 years later. Her settlement 
was Â£25 million. Her most recent marriage, to Richard Mazzuchelli, lasted just 
18 months. Now she is seeing ex-boxer Roffredo Gaetani, an Italian count.

 I ask if it feels strange that, to the West, she only began to exist when she 
got married.

 'That is not true.' She smiles sweetly. 'I only existed when I got divorced.' 

 Is that hurtful?

 She holds the smile, like the former beauty queen she is. 'No, it does not 
hurt. I know what I have done.'

 She first did what she had to do when she arrived in America aged 24. 'Many 
of my friends did not have the courage to leave, to leave their families and 
the life they knew and make a change for freedom. I had to leave childhood 
friendships and come to a new country with no money, no friendships. Starting 
from scratch.'

 Ivana continues to visit her mother, who still lives in the same area in what 
is now the Czech Republic. 'But I don't want to live there and I don't want to 
do business there. It took me 24 years to get out of that country,' she says.

 Get out she well and truly did. The voluminous PR comes back to lead Ivana to 
Hola! and Der Spiegel, and I just have time to ask what she feels has been the 
most surreal moment in her life. She stops smiling.

 'There have been no surreal moments. Because everything I have done in my 
life, I have worked for,' she says. 'It didn't just happen with a fortune in my 
lap. There were no surprises. I never have one deal on the table, always 10. 
Some work and some don't. Other people go stubbornly after one goal - and if 
that fails, their whole life falls apart.

 I always have something else to put my energy into. I set myself a goal and 
try to achieve it. America is immigrant country. All the most successful 
people, all the most important, are immigrants.'

 I had not allowed for the possibility that Ivana might be smart, but I should 
have. For a start, she lived with Donald Trump and managed not to kill him. 
Everyone said she was an immigrant gold-digger, not even a proper American 
trophy - but I think it was he who was beneath her. She is intelligent, and 
that was the trophy part, because being with a smart woman flatters a stupid 
man.

 A magazine called Ivana's Living in Style is, of course, an oxymoron. We are 
supposed to see, in the articles about her bathroom with its monogrammed 
napkins, echoes of a golden age. But let's not get too nostalgic about the 
rich. The appeal of the very wealthy is not merely that they should spend 
lavishly, but also stylishly. All of Truman Capote's 'swans' were stunning and 
elegant as well as just plain rich. Ivana is no Babe Paley.

 Trump's publisher, Dan Dolan, corners a couch full of quivering journalists 
as they try to leave, and bellows: 'Ivana Trump is a character out of a 1980s 
blockbuster. Except people don't write 1980s blockbusters any more. She is the 
Zsa Zsa Gabor for the new millennium. She took the Zsa Zsa shtick and put an 
ironic spin on it.'

 Which is mildly amusing. But only mildly. It is upsetting to see any human 
being, let alone one who turns out to be as clued up as Ivana, selling her 
own-name perfume on the shopping channel. True, she is in on the joke. It's 
just not a very good one.
 