
‘It’s all fake news, it’s phoney stuff – it didn’t happen … I think we have 
one of the great cabinets ever put together … Don’t be rude. Don’t be rude. 
Don’t. Be. Rude … I’m not going to give you a question. I’m not going to give 
you a question. You’re fake news.” In his firstpress conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
, President-elect Trump was fiery, abrupt and off-the-cuff. He spoke less like 
a president than like a bad-tempered reality TV star with – in Lord of the 
Flies terms – a firm grip on the conch.

Public oratory has been at the centre of the American project from the time of 
its founders. The framers of the constitution gave themselves classical noms de 
plume in their correspondence, and consciously modelled their new nation on the 
Roman republic. Every presidency is punctuated with set-piece speeches, and its 
historical turning points have been marked by historic speeches. In Donald J 
Trump, though, we have a presidential communicator who is quite unlike the 
other ducks.

So what does this augur for the public face of his administration? How does 
his language work? On a purely linguistic level, three things seem striking.

1) Trump uses a pretty small working vocabulary. This doesn’t seem to be a 
conscious strategy, though it works as well as if it had been. Much was made 
during primary season of the way in which reading-level algorithms (unreliable 
though they are) found his speeches pitched at fourth-grade level, ie the 
comprehension of an average nine-year-old.

2) His syntax, spelling and punctuation are – in conventional terms – a 
catastrophe. In his tweets, he is prone to run-on sentences, shouty 
capitalisations, unpresidented misspellings and malapropisms, quote marks used 
for emphasis and verbless exclamations. In speaking, he is prone to anacoluthon 
– sentences whose grammar collapses – and reflexive repetition.

3) The workhorses of his rhetoric are charged but empty adjectives and adverbs.
Things are “great”, “wonderful”, “amazing”, “the best”, or they’re “crooked”, 
“fake”, “unfair”, “failing”. He sprinkles intensifiers liberally: “a very, 
very, very amazing man, a great, great developer”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-rhetoric-how-being-inarticulate-is-seen-as-authentic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7dd38d8c27a30e4a81ac5872b3dde353ff9de52%2F73_266_3374_2024%2F3374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%E2%80%99s%20rhetoric%3A%20a%20triumph%20of%20inarticulacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-rhetoric-how-being-inarticulate-is-seen-as-authentic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%E2%80%99s%20rhetoric%3A%20a%20triumph%20of%20inarticulacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-rhetoric-how-being-inarticulate-is-seen-as-authentic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7dd38d8c27a30e4a81ac5872b3dde353ff9de52%2F73_266_3374_2024%2F3374.jpg>
 People mistrust smooth talkers, and Barack Obama’s showy articulacy didn’t 
always count in his favour. Photograph: UPI / Barcroft Images 
All of those qualities, though they invite sneers, have something to be said 
for them as communicative strategies. Simple language reaches the widest 
possible audience and it tends (insert rueful joke here) to connote honesty. 
The plain style – short words, simple syntax and a folksy approach – has long 
been a winner for presidents. Remember George W Bush pretending to be a 
down-home Texan cowpoke? Remember Ronald Reagan playing “the Gipper”? Remember 
Bill Clinton playing the good ol’ boy? People mistrust smooth talkers, and 
Obama’s showy articulacy didn’t always count in his favour.

Simple (or absent) grammatical structures leave the audience with nothing so 
taxing as a train of thought: rather, a random collage of emotive terms, 
repeated for emphasis. You come away from a Trump speech with a feeling, not an 
argument.

Trump’s plain style is unvarying, though, and that’s a key part of his ethos, 
or how he projects himself to his public. Most of his predecessors were able to 
command a range of registers. The presidential – dignified, high-flown – was 
available to George W Bush even as he struggled with his syntax (a struggle 
that, as I’ve suggested with Trump, didn’t necessarily hurt him). It was 
abundant in Obama. And it underpinned even Reagan’s folksiness.

In fact, the ability to shift register mid-speech – to say something 
historic-sounding but then to humanise it with a confidential joke, a mention 
of “folks”, or a self-teasing personal anecdote – has been a basic presidential 
skill. Lincoln certainly had it. And even on the attack, Trump’s predecessors 
never sounded petulant. They worked to convey either grave seriousness, or a 
sense of command so absolute that contempt was expressed as amusement. Think of 
Obama’s deadly sally at John McCain – “I don’t believe that Senator McCain 
doesn’t care what’s going on in the lives of Americans; I just think he doesn’t 
know”; or Reagan smirking at Jimmy Carter, “There you go again …”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-rhetoric-how-being-inarticulate-is-seen-as-authentic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd87761f3a32bdef16b204060879644e68afae440%2F83_113_1910_1145%2F1910.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%E2%80%99s%20rhetoric%3A%20a%20triumph%20of%20inarticulacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-rhetoric-how-being-inarticulate-is-seen-as-authentic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%E2%80%99s%20rhetoric%3A%20a%20triumph%20of%20inarticulacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdonald-trumps-rhetoric-how-being-inarticulate-is-seen-as-authentic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd87761f3a32bdef16b204060879644e68afae440%2F83_113_1910_1145%2F1910.jpg>
 George W Bush struggled with his syntax but even he could shift registers and 
sound dignified. Photograph: Mark Wilson/Getty Images 
In Trump, there is a note of wounded vanity, and of spite – “Meryl Streep, one 
of the most over-rated actresses in Hollywood” – that you struggle to find in 
recent presidential history other than in Nixon’s private conversations. Trump 
simply doesn’t sound presidential, ever. He doesn’t have different registers 
for different occasions: he always sounds boastful, vengeful, bullying and 
naive.

To many of us, that looks like a failing. But to some, we might have to accept 
that it’s a selling point: he doesn’t sound like a normal president, and that’s 
why people like him. There’s only oneDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. What you see is what you 
get. That can be seen as a sort of authenticity.

A related point: where Trump’s language differs most profoundly from that of 
any of his predecessors is in his ability flatly and unblushingly to contradict 
himself. I’m saying this not to rattle my pearls at how awful he is, but to 
marvel at how it works rhetorically.

Most politicians are good at being equivocal. They are“economical with the 
actualite”; they “misspeak”; in extremis, like Bill Clinton, they may quibble 
over “what the meaning of ‘is’ is”. But they do not like to say something that 
is unequivocally, checkably at odds with the truth of their behaviour or with 
their previous statements.

Winning words: the language that got Donald Trump elected
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mind-your-language/2016/nov/11/winning-words-the-language-that-got-donald-trump-elected>
This is because, as a rule, the most effectively damaging charge against a 
politician has been dishonesty – or its practical cousin, hypocrisy. The media 
can say you are wrong or even evil. But these attacks don’t nail you to the 
wall. They can be ascribed to ideological opposition or to differing 
interpretations of data. If you said X and you did Y, or you said X and they 
prove you knew Y was the case, you are sunk. You have damned yourself on your 
own terms.

This rule shows all signs of having been suspended for President-elect Trump. 
Yes, a lot of the time he’s vague. But when he does say things that are 
concrete, he says them directly: I never supported the Iraq war; Alicia Machado 
made a sex tape; I saw thousands of Muslims cheering 9/11; Hillary Clinton 
started the rumours about Obama’s birth certificate but Donald Trump “finished 
them”, and so on. Often those things can be proved to be untrue, or contradict 
something he previously said. Yet that seems to do him no harm at all.

I wonder at this as much, I imagine, as you do. My hunch is that we have an 
electorate so used to politicians being equivocal, and so enraged by it, that 
the bounce Trump gets from not sounding like that is much bigger than the 
demerit he incurs for being a clouds-of-smoke-billowing-from-his-pants liar. 
We’d rather have an open liar, in other words, than a conventional politician. 
Let’s see how that works out.

Sam Leith is the author of You Talkin’ To Me?: Rhetoric from Aristotle to 
Obama (Profile Books).To order a copy for £7.64 (RRP £8.99) go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/you-talkin-to-me.html> or call 0330 333 6846.
 