
A Tunisian man detained on suspicion of involvement in last week’s Berlin 
truck attack has been released after investigators determined that he was not 
in contact with the main suspect immediately before the rampage.


 The 40-year-old was detained in Berlin on Wednesday. Federal prosecutors said 
at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/berlin-truck-attack-christmas-market-tunisian-man-detained-german-prosecutors>
 that his telephone number was saved in Anis Amri’s mobile and they suspected 
he might have been involved.

Their spokeswoman Frauke Koehler said on Thursday that investigators had 
suspected Amri might have sent him a message and a picture over a messenger 
service shortly before theattack on a Christmas market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/police-raid-berlin-refugee-shelter-after-christmas-market-attack>
 on 19 December.

But “further investigations determined that the man who was provisionally 
detained isn’t this possible contact person of Anis Amri, so he had to be 
released from custody”, she told reporters.

Amri, a 24-year-old Tunisian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/anis-amri-from-young-drifter-to-europes-most-wanted-man>
, is believed to have driven the truck that plowed into the market, killing 12 
people. His fingerprints and wallet were found in the truck. The Islamic State 
group has claimed responsibility for the attack and released a video showing 
Amri pledging allegiance to its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.

Investigators have determined that the video is genuine, Koehler said.

On 21 December Germany released a Europe-wide wanted notice for Amri, who used 
a string of different names and nationalities. He waskilled in a shootout last 
Friday with Italian police in a Milan suburb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/anis-amri-berlin-attack-suspect-shot-dead-milan>
 after they stopped him for a routine identity check.

Prosecutors believe he travelled via the Netherlands and France, Koehler said. 
In Milan, he was carrying a .22 pistol that he used to shoot a police officer, 
hitting him in the shoulder.

A bullet found in the truck used in the attack was also from a .22 firearm, 
but ballistic tests have still to confirm whether it was the same weapon, 
according to Koehler.

The truck’s regular Polish driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/berlin-christmas-market-attack-polish-truck-driver-lukasz-urban-germany-order-merit>
 was found dead in the cab. Koehler said a provisional autopsy report showed he 
had died close to the time of the attack, but it was not yet possible to give 
an exact time.

Koehler confirmed German media reports that the truck had apparently been 
slowed by an automatic braking system, bringing it to a standstill after 70 to 
80 metres (230-260ft) and preventing worse carnage.

Amri, who had previously spent time in prison in Italy, arrived in Germany in 
July 2015. German authorities tried this year to deport him toTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> after his asylum application was 
rejected.

Italian investigators are trying to determine whether Amri was making use a 
jihadi network in Italy, his port of entry toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in early 2011 amid the Arab 
spring upheaval.

However, “no particular networks have emerged in Italy”, Paolo Gentiloni, the 
Italian prime minister, told reporters in Rome.

Authorities in Rome, meanwhile, seized mobile phones during a search of two 
residences in Rome where Amri stayed in 2015, the Italian news agency Ansa 
reported. One of the apartments is home to a Tunisian currently in jail for 
drug dealing.

German authorities had put Amri under covert surveillance for six months 
earlier this year after a warning from intelligence agencies that he might be 
planning an attack. The surveillance ended in September after police found no 
evidence of his alleged plans.

Separately, prosecutors in the western German city of Duisburg said on 
Thursday that they had opened a fraud investigation against Amri in April but 
shelved it in November because his whereabouts were unknown. Amri was being 
investigated for receiving asylum-seeker benefits in two different towns, under 
different identities, for a few days in late 2015.
 