
Twitter has suspended the account of Jordanian preacher and al-Qaida spiritual 
leaderAbu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/sep/24/cleric-abu-qatada-terror-acquittal-video>
, along with two other influential scholars aligned with the extremist group.

The three accounts, which between them had tens of thousands of followers and 
were used several times a day, were at the heart of an online network of 
al-Qaida supporters, said Cole Bunzel, scholar of jihadism at Princeton 
University. Bunzel tweeted:
Cole Bunzel (@colebunzel) 
After years tolerating them, @twitter <https://twitter.com/twitter> finally 
suspends accounts of 3 leading al-Qaida-aligned scholars, al-Maqdisi, Abu 
Qatada & al-Siba'ipic.twitter.com/3QPvU6Jiya <https://t.co/3QPvU6Jiya>
 <https://twitter.com/colebunzel/status/813413473556176896> December 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/colebunzel/status/813413473556176896> 
The accounts focused mostly on the war in Syria, frequently attacking Islamic 
State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, but also commented on other 
issues, from law to religious judgments.

“Attacking the west is not a priority in their messaging,” Bunzel told the 
Guardian. He added that Abu Qatada andAbu Muhammad al-Maqdisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/05/jordan-release-jihadi-cleric-al-maqdisi-isis-killing-pilot-al-kasasbeh>
’s commentary had mostly been limited to the war in Syria.

Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> has cracked down 
heavily on Isis supporters, leading them to shift towards alternative messaging 
services including Telegram, but al-Qaida supporters have not been so heavily 
targeted.

“Twitter has been a permissive forum for supporters of al-Qaida as compared to 
supporters of the Islamic State who have been pushed off,” Bunzel said. “The 
focus of these crackdowns has been on the Islamic State.”

It was not clear what had prompted the shutdown, or whether the move would 
cause al-Qaida supporters to embrace other social networks. So far only major 
figures appear to have been targeted by Twitter, not their supporters, he said. 
“The people who were retweeting and interacting with these ‘big three’ online: 
they are still online, still communicating.”

Qatada was deported from the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/07/abu-qatada-deported-from-uk> to 
Jordan to face terror charges after a court battle lasting nearly 10 years with 
a series of British home secretaries. Last summer he was released from custody 
after beingacquitted of all charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/abu-qatada-cleared-terror-charges-jordan-court>
. Since his release, he has become an increasingly vocal critic of Isis.

Maqdisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/05/jordan-release-jihadi-cleric-al-maqdisi-isis-killing-pilot-al-kasasbeh>
, regarded as the most influential jihadi scholar alive, is counted as a close 
friend by al-Qaida leader Ayman al-Zawahiri.

Twitter said it could not comment on individual accounts, for privacy and 
security reasons, but a spokesperson said: “We condemn the use of Twitter to 
promote terrorism and the Twitter rules make it clear that this type of 
behaviour, or any violent threat, is not permitted on our service. Since the 
middle of 2015 alone, we’ve suspended more than 360,000 accounts for 
threatening or promoting terrorist acts, primarily related to Isis.”
 