
Twelve months ago, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> seemed as firmly stuck in the 
New York of the 1980s as Michael Douglas in Wall Street. His phallic towers 
were an expression of power and money and perhaps a desire to get as far from 
the street as humanly possible.

Then came The Apprentice <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/apprentice>
, America's unlikely TV hit of the season and the property developer has been 
returned to current day iconic status.

Last Thursday, almost 28m Americans watched a two-hour special on NBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> in which Mr Trump picked the winner of 
a 15-week contest for a job running one of his businesses. It attracted higher 
ratings than CSI, Survivor and American Idol.

The premise was Survivor meets corporate America, with one person kicked out 
by Mr Trump every week. The players were set tasks such as sell ing lemonade on 
a Manhattan street corner, organising a golf tournament, or creating an 
advertising campaign for corporate jets. At the end of each show, on a TV set 
disguised as a boardroom, Mr Trump would give a dismissive wave of the hand, 
squint and utter the catchphrase: "You're fired."

But last Thursday it was "you're hired". The winner, Bill Rancic, who formerly 
sold cigars online, was given the job of overseeing the building of a landmark 
90-storey tower on the site of the Chicago Sun-Times on a salary of $250,000 a 
year.

The biggest winner though was NBC. The network, facing the loss of Friends and 
Frasier, has breathed a sigh of relief at the show's success. It is an 
advertiser's dream, attracting moneyed people in the right demographics. Two 
more seasons have been ordered.

The contestants on the show get the most airtime but Mr Trump is the star. He 
travels in a helicopter with Trump emblazoned on the side in big letters, 
constantly brags and uses phrases such as "holy mackerel".

Websites have been devoted to his hair - what appears to be a bizarre 
comb-over kept rigidly in place and described by comedian David Letterman as 
"unbe-weave-able".

Robert Thompson, director of the centre for the study of popular television at 
Syracuse University, said Mr Trump has the "cheese" factor. "He's great fun to 
mock. He talks in hyperbole - everything is the most beautiful or the most 
expensive - he has the tastes of a French boudoir circa 1750. He's the clown 
prince of kitsch. He's smart enough that he can't be completely oblivious to 
the joke but I'm not sure he's entirely cognisant that he is such a comic 
character."

Mr Trump's real wealth is unclear. He came close to bankruptcy in the 1990s 
but now claims to be worth $6bn (Â£3.3bn). Forbes puts him closer to $2.5bn. He 
claims to be the biggest real estate developer in New York but that too is 
disputed. One report suggested he has developed 13 residential towers in the 
city but does not own them all. His casino empire, the only part of his 
business that is quoted, is close to financial ruin.

The success of the show has prompted much musing among the American media and 
business academics. One theory is that, brash and uncouth as he is, Mr Trump is 
an easy to understand, old-fashioned dealmaker who puts up skyscrapers. For a 
public cynical of Wall Street but eager to believe in the American dream, Mr 
Trump is easier to grasp than a company such as Enron that promised riches on 
the back of making markets on invisible bits and bytes travelling through wires.

As Mr Rancic was getting to work, NBC was basking in its ratings and Mr Trump 
was enjoying his spotlight, Bruce Leggett-Flynn, a restaurant and bar manager, 
was emerging into the cold from Trump Tower on Wall Street where the auditions 
are already taking place for The Apprentice II.

Mr Leggett-Flynn did not make it through. The casting director had grouped 
them into a dozen people and asked them to debate ethics and Martha Stewart. 
But he was philosophical. Donald Trump he said "is a good guy". But would he 
really want to work for him? He pauses, thoughtful. "Not really," he said. Then 
more certain: "Not at all."
 