
Tyson Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> has no plans to 
retire from boxing despite having his licence suspended on Thursday by the 
British Boxing Board of Control, his uncle and trainer has confirmed.

The 28-year-old, who announced on Wednesday that he has voluntarily vacated 
his WBO and WBA world heavyweight titles with immediate effect, is under 
further investigation into “anti‑doping and medical issues” after withdrawing 
from his scheduled rematch with Wladimir Klitschko for the second time after 
being declared “medically unfit”.

Fury recently told Rolling Stone magazine that he had been taking cocaine to 
help with depression and will now seek medical care. However, Peter Fury 
believes that his nephew will return to the ring in future.

“I was with him yesterday, me and his dad [John], and just listening to him 
speak and the way he is,” he told BBC Radio 5 Live. “Boxing is in his life. 
It’s in his blood. It’s in his veins. He doesn’t know anything else. He’s just 
frustrated. When you lose interest in everything and you can’t see the meaning 
of anything – clearly you’ve got a problem.

Klitschko and Joshua wait in wings as Fury faces board decision on world titles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/wladimir-klitschko-anthony-joshua-tyson-fury-board-meeting-world-titles>
“He’s addressing it now and we spoke for three and a half, four hours 
yesterday. The treatment he’s had already is doing him a lot of good. He hasn’t 
got a drug addiction. He just did a stupid thing. He’s not going into any 
clinics for drug abuse; he’s got manic depression, which is a version of 
bipolar [disorder].

“They did have a name for it but I can’t think of it. They said over a period 
of the next few months he should start to respond and [make] progress.”

The WBA and WBO are expected to make imminent decisions regarding the world 
titles Fury has vacated, with Anthony Joshua and David Haye among the 
contenders. The BBBC will also have to take more permanent action regarding his 
licence, and Peter Fury urged them to take his condition into account.

“The board needs to understand that he’s got a severe depression problem,” he 
said. “He’s got all of his reports to go with it. He’s attending the necessary 
clinics. Once Tyson Fury produces all of his records of what he’s been through, 
the boxing board I don’t think will have any option but to give him his licence 
back because this is a guy that’s needing medical treatment.

“Once the powers that be say he’s fit to box and he’s OK there’s no reason why 
he can’t be reinstated.

“He is the linear heavyweight champion of the world. He’s done what nobody 
else could do. He’s in the pinnacle of his career. He’s only 28 years of age. 
He’s got a massive future.

“He is controversial. He lights up boxing, whether it be good or bad. I think 
it’s a case of he is the world champion, the true world champion. I think when 
he does come back he’ll be welcomed with open arms. Especially the way he’s 
voluntarily relinquished his belts.”

Fury is the subject of a UK Anti-Doping investigation for the anabolic steroid 
and a hearing into his alleged doping violation had been scheduled for 
November. The conclusion to the case could yet influence the BBBC’s next move.

While inactive in 2010, Ricky Hatton had his licence withdrawn after he was 
found guilty of misconduct amid allegations he had snorted cocaine. He 
successfully reapplied for his licence two years later.

The suspension of Fury’s however, is complicated by the doping allegations 
that emerged in June but date back to February 2015. They were reported shortly 
after he postponed his scheduled rematch with Klitschko, citing an ankle 
injury, and before the latest controversies in which he has been involved.

Since then, Fury had failed to appear at a press conference to promote the 
rematch amid claims of his car breaking down and his phone running out of 
battery, and withdrew from the 29 October date after being declared “medically 
unfit” to fight.

At that time those around him revealed he was struggling with depression. Fury 
shortly afterwards announced his retirement on Twitter before backtracking 
three hours later. At that point he told Rolling Stone of the struggles he was 
undergoing.
 