
Tyson Fury launched a foul-mouthed tirade at Wladimir Klitschko as the pair 
traded insultsbefore their rematch in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/tyson-fury-rematch-wladimir-klitschko-july-manchester>
 on 9 July.

After the Ukrainian veteran had suggested the new heavyweight champion’s image 
was bad for boxing and that he looked forward to there being “a champion that 
represents the sport in a good way and can be looked up to”, Fury responded by 
mocking Klitschko and doing an impersonation of him.

“He can make all the excuses – ‘I was having a bad day, my fingernail broke,”’ 
Fury said of their first fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
.

“Who gives a shit what happened to your fingernails? You got beaten fair and 
square the first time in Germany. You got whupped.

“You will need to be about 1,000 times better because you landed about four 
shots in 12 rounds.

“You might be going down as a Hall of Fame fighter but you are hall of dogshit 
fighter in my eyes.

“If the super champion can’t land on a big, fat, lazy Gypsy with a loud mouth, 
what kind of super champion is he? He must be a shit one.”

Fury, who beat Klitschko on points last November in Germany to become world 
champion,has provoked outrage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/tyson-fury-british-boxing-board-sexist-comments>
 by equating homosexuality and abortion with paedophilia and saying a woman’s 
“best place is on her back”.

The 40-year-old Klitschko, speaking at the Manchester Arena where the next 
fight will be held, said of him: “I’m not OK with what comes out of Fury’s 
mouth, his statements – for example that all homosexual men and women and 
paedophiles belong in the same place, in jail basically. That all women belong 
in the kitchen and on their back.

“So that is basically where he sees Elton John and the Queen. To all people 
who say the same and think the same way out there and to you Fury – I want to 
say fuck off.”
 