
Tyson Fury has claimed a sheikh in Dubai offered to host his world heavyweight 
title rematch withWladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> aboard a yacht in a bout 
that could have been worth $120m [£82m].

Fury is contractually obliged to face Klitschko again after ending the 
Ukrainian’s near 10-year reign as world champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
 last November and says “there are five possible venues” for later this year.

Tyson Fury escapes punishment but is reminded of his ‘heavy responsibilities’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/tyson-fury-british-boxing-board-sexist-comments>
While Wembley and Croke Park in Dublin as well as locations in Germany, Abu 
Dhabi and Qatar have been discussed, the WBA and WBO champion claimed he had 
received an extraordinary proposal by an unnamed sheikh to hold the fight on 
his yacht amid a media blackout.

According to the 27-year-old, the showdown would only be available to 120 
audience members, each paying $1m for a ticket.

“There are five possible venues. I’m hoping it’s not going to go back to 
Germany. I’d rather go to Abu Dhabi or Qatar than there,”he told the Daily 
Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/othersports/boxing/tyson-fury/12139100/Tyson-Fury-Ive-been-offered-120million-to-fight-Wladimir-Klitschko-on-board-a-luxury-super-yacht.html>
. “We even had negotiations to have it on a cruise ship. There was a sheikh in 
Dubai who owned a yacht which would fit only 120 people on.

“He didn’t want to broadcast the fight anywhere and he said he could sell 120 
tickets at $1m each, so that would have been $120m. He wanted to have an 
exclusive heavyweight championship of the world fight with no TV station, with 
just those 120 people watching.

“He didn’t say how much I would get, but I probably would have had the biggest 
half of the $120m – so I was all for it. I don’t think it’s possible now, but 
it would have been an epic story.”

However, Fury has cast doubt on the fight even going ahead and suggested he 
may walk away from the sport altogether. The Briton, who has threatened to 
retire in the past, told BBC Radio 5 live: “I’m struggling to get motivated.

“I could walk away. I could just sail into the sunset unbeaten with all the 
belts and live a normal life. All that I would be boxing for is money and I 
always thought to myself I never want to let sport become about money.”
 