
Fighters fight, or so the old adage goes. World heavyweight boxing champion 
Tyson Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> is fighting for his 
life against the most daunting opponent he can face, the snarling black dog of 
depression. The tools of his trade, his fists, will be obsolete in this fight. 
The battle he is facing will be ongoing with no final bell being sounded.

Fury is a man who specialises in infuriating people. He plays to the peanut 
gallery with soundbites that vary from the bizarre to the highly offensive.The 
defining victory of his career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
, against Wladimir Klitschko, should have been feted for years, instead his 
boxing triumph was obscured by the force of a feckless tongue.

Wladimir Klitschko accuses Tyson Fury of ‘dragging boxing through the mud’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/wladimir-klitschko-accuses-tyson-fury-of-dragging-boxing-through-the-mud>
Historically, the heavyweight champion of the world has symbolised something 
bigger than boxing. It defined a large, strong and powerful man who represented 
a physical zenith. Time has moved on, and the myriad of title belts and quality 
has lessened its impact. Yet, the symbolism of a heavyweight boxing champion 
who is inactive due to his mental health is a haunting and painful image.

Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> is an unforgiving sport in 
the ring and, most pertinently, in the boardroom. Fighters cannot lose focus 
for a second, a slightly misjudged guard can leave them damaged permanently. 
Similarly, outside of the ropes, they must be careful who they trust in 
managing their careers, financially and professionally. Fury will not 
anticipate much sympathy or compassion from the governing bodies during his 
inactivity. He is a physical commodity to them and, without his fists, he is 
rendered obsolete.

Fury’s situation has been blamed on winning the heavyweight crown and the 
negative reaction of the public towards him after he picked up the belt. 
However,speaking to Donald McRae five years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/nov/05/tyson-fury-interview>, he 
highlighted his difficulties. “One minute I’m over the moon and the next minute 
I feel like getting in my car and running it into a wall at a hundred miles an 
hour. I don’t know what’s wrong with me. I’m messed up.”

For many fighters, their psychological problems are at their most stark 
outside of the ring.Ricky Hatton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/29/ricky-hatton-depression-pacquiao-manny>
 andFrank Bruno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/oct/09/frank-bruno-world-mental-health-day>
 openly faced battles with depression after moving on from the fight game and 
losing their raison d’être. Fury faced mental difficulties before he won the 
heavyweight title and he faces them even more acutely now as the warm glare of 
the spotlight shines on him.

Why I run: to live | Jonathan Drennan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/apr/13/why-i-run-to-live>
Mental health issues are not easily diagnosed or cured. One of the most 
effective and simple antidotes is basic human compassion and understanding. He 
needs to know that he will receive love and understanding from those that care 
about him.

Fury may never fight again and it doesn’t really matter at the moment. As he 
faces the sound and the fury of critics who lament another missed boxing fight, 
his focus should only be on his mental health and the small steps he needs to 
take to find some sort of semblance of happiness and balance within his life.

Depression is indiscriminate, relentless and can claw at every vestibule of 
the mind. The boxing community needs to unite and show him compassion. There is 
no time to waste. The alternative is too horrible to imagine.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Helplines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>

• This article is from Behind the Lines <https://jdrennan13.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Jonathan Drennan <https://twitter.com/jwdrennan> on Twitter
 