
Tyson Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> has voluntarily 
vacated his WBO and WBA world heavyweight titles with immediate effect to focus 
on his medical treatment and recovery.

Fury recently withdrew from a rematch with Wladimir Klitschko for the second 
time after being declared “medically unfit” and courted more controversy after 
it was reported he had tested positive for cocaine. The British Boxing Board of 
Control wasset to discuss removing Fury’s licence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/wladimir-klitschko-anthony-joshua-tyson-fury-board-meeting-world-title>
 on Wednesday, which would have led to him being stripped of the belts, but the 
boxer has beaten them to the punch by vacating them.

The 28-year-old said in a statement: “I won the titles in the ring and I 
believe that they should be lost in the ring but I’m unable to defend at this 
time and I have taken the hard and emotional decision to now officially vacate 
my treasured world titles and wish the next-in-line contenders all the very 
best as I now enter another big challenge in my life which I know, like against 
Klitschko, I will conquer.”

Fury upset the odds by beating the Ukrainian Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
 in November 2015, also claiming the IBO belt, but he has yet to honour a 
rematch, twice pulling out.

Fury added: “I feel that it is only fair and right and for the good of boxing 
to keep the titles active and allow the other contenders to fight for the 
vacant belts that I proudly won and held as the undefeated heavyweight champion 
of the world when I defeated the long-standing championWladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko>.”

Fury recently told Rolling Stone magazine that he had been taking cocaine to 
help with depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-cocaine-live-anymore-boxing>
 and he will now seek medical care.

His promoters, Hennessy Sports, added in a statement: “Out of respect for the 
governing bodies, the sport of boxing and the heavyweight division Tyson has 
made the difficult decision to vacate the belts. This will also allow him the 
time and space to fully recover from his present condition without any undue 
pressure and with the expert medical attention he requires and his close family 
support.”

The move looks set to hand Klitschko and Anthony Joshua the chance to fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/anthony-joshua-wladimir-klitschko-2016-showdown>
 for the vacant heavyweight titles.

Negotiations are ongoing between Klitschko and Joshua, with promoter Eddie 
Hearn hoping to get the fight on in December.

Tyson Fury is facing his toughest opponent and needs our compassion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/oct/07/tyson-fury-boxing-depression-compassion> 