
Tyson Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> has admitted taking 
cocaine as he battles bipolar disorder, with the world heavyweight champion 
once again casting doubt on whether he will box again.

Fury, who backtracked from his pledge to retire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/tyson-fury-retirement-boxing-twitter>
 from the sport on Monday, is receiving professional help for mental health 
issues that have arisen as a result of what he called a “witch-hunt” against 
him following his victory against Wladimir Klitschko in November last year.

Tyson Fury is having a laugh – a sad and lonely one | Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-sad-lonely-world-heavyweight-champion>
The 28-year-old pulled out of his proposed rematch with Klitschko last month 
and it has since been reported that he tested positive for cocaine. In his 
first interview for several months,with Rolling Stone magazine 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/sports/tyson-fury-boxing-champ-opens-up-about-drug-use-w443250>
, which was published on Tuesday, Fury admitted that he had taken the drug “in 
the last few months” and raised questions about whether he would even live to 
the end of the year.

“It’s been a witch-hunt ever since I won that world title,” he said. “Ever 
since I got a bit of fame for doing good there’s been a witch-hunt on me 
because of my background, because of who I am and what I do, there’s hatred for 
travellers and gypsies around the world. Especially in the United Kingdom.

“Especially with the British Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> 
Board of Control and some of the sanctioning bodies of the world titles. From 
then on, they’ve tried to get me chucked out of boxing because they cannot tame 
me, they cannot hire me, I’m not for sale, no one can turn a key in my back, no 
one can do nothing to stop me. So now they’re saying I took some cocaine and 
whatever.”

Asked if he meant that he had never taken cocaine, Fury said: “Listen, I’ve 
done a lot of things in my life. I’ve done lots of cocaine. Lots of it. Why 
shouldn’t I take cocaine? It’s my life, isn’t it? I can do what I want. Yeah, I 
have done cocaine. Plenty of people have done cocaine as well. What the fuck 
has that got to do with anything? That ain’t a performance-enhancing drug.
GYPSYKING, (@Tyson_Fury) 
The everyday racist behaviour in 2016 😢😢😢😢😢😢😢😢 
pic.twitter.com/XX8G8KgQcc <https://t.co/XX8G8KgQcc>
 <https://twitter.com/Tyson_Fury/status/783393326162644992> October 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Tyson_Fury/status/783393326162644992> 
“ Am I not allowed to have a life now as well? Do they want to take my 
personal life off me, too? I’ve not been in a gym for months. I’ve not been 
training. I’ve been going through depression. I just don’t want to live any 
more, if you know what I’m saying. I’ve had total enough of it. They’ve forced 
me to the breaking edge. Never mind cocaine. I just didn’t care. I don’t want 
to live any more. So cocaine is a little minor thing compared to not wanting to 
live any more.

“I hope I die every day. And that’s a bad thing to say when I’ve got three 
children and a lovely wife, isn’t it? But I don’t want to live any more. And if 
I could take me own life – and I wasn’t a Christian – I’d take it in a second. 
I just hope someone kills me before I kill me self. I’ll have to spend eternity 
in hell.”

Fury, who was stripped of his IBF title when it became clear he planned to 
face Klitschko again instead of the mandatory challenger Vyacheslav Glazkov, 
had postponed the first defence of his WBO and WBA titles from July because of 
an ankle injury. But he admitted that he has been trying to postpone the fight 
in a bid to deal with his depression.

“To be honest, yes. I’ve not been in the gym for months. I’ve been awol. I’ve 
been out drinking, anything to get me mind off what’s been going on to me. You 
wouldn’t understand it if I told you. It’s so corrupt. And the real people 
inside of boxing know what’s going on. They know it.

“I don’t see a way out, I don’t even see a way of living for me, I don’t want 
to live any more. It has brought me to the brink of death, that’s where I’m at 
at the moment.

“It is crazy, that’s what’s going on, but listen, I don’t really care. They’ve 
won. They’ve got what they wanted. That’s it. I’m as fat as pig. I’m 285 
pounds, 290 pounds. It is what it is. I’ve been out. I’ve been an emotional 
wreck.”

Fury was then asked whether he was still taking cocaine. “I stopped it all on 
the first of the month,” he responded. “I’m trying to forget about it all. I’m 
putting boxing behind me, the drinking, the drugs, just getting back in the 
church and right with God. Cause that’s all that matters with me. This is me 
first and last interview. I just want time alone with my family, I’m going 
through a lot of personal demons, I’ve got demons on me, I’m trying to shake 
them all off. I want a normal life. I don’t want to box any more, I don’t want 
it no more.”
 