
Tyson Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> is likely to lose 
one of his two remaining world heavyweight titles before the end of the month 
after the president of the World Boxing Organisation confirmed it will discuss 
the troubled fighter’s status as its champion at a meeting on 17 October.

Officials from the WBO will gather for their annual convention in San Juan, 
Puerto Rico, and Paco Valcárcel told the Guardian a decision relating to Fury 
will be finalised at the four-day meeting.

Fury faces being stripped of his WBO belt, which he secured alongside the IBF 
and WBA versions bybeating Wladimir Klitschko in Düsseldorf last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
, given the discussions in Puerto Rico will focus on his absence from the ring 
since his shock victory 11 months ago and allegations hetested positive for 
cocaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/tyson-fury-tests-positive-cocaine-unlikely-to-be-banned>
 in September. Fury hardly helped his cause by claiminghe had taken “lots of” 
the class A drug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-cocaine-live-anymore-boxing>
 in order to deal with a bipolar disorder in an interview with Rolling Stone 
magazine published this week.

“We will be writing to Tyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> before the convention asking him 
to explain his inactivity as well as his comments regarding drug taking,” 
Valcárcel said. “It is possible he has gone against WBO rules and guidelines in 
a way that would not allow him to continue as champion.”

The news comes as the British Boxing Board of Control confirmed it will decide 
next week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/tyson-fury-licence-discussion-british-boxing-board-control>
whether or not to withdraw Fury’s licence, partly in light of his remarks to 
Rolling Stone, in which he reiterated his belief he was the victim of a “witch 
hunt” and claimed “personal demons” had driven him to “the brink of death”.

“We have a meeting on 12 October. All of Mr Fury’s recent issues will be 
discussed at that point, after which we’ll see what we’re going to do,” said 
the BBBC general secretary, Robert Smith. “There are a number of issues with Mr 
Fury that need to be considered, that have been well-publicised.”

Speaking in regards to the alleged failed drugs test, which according to ESPN 
came from a urine sample Fury gave to the Las Vegas-based Voluntary Anti-Doping 
Association on 22 September, Smith said: “Cocaine is against the law of the 
land. We can’t ignore the law of the land. It’s drug use and we will deal with 
it accordingly.”

Ricky Hatton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rickyhatton> was stripped of 
his licence amid allegations of cocaine use, as well as for a lack of activity 
in the ring, six years ago and the former IBF light welterweight champion is 
among a number of past and present fighters who have offered their support to 
Fury. “I’ve sent a text to Tyson asking him to give me a ring if he needs me,” 
the 37-year-old told the Manchester Evening News. “I’ve had some bad moments 
like what I’m hearing about him, so I want to make sure he’s OK.” Speaking to 
TalkSport, the WBC cruiserweight champion, Tony Bellew, said: “He [Fury] is at 
fault but he’s not well and I wish the country would get behind him.”

Fury was stripped of his IBF title in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/09/ibf-tyson-fury-world-heavyweight-title>
 after agreeing to a rematch with Klitschko instead of facing the mandatory 
challenger Vyacheslav Glazkov. The 28-year-old thenpulled out of facing 
Klitschko last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-rematch-called-off>
 after his camp claimed he was “medically unfit” to take on the Ukrainian as 
scheduled on 29 October.

The WBA are also considering whether of not to strip Fury of their version of 
the heavyweight title but when contacted by the Guardian could not confirm when 
that decision will be made.
 