
An agreement is in place for the rematch between Tyson Fury and Wladimir 
Klitschko <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> for the WBA 
and WBO heavyweight titles to take place in Manchester on 9 July, according to 
the British fighter’s trainer and uncle Peter Fury.

Tyson Fury shocks Wladimir Klitschko to take world heavyweight title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
Peter Fury wrote on Twitter. “(On) 9th July Tyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> vs Klitschko is coming to 
Manchester Uk. Official announcement coming 12 noon.”

A rematch between the two has effectively been under negotiation since Fury 
unexpectedly outpointed Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
 in Düsseldorf in November to win the WBA, WBO and IBF titles and become the 
first to defeat him in 11 years.

The 40-year-old Klitschko almost instantly activated the rematch clause that 
had been in the first fight’s contract, which led to Fury being stripped of the 
IBF title through his inability to defend it against the mandatory challenger, 
Vyacheslav Glazkov.

Negotiations have been progressing slowly since then, with several venues in 
the UK and Germany under consideration.

It is understood Fury’s manager and promoter, Mick Hennessy, who spent much of 
the previous week overlooking another of his fighters,the injured Nick Blackwell
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/04/nick-blackwell-woke-induced-coma-talking-to-family-boxing>
, has this week been working with Klitschko’s manager, Bernd Boente.

Charles Martin says conditioning coach will ensure victory over Anthony Joshua
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/charles-martin-anthony-joshua-garry-matthews-ibf-heavyweight-title-boxing>
Fury suffered a minor back injury last month but said recently he believes the 
delay in an announcement has been down to Klitschko’s hope he will gain weight 
if given time off. “I think they think I will put on 10 stone and self-detonate 
but that’s not going to happen,” he said. “When I get the date, I’ll go 
straight back in the gym and start working it off.

“I’ve got a back injury. An old injury flared up when I went over to help 
Hughie [his cousin] out for his fight [on 26 March]. I got taken to hospital 
and ever since then, every time I get punched in the back, it goes into a 
spasm, like a trapped nerve. It’s a painful experience. But, listen, when they 
announce the date, I’ll be ready, back injury or not.”

He has also exchanged insults on Twitter over the last week with Anthony Joshua
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/05/tyson-fury-anthony-joshua-war-of-words>
, who in London on Saturdaychallenges Charles Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/charles-martin-anthony-joshua-garry-matthews-ibf-heavyweight-title-boxing>
 for what was once Fury’s IBF title.
 