
Tyson Fury’s serial burlesque continued in Cologne on Thursday but the world 
heavyweight champion did not sound as if he was joking when he said he would 
probably quit boxing if he lost his rematch withWladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> in Manchester on 9 July.

Whether the Mancunian was serious when he claimed he was a “recovering heroin 
addict” who still took cocaine and ecstasy was impossible to know, given his 
innate capacity for irreverence and wind-up. But Fury sounded convincing when 
he revealed that, after a few days on a natural high when he beat Klitschko in 
Düsseldorf in November last year, he was “rock bottom”, adding: “What does it 
all really mean? Nothing, does it …

Tyson Fury a wrecking ball close to self-destruction in Klitschko buildup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/tyson-fury-wrecking-ball-self-destruction-wladimir-klitschko>
“I’m still trying to figure what life’s all about. Life’s about family, I 
suppose, being happy with your surroundings, and your wife and kids … But 
obviously I don’t fit in anywhere. I’ll be searching till the day I die.”

Four stone overweight, and appearing bored and detached, Fury went into the 
Ukrainian’s backyard and reiterated his distaste for boxing, whichlit up their 
meeting the previous day in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/tyson-fury-wrecking-ball-self-destruction-wladimir-klitschko>
. He toldthe video interviewer Kugan Cassius 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DKeHAZhqDxA&feature=youtu.be&a>: “I don’t like 
it. I’ve done what I’ve got to do now and I want to get out of it. That’s it. 
As soon as I can get out the better.”

Asked if that meant he would walk away if he lost to the former champion, he 
said: “Probably, yeah … unless I can get some big money somewhere else.”

That would send a minor shudder through his team, his promoter, TV backers – 
not to mention his chief rival, Anthony Joshua – but the unpredictable Fury has 
always been his own man. His uncompromising views on women and homosexuality 
have offended many – including Klitschko, who repeated his previous disapproval 
of them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ftyson-fury-to-klitchsko-shame-on-you-you-let-a-fat-man-beat-you-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shirtless%20Fury%20to%20Klitschko%3A%20'Shame%20on%20you%2C%20you%20let%20a%20fat%20man%20beat%20you'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ftyson-fury-to-klitchsko-shame-on-you-you-let-a-fat-man-beat-you-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shirtless%20Fury%20to%20Klitschko%3A%20%27Shame%20on%20you%2C%20you%20let%20a%20fat%20man%20beat%20you%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ftyson-fury-to-klitchsko-shame-on-you-you-let-a-fat-man-beat-you-video&media=>
Shirtless Fury to Klitschko: ‘Shame on you, you let a fat man beat you’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/apr/28/tyson-fury-to-klitchsko-shame-on-you-you-let-a-fat-man-beat-you-video>
Fury cares little for the opinions of others – including the television 
personality Piers Morgan, who goaded him on Twitter. “Piers tweeted a fat 
picture of me, saying he’s fitter than the heavyweight champion of the world 
and inspirational. I tweeted back saying: ‘If only you could talk like me you’d 
have your chat show in America back on TV.’”

He said he must be “doing something right” if he was attracting the interest 
of celebrities but added: “I’m not really interested. I’ve got no celebrity 
friends. I’ve got no different friends than I’ve had all my life. Just the same 
person, a simple person. Don’t live an extravagant lifestyle.

“Just want to be left alone in peace, really, so I can have a chicken 
sandwich. I’ve said it a lot of times, haven’t I? So, it must be true, what I’m 
saying. After this fight I’ll have enough money to retire and there’ll be no 
motivation to carry on.”

He also said he would gladly swap roles with his wife, Paris, if she wanted to 
take the punches and he could stay at home and do the housework. “Of course I 
would. I’d happily sit at home, drive a brand new Range Rover about and go 
spending money how you like… chilling out with your friends and taking your 
kids to school. It’s an easy life, isn’t it? Easy life of a housewife.”

He has spoken before about handling depression, and said there was “no 
in-between” for him. “It’s either high or low. I’m either off my head on 
cocaine or down on the floor from a tranquiliser injection. Most of the time, 
I’m just down and depressed like today, because for every high there’s a low.”

As for the fight, he said: “I don’t care whether I win or lose. Win or lose, I 
don’t know what’s going to happen… I’m sick of it. I’ll tell you what would be 
funny, if I turned up in this shape for the fight. I’d be fucked after five 
rounds.”

For now, he was going to “see the wife and kids at the weekend, then back to 
training, get some weight off”.

As much as he tries to sound nonchalant about the prospect of sharing the ring 
again with the best heavyweight of the past decade, there is growing concern in 
Fury’s camp about his attitude.

His trainer and uncle, Peter, told Sky: “This is a genuine 50-50 fight. 
Klitschko knows what to expect. Tyson knows what to expect. Knowing Tyson so 
well and knowing boxing a little bit, and I see a stoppage in this fight. I 
don’t see it going to the distance.

“I’m not a man to exaggerate my words. This is the way I see this fight 
panning out for either man. You are one punch away from disaster in heavyweight 
boxing. It’s what makes it so exciting for everyone around the world. Enjoy the 
fight and may the best man win.”

That sounded very much like a trainer seriously worried that his fighter has 
lost the focus that lifted him to the best performance of his career less than 
six months ago.
 