
The British Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of Control 
will decide in a meeting on 12 October whether it will withdraw Tyson Fury’s 
licence.

Tyson Fury: I took cocaine but don’t want to live any more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-cocaine-live-anymore-boxing>
Fury, the WBO and WBA heavyweight champion, was previously scheduled to earn 
the biggest purse of his career in a rematch with Wladimir Klitschko on 29 
October.

After what has perhaps been the most damaging fortnight of his career, he 
could instead face a lengthier period out of the ring.In a dark interview with 
Rolling Stone published on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-cocaine-live-anymore-boxing>
, Fury appeared to confirm reports he had tested positive for cocaine by 
discussing using “lots of” the drug. He also said he was uncertain if he will 
“see the year out”.

The publication say that interview took place on Monday, after he took to 
Twitter to announce his retirement but before he back-tracked just three hours 
later. Five days previously it was reported he had tested positive for cocaine.

On 30 September, Fury withdrew from the Klitschko rematch – having already 
postponed it citing an ankle injury – when a statement from his manager, Mick 
Hennessy, explained he was “medically unfit” to fight. He is also scheduled to 
attend a hearing in November for an alleged doping violation.

Tyson Fury is having a laugh – a sad and lonely one | Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-sad-lonely-world-heavyweight-champion>
In 2010 the Board withdrew the licence of the inactive Ricky Hatton amid 
allegations of cocaine use, and when asked of its plans for Fury, the general 
secretary Robert Smith said: “The board meets next week and we’ll discuss it, 
I’m fairly sure. The meeting won’t be forTyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> alone. We have a meeting on 
October 12. All of Mr Fury’s recent issues will be discussed at that point, 
after which we’ll see what we’re going to do.

“He is licensed by us. The sanctioning bodies, the WBO, WBA – they are not 
governing bodies – they can strip him, declare the titles vacant, or he can 
vacate them. We deal with the licence so in theory, if we were to suspend him 
they would have no choice but to strip him because he can’t defend them, can he?

“There are a number of issues with Mr Fury that need to be considered, that 
have been well-publicised. We’ve had other issues this weekend that have been 
more important than Tyson Fury [such as the death of the fighter Mike Towell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/01/mike-towells-partner-and-promoter-pay-tribute-to-boxer-following-his-death-video-report>
]. Cocaine is against the law of the land. We can’t ignore the law of the land. 
It’s drug use and we will deal with it accordingly.

“Mr Hatton had his licence withdrawn, and had a hearing. You can’t just take a 
man’s licence away without taking the proper procedures, if we decide that’s 
the right thing to do.”

Fury had told Rolling Stone: “Listen, I’ve done a lot of things in my life. 
I’ve done lots of cocaine. Lots of it. Why shouldn’t I take cocaine? It’s my 
life, isn’t it? I can do what I want. Yeah, I have done cocaine. Plenty of 
people have done cocaine as well.

“I’ve not been in a gym for months. I’ve not been training. I’ve been going 
through depression. I just don’t want to live any more, if you know what I’m 
saying. I’ve had enough of it.

“I’m in a very bad place at the moment. I don’t know whether I’m coming or 
going. I don’t know what’s going to happen to me. I don’t know if I’m going to 
see the year out, to be honest.”

The 28-year-old, who also became the IBF heavyweight champion the night he 
unexpectedly outpointed Klitschko 11 months ago, was stripped of that title 
when agreeing to a rematch instead of facing the mandatory challenger 
Vyacheslav Glazkov.

He retains the WBO and WBA titles but his inactivity and the potential 
withdrawal of his licence make it increasingly likely that will change.
 