
The fears that boxing’s joker-in-chief Tyson Fury was skating close to 
self-destruction were given stark and embarrassing substance when the world 
heavyweight champion was reunited withWladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> in Manchester on 
Wednesday. Not only was he unashamedly overweight just over two months from 
their hugely anticipated rematch, but he ranted like a man in search of a 
friend. Any friend.

Fury will, no doubt, shed the superfluous weight before they share a ring at 
Manchester Arena on 9 July, but it is not a good look for a champion so 
dismissive of his arch-rival, Anthony Joshua, whom he describes as no more than 
a bodybuilder after he annexed the IBF version of the titlewhen he knocked out 
the deeply unimpressive Charles Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/10/anthony-johsua-tyson-fury-world-heavyweight-champion>
.

There could not be a greater disparity between Britain’s two claimants to what 
was once the biggest prize in sport. Joshua, the unbeaten Watford heavyweight, 
is already chiselled to near-perfection as he prepares for his first defence, 
against the American Dominic Breazeale, which takes place in London only two 
weeks before Fury-Klitschko.


Tyson Fury and Wladimir Klitschko trade insults in buildup to rematch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-rematch-insults-boxing>
Klitschko, who has always been an exemplary champion, well-spoken, respectful 
and intelligent, has had to put up with plenty from British challengers before:
Fury in his Batman pastiche clowning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/23/tyson-fury-wladimir-klitschko-batman-costume>
 before they fought last November and whenDavid Haye showed Wladimir and his 
brother Vitaly headless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/apr/17/david-haye-wladimir-klitschko-heavyweight-title>
 on a platter before his toe gave up on him in a limp challenge for the title.

But this went into new, disturbing territory. As Klitschko said on Wednesday: 
“I want to be a champion who represents the sport in a good way and be looked 
up to. I’m not OK with what comes out of Fury’s mouth. For example: that all 
homosexual men and women and paedophiles belong in the same place, in jail 
basically. That all women belong in the kitchen and on their back. So that is 
basically where he sees Elton John and the Queen.

“To all people who say the same and think the same way out there, and to you 
Fury – I want to say fuck off.”

It was then that the tone dipped alarming. Stripping off his shirt to show an 
expanse of under-trained belly, Fury countered: “I don’t live a strict 
lifestyle – I don’t even live an athlete’s lifestyle. It is an absolute 
disgrace to call me an athlete. Shame on you – you let a fat man beat you!”

The verbal blows kept coming. “Boxing doesn’t mean a lot to me. If it did, I 
wouldn’t have gone into camp four stone overweight and eaten every pie in 
Lancashire and drunk every pint of beer in the UK. I hate every second of it, 
and I wish I wasn’t a boxer, but I’m in this position.

“I hate the training, the boxing, speaking to you, all you idiots, the whole 
lot. I’d rather be at home with the kids watching television. I hate boxing, 
but I’m just too fucking good at it and making too much money to stop.

“I’m like a performing monkey. I am really a joke, aren’t I? Every time I play 
the bad guy, the villain, the outlaw, the outcast. But the majority of people 
like to see that.”

It is a shame it has come to this. It could be by some way the better of the 
two world heavyweight title fights that bookend Wimbledon. But there is a 
distinct chance it could be a night to remember for all the wrong reasons. 
Somebody needs to have a word with Fury. He is in danger of wrecking his 
magnificent achievement and Klitschko will be merciless in that process.
 