
Tyson Fury’s rematch with Wladimir Klitschko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> will be called off for a 
second time after the world champion was declared medically unfit to fight.

The pair had been due to meet in Manchester on 29 October, with Fury defending 
the WBA and WBO heavyweight belts he took off Klitschko last November.

Floyd Mayweather 'must move on' after failing to make Conor McGregor fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/floyd-mayweather-conor-mcgregor-fight-boxing>
A statement from Fury’s promoters Hennessy Sports confirmed the postponement: 
“It is with the deepest regret that we have to announce that the World 
Heavyweight Championship rematch betweenTyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> and Wladimir Klitschko, 
scheduled to take place on the 29th October 2016 at the Manchester Arena, will 
not be going ahead.

“Tyson has, this week, been declared medically unfit to fight. Medical 
specialists have advised that the condition is too severe to allow him to 
participate in the rematch and that he will require treatment before going back 
into the ring. Tyson will now immediately undergo the treatment he needs to 
make a full recovery.

“We and Tyson wish to express our sincerest apologies to all those concerned 
with the event and all the boxing fans who had been looking forward to the 
rematch. Tyson is understandably devastated by the development.”

One attempt at a rematch has already been abandoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/tyson-fury-pulls-out-wladimir-klitschko-injury>
 because of an ankle injury sustained by Fury and it is now understood the 
fight will be called off for a second time.

After Fury’s injury it then emerged that UK-Anti Doping (Ukad) had charged the 
champion, over a urine sample taken in February 2015, and his cousin Hughie 
with a doping offence.

It was alleged the sample – taken nine months before his defeat of Klitschko – 
contained traces of the banned substance nandrolone. Fury was provisionally 
suspended, but that ban has since been lifted, and his legal team said they 
would be suing Ukad over the allegations. His hearing will be held in November.

Fury was last week due to attend a press conference with Klitschko but failed 
to show up, with his manager citing car problems. There was no comment from 
either camp on Friday.
 