
The world heavyweight champion Tyson Fury, who last week pulled out of his 
proposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/tyson-fury-peter-fury-wladimir-klitschko>
 rematch with Wladimir Klitschko citing mental health issues, has reportedly 
tested positive for cocaine.

Fury, who holds the WBA and WBO world titles, was said to have been informed 
on Thursday night that his A sample from a random urine test on 22 September 
had tested positive for the substance benzoylecgonine, the central compound 
found in cocaine. Fury pulled out of the rematch a day after the test.

Boxer Mike Towell dies after suffering severe bleeding to his brain in bout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/scottish-boxer-mike-towell-dies-after-bout>
The news was broken by ESPN, which quoted a letter from the Voluntary 
Anti-Doping Agency (Vada) president, Dr Margaret Goodman, to representatives 
for Fury, Klitschko, the British Boxing Board of Control and the United States’ 
Association of Boxing Commissions. In it Goodman wrote: “This letter is to 
advise you that the ‘A’ sample urine specimen number 4006253 collected from
Tyson Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury> on September 22, 2016 
in Lancaster, England through his participation in the Voluntary Anti-Doping 
Association program has been analysed for anabolic agents, diuretics, beta-2 
agonists, stimulants and drugs of abuse. The results of the analysis are as 
follows: Adverse. Urine specimen contains benzoylecgonine.”

However in an email to the Guardian, Goodman said that Vada would not be 
commenting on story and that they “do not release results publicly unless 
requested by the athlete”. Even if the positive test is confirmed Fury is 
unlikely to face a ban from competing as cocaine is not prohibited when it is 
taken out of competition under World Anti-Doping Agency rules. However with the 
WBO having requested he provide evidence that he was “mentally unfit” to fight 
against Klitschko by Wednesday, and the IBO having also asked him for a medical 
report, the 28-year-old from Morecambe still faces the prospect of losing one 
or more of his world title belts before he next steps in the ring. Separately 
Fury also has a UK Anti-Doping investigation hanging over him after a sample
tested positive for the anabolic steroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/tyson-fury-suing-uk-anti-doping-over-nandrolone-allegations>
 nandrolone last year. However he denies any wrongdoing and is contesting those 
charges.

Fury won the world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/nov/28/wladimir-klitschko-v-tyson-fury-boxing-live>
 with a convincing points victory over Klitschko last November but since then 
he has made headlines for what he has done outside the ring. His rematch 
against Klitschko was originally due to take place in Manchester during the 
summer but Fury pulled out citing an ankle injury. Earlier he had admitted he 
was five stone over his fighting weight having eaten and drunk to excess.

The fight was then rescheduled for 29 October but doubts were raised about it 
going ahead when Fury didn’t show up for the press conference in London on 10 
September, claiming that his car had broken down on the motorway and his phone 
battery had also died. Those fears were realised less than a fortnight later 
when Fury was declared medically unfit to fight.

Tyson Fury seeking professional help after ‘witch-hunt’, says uncle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/tyson-fury-peter-fury-wladimir-klitschko>
Bernd Bönte, Klitschko’s manager, responded to the cocaine claim by telling 
ESPN: “I think Fury is probably the most unworthy heavyweight champion in 
history, not only because of this situation but because of the whole package of 
his sexist comments, his antisemitic comments and his homophobic comments that 
have been [well documented].”

It was widely reported that Fury had severe depression, with a statement from 
Hennessy Sports saying he was “devastated” when the rematch was called off. A 
statement released last week added: “Medical specialists have advised that the 
condition is too severe to allow him to participate in the rematch and that he 
will require treatment before going back into the ring. Tyson will now 
immediately undergo the treatment he needs to make a full recovery.”

Neither Fury’s representatives nor the BBBC were available for comment when 
contacted by the Guardian. A Ukad spokesperson said: “UK Anti-Doping will not 
discuss or disclose information relating to cases, until due legal process has 
been completed.”
 