
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> has launched an appeal 
against a landmark employment tribunal ruling that its minicab drivers should 
be classed as workers with access to the minimum wage, sick pay and paid 
holidays.

The taxi-app company filed papers with the appeal tribunal on Tuesday in an 
attempt to overturn the October judgment that, if it stands, could affect tens 
of thousands of workers inthe gig economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/03/gig-economy-zero-hours-contracts-ethics>
.

The Uber driver trying to support his family: 'We are not earning enough'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/09/uber-driver-trying-to-support-family-not-earning-enough>
The move came as several dozen Uber drivers picketed City Hall on Wednesday 
holding placards demanding Transport for London, which licences Uber as a 
private hire operator in the capital, “endsweated labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/09/uber-drivers-report-sweated-labour-minimum-wage>
 now”. It also mounted a protest at the City of London offices of Salesforce, a 
US computing company that is a major Uber client.

Two Uber drivers, James Farrar and Yaseen Aslam, took Uber to court on behalf 
of a group 19 others who argued that they were employed by the San 
Francisco-based company, rather than working for themselves. Uber’s business 
model has been based on treating drivers who log on to its app as self-employed 
contractors and taking a cut of their fares, which Uber dictates.

The employment tribunal judges were scathing about Uber’s case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
 that drivers who use its phone app to pick up fares were self-employed.

“The notion that Uber in London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> is a 
mosaic of 30,000 small businesses linked by a common ‘platform’ is to our minds 
faintly ridiculous,” they said. “Drivers do not and cannot negotiate with 
passengers … They are offered and accept trips strictly on Uber’s terms.”

Farrar said Uber’s appeal was expected but was “really disappointing”. “It 
means we have to fight again, but why?” he said. “It is just because they don’t 
want to pay the minimum wage. We are confident. Our case is rock solid and the 
original judgment was emphatic.”

Jo Bertram, Uber’s UK general manager, said: “Tens of thousands of people in 
London drive with Uber precisely because they want to be self-employed and 
their own boss. The overwhelming majority of drivers who use the Uber app want 
to keep the freedom and flexibility of being able to drive when and where they 
want.”

Meanwhile, 25 more Uber drivers are planning to claim workers’ rights from 
Uber and have joined the legal action the law firm Leigh Day is bringing with 
the GMB union.

“Since the judgment was issued, we and GMB have spoken to hundreds of Uber 
drivers who wish to claim compensation for Uber’s failure to provide these 
entitlements in the past, as well as to ensure that they are paid at least the 
national minimum wage and holiday pay in future,” said Nigel MacKay, the lawyer 
representing the claimants.

“We are issuing claims on behalf of those drivers and the latest 25 claimants 
who have joined the legal action will be included in claims for compensation. 
We anticipate issuing further claims on behalf of drivers in the coming weeks.”

Leigh Day believes there may be thousands of drivers who can claim for the 
money and benefits they have not received as drivers for Uber.

Uber’s appeal comes amid mounting concern within the government about the 
growing trend towards self-employed workforces. The government has recently 
announceda six-month review of modern working practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-hires-former-tony-blair-policy-boss-to-review-workers-rights>
 andHMRC is setting up a new unit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/hmrc-launch-crackdown-gig-economy-firms-agency-self-employed-staff>
, the employment status and intermediaries team, to investigate companies.

Last week Frank Field, the chairman of the House of Commons work and pensions 
select committee, published a report including the testimonies of 83 Uber 
drivers, which claimed that they had almost no independence.

Field’s report, contested by Uber, said the company dictates drivers’ working 
patterns once they have logged on, imposes lockouts from its system if drivers 
turn down too many jobs, and has raised its commission while cutting the rates 
drivers can charge. This, combined with the cost of the vehicles needed to meet 
Uber’s requirements, is creating “chronically low pay” and insecurity, the 
report said.
 