
Omonia Nicosia v Manchester City

Michael Johnson has travelled to Cyprus but a groin injury makes him a doubt 
for tonight's first-round, first-leg match. Martin Petrov has a similar problem 
and has not travelled. City's manager, Mark Hughes, said he is likely to 
shuffle his pack as they face three games in a week, withPortsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> in the Premier League on 
Sunday and Brighton in the Carling Cup on Wednesday. The Brazilian forward 
Robinho is uncertain to play a full game against Omonia. The other new signings 
Shaun Wright-Phillips, Vincent Kompany and Pablo Zabaleta are also eligible to 
play tonight.

Manchester City (from): Hart, Richards, Ball, Johnson, Ireland, 
Wright-Phillips, Robinho, Elano, Jo, Garrido, Schmeichel, Fernández, Hamann, 
Dunn, Evans, Ben Haim, Sturridge, Etuhu, Kompany, Zabaleta, Glauber.

Portsmouth v Guimaraes

Portsmouth's Nigeria winger John Utaka is a fitness doubt having damaged a 
knee in training on Tuesday. He faces a late fitness test but Glen Little, who 
has yet to appear in a match since his summer move from Reading, is on stand-by 
after coming through a reserve team game to test a thigh injury. Harry Redknapp 
has excluded the striker David Nugent and the former Arsenal defender Lauren 
from his European squad. The manager admitted that when he had to submit his 
list of names last month he had expected the pair to be sold in the transfer 
window.

Portsmouth (from): James, Johnson, Campbell, Distin, Belhadj, Utaka, Little, 
Diarra, Davis, A Traoré, Crouch, Defoe, Diop, Kaboul, Kanu, Hughes, Wilson, 
Ritchie, Pamarot, Hreidarsson, Mvuemba, Ashdown.

Nancy v Motherwell

Motherwell are hopeful Stephen Hughes will be fit for tonight's match. The 
midfielder trained last night for the first time since picking up a knock in 
Saturday's defeat by Celtic.Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> otherwise have an unchanged 
squad. Nancy will be without their Morocco international winger Youssouf Hadji, 
who has a hip problem.

Motherwell (from): G Smith, Quinn, Hammell, Craigan, Reynolds, Hughes, Lasley, 
Malcolm, McGarry, Fitzpatrick, Porter, Clarkson, Sutton, D Smith, O'Brien, 
Murphy, Connolly, Nielsen.
 