
Speaking to the press ahead of her first UFC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> title defense this Friday in Las Vegas, 
bantamweight champion Amanda Nunes said she’s not sure what to make of her 
challenger but something seems off.

“It’s good for me Ronda Rousey’s not doing anything,” Nunes said. “I can rest 
and focus on my training and losing weight and that’s it.”

Nunes isn’t the only one wondering what’s up with Rousey after one of the most 
influential figures in the UFC erected a wall around herself during a mostly 
self-imposed 13-month hiatus.

It certainly comes across as strange behavior when an elite fighter, a star, 
goes out of their way to avoid the limelight, but this is what “Rowdy” Ronda 
has donesince Holly Holm knocked her out in Melbourne last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/15/holly-holm-stuns-ronda-rousey-for-ufc-womens-bantamweight-title>
. When Rousey finally declared that it was time to fight again, it came with a 
concession from UFC president Dana White that the vast majority of her 
promotional duties for UFC 207, including fight week’s traditional photo ops 
like open workouts and press conferences, were optional.

Rousey claimed they would distract from her goal of winning back the belt, and 
this is where the picture gets muddled for Nunes, who views Rousey’s actions as 
confusing and potentially telling. An overdose on media obligations played a 
part in the loss to Holm, Rousey said, and because she believed some members of 
theMMA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> media had been unfair to her in 
the wake of that performance she decided against talking to anyone this time 
around. That could be why she’s skipping questions. Or it could be another 
reason, something more psychological and to do with avoidance.

Ronda Rousey learned a painful truth: an unblemished career is extremely rare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/16/ronda-rousey-learned-a-painful-truth-an-unblemished-career-is-extremely-rare>
White called it a “one off” situation, and said that after the bout he 
expected Rousey to avail herself to the media.

“Ronda has given more than anyone,” White said on Wednesday during a media 
scrum in Las Vegas. “If you look at the amount of press done by any fighter in 
UFC history, Ronda smokes everybody by a long-shot. This is the way she wanted 
it. The only thing she cares about right now is focusing on winning.

“Ronda’s done a lot of things for us. This is what she wanted so I gave it to 
her.”

When the new-look UFC, owned by WME-IMG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/11/ufc-sale-4bn-dana-white-wme-img>
, the talent agency that looks after Rousey, heralded her return in October, 
the slogan was simple enough: “She’s back.” But by maintaining a low profile, 
it seems like Rousey hasn’t really returned at all.

As always, whenever Rousey is involved the stakes are elevated, which is why 
the crowd will explode when she makes her ring walk prior to Nunes’ arrival in 
the cage.

Rousey’s night will to go down one of two ways—there’s no in-between here 
because she made the lines so stark. She will be relegated or redeemed.

The UFC media darling, a famous and groundbreaking female athlete, faced an 
overtly cruel social media driven backlash after Holm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/17/holly-holm-defends-ronda-rousey-people-can-be-pretty-brutal>
, emerging only to provide brief glimpses into the depths of her suffering. 
Rousey told Ellen DeGeneres in February, for instance,that she contemplated 
suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/16/ronda-rousey-thought-about-killing-myself-immediately-after-holm-knockout>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiwCdv9iR8P8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiwCdv9iR8P8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiwCdv9iR8P8&media=>
Much of Rousey’s identity was built around more than winning. She needed to be 
a killer, the best of the best.

Rousey stopped 11 of her first 12 opponents in the opening round, and her 
stardom grew far and wide. She was such a force that,comparisons to Mike Tyson 
weren’t uncommon 
<http://www.foxsports.com/ufc/story/ufc-dana-white-ronda-rousey-really-did-have-that-mike-tyson-aura-111815>
 and Rousey stoked a firestorm of media attention that translated to 
increasingly strong pay-per-view revenue for the UFC. Then, like Tyson, she was 
exposed. Human, broken and fragile looks the same in Tokyo, where Tyson went 
down to James “Buster” Douglas, as it does in Melbourne, where Rousey was 
undone in just over a round.

“What am I anymore if I’m not this?” Rousey wondered after Holm dropped her 
cold. “I was literally sitting there thinking about killing myself. In that 
exact second, I’m like, ‘I’m nothing.’ I’m like, ‘What do I do anymore? No one 
gives a shit about me anymore without this.’”

Judo gold medallist Kayla Harrison to follow 'frenemy' Ronda Rousey into MMA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/kayla-harrison-judo-mma-switch-ronda-rousey>
A few months later, as Rousey shared her thoughts on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, 
the deposed champion made it clear that she intended to fight again. DeGeneres 
praised her for allowing others who felt a similar despair to find courage in 
knowing a person of immense confidence and power like Rousey isn’t immune to 
the darkest things.

Nearly every aspect of Rousey’s fall make it a unique event in the short but 
turbulent history of MMA — a perfect storm of athletic excellence, cockiness, 
the rub of celebrity, and a uniquely emotional reaction to failure.

“All the greats throughout history, they’ve all lost,” White said. “Ali lost. 
Tyson lost. Go through the list of all the greatest fighters that ever lived. 
Everybody has a loss. It’s always interesting and exciting to see if they can 
overcome and comeback from a devastating loss like hers was.”

The story of Rousey’s recovery will be sorted out in the cage against Nunes, 
who has taken Rousey’s anti-everything position in stride. Nunes won the title 
in Julyby pounding Miesha Tate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/nunes-tate-ufc-200-lesnar-hunt-cormier-silva>
, and knows a win against Rousey could significantly elevate her status.

The hard-punching 28-year-old Brazilian should enjoy some advantages over her 
American foe. The most obvious revolves around hitting and being hit. Nunes 
(13-4) lands strikes at a solid rate, and Rousey (12-1) has often been on the 
receiving end more than she’d like. With the damaging potential of Nunes’ power 
and the lingering memory of Holm’s victory, it’s easy to speculate but hard to 
know for certain how well Rousey will handle the stress. By drawing a line in 
the sand with the media, Rousey has gone all-in and managed to ratchet up the 
pressure on herself.

UFC 207 has turned into a tribute of sorts to the bantamweight division.

Joining Nunes, the UFC’s other 135lbs champion, Dominick Cruz, has injected as 
much trash-talking as anyone can handle, taking aim at heavy-hitting challenger 
Cody Garbrandt. As with all of Cruz’s fights, the man standing opposite him has 
to be equipped to do several things in order to compete.

Garbrandt can crack, but if he can’t find Cruz (22-1) to hit him what good 
will that do? Pinning Cruz down, confining him and setting up potential offense 
won’t come easy for Garbrandt, who is so charged up after dealing with Cruz’s 
trash talking that he stormed away during an on-camera interview. That could 
easily be Garbrandt (10-0) on fight night, getting carried away and making 
mistakes that cost him over the course of a 25-minute fight.

Also at 135, former bantamweight champion TJ Dillashaw (13-3) faces the 
biggest puncher in the division, squat mauler John Lineker (29-7). It’s a 
stylistically fascinating contest. Dillashaw’s movement, work rate and 
wrestling should mess very well with Lineker’s straight forward 
punch-through-a-wall style. The UFC hasn’t declared that the winner of this 
contest will be next in line to face Cruz or Garbrandt, but chances are he will 
be.
 