
Jon Jones, the UFC’s interim light heavyweight champion, and one of the 
organization’s biggest draws, has been given a one-year suspension by the US 
Anti-Doping Agency.

The 29 year-old had entered arbitration with Usada last month over an out of 
competition test in June. The test showed Jones had used the prohibited 
substances clomiphene and letrozole, which he claimed came from a pill he used 
to enhance sexual performance. Jones said he had not used them in order to give 
him an advantage in his fight career. The champion added that he believed he 
was taking a brand called Cialis, which did not contain banned substances, but 
had actually been given Tadalafil. Usada tested Tadalafil and confirmed it 
contained the banned substances.  

Judo gold medallist Kayla Harrison to follow 'frenemy' Ronda Rousey into MMA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/kayla-harrison-judo-mma-switch-ronda-rousey>
While the arbitration panel said it believed Jones is not a cheat, it did say 
he had not done enough to confirm the substance he took was permitted. “On the 
evidence before the Panel, [Jones] is not a drug cheat,” the panel said. “He 
did not know that the tablet he took contained prohibited substances or that 
those substances had the capacity to enhance sporting performance. However by 
his imprudent use of what he pungently referred to as a ‘dick pill’ he has not 
only lost a year of his career but an estimated $9m”.

The UFC agreed that Jones was careless rather than a cheat. “While the 
decision indicates no evidence of Jones’ intentional use of banned substances, 
it does highlight the care and diligence that is required by athletes competing 
in theUFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> to ensure that no prohibited 
substances enter their system,” the promotion said in a statement. 

As the suspension is retroactive, Jones will be able to fight again in July 
2017, a year after he was pulled from the card for UFC 200.



 