
Ed Warner, the UK Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> 
chairman, has warned that the sport still has plenty of work to do in order to 
deter drug cheats.

The governing body has launched its own “Clean Athletics” brand, which will 
replace the former anti-doping department, and has again called for 
hard-hitting measures to be brought in against dopers.

IAAF guidelines open way for clean Russian athletes to compete again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/iaaf-guidelines-for-russian-athletes-after-mclaren-report-doping>
A year on from publishing A Manifesto for Clean Athletics, UK Athletics has 
reaffirmed its intention to enforce lifetime bans against any British athlete 
guilty of a serious anti-doping violation.

It has also urged for bans to be extended to a minimum of eight years for 
serious doping offences to ensure that cheating athletes miss two Olympic or 
Paralympic cycles.

Warner said: “As we announced last year, the integrity of athletics was 
challenged as never before in 2015. However, 2016 saw a seismic change in the 
way athletics responded to doping in sport.

“We are using this one-year-on moment to launch our own Clean Athletics brand 
and would urge other sports to follow suit to remain focused on what they want 
to achieve.”

The Russian Athletics Federation remains suspended by the IAAF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/iaaf> over state-sponsored doping, while the 
country was banned entirely from competing at the 2016 Paralympics in Rio.

National anti-doping organisations met in Dublin on Tuesday and concluded that 
Russia should be banned from both competing in and hosting international 
sporting events.

“The stances taken by both the IAAF for athletics and the IPC on behalf of all 
Paralympic sports could be seen as a turning point, but there is still much to 
do,” Warner said.

“Watching federations such as Athletics Ethiopia announce its own lifetime 
bans is another step in the right direction.”

UK Athletics also insists athletes competing in world championships “have a 
valid blood/biological passport” and have been subject to a predetermined 
number of in-competition and out-of-competition tests by the International 
Association of Athletics Federations in the preceding 12 months.

Warner said: “Overall, we are concerned that the pace of change remains too 
slow, in spite of the Russian situation and the spotlight it shed onWada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> [the World Anti-Doping Agency] and its 
relationship with the IOC last summer.

“There remains too much denial in too many quarters, but we will continue to 
work to make progress in the areas we can.”
 