
Some of Britain’s best-loved landscapes are being threatened by the 
government’s rush to declare the country “open for business”, warn rural 
campaigners.

Large developments and infrastructure projects are planned in some of the UK’s 
most treasured tourist destinations, including theLake District 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lake-district>, the Cotswolds, and Sussex’s 
High Weald as well as on large swaths of green belt land.

Britain’s open spaces are likely to come under further pressure in the next 
few years. The chancellor, Philip Hammond, pledged £23bn for theNational 
Productivity Investment Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance>
 in his autumn statement, with money earmarked in the next five years to create 
an Oxford to Cambridge expressway and new railway infrastructure in the 
Midlands. The government has also set a target of 200,000 new homes a year, and 
some expect that target to be increased in the housing white paper, due to be 
published this month.

Shaun Spiers, chief executive of the Campaign to Protect Rural England  
<http://www.cpre.org.uk/?gclid=CInSkam_ntECFasp0wodCrQEGw>(CPRE), said there 
was “a real concern” about the way development is being prioritised. “Everybody 
recognises that we need to update infrastructure, and the CPRE’s traditional 
role since it was set up in 1926 has been to question whether or not it’s 
necessary and if there are alternatives to industrialising landscapes,” Spiers 
told theObserver.

“There’s a terrible sense right now that ministers are just keen to say that 
Britain’s open for business at the expense of everything else. It’s all 
justified on narrow economic grounds, and I’m not sure anyone is standing back 
and saying ‘what are the alternatives?’”

One major infrastructure development under consideration is the National 
Grid’s £2.8bn plan to connect the planned Moorside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/wordsworths-last-known-descendent-joins-fight-against-lake-district-pylons>
 nuclear power station, Sellafield’s replacement, to the UK power network with 
a 102-mile long power line. The route goes through the Lake District national 
park, and while the National Grid plans to put 15 miles of cabling underground 
through the park, 90 pylons each 48m (160ft) tall, will be erected in a line 
just 10m from the park’s southern edge through the Duddon estuary. Campaigners 
from the groupPower Without Pylons <http://www.powerwithoutpylons.org.uk/> and 
theFriends of the Lake District  <http://www.friendsofthelakedistrict.org.uk/>
will gather today for a protest walk through the area.

“It would destroy some of the most spectacular landscapes of the national 
park,” said the organisation’s Elaine Essery. “We think there are better 
alternatives – and they would amount to tens of pence on people’s electricity 
bills.” The National Grid’s final consultation on the issue closes this 
Saturday.

With the pylon scheme considered a “nationally significant infrastructure 
project”, the final decision on whether it will go ahead will be taken by the 
Secretary of State, currently Greg Clark, at the department for Business, 
Energy and Industrial Strategy. Of 50 schemes that have been decided since NSIP 
rules were introduced in 2008, only one has so far been rejected, according to 
Power Without Pylons.

To add to campaigners’ fears, planning laws and regulations on house-building 
have been significantly relaxed in recent years in an attempt to address the 
housing shortage in the south-east of England.CPRE research in April showed 
that 275,000 homes are proposed for green belt land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/25/number-of-green-belt-homes-planned-up-200000-in-four-years>
.

Plans to build 600 homes near Pease Pottage in Sussex, on the High Weald, have 
been approved, and a further 60 will be built in the Cotswolds in 
Milton-under-Wychwood. Proposals to build 119 homes in Hungerford in the North 
Wessex Downs are awaiting a decision.
 