
Thousands of farmers will descend on Brussels on Monday to protest about 
falling dairy and meat prices as European ministers hold an emergency meeting 
to discuss the crisis in the agriculture industry.

An estimated 4,000 farmers, including some from Britain, plan to march through 
the centre of Brussels on Monday to highlight the pressure they are under from 
falling prices.

Elizabeth Truss, the environment secretary, will represent Britain at a 
meeting of European farming ministers in Brussels called to discuss ways to 
alleviate the pressure on farmers.

Dairy farmers call for supermarket boycott as milk price falls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/06/dairy-farmers-call-for-supermarkets-boycott-as-milk-price-falls>
Truss has pledged to push for the creation of a new futures and insurance 
market in dairy products so that farmers can insure themselves against price 
fluctuations.

The National Farmers Union has said dairy farmers face a “state of emergency” 
after a 25% fall in the wholesale price of milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/06/dairy-farmers-call-for-supermarkets-boycott-as-milk-price-falls>
 in the past year. The average farmgate price of milk stands at 23.35p a litre, 
below the estimated cost of production of 30p a litre.

Farmers in Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> have also 
been hit by falling in milk prices, as well as a drop in the price of lamb.

Meurig Raymond, NFU president, will hold talks with Truss after the meeting. 
Raymond wants long-term contracts between farmers and supermarkets to be 
introduced and for the government to force retailers to improve the labelling 
of their products so shoppers can see where food has been sourced.

Raymond said: “Farmers need the secretary of state to strongly stand up for 
British farming interests in Europe. “We need the European commission to 
implement measures to ease cash flow difficulties and strengthen safety nets.

The battle for the soul of British milk | Jon Henley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/02/-sp-battle-soul-british-milk> 
“British farmers need the GSCOP [the UK’s Groceries Supply Code of Practice] 
and groceries code adjudicator to stamp out unfair trading practices in the 
food supply chain. I want that same protection offered by other member states 
when British farmers trade with European retailers.”

Farmers in Britain blame supermarkets for the slide in milk prices. They claim 
milk has been used as a weapon in the industry price war and that retailers are 
not doing enough to promote British-sourced products. In protest they have 
blockaded distribution centres andherded two cows through an Asda store in 
Stafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/09/farmers-herd-cows-asda-protest-low-milk-prices>
.

In response, supermarkets have claimed the fall is the result of an oversupply 
of milk in Europe, but they have bowed to pressure from farmers on a number of 
issues. Asda,Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>, Aldi 
and Lidl have increased the amount they pay, and Tesco has agreed to use only 
British milk in its own-brand yoghurts instead of importing from Germany, as it 
had done previously.
 