
Britain’s golden eagle population has soared to new heights, according to a 
new survey released on Wednesday.

There are now more than 500 breeding pairs in the UK, up 15% and passing the 
threshold at which bird’s long-term future is thought viable.

The huge raptors, which have a wingspan of 2m, have benefitted from fewer 
illegal killings and less grazing on hills by sheep and deer which leads to 
reduced prey, such as hares and grouse.

However, the birds still only occupy about two-thirds of their traditional 
territories, with particularly low numbers in the east ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. In that region many of the empty 
ranges are on land intensively managed for driven grouse shooting and several 
illegal killings have occurred in recent years.

The national survey, funded by the RSPB <http://www.rspb.org.uk/> and Scottish 
Natural Heritage <http://www.snh.gov.uk/> (SNH), found 508 breeding pairs, all 
in Scotland.England’s last golden eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/14/englands-last-golden-eagle-feared-dead>
 went missing this year and is feared dead. The previous survey, in 2003, found 
442 breeding pairs, up from 422 in 1992.

Golden eagles were once common across Britain but had disappeared from England 
and Wales and fallen to very low numbers in Scotland by the mid 19th century 
due to widespread persecution.

The surviving population in Scotland then suffered a sharp decline in breeding 
success in the 1960s due to organochlorine pesticides which caused mass 
infertility. Golden eagles are usually long-lived, with many adults living for 
up to 25 years.

“The sight of a golden eagle soaring in the sky above is an awe-inspiring part 
of our natural heritage and this increase in numbers of golden eagle pairs is 
great news,” said Duncan Orr-Ewing, at RSPB Scotland.

Golden eagles prey on grouse and have been targeted as a result, but Orr-Ewing 
said attitudes are shifting. “The biggest driver [for the rising population] is 
a decline in illegal persecution,” he said. “Hopefully we are seeing a more 
enlightened attitude to birds of prey.”

He said there had been fewer killings due to the satellite tagging of golden 
eagles, which helps identify killings, and the huge negative publicity that now 
follows the crimes.

But persecution remains a problem, as some birds simply disappear after their 
tags are apparently deliberately destroyed – at leasteight in the past five 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/11/eight-tagged-golden-eagles-disappear-scottish-highlands>
.

“There is no other explanation – this is military grade technology,” Orr-Ewing 
said. Four satellite-tagged golden eagles have also been found illegally killed 
in the central and eastern Highlands since 2009.

Golden eagle numbers are particularly low in the east of Scotland, with just 
30% of known territories occupied – 34 out of 91. “There is an abundant food 
supply and they should be doing really well there,” Orr-Ewing said.

Lack of prey has hampered the bird’s recovery in the western highlands, where 
overgrazing has made the landscape unsuitable for hares and grouse. But there 
has been a big decline in the number of sheep on the hills and a focus on 
reducing deer numbers from the current 750,000 across Scotland, as well as the 
planting of native woodland that increases prey numbers.

The new figures represent a significant landmark for the golden eagle, as a 
2008 SNH report 
<http://www.snh.org.uk/pdfs/publications/commissioned_reports/193.pdf> 
concluded that more than 500 breeding pairs are needed for the raptor to have 
“favourable conservation status” in the UK, meaning it has a population that 
can survive in the long term.

Tim Baynes, director of the Scottish Moorland Group 
<http://www.scottishlandandestates.co.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&id=92&Itemid=125>
, which represents grouse moor owners and gamekeepers, said: “Our members are 
passionate about the golden eagles on their land. The south central Highlands, 
which includes significant areas of driven grouse moor, has shown by far the 
greatest increase in range occupancy – [now] 70% – since 2003”.

The UK parliament debated a petition to ban driven grouse shooting 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/01/government-rejects-call-for-grouse-shooting-ban-after-mps-say-it/>
 in October. Environment minister Thérèse Coffey said the government had “no 
intention” of introducing a ban, but “every intention” of persecuting those who 
illegally kill birds of prey.
 