
Industrial production fell sharply and unexpectedly in October, dealing a blow 
to hopes that the UK economy will end 2016 on a high.

A surprise 1.3% drop in production over the month followed a 0.4% decrease in 
September, according tothe Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics>, and was the 
biggest monthly fall in four years. Economists had forecast a 0.2% rise for 
October.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Markit, said the figures were “an 
appreciable blow” to prospects for the UK economy in the fourth quarter.The 
economy was stronger than expected in the months immediately after the Brexit 
vote in June, growing by 0.5% in the third quarter. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/uk-economy-shrugs-off-brexit-uncertainty-with-05-growth>

UK's trade deficit before Brexit vote narrower than first calculated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/uks-trade-deficit-before-brexit-vote-narrower-than-first-calculated>
Archer said: “We had believed that there was a good chance that UK GDP growth 
in the fourth quarter could match the resilient 0.5% growth in the third 
quarter. October’s drop in industrial production puts a significant dent in 
prospects.”

One of the fall’s main drivers was a 10.8% decline in oil and gas extraction 
resulting from a temporary shutdown in the Buzzard oilfield in the North Sea.

A breakdown of the figures also showed that manufacturing  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/manufacturing-sector>output – the largest 
part of industrial production – also fell unexpectedly, by 0.9% in October 
after a 0.6% increase a month earlier. Economists were expecting a 0.2% rise in 
manufacturing.

Kate Davies, senior statistician at the ONS, said: “October saw a sharp fall 
in UK oil output, largely down to the total shutdown of the major Buzzard 
oilfield.


“Small falls in output across a range of sectors also contributed to a drop in 
overall manufacturing.”

On an annual basis, industrial production was down 1.1% in October, while the 
narrower measure of manufacturing output was down 0.4%.

Martin Beck, senior economic adviser to the EY Item Club, a forecasting group, 
said Britain’s “makers” had got off to a weak start in the fourth quarter, but 
said some of the erratic factors that were behind the weak performance in 
October should start to fade.

“As the role of temporary factors set to fade at some point, an improved 
performance over the remainder of the quarter seems likely, but that industry 
will make a positive contribution to GDP growth is looking tenuous,” Beck said.
 