
Inflation <https://www.theguardian.com/business/inflation> is about to do at 
home what currency movements have done to your holiday money abroad – devalue 
the pound in your pocket.

Rising air fares, more expensive food and a bump in the cost of fuel at the 
pumpspushed inflation to 1.6% in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/uk-inflation-hits-two-year-high>
, effectively ending a brief two-year period when wages outstripped price rises 
by a wide margin.

The last time prices began to rocket, the UK was on its way to an inflation 
rate of 5.2% and the biggest fall in real incomes in modern times.

Related: UK inflation hits two-year high at 1.6% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/uk-inflation-hits-two-year-high>

It was 2011 and William Windsor had married Kate Middleton, adding some colour 
to a country still in shock from the financial crash. But the year was also 
characterised by public spending cuts, wage freezes, a crisis in Europe and 
riots across most of Britain’s major cities.

Could the same happen again? According to the National Institute for Economic 
& Social Research inflation is heading towards 4%as the effect of Brexit 
uncertainty keeps the pound low and imports expensive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/16/imf-trump-protectionism-world-economy-trade-us-europe>
.

Such a sharp spike in prices will strain household finances, especially when 
wages growth is expected to remain at around 2.5%.

Bank of England policymaker Michael Saunders said last week that developments 
in the labour market such as zero-hour contracts and agency working meantwages 
were unlikely to take off any time soon 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2017/953.aspx>.

The government has pledged to double down on austerity from April, with cuts 
to tax credits and other benefits as well as the savings made over the last 
five years.

Related: Apple increases App Store prices by 25% following Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/17/apple-ios-mac-app-store-prices-rise-25-per-cent-following-brexit>

Europe is about to enter a critical year, with elections in France, Germany 
and the Netherlands threatening a lurch to the right. There is also the 
prospect of an ugly fight with the UK over Brexit.

That leaves one last thing from the list of woes that beset 2011 – civil 
unrest. Could there be riots? Who knows. But the government is certainly 
putting all the ingredients together with a blatant disregard for the social 
fabric of the nation.

For the time being shoppers have shut their ears to Cassandras who warn of 
trouble ahead. In the run-up to Christmasthey reached for their credit cards 
instead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>
.
 