
Britain is naive to expect a “free lunch” in trade negotiations with the EU, 
according to a scathing House of Lordsreport 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/eu-external-affairs-subcommittee/inquiries/parliament-2015/brexit-future-trade-uk-eu-inquiry/>
 that calls for a transition phase to ease the pain.

“The notion that a country can have complete regulatory sovereignty while 
engaging in comprehensive free trade with partners is based on a 
misunderstanding of the nature of free trade,” said the cross-party group of 
peers.

The report, the second of six parliamentary studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/lords-brexit-reports-northern-ireland-uk-irish-relations>
 on the mechanics of Brexit out this week, also accuses the government of 
underestimating the consequences of its limited negotiating position.

“We recognise that the government is engaging with industry stakeholders but 
are not convinced that the level of engagement and expertise within government 
are commensurate with the scale of this unprecedented task, particularly given 
the government’s commitment totrigger article 50 by the end of March 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/keir-starmer-calls-for-detailed-brexit-plan-after-mps-vote-to-trigger-article-50>
,” wrote the Lords’ EU internal market and EU external affairs sub-committees.
Four options 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1zbcCaaz-GWyHb4_ohV36aNpjX9_zaNir7fqHN2wlnUg>
Peers took evidence on four main options facing the government: remaining in 
theEuropean Free Trade Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/09/norway-may-block-uk-return-to-european-free-trade-association>
 (EFTA) like Switzerland or Norway, a more limited Turkish-style position 
inside the customs union, afree trade agreement (FTA) similar to that 
negotiated by Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/justin-trudeau-canadian-pm-cancels-brussels-trip-talks-trade-deal-eu>
 or falling back on the system of international tariffs agreed by the World 
Trade Organisation (WTO).

But expert witnesses warned that all the options involved weighing up the 
economic benefits of trade against lost political independence, leaving no 
foreseeable scenario where Britain was in a stronger position outside the 
single market. “There is no free lunch,” said Dr Ulf Sverdrup, director of the 
Norwegian Institute of International Affairs.

Far from escaping the protectionism of “Fortress Europe”, as some Brexit 
supporters have promised, walking away entirely and relying on the WTO tariff 
regime could both push up food prices and introduce huge uncertainty for UK 
farmers who would have to fight to inherit quotas agreed under opaque WTO 
“schedules”.

“There will be much more severe restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/uk-firms-face-more-not-less-red-tape-if-britain-exits-customs-union>
 in certain sectors, primarily agriculture, than we face at the moment as a 
member of the single market,” said Richard Eglin, a senior trade advisor with 
the law firm White and Case.

“While the UK could unilaterally decide to lower its tariffs on agricultural 
goods, this could complicate the process of agreement to its schedules and 
reduce its leverage in future FTA negotiations, as the UK would be less able to 
offer preferential terms to other countries,” explained the report.
Import export 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-12T15:33:55/embed.html>
Other British companies, such as airlines, faced a devastating loss of 
competitive advantage if the UK moves abruptly from the single market without 
some form of negotiated trade agreement to replace it. Aviation “is hardly 
touched upon by WTO commitments”, said Piet Eeckhout, a professor of EU law at 
University College London, while in the single market “you have a full single 
market in aviation”, where “any EU airline … can perform freely any flights 
across the European internal market”.

Government witnesses said they were keeping an open mind about different 
approaches to the problem and were confident of a strong negotiating position.

George Bridges, under-secretary of state at the Department for Exiting the EU 
(DExEU), told the committee that the government was looking at all the options, 
though favoured a bespoke UK agreement, because “we perceive ourselves as being 
in a unique position as regards the EU”. Lord Bridges said he wanted an 
agreement that would allow the UK to control its borders and laws and provide 
“the freest possible relationship as regards trade for our businesses”.
Tariff variations 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-12T15:40:50/embed.html>
This was met with scepticism by peers, who pointed to the fledgling Department 
for International Trade as a sign the government was already committed to 
leaving the single market, even if it had little idea what to replace it with.

Sandip Verma, chair of the EU external affairs sub-committee which led the 
study, said: “It is unlikely that a bespoke EU trade agreement can beagreed 
within article 50’s two-year period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
, so a transitional deal is vital for protecting UK trade, and jobs that rely 
on trade. The government should focus on trade with the EU and its WTO 
schedules. Deals with non-EU countries are contingent on the outcome of these 
negotiations, and need to be sequenced accordingly.”

Mark Price, minister of state for trade policy, told the committee that a 
trade policy team of 40 people just after the referendum had grown to about 110 
people, and was likely to number about 150 by the end of the year, though there 
were no plans to hire trade negotiators for future FTAs for the next three or 
four months.

The report responded: “The government appears to be underestimating the 
resources required to negotiate a bespoke deal with the EU, to adopt its WTO 
schedules, and to agree future trading relationships with third countries.”

It fears these practical concerns pale in comparison with the fundamental 
misunderstanding about Britain’s ability to negotiate both market access and 
political freedoms.

“The level of market access the UK is able to negotiate with the EU would 
depend in part on the extent to which it was willing to accept and adopt EU law 
or demonstrate equivalence with EU rules,” concluded the peers. “In the medium 
to long term the UK may have to continue to update its domestic law to be 
consistent with EU law.”

“Trade-offs will need to be made in whatever trading framework we eventually 
agree,” added the chairman of the EU internal market sub-committee, Larry 
Whitty. “While an FTA would provide the greatest flexibility, and no commitment 
to freedom of movement, there is no evidence that it could provide trade on 
terms equivalent to membership of the single market.”
 