
It has been a triumph for British period drama at the Emmy award nominations 
<http://www.emmys.com/awards/nominees-winners> as both Downton Abbey and Wolf 
Hall picked up multiple nods in categories such as outstanding drama series and 
outstanding actor.

British talent triumphed throughout, with nominations for the actors Ricky 
Gervais, David Oyelowo and Mark Rylance, while the BBC’s political dramaThe 
Honourable Woman <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-honourable-woman>
 was also among the nominees on Thursday.

However, the biggest winner of the night was the fantasy blockbuster Game of 
Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, which 
bagged an impressive 24 nominations across all the major drama categories, 
including best drama series.

Emmy awards nominations 2015: full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/16/emmy-awards-2015-full-list-nominees>
Once again, Downton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> received the most 
nominations of any British drama, continuing the series’ long-running awards 
success in the US. The fourth series saw nominations for Jim Carter for best 
supporting actor and Joanne Froggatt for best supporting actress.

The ITV show, which has earned the most Emmy nominations of any non-US show in 
history, will again compete against glossy American dramas such asHouse of Cards
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards>, Game of Thrones and 
Mad Men for the accolade of outstanding drama series.

It was also a night of success for the BBC, which outperformed all its British 
rivals mainly thanks to their celebrated adaptation of Hilary Mantel’sWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/wolf-hall>, which was nominated for 
outstanding limited series. Rylance will also compete against fellow Brits 
Oyelowo and Gervais to win best actor in a mini-series or movie for his role as 
Thomas Cromwell.

Emmy nominations 2015 - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2015/jul/16/emmy-nominations-2015-in-pictures>
The Honourable Woman, BBC 2’s one-off series addressing the Israel-Palestine 
conflict, also picked up four nominations, including outstanding actress in a 
mini-series forMaggie Gyllenhaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/maggie-gyllenhaal>, best writer and director 
for Hugo Blick and outstanding limited series.

Greg Brenman, the executive producer of Drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/drama> Republic, which made The 
Honourable Woman for the BBC, said: “I’m absolutely delighted that Hugo Blick’s 
writing and his direction have been nominated – a resounding testament to his 
vision and to the enormous accomplishment of this series.”

Blick said: “I will definitely be putting two lumps of sugar in my cocoa this 
evening.”

Other British talent celebrated at this year’s Emmys included Emma Thompson, 
who earned a nomination for outstanding actress in a mini-series or film for 
the live broadcast of Sweeney Todd: Demon Barber of Fleet Street, and the 
Scottish actorAlan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/nov/14/alan-cumming-i-never-felt-achieved-enough-always-told-was-nothing>
 who picked up his third Emmy nomination for his role as political spin doctor 
Eli Gold in the American drama The Good Wife.

The success of British actors at this year’s Emmys could be seen as reflective 
of the overall American television and film landscape, where British talent 
from Dominic West and Hayley Atwell to Damian Lewis andMichael Sheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-sheen> are increasingly dominating 
the lead roles.

Speaking to the Guardian earlier this year, Paul Lee, boss of the US television
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/us-television> network ABC, said: 
“Thanks to the increasing popularity of UK shows and actors in the US, doors 
have been thrown wide open. If [House star] Hugh Laurie was cast again, I doubt 
he’d be given an American accent”.

However, the international success of these British series also comes at a 
time when the four public-service broadcasters – the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and
Channel 5 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive> – have reduced the 
amount they spend on drama by 44% since 2008.

The seventh and final season of Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> also proved 
unsurprisingly popular with the Emmy Academy this year, with 11 nods for the 
show. It will be hoping to repeat the success of its first four seasons and 
earn a gold-plated goodbye with the award for best drama series.

This year also marks Jon Hamm’s final chance to win the award for best actor 
for his portrayal of the enigmatic Don Draper. Since he began on the show, Hamm 
has received eight nominations but has yet to win.

However, the awards were not without their annual controversy over the 
inclusion and exclusion of certain shows. The decision to nominate Gervais as 
outstanding actor in a mini-series for the one-off special of his comedy series 
Derek was the cause of much outrage on social media. Undeterred, the actor 
tweeted a picture of himself next to the caption: “No to fox hunting and yes to 
Emmy nomination. My bestest week ever.”

Other less successful shows included Empire, which has enjoyed enormous 
popularity in the US, with audiences averaging 23 million, but only received 
three nominations, while the comedy Broad City and dramaThe Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-americans> were both left without 
any nominations at all.

The Emmy nominations also highlighted the growing influence of high-quality 
web-based shows. Netflix scooped 34 nominations overall for series such as 
Orange Is the New Black, Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt and House of Cards, and it 
was also the first year that Amazon’s Instant Video picked up Emmy nominations. 
Their Golden Globe-winning show Transparent was a hit in the comedy section, 
earning 11 nominations, including nominations for outstanding comedy series and 
lead actor in a comedy series for Jeffrey Tambor as a transgender parent.

 The award winners will be announced at a ceremony on 20 September and 
broadcast on Fox in the US. Brooklyn Nine-Nine star Andy Samberg is set to host.
 