
Theresa May’s approval of the Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> nuclear plant saved 
UK-China relations from being “tossed into uncertainty” but London’s 
“China-phobia” could still spell trouble for the partnership, Beijing’s 
official news agency has warned.


In an opinion piece 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-09/15/c_135689586.htm> on Friday, 
Xinhua celebrated the decision to move ahead with the £18bn project which was 
unexpectedly placed under review because of what the state-run agency dismissed 
as “some fictitious ‘national security’ concerns about Chinese investment”.

Xinhua said Hinkely C’s approval would mean the creation of 25,000 jobs and 
would help “provide a vital solution to [Britain’s] electricity needs”.

Nuclear power – yes please. Hinkley Point – no thanks | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/15/nuclear-power-no-hinkley-point-yes-atomic-energy>
“But let us not forget that the program, despite its various benefits for all 
parties, was once on the brink of being killed by groundless worries that 
China’s investment would be a threat to Britain’s national security,” the 
Communist party-controlled news agency added.

“Had the program gone under, all sides were to lose dearly, while 
China-Britain relations could have been tossed into uncertainty.”

Xinhua said the prime minister’s first major strategic decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/15/the-guardian-view-on-hinkley-point-c-hard-choice-wrong-call>
 had brought the so-called“golden era” of UK-China relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/18/britian-has-made-visionary-choice-to-become-chinas-best-friend-says-xi>
, negotiated under David Cameron, back from the brink – for now.

“However, in spite of the approval, China-phobia sentiments continue to hover 
and could possibly introduce more troubles as construction of the project gets 
underway,” warned the commentary, written by journalist Liu Chang.

Xinhua voiced concern about the introduction of “significant new safeguards” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-confirms-hinkley-point-c-project-following-new-agreement-in-principle-with-edf>
 for future foreign investment in critical infrastructure.

Those measures, it argued, were the result of nonsensical “misgivings” held by 
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> about a possible 
threat posed by China to Britain’s national security.

“[Her] remarks reflect a fact that some westerners still harbour strong 
misunderstandings ofChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>,” Xinhua 
said, adding: “Let us hope that London quits its China-phobia and works with 
Beijing to ensure the project’s smooth development.”

Hua Chunying, a spokesperson for China’s ministry of foreign affairs, struck a 
more diplomatic tone.

“The Chinese side welcomes the British government’s decision to approve the 
project, as it serves all parties’ interests,” Hua said ina brief statement 
<http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/t1397971.shtml>. 

“It is hoped that with the hard work of China, the UK and France, Hinkley 
Point and other subsequent nuclear cooperation projects can proceed smoothly 
and produce win-win results.”

Those comments were a reminder of the importance Beijing attaches to still 
being able to build a Chinese-designed nuclear plant atBradwell in Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-chinese-firm-to-submit-essex-nuclear-plant-plans>
.

China hopes to use that project as a shop window to promote its nuclear 
technology around the world and experts believe the future of relations between 
London and Beijing willhinge on its fate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/china-uk-golden-relationship-hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power>
.

On Friday, the Guangming Daily, a leading party newspaper, said the Hinkely 
go-ahead had “great significance” for the advance of Chinese nuclear technology 
into Europe, “and even the world.”

But it cautioned <http://news.ifeng.com/a/20160916/49976938_0.shtml> that the 
new rules on foreign investment in critical infrastructure meant it was now 
likely that the agreement to build Bradwell would be renegotiated.

The China Daily, an English-language mouthpiece, painted the Hinkley decision 
as a triumph for Theresa May.

“May has managed a good deal – she has managed to satisfy her domestic 
critics, satisfy her own cautious nature, and keep the Chinese on side,” one 
government official, who declined to be named,told the Beijing-run newspaper 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/world/2016-09/15/content_26804058.htm>. 

Additional reporting by Christy Yao
 