
Britain’s economy looks on course for a solid finish to the year after a 
closely watched business survey for last month smashed expectations, although 
worries about inflation and political uncertainty are making firms nervous 
about 2017.

Companies in the UK’s services sector, which spans banking to hotels, enjoyed 
the fastest growth in activity since January as they continued to recover from 
a short, sharp downturn following the Brexit vote. The report chimed withother 
indicators suggesting businesses and consumers have shrugged off the referendum 
result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/the-brexit-economy-remarkable-resilience-as-spectre-of-inflation-looms>
 for now.

The headline reading on the Markit/CIPS UK services PMI 
<https://www.markiteconomics.com/Survey/PressRelease.mvc/5cc8d3c635dc45e09f8aa63bcad547a1>
 [pdf] rose to 55.2 in November from 54.5 the month before. That beat 
economists’ forecasts for it to ease to 54.0 in a Reuters poll of economists. 
The index has now been above the 50-mark separating growth from contraction for 
four months running.

Demand is weak and investment’s faltering. That’s OK then
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/04/uk-demand-weak-investment-faltering-low-inflation>
The services poll follows Markit’s reports on the smaller construction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/02/uk-construction-activity-costs-brexit-vote>
 andmanufacturing sectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/manufacturing-growth-slows-as-weak-pound-pushes-up-prices>
 last week. The survey compilers said all the readings together suggested the 
economy was on course to grow 0.5% in the final three months of the year,
matching the pace of growth in the third 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/gdp-growth-brexit-vote-ons-business-investment>
 and defying economists’ post-referendum warnings of a sharp slowdown.

Chris Williamson, the chief business economist at IHS Markit, commented: “The 
further upturn in the vast services sector shows that the pace of UK economic 
growth remains resiliently robust in the fourth quarter, despite ongoing 
uncertainty caused by Brexit.

“The three PMI surveys collectively indicate that the economy will grow by 
0.5% in the fourth quarter.”

The report, which covers most of the services sector but not retailers, showed 
employment growth picked up to the fastest pace since April as new business 
continued to rise, helped in part by overseas demand thanks to the weak pound. 
Sterling’s sharp fall since the EU referendum in June has made UK goods and 
services cheaper in overseas markets.

The flipside of the weak pound for businesses is higher import costs, with 
services companies reporting pressures from higher food and fuel costs and 
pricier business travel. Input price inflation remained sharp in November 
despite easing for the first time since May, and there was a similar trend for 
prices charged by service providers.

Chris Williamson (@WilliamsonChris) 
UK firms' input costs have risen at the fastest rate for 5 years so far in Q4. 
Either margins will be squeezed or consumer prices will rise
pic.twitter.com/Mjcs5JwC4n <https://t.co/Mjcs5JwC4n>
 <https://twitter.com/WilliamsonChris/status/805711048724643840> December 5, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/WilliamsonChris/status/805711048724643840> 
Those inflationary pressures combined with political uncertainty to knock 
business sentiment, which weakened for the first time since July, according to 
the poll. Donald Trump’s victory in the race for the US presidency on an 
anti-globalisation platform was also a factor weighing on business mood, the 
report said.

David Noble at the survey’s co-publishers, the Chartered Institute of 
Procurement & Supply (Cips), said: “The ongoing battle with currency 
fluctuations, a weak pound and the impact of inflation will continue to 
undermine company profits.

“The silent undercurrent of uncertainty also dampened the mood compared to 
last month, as business sentiment was at its lowest since July and the 
second-lowest since December 2012. This reveals how the result of the EU 
referendum vote, and now the recent US election, continues to have an impact on 
future business expectations.”

With signs that the economy has remained resilient since June’s vote and that 
inflation has not jumped higher so far, the Bank of England has signalled it is 
in a holding pattern on interest rates.

It cut borrowing costs to a new record low of 0.25% in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 to shore up confidence and had hinted at another cut before Christmas but
recently rowed back from that guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
 as the economic news continued to beat expectations.
 