
The former Tory MP Neil Hamilton has been elected to lead the seven-strong 
Ukip group in the Welsh assembly, winning by four votes to three.

At last week’s elections, Labour remained by far the largest party in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/welsh-labour-might-need-coalition-to-run-next-government>
 but Ukip’s wins were striking. As well as Hamilton winning a seat, the former 
Tory MP Mark Reckless and the Ukip leader in Wales, Nathan Gill, were also 
successful.

The choice of Hamilton as leader at Cardiff Bay will be seen as a blow for 
Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, the Ukip 
leader, who is a fan of Gill, and could signal the start of a challenge both to 
Gill’s leadership in Wales and possibly even Farage in the UK.

Hamilton’s wife, Christine, said her husband would not speak to the Guardian, 
citing what she called a “vile” article by Michael White, who described him as 
a “shameless, self-promoting rascal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/may/09/why-neil-hamiltons-return-should-trouble-us>
”.





The Guardian view on the Scottish and Welsh elections: doing it their own way 
| Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/the-guardian-view-on-the-scottish-and-welsh-elections-doing-it-their-own-way>
Following his win Hamilton told the BBC: “We’ve achieved an outcome by 
consensus. We decided to put all past differences behind us and forget the lead 
up to the election campaign, where there was a lot of personal animosity 
created.

“I’ve been chosen to do a specific job to be leader of the Ukip AMs within the 
assembly. I’ve got great deal of parliamentary experience. I’ve been a 
government minister. I’m going to make use of that experience within the group 
to give Ukip the maximum amount of impact during the course of the next five 
years.”

Gill told an election debate in April that he probably would not have chosen 
Hamilton as a Ukip candidate.

While a Tory MP, Hamilton faced allegations that he took cash for asking 
parliamentary questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/dec/22/hamiltonvalfayed>, which he has 
always denied.

He was born near Blackwood in south Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, but was MP for Tatton from 1983 to 1997 
and his Welsh credentials have been questioned. In an impromptu quiz on the BBC 
he did not know that the famous Welsh band Manic Street Preachers come from 
Blackwood.




 