
"The Vampire and Lycans clan have been at war for centuries before I was born 
…" – Selene


These are the first words spoken in Underworld: Awakening. They're part of a 
tortured introductory voiceover that seems to last for several months, even 
though it only contains 108 words. The introduction serves a thankless task: 
getting you up to speed on exactly what happened in the previous three 
Underworld films, as if a) people would make their first step into a 
clapped-out franchise by starting with the fourth instalment and b) anyone 
actually had a personal investment in anything that happened in any Underworld 
film.

But, fine, perhaps you really are new to Underworld. Perhaps you're watching 
this on TV because you've been paralysed by episode three ofFargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/27/fargo-recap-season-one-episode-two-rooster-prince>
, or because you can't turn over to Syfy and watchStrippers v Werewolves 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1702009/> instead. If that's the case, here's the 
Underworld series in a nutshell: Kate Beckinsale is a sexy vampire who falls in 
love with a werewolf, even though she's supposed to kill werewolves. Then the 
werewolf becomes a vampire/werewolf who has sex with Kate Beckinsale. (There 
was a third film, but Beckinsale wasn't in it, so nobody cared what happened.) 
There, that's the entire series summed up in 51 words. To save everyone time, I 
should write the introduction to the next Underworld film.

"The world I once knew has changed. Vampires and Lycans are now the hunted" – 
Selene

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeC67kNZGpeA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeC67kNZGpeA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeC67kNZGpeA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch Awakening trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eC67kNZGpeA>

The weirdest thing about all this scene-setting is that it's almost redundant. 
Whatever mythology the series had painstakingly put together is almost 
immediately jettisoned. At the very beginning film, we learn that Beckinsale 
has been cryogenically frozen for a decade, all the werewolves and vampires are 
dead and the humans are now, ostensibly, the baddies. That's the only launch 
pad for the next 90 minutes or so, when we watch Beckinsale murder scores of 
strangers with a brave new level of sub-Arnie wit as she searches for her 
boyfriend from the first two films – except nobody thought to tell her that the 
actor who plays her boyfriend didn't want to reprise his role this time. All 
that death for nothing. Life is precious, and she'd do well to remember that. 
Perhaps someone should buy her a DVD of Eat Pray Love for her next birthday.

Luckily, some of Underworld's trademarked moves have managed to sneak in. The 
hammy British actors, from Bill Nighy to Derek Jacobi, in the first films are 
all present here in the form of Charles Dance and Stephen Rea. Their 
performances, which appear to be the result of a secret scenery-chewing 
competition, are the closest this film gets to a treat. Although that might 
only be because the rest of the film is roughly the equivalent of being trapped 
in Riga's loudest malfunctioning strobe-light factory while someone 
aggressively makes you stupider by attacking you in the head with a saucepan.

"Defend the second rotunda!" – David
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrA35RJfkHjc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrA35RJfkHjc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrA35RJfkHjc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch Rise of the Lycans trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rA35RJfkHjc>

Tonally, Underworld: Awakening seems like one of the original Planet of the 
Apes sequels. The story was told and conclusively dealt with in the first two 
films, but the series still makes money, so it's just spinning its wheels until 
everyone gets bored and wanders off. The last Underworld film, Rise of the 
Lycans, was a superfluous Battle for the Planet of the Apes filler episode. 
This film is a humans-v-other story, like Conquest of the Planet of the Apes. 
But at least those films were fairly obvious allegories for the US civil rights 
movement, whereas the Underworld series appears to be is a test to see how much 
rubbish teenage boys will sit through if there's a pretty girl in it. On the 
other hand, we haven't seen Underworld's Beneath the Planet of the Apes yet. 
Perhaps this means the next film will be full of bomb-worshipping mutants who 
blow up the world and kill everyone in it. Fingers crossed.

But, really, the question is this: can a film in which a girl tears open a 
werewolf's head with her bare hands really be all that bad? The answer, 
staggeringly, is yes. Strippers v Werewolves is still on, you know. The remote 
control can't be far away.

Notes


• I'm no mathematician, but I'd conservatively estimate that 80% of this film 
is just stuff jumping in slow motion.

• Underworld was more than two hours long. Underworld: Evolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/110239/underworld> was 15 minutes 
shorter.Underworld: Rise of the Lycans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128158/underworld> was 15 minutes 
shorter than that. Underworld: Awakening doesn't even hit the 90-minute mark. 
The good news is that if there's ever a fifth Underworld film,they might be 
able to fit it onVine <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/vine>.

• And a fifth film is all but an inevitability, given that Underworld: 
Evolution was the most successful film of the entire series, for reasons that 
make me want to take to bed and divorce myself from humanity.

• Perhaps Beckinsale's most admirable trait is her ability to pull on a 
full-length PVC catsuit in about 20 seconds immediately after escaping from a 
cryogenic freezer. If I'd had been the star, I would have needed a 45-second 
cutaway shot of me rolling on the floor in a pile of talcum powder, trying to 
stuff my thighs into the leg holes with both hands. You're welcome for that 
mental image.
 