
Union leaders are calling on the Post Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> to halt closures and take 
part in “meaningful talks” on jobs and pension cuts to avert five days of 
strike action planned ahead of Christmas.

Dave Ward, general secretary of the Communication Workers Union, which acts 
for about 4,000 postal workers, said: “We will be tabling a fresh proposal to 
the Post Office and government within 24 hours. Our ambition is to avoid any 
strike action. For this to happen, the Post Office and government need to enter 
into serious negotiations on the future of the Post Office.”

The Post Office has said next week’s strike will have minimal impact on 
Christmas mail, but that claim is disputed by the postal workers’ unions.

The government-backed post office operator said less than 3% of its outlets 
would be affected by the action expected to start from 19 December. But the 
CWU, which is protesting over pay, pension and job cuts, said more than a fifth 
of parcels were handled by the 300 crown post offices where its members work.

A spokesman for the union accused the Post Office of “giving the public a 
false sense of security”.

He said that the crown offices, which are run directly by Post Office 
employees involved in the strike, were based in key cities, such as Manchester, 
London and Birmingham, and were far larger than the thousands of local offices 
run by independent business people.

But Kevin Gilliland, the network and sales director for the Post Office, said: 
“It will be business as usual in almost all of our network, with over 50,000 
Post Office people on hand to support customers as they make their preparations 
for Christmas.”

Post Office workers to stage five days of strikes next week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/post-office-workers-to-stage-five-days-of-strikes-next-week>
He said the Post Office was extremely disappointed that the CWU preferred to 
call for strike action, despite the company’s pledge to return to talks on 
Wednesday.

Royal Mail, which handles parcel and letter deliveries and is now a private 
company after it was split off from the Post Office several years ago, said it 
expected the action to have little or no effect on the services it provides its 
customers.

But the CWU disagreed, saying: “The Royal Mail has got to have parcels and if 
you can’t go to your local Post Office to drop them off then they won’t be 
there to deliver.”

However, it is possible that this round of strikes by the CWU, which has been 
embroiled in the dispute with the Post Office for more than a year, will not 
have as much impact as previous action.

Unlike a series of strikes earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/14/more-than-300-post-offices-24-hour-walkout-strike>
, Unite, the union which acts for 700 Post Office managers, is not taking part 
this time.

Unite’s officer for the Post Office, Brian Scott, said: “We are due to meet 
with the company on 22 December, at a senior level, and so we feel it is not 
appropriate to take further action in advance of that. These discussions are 
part of our efforts to find a solution to the dispute.”

But he added: “This does not undermine our support for the CWU campaign to get 
an impetus for a refreshed Post Office that will make it sustainable, including 
the call for a PostBank. This debate should include government.”

The strike action comes after the Post Office confirmed plans to transfer more 
than 60 of its largest outlets to the private sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/post-office-to-move-up-to-61-branches-to-wh-smith>
. Along with other cost-cutting proposals, the closures will lead to the loss 
of about 2,000 of its 6,600-strong workforce in crown branches, back office and 
cash handling.

About half the Post Office’s total workforce is also being forced to shift 
from a final salary pension scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/post-office-pension-benefits-cut-defined-contribution>
 to a defined contribution scheme, which unions say could cut retirement 
benefits by 30% or more in some cases.
 