
In Britain, in 2014, we are compelled to debate whether people should work for 
free. Unpaid internships have become a pillar of the modern British class 
system, discriminating on the basis of wealth rather than talent. The system 
acts as a filter for entire professions, helping to transform them into closed 
shops for the uber-privileged. Not only are they exploitative, they effectively 
allow the children of the well-to-do to buy up positions in the upper echelons 
of British society. But, finally, it is possible – just possible – that this 
key means of rigging Britain in favour of a small elite faces its reckoning. On 
Tuesday, Labour shadow minister Liam Byrne will return to his old school to set 
out the case for dealing with this national scandal. Despite some internal 
resistance, Labour’s leadership are moving towards backing a four-week limit on 
unpaid internships.

According to the Sutton Trust 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCMQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.suttontrust.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2014%2F11%2FUnpaid-Internships.pdf&ei=yaGNVMzBG5DtarW7gpgH&usg=AFQjCNHbqjOQ7dlzuQNh7piDA-Xjf4xTlQ&sig2=sJY9sQ7j4BGz8PUQa6flZw&bvm=bv.81828268,d.d2s>
, more than one in three graduate interns are working for nothing. At any given 
time, the charity estimates, 21,000 are working unpaid, although a 2010 
estimate by the thinktank IPPR put the figure at 100,000. For those unable to 
rely on the Bank of Mum and Dad, such unabashed exploitation can be completely 
unaffordable. Unpaid internships are often gateways to professions – like, for 
example, law, the media, the tragically professionalised political world – and 
are all too frequently located in London, one of the most expensive cities on 
Earth. The Sutton Trust estimates that a single person in London will have to 
cough up £5,556 for the privilege of undertaking an unpaid internship for 
six months; in Manchester it is not much cheaper, at £4,728.

For a generation facing a worse lot in life than their parents, this is a time 
of desperation. Hundreds of thousands of young people are out of work; many 
others have been driven into insecure or zero-hour employment; andaround half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/19/half-recent-uk-graduates-stuck-jobs-ons>
 of recent graduates are trapped in non-graduate work. Such desperation is 
lucrative for many employers. They know that those with the means will do 
whatever they can to get their foot in a door which has been slammed in the 
faces of so many others. After all, more thanhalf of employers surveyed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/15/student-guide-to-internships>
 refuse to give jobs to graduates with no prior work experience.

The public has little doubt that unpaid internships are a wealth bar. 
According to polling by the Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission,74% of 
Britons 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/ban-unpaid-internships-completely-says-social-mobility-commission-9796805.html>
 believe that a young person in their family could not afford to take up an 
unpaid internship. Yes, there are many reasons why the apex of society is such 
a stitch-up for the pampered and privileged, but the internship filter is 
certainly one of them.More than half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/28/british-society-elitism-privileged-owen-jones>
 of the top 100 media professionals attended a fee-paying school, even though 
just 7% of Britons overall did; and 43% of newspaper columnists were educated 
in the private sector. This is not just an unjust waste of talent, leaving 
aspiring journalists from more humble backgrounds unable to pursue their dream. 
It helps to ensure that the media reflects the opinions, prejudices and 
priorities of a gilded elite.

Many unpaid interns wish to remain anonymous out of a fear of damaging their 
careers, but their experiences are telling. Take one woman who won a month-long 
internship with a leading Sunday newspaper. “Because the internship was unpaid 
and I’m from Leicester, not Chelsea, I could only afford to stay for one week 
and got very little out of it,” she says. She now works in press management. 
Freddie Foot from Bristol recently graduated with an international development 
degree. “The current climate seems to imply that to get your foot in the door 
you have to do one of these internships,” he says. “The issue is that unless 
your parents live in London – where most of these jobs are – or you can take 
three months off unpaid, it is basically an impossibility.”

When Matthew Cole moved to London, he lived in a “makeshift DIY bedroom 
partition in a lounge” in a building that should have been condemned, and 
worked to try to support his unpaid labour. “However, when you are exhausted by 
the work you do to pay the rent and eat, it’s very hard to find the energy or 
time to work for free on anything, internship or otherwise.”

Apologists for unpaid internships – proof that you can find people who will 
defend almost anything – sometimes mount the following defence: if the 
non-privileged are real go-getters, they will spend their every remaining hour 
slogging away in bar jobs to support themselves. What a society they condone, 
where those without money must work themselves half to death in order to even 
be considered for a job in an top profession.

These unpaid internships should be illegal – and by that, I mean under 
existing law. As Intern Aware, a group that has done more than anybody to fight 
this national scourge,point out 
<http://www.internaware.org/unpaid_internships_are_illegal>, under employment 
law if you “work set hours, do set tasks and contribute value to an 
organisation” you are a worker and are entitled to a minimum wage. And yet a 
YouGov survey foundmore than eight out of 10 
<http://startups.co.uk/unpaid-internships-actually-harm-career-prospects-study-finds/>
 businesses who used unpaid interns admitted they undertook useful tasks.

HMRC, the department responsible for enforcing the law, has been “totally 
ineffective”, says Intern Aware’s Ben Lyons. So it took matters into its own 
hands, encouraging former unpaid interns to take their employers to court to 
recoup wages they should have been paid. Ex-interns from Harrods, Sony and a 
leading London tourist attraction are among those who were successful. Such 
cases serve as useful warnings, but they are no solution. “If the primary 
reason you’re doing an internship is to get a reference or get a new job, you 
won’t do that,” says Lyons. “There’s no real way under the existing law that 
the vast majority of internships will come forward.”

Change may now be afoot, however. As well as a hardening of the Labour line on 
internships, this debate is coming to the House of Lords – with some 
cross-party support for reform. There are other battles that must be fought: 
expensive post-graduate qualifications are now often a must for many often a 
must for professions but too costly for many; there’s a need for scholarships 
to support those from underrepresented backgrounds; and we have to tackle the 
social and economic inequality that lies at the root of the gap in educational 
attainment.

Yet a curbing of unpaid internships would be a real blow to Britain’s 
entrenched class system. What an opportunity: it must not be missed.
 