
Here’s a marvellous tale to jumble your winkles: once upon a time, there lived 
a man who was 6ft 6in tall – a big, sometimes friendly,swashboggling 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-36397983> giant of children’s 
literature. But here’s the most scrumdiddlyumptious thing of all, it was this
gobblefunking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/14/roald-dahl-dictionary-best-gobblefunk-words>
 gentleman who conjured two of the greatest girl-heroines in the history of 
literature. One, a five-year-old genius with telekinetic powers and a love of 
Charles Dickens, the other a small and bespectacled orphan who enlists the 
queen of England to help quash a pack of giants. The eponymousMatilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/aug/31/review-matilda-roald-dahl>
 and The BFG’s Sophie are, of course, the indelible creations of the lateRoald 
Dahl <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl>.

‘We are the weirdos’: how witches went from evil outcasts to feminist heroes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/28/witches-evil-outcasts-feminist-heroes-pop-culture>
Dahl, who died in 1990, has a splintered reputation. He is our national 
treasure, the magical man who brought us some of the best-loved books in the 
history of children’s literature. He was also, by most accounts, a bully, a 
bigot, a womaniser. Perhaps our unwillingness to reconcile these elements of 
his being – the nasty and the nice – explains why he is so rarely absent from 
the cultural conversation. How to deal with Dahl ... We never like our public 
figures to be too complicated and, when it comes to children’s authors, we want 
plain saints. But, as any kid knows, it’s the icky, sticky, often delicious 
blend of nasty and nice that makes his books tick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0df978eba30318c3fb16bad0cbdb80ccaff77862%2F0_49_3184_1910%2F3184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsquashable%20squirts%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Roald%20Dahl's%20girl%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsquashable%20squirts%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Roald%20Dahl%27s%20girl%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0df978eba30318c3fb16bad0cbdb80ccaff77862%2F0_49_3184_1910%2F3184.jpg>
 Mara Wilson in the film adaptation of Matilda. Photograph: 
Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
With The BFG – now a Spielberg-helmed Disney film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-bfg-review-mark-rylance-steven-spieberg-roald-dahl>
 – Dahl’s words alongsideQuentin Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/quentin-blake>’s drawings remain a perfect, 
inseparable match: those naif, febrile and scratchy little sketches, paired 
with Dahl’s arch and antic tone, in which something fractious and faintly 
peevish always simmers beneath the sweetness. With Sophie and Matilda – both 
scrupulously polite, conscientious little girls – that simmering is one of 
revenge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ba872a860d5e2d12946c814e4b1cc2609bc185f%2F0_0_1901_2560%2F1901.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsquashable%20squirts%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Roald%20Dahl's%20girl%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsquashable%20squirts%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Roald%20Dahl%27s%20girl%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ba872a860d5e2d12946c814e4b1cc2609bc185f%2F0_0_1901_2560%2F1901.jpg>
 Roald Dahl’s The BFG. 
Matilda must contend with the tyrannical headmistress Miss Trunchbull, who has 
swindled the shy and lovely Miss Honey out of her inheritance, while Sophie is 
up against a pack of child-eating giants. At one point, Matilda’s mother gabs: 
“Looks is more important than books.” Matilda, of course, proves the opposite 
to be true: both she and Sophie succeed through their wily intelligence. Even 
that brute Trunchbull knows that “a bad girl is a far more dangerous creature 
than a bad boy. What’s more, they’re much harder to squash. Squashing a bad 
girl is like trying to squash a bluebottle. You bang down on it and the darn 
thing isn’t there.” Generations of small and unsquashable girls have 
internalised the lessons of Sophie and Matilda, to learn that smarts and 
cunning prevail over force and fury.

Matilda, as the Slate’s critic Chelsey Philpot put it, “made being a nerd cool 
before being a nerd was cool 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/books/2013/04/roald_dahl_s_matilda_celebrates_its_25th_anniversary.html>
”.Another woman tweeted recently 
<https://twitter.com/MissEdwardsCLT/status/750457062220529664> that the book 
“let me know that my thoughts were indeed valid; even as a child, nerd, girl, 
outsider etc ...” Of those four designations, Dahl himself could only lay claim 
to the first: he was, for better and for worse, a permanent kid. In old age, 
hewould refer to himself as a “geriatric child.” His granddaughter, the model
Sophie Dahl <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/oct/19/biography.fiction> – 
on whom The BFG’s heroine is based – has spoken about burying him with an array 
of his favourite things, including: “The most enormous box of chocolate bars, 
Twixes, Kit-Kats, Mars bars, everything, just to keep him going til he got to 
heaven.”

In his children’s stories, Dahl championed underdogs and loathed bullies. The 
pluck of Matilda, for example, is enhanced by the grotesquely wrought, towering 
Trunchbull. With her “bull neck”, grapefruit calf muscles and propensity for 
defenestrating boys and hurling girls by their pigtails, she is matched only in 
horridness by the giants of the BFG – Bonecruncher, Fleshlumpeater, 
Bloodbottler et al. Off the page, however, Dahl could be just as rotsome as his 
monsters. He was an egregious and unashamed antisemite, who, in 1983, sought to 
defend his prejudice with some appalling – and appallingly misjudged – words. 
“There is a trait in the Jewish character that does provoke animosity,” he told 
the New Statesman. “Maybe it’s a kind of lack of generosity towards non-Jews. I 
mean there is always a reason why anti-anything crops up anywhere; even a 
stinker like Hitler didn’t just pick on them for no reason.” Eventually, his 
bad behaviour became intolerable to Robert Gottlieb, Dahl’s long-suffering – 
and Jewish – editor. WhenGottlieb sent Dahl a letter 
<http://boingboing.net/2011/06/07/roald-dahl-kind-of-a.html> washing his hands 
of him, he allegedly received a standing ovation from the rest of the staff at 
the Knopf publishing house. “You have behaved to us in a way I can honestly say 
is unmatched in my experience for overbearingness and utter lack of civility,” 
Gottlieb wrote. “I’ve come to believe that you’re just enjoying a prolonged 
tantrum and are bullying us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4725d9b026fad366479d0b25887ecc9265f2f588%2F0_0_5051_3032%2F5051.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsquashable%20squirts%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Roald%20Dahl's%20girl%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsquashable%20squirts%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Roald%20Dahl%27s%20girl%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4725d9b026fad366479d0b25887ecc9265f2f588%2F0_0_5051_3032%2F5051.jpg>
 Mark Rylance in The BFG. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Appreciating the pragmatic heroism of his girl characters is also easier if 
you’ve never read Dahl’s adult fiction. For grownups – or, at least, ostensible 
grownups – he wrote nasty tales oozing with bodily revulsion and sexual 
humiliation.The playwright Noël Coward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/noelcoward>, writing in his diary, observed 
in them “an underlying streak of cruelty and macabre unpleasantness 
<http://thisrecording.com/today/2011/6/1/in-which-we-consider-the-macabre-unpleasantness-of-roald-dah.html>
, and a curiously adolescent emphasis on sex”. It seems more accurate to call 
that streak “blatant” rather than “underlying”. Consider, for example,Dahl’s 
short story Bitch <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitch_(short_story)>. First 
published in Playboy in 1974, the story culminates with its protagonist, Uncle 
Oswald, “a wanton and incorrigible philanderer”, turning into “a gigantic 
perpendicular penis, seven-feet tall and as handsome as they come”. Oswald, 
giant dick that he now is and perhaps always has been, boasts: “But tell me 
truly, did you ever see a sexual organ quite so grand as me?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc793c1af30093e943cd1bf64b3229b1bf1c1cac7%2F0_313_1191_1488%2F1191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsquashable%20squirts%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Roald%20Dahl's%20girl%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsquashable%20squirts%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Roald%20Dahl%27s%20girl%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Funsquashable-squirts-the-legacy-of-roald-dahls-girl-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc793c1af30093e943cd1bf64b3229b1bf1c1cac7%2F0_313_1191_1488%2F1191.jpg>
 Mara Wilson in 1996’s Matilda. 
It’s an exposure of stupidity and vanity not dissimilar to an exchange in 
Matilda. “He does do some pretty silly things now and again, doesn’t he, 
mummy?” our heroine remarks mildly, having just duped her father into rubbing 
peroxide in his hair. Her mother answers: “I’m afraid men are not always quite 
as clever as they think they are. You will learn that when you get a bit older, 
my girl.”

As Dahl himself got older, his stories did indeed become sweeter and wiser; 
published in 1982 and 1988 respectively, The BFG and Matlida constitute the 
last children’s books he published in his lifetime. Decades on, you can see 
Sophie and Matilda’s lineage in a succession of quietly valiant heroines, among 
themLemony Snicket <https://www.theguardian.com/books/lemony-snicket>’s Violet 
Baudelaire <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Violet_Baudelaire>, Philip Pullman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippullman>’s Lyra Belacqua 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lyra_Belacqua> and JK Rowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling>’s best and most bookish 
muggle-born witch,Hermione Granger 
<http://harrypotter.wikia.com/wiki/Hermione_Granger>. Through them and their 
antecedents, small minds such as Matilda’s continue to grow, “nurtured by the 
voices of all those authors who had sent their books out into the world like 
ships on the sea”. Even a grown woman might, as she does, receive a piece of 
solace emptied out of nastiness: “These books gave Matilda a comforting 
message: you are not alone.”
 