
Up to $500m (£346m) spent by the US, EU and other donors to protect the 
world’s second largest swath of rainforest has failed – for the trees, the 
animals and the people who live among them – a major study has found.

Analysis of five equatorial African countries in the Congo basin has found 
that destructive developments including illegal logging, oil and gas 
exploration, and palm oil plantations are taking place in 34 large protected 
areas, and that conservation has displaced villages and led to conflict and 
human rights abuses.

According to the Rainforest Foundation – whose researchers spent 18 months 
interviewing people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cameroon, Gabon, 
Central African Republic and the Republic of Congo – elephants,bongos 
<http://www.awf.org/wildlife-conservation/bongo>, gorillas and chimpanzees are 
declining at alarming rates while communities report abuse by people paid to 
protect the environment.


“Without exception, all communities in the countries where field research took 
place associate protected areas with increasing hardships due to restrictions 
to their livelihood activities, including diminished access to food,” said the 
report, Protected areas in the Congo basin: failing people and biodiversity. 
“Whenever gains may have resulted from protected areas, very little, if 
anything, has reached local communities to date.”

In only eight of the 24 areas did conservation provide any work, and this was 
sporadic employment as park rangers or tourist guides. No evidence was found of 
compensation paid to communities for stopping hunting or taking timber.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fus-eu-conservation-funds-failing-to-protect-trees-people-rainforest-foundation-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c58116525b3ff8351d9fd594599aabed06a228d%2F0_0_5508_3672%2F5508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20and%20EU%20conservation%20funds%20failing%20to%20protect%20trees%20or%20people%2C%20claims%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fus-eu-conservation-funds-failing-to-protect-trees-people-rainforest-foundation-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20and%20EU%20conservation%20funds%20failing%20to%20protect%20trees%20or%20people%2C%20claims%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fus-eu-conservation-funds-failing-to-protect-trees-people-rainforest-foundation-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c58116525b3ff8351d9fd594599aabed06a228d%2F0_0_5508_3672%2F5508.jpg>
 Sustainable logging in Mindourou, Cameroon. Photograph: Brent Stirton/Getty 
Images 
According to the Rainforest Foundation, the biggest overall funder of Congo 
rainforest conservation has been the US government – mostly through the US 
Agency for International Development (USAid), but also through the State 
Department.

“We have identified at least $110m that has been put into conservation efforts 
just by USAid from 2004-10, and they have committed to spending another $50m 
from 2013-18,” said Simon Counsell, Rainforest Foundation director.

 The next biggest funder has been the EU, which spent about $118m between 1992 
and 2010. Money was channelled through theEcofac project 
<http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/documents/case-studies/central-africa_natural-resources_ecofac_en.pdf>
 (pdf), with a further €30m (£24m) for funding committed for the next five 
years.

 A further $50m has come through the African Development Bank, the Norwegian 
government, Germany, Japan and others.

“Taking into account all the money that has come through organisations such as 
WWF and WCS [the WildlifeConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society] from private 
donations and foundations, we calculate that probably $400m has been spent on 
these protected areas in the last 15 years or so, and quite possibly as much as 
$500m,” said Counsell.

The report said most conservation in the Congo basin is based on a 
militaristic approach, known as “guns and guards”. It depends on armed 
anti-poaching “ecoguards” restricting hunting and stopping people going into 
the forest.

But this model is described in the report as heavy-handed, leading to 
communities being threatened and turning them against conservation. Indigenous 
groups, such as the Pygmies, are said to suffer the most, largely because their 
semi-nomadic lifestyles tend to overlap with protected areas.

The authors blame governments, saying they are obliged by law to uphold land 
and human rights as well as people’s rights to free, prior and informed consent.


“Business as usual in the form of top-down conservation in the Congo basin can 
be counterproductive and is often downright unjust as human rights abuses are 
perpetrated in the name of conservation,” said the report.

“Local people bear the brunt of anti-poaching measures even though they are 
not the drivers of poaching. At the same time, systematic efforts to tackle 
high level illegal wildlife trade networks have not taken pressure off local 
communities or diminished the abuses they suffer.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fus-eu-conservation-funds-failing-to-protect-trees-people-rainforest-foundation-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a653cd784a4559563a12e0c27856fda81da12dd%2F0_0_5100_3400%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20and%20EU%20conservation%20funds%20failing%20to%20protect%20trees%20or%20people%2C%20claims%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fus-eu-conservation-funds-failing-to-protect-trees-people-rainforest-foundation-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20and%20EU%20conservation%20funds%20failing%20to%20protect%20trees%20or%20people%2C%20claims%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fus-eu-conservation-funds-failing-to-protect-trees-people-rainforest-foundation-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a653cd784a4559563a12e0c27856fda81da12dd%2F0_0_5100_3400%2F5100.jpg>
 An elephant eats fruit on the forest floor in the Republic of Congo’s 
Nouabalé-Ndoki national park. Photograph: Ian Nichols/NGS/Getty Images 
Counsell said: “A new, more sustainable form is needed in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, which works with local people 
rather than against them. Donor governments need to carefully consider whether 
their support to strict forest preservation is effective.”

Of the 34 protected areas included in the study, 26 reported displacement of 
people to make way for conservation, 21 reported conflicts between park 
management and communities, and 18 said they were not consulted before the 
protected areas were created.


The study follows a complaint by Survival International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/03/wwf-accused-of-facilitating-human-rights-abuses-of-tribal-people-in-cameroon>
 to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development accusing WWF of 
inadvertently facilitating serious human rights abuses against Pygmies living 
in Cameroonian rainforests.

The WWF <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wwf>, in a response included 
in the report, said enforcing protected areas is problematic across the Congo 
basin and made more difficult because of nearby armed conflict.

“Militarisation of the south-east Cameroon area – linked to arms trafficking, 
well-armed poaching and conflict inCentral African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic> – has been 
identified as a factor in an increased number of reports of unacceptable 
conduct and alleged abuse by ecoguards and others,” Frederick Kwame Kumah, 
WWF’s director for Africa, said in the report.

The authors recommend a shift away from the conventional people-free parks 
philosophy to one that sees the remaining Congo basin rainforests not as 
pristine nature to be saved but as places where local communities are part of 
the equation and can benefit from the forests.
 