
The American anti-abortion campaigner Troy Newman has been denied a visa to 
travel to Australia, just days after the government indicated it mightblock the 
American singer Chris Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/28/chris-brown-singer-australia-rihanna>
 from touring the country.

Newman was due to speak on the topic “save the babies down under” at events 
promoted by the group Right to Life Australia, but was branded an “anti-choice 
extremist” by the Labor MP Terri Butler, who said Newman’s visa should be 
denied on character grounds.

Cancel visa of activist who called for abortion doctors to be killed, Labor 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/labor-calls-for-visa-ban-on-activist-who-called-for-abortion-doctors-to-be-killed>
Butler wrote to the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/labor-calls-for-visa-ban-on-activist-who-called-for-abortion-doctors-to-be-killed>
 arguing that the campaigner could “cause significant harm to our community” 
because he had previously called for the execution of abortion doctors.

On Wednesday Dutton said the government was taking action. “I can confirm that 
my department has cancelled the visa for Mr Troy Newman under Section 128 of 
the Migration Act,” the minister said.

“Mr Newman can appeal for a revocation of this decision and no further comment 
will be made during this appeal period.”

Newman is president of Operation Rescue, an anti-abortion group that denounced 
the visa cancellation. The group blamed “viciously false accusations brought by 
Australian pro-abortion activists and news media that Newman supports violence 
against abortion providers”.

“Newman has never advocated violence and in fact, urges pro-life activists to 
work within the governmental and legal system to accomplish change,” Operation 
Rescue saidin a statement 
<http://www.operationrescue.org/archives/australia-revokes-newmans-visa-attempts-to-block-him-from-traveling-in-us/>
.

“Newman boarded his flight in Wichita, Kansas, hoping that the situation would 
be resolved by the time he arrived in Los Angeles. However, while boarding a 
connecting flight in Dehownver, Colorado, Newman was stopped and told he could 
not board his flight to LA because of an order by the Australian government.”

Newman’s allies posted footage of the scene at Denver as Newman argued with 
airport staff who told him he would have to contact the Australian government 
to contest their refusal to let him on the flight.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGJek9bi1bc0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGJek9bi1bc0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGJek9bi1bc0&media=>
 Troy Newman is refused access to his connecting flight in Denver. 
Operation Rescue’s senior policy adviser, Cheryl Sullenger, said Newman had 
been the victim of “political persecution, plain and simple, as well as an 
attempt to silence the pro-life message in Australia”.

In the same statement, Right to Life Australia said the group was “very upset 
that this has happened and are working furiously to turn it around”.

The national president of the organisation, Margaret Tighe, told Guardian 
Australia that the group has been in touch with Dutton’s office to overturn the 
decision, which she calls a “gross denial” of Newman’s rights.

“We’re working as hard as we can to make sure his visa is reinstated,” Tighe 
said. “The reason they want to stop him coming is because he had been very 
effective … the only reason they are doing this is to prevent freedom of 
speech.”

Butler had focused on comments in the book Their Blood Cries Out, which was 
co-authored by Newman. She pointed to this passage: “In addition to our 
personal guilt in abortion, the United States government has abrogated its 
responsibility to properly deal with the blood-guilty. This responsibility 
rightly involves executing convicted murderers, including abortionists, for 
their crimes in order to expunge bloodguilt from the land and people.”

On Wednesday Butler welcomed the minister’s decision to block the visa and 
rejected claims Newman had been subjected to false accusations.

Butler said her letter to Dutton had quoted Newman’s own direct comments. 
“Right to Life should concentrate on making sure there is responsible and 
respectful debate and not on importing people who advocated for doctors to be 
executed for doing things that are lawful,” she said.

Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, backed Butler’s request for the visa to be 
cancelled. “Mr Newman’s public comments go well beyond what would be regarded 
as acceptable debate in this country,” Wong said. “His views are repugnant. Mr 
Newman’s presence in Australia risks inciting intimidation and violence against 
vulnerable women.”

The government’s decision to cancel Newman’s visa is a different process from 
the one adopted in the case of Brown, whose travel was scheduled for December. 
Brown wasissued with a notice of intention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/27/chris-brown-denied-visa-to-tour-australia-on-character-grounds-reports>
 to consider visa refusal, giving the artist 28 days to present material as to 
why he should be allowed into the country.

Chris Brown denied visa to tour Australia on character grounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/27/chris-brown-denied-visa-to-tour-australia-on-character-grounds-reports>
Brown pleaded guilty to attacking his then girlfriend, the pop singer Rihanna, 
in 2009 and was sentenced to five years of probation.

He was due to travel to Australia for shows in Perth, Melbourne, Sydney and 
Brisbane, but a petition by campaign group GetUp! to deny him a visa has 
attracted more than 14,000 signatures.


In a series of comments posted on his official Twitter account on Tuesday, 
Brown argued that his “life mistakes should be a wake up call for everyone” and 
he should be allowed to proceed with his visit.


“I would be more than grateful to come to Australia to raise awareness about 
domestic violence,” he wrote.

Brown said young people did not listen to parents or public service 
announcements, but entertainers had the power to change lives.
Chris Brown (@chrisbrown) 
I would be more than grateful to come to Australia to raise awareness about 
domestic violence.Im not the pink elephant in the room anymore
 <https://twitter.com/chrisbrown/status/648841918961442816> September 29, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/chrisbrown/status/648841918961442816> Chris Brown 
(@chrisbrown) 
My life mistakes should be a wake up call for everyone. Showing the world that 
mistakes don't define you. Trying to prevent spousal abuse
 <https://twitter.com/chrisbrown/status/648842362253279232> September 29, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/chrisbrown/status/648842362253279232> Chris Brown 
(@chrisbrown) 
The youth don't listen to parents nor do they listen to PSA's. The power that 
we have as Entertainers can change lives.
 <https://twitter.com/chrisbrown/status/648842776386273280> September 29, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/chrisbrown/status/648842776386273280> 
The minister for women, Michaelia Cash, indicated last week that Brown should 
not be allowed into Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/chris-brown-should-not-be-allowed-into-australia-says-minister-for-women>
.

“People need to understand if you are going to commit domestic violence and 
then you want to travel around the world, there are going to be countries that 
say to you ‘You cannot come in because you are not of the character we expect 
in Australia’,” Cash said at a media event to launch the government’snew 
domestic violence initiatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/24/malcolm-turnbull-announces-new-strategies-to-tackle-domestic-violence>
.
 