
A federal appeals court ruled on Friday that the US Navy was wrongly allowed 
to use sonar in the nation’s oceansthat could harm whales and other marine life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/14/stranded-whales-ocean-navy-sonars>
.

The ninth circuit court of appeals reversed a lower court decision upholding 
approval granted in 2012 for the Navy to use low-frequency sonar for training, 
testing and routine operations.

The five-year approval covered peacetime operations in the Pacific, Atlantic 
and Indian Oceans and the Mediterranean Sea.

'A deaf whale is a dead whale': US navy sonars could be cause of strandings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/14/stranded-whales-ocean-navy-sonars>
The appellate panel sent the matter back to the lower court for further 
proceedings.
A message seeking comment from representatives of the US Pacific Fleet in 
Honolulu was not immediately returned.

Sonar, used to detect submarines, can injure whales, seals, dolphins and 
walruses and disrupt their feeding and mating. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/25/navy-sonar-devices-threat-whales-animals>

The 2012 rules adopted by the National Marine Fisheries Service permitted Navy 
sonar use to affect about 30 whales and two dozen pinnipeds; marine mammals 
with front and rear flippers such as seals and sea lions, each year.

The Navy was required to shut down or delay sonar use if a marine mammal was 
detected near the ship. Loud sonar pulses also were banned near coastlines and 
in certain protected waters.

Environmental groups, led by the Natural Resources Defense Council, filed a 
lawsuit in San Francisco in 2012, arguing the approval violated the Marine 
Mammal Protection Act.

Navy sonar devices could signal threat to whales and other marine animals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/25/navy-sonar-devices-threat-whales-animals>
The appellate court ruled 3-0 that the approval rules failed to meet a section 
of the protection act requiring peacetime oceanic programs to have “the least 
practicable adverse impact on marine mammals”.

“We have every reason to believe that the Navy has been deliberate and 
thoughtful in its plans to follow NMFS guidelines and limit unnecessary 
harassment and harm to marine mammals,” the appellate ruling said.

However, the panel concluded the fisheries service “did not give adequate 
protection to areas of the world’s oceans flagged by its own experts as 
biologically important,” according to a summary accompanying the court’s 
decision.

“The result is that a meaningful proportion of the world’s marine mammal 
habitat is under-protected,” according to the decision.
 