
Account and commenting help

Q: I have forgotten my password for my Guardian registration account.

A: To reset your password please follow this link 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/reset>. You will receive an email with further 
instructions. Do check your spam folder if it doesn’t arrive in your inbox.

Please note, this email should arrive within a few seconds. If it does not, 
then it could be because your email provider quarantines automated emails to 
scan for viruses for a short period before sending them to you, in which case 
you will need to contact your IT team or email provider. If the registration 
email does not arrive at all, the most likely reason is that the email address 
that you have entered is not registered on our system.

Q: I want to change my username.

A: If you have not posted any comments you will be prompted to create a 
username when you post a comment for the first time. If you have posted 
comments or experience any difficulties, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com 
<mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> from the email address associated with your 
Guardian account and we can provide assistance. Please note that at this time 
it is not possible to change usernames for GuardianWitness profiles.

Q: I want to change my registered email address/postal address/other personal 
details.

A: Please follow this link <https://profile.theguardian.com/account/edit> and 
sign in if you’ve not already done so, amend the details and press ‘Save 
changes’ at the bottom of the page.

Q: I want to unsubscribe from emails.

A: If you have a registration account and want to change your email 
preferences, please followthis link 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/email-prefs>. If you don’t have an account, 
then Please note that this doesn’t cover emails from Guardian Jobs, for which 
you need to contact theJobs Help team <http://jobs.theguardian.com/contact.html>
 for assistance.

Should this fail to stop the emails, please contact us here at user help (the 
address is at the bottom of this page) and attach one of the unwanted emails 
including the header so we can investigate.

Q: How do I register to post comments?

 * Go to http://www.theguardian.com <https://www.theguardian.com/international>
 and click on “Sign in” in the top-left corner of the screen. You will be taken 
to the ‘Sign in with the Guardian’ page. 
 * If you have not previously registered, on ‘Don’t have an account? Sign up’, 
click on ‘Sign up’ to create your account. 
 * Complete the form and click on the ‘Create account’ button. If creating 
your account with Google or Facebook, please note that your Google or Facebook 
profile name will become your username. 
 * You will receive an email to validate your email address. After you have 
validated your email address you will be able to comment. 
Q: I would like to add a link to my comment.

Before posting your comment, to insert a link, highlight the text in your 
comment that you wish to turn into a link, then click on the ‘Link” button and 
you will be prompted to enter the web address after “http://www <http://www/>.”


Q: I want one of my comments deleted.

A: You need to contact the moderation team, the quickest way to do this is to 
use the ‘report’ button stating that you’re the author of the comment and why 
you want it to be removed. Abuse reports reach the moderation team instantly 
and your comments will be taken down immediately where appropriate. For contact 
details for the moderation team, please see the answer to the next question.

Q: Why have I been banned/put on a pre-moderation list?

A: All moderation queries are handled by the moderation team and should be 
sent to them directly atmoderation@theguardian.com 
<mailto:moderation@theguardian.com> or opinion.moderation@theguardian.com 
<mailto:opinion.moderation@theguardian.com> (for moderation on Opinion articles 
specifically). There’s also anextensive list of frequently asked questions 
about community features and functionality on the Guardian website. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community-faqs>

Q: How do I delete my account?

A: In order to try and stop people creating multiple accounts for the purposes 
of abusing others or over-representing the support for a cause or position, we 
chose not to allow users to delete their own accounts. If you would like to 
delete your account, please contact us at user help (the email address is at 
the bottom of this page) from the email address that the account is registered 
to and we can delete it for you.




General Queries

Q: How do I contact…?

A: We have a contacts page <https://www.theguardian.com/help/contact-us> which 
is accessible from the bottom of all of our web pages. Please note that if 
somebody is a freelance writer, they will not have an @theguardian.com email 
address. If this is so, you should contact the editorial desk that they 
contribute to and ask for your message to be passed on.

Q: I have a question about my subscription.

A: Please see our subscriptions FAQ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/subscriber-direct/subscription-frequently-asked-questions>
 which contains answers to the most common questions and contact details for 
the subscriptions departments.

Q: I have a question about my membership.

A: Please contact the membership team at: membershipsupport@theguardian.com 
<mailto:membershipsupport@theguardian.com>.

Q: I’ve spotted a mistake or wish to complain about something in the Guardian.

A: It is the policy of the Guardian to correct significant errors as soon as 
possible and the paper has appointed a readers’ editor to deal with questions 
and complaints from readers, you can email them at
guardian.readers@theguardian.com <mailto:guardian.readers@theguardian.com> for 
the Guardian orobserver.readers@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:observer.readers@observer.co.uk>

For less significant errors such as spelling mistakes or broken links, please 
tell us here at user help atuserhelp@theguardian.com 
<mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>

If you can include a link to the article that contains the mistake, that would 
be very useful.

Q: I’m interested in working for or having work experience with the Guardian.

A: The Guardian’s work for us page <https://www.theguardian.com/workforus> has 
details of all of our job vacancies and information about how to apply for work 
experience.

Q: I have an idea for an article.

A: You need to pitch your idea to the most appropriate section. Please read our
contributors’ guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/1999/nov/22/contributors-guide-and-contacts> 
for more information.

Q: How do I seek permission to reproduce an article or photograph from the 
Guardian or Observer?

A: It is free to link to a Guardian website article, but if you wish to 
reproduce material you need to seek permission from our syndication department, 
you can do this by clicking on the ‘reuse this content’ link at the bottom of 
each article. For further information please visit oursyndication page 
<http://syndication.theguardian.com>. 

Q: How do I advertise in the Guardian?

A: Please see our advertising page <http://advertising.theguardian.com/> for 
information and contact details.

Q: How do I contact user help?

A: Please check this FAQ page as your question may have already been answered. 
If not, please email:userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have a question relating to a user account, can you please email us 
from the address that you have registered with us. You can also follow us on 
Twitter at@GuardianHelp <http://twitter.com/GuardianHelp>
 