
Wesley So won the London Classic and the four-event Grand Tour but the show 
stealer at Kensington Olympia last weekend was Valentina Gunina. The 
27-year-old from Murmansk scored an unbeaten 9/10 to win the Super Rapidplay – 
10 rounds of speed games with a £5,000 first prize and a record 475 entries 
including 43 grandmasters.

Gunina had never played in England before, flew in specifically for the 
tournament and was the only Russian in the event apart from the UK resident 
Alex Chernaiev. She holds the GM title at men’s level and her CV includes three 
European titles, two Russian championships and three Olympiad gold medals. 
Significantly for the London contest she has also won the women’s world blitz 
title.

Her technique at the board was remarkable. Rapidplay is 25 minutes on the 
clock plus 10 seconds per move increment for each player, so the normal 
approach is a quick opening followed by a considered think. But in most of her 
games Gunina played fast throughout, using a creative, complex and attacking 
style. She was 20 minutes ahead on the clock against both England’s David 
Howell and France’s legend Etienne Bacrot, who finally drew. Gunina’s only 
other dropped half point was a seven-move draw with her French boyfriend, GM 
Laurent Fressinet.

Tournament winners need some luck and Gunina had two helpful breaks. John Nunn 
lost trivially in a drawn ending while in her decisive final round Luke 
McShane, the 2015 Super Rapidplay winner, made a one-move blunder in a position 
where he had a winning choice available (see the puzzle below).

It was a stunning result, a 2831 rating performance – the level of the world 
champion, Magnus Carlsen – from a player rated 2491 and seeded 33rd. On the 
all-time megascale of female upsets it may rank second only to 14-year-old 
Sofia Polgar’s 8.5/9 at Rome 1989, when the defeated Russian GMs tried to 
conceal the result on their return to Moscow.

Other women competitors described Gunina’s result as inspiring. Final scores 
were Gunina 9/10, Eltaj Safarli (Azerbaijan) 8.5, with England’s Gawain Jones 
and Howell plus Fressinet among 11 players on 8 points.

Online databases have transformed opening theory by making it possible to 
prepare lines of play many moves deep for your opponent. The downside, which 
effectively decided the Grand Tour in the very first round when Hikaru Nakamura 
blundered against Wesley So, is that there is much more data for the human 
brain to recall at the board, leading to mixing up variations or making moves 
in the wrong order. Even the eminent ex-champion Vlad Kramnik admits that this 
happens to him frequently.

Nakamura presumably intended 13 Bd3 followed by Ne2, but playing the knight 
move first allowed So’s Nxe4! counter after which White is struggling. Black 
could even afford an inaccuracy of his own (21...Rxc4! is the accurate play) 
but White’s position went steadily downhill and he resigned two pawns down 
without compensation. It was Nakamura’s 29th birthday …

Hikaru Nakamura v Wesley So

1 d4 Nf6 2 c4 g6 3 Nc3 d5 4 cxd5 Nxd5 5 e4 Nxc3 6 bxc3 Bg7 7 Be3 c5 8 Rc1 O-O 9
 Qd2 e510 d5 Nd7 11 c4 f5 12 Bg5 Nf6 13 Ne2?? Nxe4! 14 Bxd8 Nxd2 15 Be7 Rf7 16 
Bxc5 Nxf117 Rxf1 b6 18 Bb4 Ba6 19 f4 Rc8 20 fxe5 Bxe5 21 Rf3 Bxc4? 22 Re3 Bg7 23
 Nf4 Rd724 a4 Bh6 25 g3 Bxf4 26 gxf4 Rxd5 27 Re7 Rd4 28 Bd2 Kf8 29 Bb4 Re8! 0-1

3474 1...Rd1?? 2 Qxd1! wins since if Qxd1 3 Rc8+ with a back rank mate. 
Instead 1...Rd5! wins with the double threat Nxh6 and Nd4, since if 2 Rc8 Bd4+ 
3 Kh1 Ng3+! 4 hxg3 Rh5 mate.
 