



The Venezuelan government is to withdraw its largest banknote from circulation 
in its latest attempt to tackle the world’s worst inflation crisis.

President Nicolás Maduro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-maduro> 
said on Sunday that the 100-bolivar note, which is currently worth only two US 
cents (1.6p) on the black market, will be withdrawn on Wednesday. Venezuelans 
will then have 10 days to exchange the notes at the central bank.

Venezuela on the brink: a journey through a country in crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/venezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis>
Maduro said the surprise move was needed to help stop criminal gangs 
profiteering on Venezuela’s border with Colombia. “We must keep beating the 
mafias,” he said.

His beleaguered government has already announced plans to introduce six larger 
notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/venezuela-on-the-brink-a-journey-through-a-country-in-crisis>
 and three new coins from Thursday this week.

Critics said the latest move was impractical and would not tackle the root 
cause of the country’s financial crisis. It also risks prompting a repeat of 
the chaos witnessed in India when the withdrawal of highest value rupee notes 
promptedhuge queues at banks. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/rupee-note-cancellation-panic-in-india-banks-500-1000>

Writing on Twitter, opposition leader Henrique Capriles said: “When ineptitude 
governs! Who would possibly think of doing something like this in December amid 
all our problems?”

Maduro is facing mounting anger over his handling of the financial and 
political crisis engulfing Venezuela. In October, officialsblocked an attempt 
to hold a referendum recall of his socialist government. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/venezuela-president-maduro-recall-referendum>
 Last month, plans for Vatican-brokered talks were put on hold after officials 
failed to attend meetings.

The opposition is seeking to oust Maduro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-maduro>, but authorities vow he will 
not leave office before his term ends in 2019.


Venezuela’s inflation rate is running at an estimated 500% and shortages of 
food and medicine have pushed the poorest members of its 30 million-strong 
population to thebrink of a humanitarian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/venezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas>
.

Paying for groceries without a credit card currently requires a rucksack full 
of cash. And the country’s credit-card machines have recently suffered 
problems, leaving many businesses asking customers to pay by bank transfer.

As Venezuela lurches from crisis to crisis President Maduro moonlights as 
salsa DJ
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/venezuela-crisis-nicolas-maduro-salsa-dj-radio>
Central bank data showed that in November, there were more than 6bn 
100-bolivar bills in circulation, 48% of all bills and coins.

 The oil-producing nation’s currency has fallen 55% against the US dollar on 
the black market in the past month.

Maduro has blamed an “economic war” being waged against his government by the 
opposition and the US. He has also singled out organised crime networks at the 
Colombia-Venezuela border for buying Venezuelan notes and subsidised Venezuelan 
goods and then selling them for vast profits in Colombia.


 While profiteering of this sort is an issue at the border, it cannot account 
fornationwide shortages of the most basic goods from food to medicine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/venezuela-women-hair-selling-colombia-basic-necessities>
, which have left millions of people hungry.

Strict currency controls introduced in 2003 that pegged the bolivar to the 
dollar, coupled with heavy reliance on oil, are seen as the root of the crisis 
by most economists.

Maduro’s move could be the latest in a long run of experiments in 
demonetisation with arguable levels of success.

Just over a month ago India’s prime minister Narendra Modi suddenly abolished 
500 and 1,000 rupee notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/rupee-note-cancellation-panic-in-india-banks-500-1000>
. Like Maduro, Modi said the move was aimed at cracking down on the shadow 
economy. But it brought India’s cash economy to a virtual standstill.

At a stroke Modi rendered 86% of currency worthless outside a bank branch, 
forcing millions to queue outside banks to change small amounts of old money 
for legal tender.

Queuing for cash is now part of the daily routine, prompting a boom in the 
queue-sitting business. India’s fractured opposition has united in decrying the 
move, which is set to key issue in next year’s elections.
 