
Venice film festival 2016: full line-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/venice-film-festival-2016-full-line-up>
American cinema has secured a pre-eminent position in the line-up of the 2016 
Venice film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>, 
with new films from Terrence Malick, Tom Ford, Damien Chazelle and Derek 
Cianfrance among the highlights of the competition that was announced on 
Thursday.

Arguably the most eye-catching film in the festival, Chazelle’s Hollywood 
musical La La Land starring Ryan Gosling and Emma Stonehad already been 
announced as Venice’s opening film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/17/ryan-gosling-and-emma-stone-musical-la-la-land-to-open-venice-film-festival>
, and it will be joined on the Lido by five other major US productions.

The Light Between Oceans, directed by Cianfrance and adapted from ML Stedman’s 
novel about a lighthouse keeper who discovers a baby adrift in a lifeboat, 
featuresMichael Fassbender <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender>
 and Alicia Vikander in the lead roles.

Ford’s Nocturnal Animals is the fashion-world magnate’s follow-up to 2008’s A 
Single Man, and is another literary adaptation – of Tony and Susan by Austin 
Wright – and starsAmy Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy-adams> as a 
woman sent a manuscript of a novel by her ex-husband.
 Jake Gyllenhaal in Nocturnal Animals 
Also selected for competition is Arrival, Canadian director Denis Villeneuve’s 
first film since scoring a commercial and critical smash with Sicario. Arrival 
is a science fiction drama centring on a language expert played by Adams, who 
is part of the team assigned to investigate mysterious alien spacecraft that 
have landed on Earth.

Venice has also picked The Bad Batch, the second film by Iranian-American 
director Ana Lily Amirpour.Described as 
<http://www.dreadcentral.com/news/84437/ana-lily-amirpour-working-cannibal-love-story-bad-batch/>
 “a cannibal love story set in a post-apocalyptic Texan wasteland”, The Bad 
Batch follows her impressive debutA Girl Walks Home Alone at Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/a-girl-walks-home-alone-at-night-review>
.
 Natalie Portman as Jackie Kennedy 
Natalie Portman’s Jackie Kennedy biopic has also been given a competition 
berth: directed by Chile’sPablo Larraín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/17/the-club-chile-catholic-church-child-sex-abuse-pablo-larrain-film>
, it follows Kennedy in the immediate aftermath of her husband’s assassination. 
Hacksaw Ridge, billed asMel Gibson’s comeback film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/jul/30/mel-gibson-taken-on-jesus-and-jews-now-for-second-world-war>
, will play in an out-of competition slot; starring Andrew Garfield, it 
chronicles the life of conscientious objector Desmond Doss, who won the Medal 
of Honour during the second world war as an army medic.

And the Magnificent Seven remake, directed by Antoine Fuqua, will play as the 
festival’s closing filmafter its premiere at Toronto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/26/toronto-film-festival-line-up-snowden-denial-the-journey>
, which slightly overlaps Venice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fvenice-2016-terrence-malick-and-tom-ford-set-for-red-carpet-in-bumper-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba72b1e31eb13af0ec5215dff687ab543c175058%2F0_0_628_377%2F628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venice%202016%3A%20Terrence%20Malick%20and%20Tom%20Ford%20set%20for%20red%20carpet%20in%20bumper%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fvenice-2016-terrence-malick-and-tom-ford-set-for-red-carpet-in-bumper-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venice%202016%3A%20Terrence%20Malick%20and%20Tom%20Ford%20set%20for%20red%20carpet%20in%20bumper%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fvenice-2016-terrence-malick-and-tom-ford-set-for-red-carpet-in-bumper-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba72b1e31eb13af0ec5215dff687ab543c175058%2F0_0_628_377%2F628.jpg>
 Hacksaw Ridge 
The appearance of Malick’s documentary Voyage of Time in the line-up appears 
to mark the end of a tortuous saga for the film. Originally conceived by Malick 
in the 1970s as an exploration of the origins of life on Earth, the director 
worked sporadically on it over the ensuing decades, with elements of it showing 
up in the Palme d’Or winning The Tree of Life. However,a lawsuit was launched 
in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/04/terrence-malick-voyage-of-time-imax-brad-pitt-cate-blanchett>
 by one of the film’s financiers, who alleged Malick had “forgotten” about the 
film, and used the funds on other projects.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVyWObJY9FQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVyWObJY9FQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVyWObJY9FQ&media=>
Festival fever: 40 films we predict will premiere at Venice, Toronto and 
Telluride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jul/20/40-films-predict-premiere-venice-toronto-telluride-festivals>
The suit was eventually settled in 2014, and two versions are thought to have 
been completed: an Imax format with narration by Brad Pitt, and a more 
conventional 35mm with Cate Blanchett. Venice will be showing the Blanchett 
version.

The festival has also found room for a number of other major figures: Emir 
Kusturica will appear in the competition with On the Milky Road, in which the 
director stars opposite Monica Bellucci in a three-part study of a turbulent 
life; veteran Russian auteurAndrei Konchalovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/22/director-andrei-konchalovsky-interview>
 brings Ray (aka Paradise), an account of three disparate figures during the 
second world war, and The Beautiful Days of Aranjuez from German directorWim 
Wenders <https://www.theguardian.com/film/wim-wenders>, an adaptation of Peter 
Handke’s philosophical play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fvenice-2016-terrence-malick-and-tom-ford-set-for-red-carpet-in-bumper-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc23d31b6aa98d94545df03dbb87033e947adee8%2F0_132_5120_3071%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venice%202016%3A%20Terrence%20Malick%20and%20Tom%20Ford%20set%20for%20red%20carpet%20in%20bumper%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fvenice-2016-terrence-malick-and-tom-ford-set-for-red-carpet-in-bumper-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venice%202016%3A%20Terrence%20Malick%20and%20Tom%20Ford%20set%20for%20red%20carpet%20in%20bumper%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fvenice-2016-terrence-malick-and-tom-ford-set-for-red-carpet-in-bumper-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc23d31b6aa98d94545df03dbb87033e947adee8%2F0_132_5120_3071%2F5120.jpg>
 Timothy Spall As Ian Paisley and Colm Meaney as Martin McGuinness in The 
Journey 
British cinema will make limited impact at Venice, with the Nick Hamm-directed 
The Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/28/colm-meaney-in-talks-to-play-martin-mcguinness-in-the-journey>
 – revolving around the friendship between previously-implacable enemies Ian 
Paisley and Martin McGuinness, showing in an out-of-competition slot, and Alice 
Lowe’s “pregnancy horror” film Prevenge picked as the opening film for the 
Venice Days sidebar.

The Venice film festival <http://www.labiennale.org/en/cinema/> opens on 31 
August and runs until 10 September.
 