
The Ligue 1 title race is officially back on. The top two, Lyon and Nancy, who 
were both knocked out of the League Cup in midweek, both lost again andBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> moved to within three points of 
top spot thanks to their win at Le Mans. What's going on? Well, Lyon are beset 
with injuries and concerns over their January recruitment while Nancy, winless 
in seven, have three players at the African Cup of Nations, seem to have run 
out of gas and are dropping faster than Nicolas Sarkozy's ratings.

It fell to relegation-threatened Lens to beat the top two in the space of four 
days: first Nancy in thecup 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b8XdKlOaKVA&feature=related> and then Lyon on 
Sunday <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZAn9SbNGr18>. Both ended in 3-0 home 
wins, and both were thoroughly deserved.

So much for Lens coach Jean-Pierre Papin coming under pressure from 
newly-appointed sports director and local hero Daniel'The Druid' 
<http://cache.viewimages.com/xc/1273246.jpg?v=1&c=ViewImages&k=2&d=17A4AD9FDB9CF19390335F8FA9CA92A6E2983D1A56EADD519930FDCFC4C15FBB>
 Leclercq. The pair put on a united front and Papin helped his own cause by 
claiming that it was his idea to bring in someone above him. "There's a time 
when enthusiasm is not enough, and you need something extra and that's why I 
asked the president to find me someone to help," he said.

Leclercq made the players sign the dressing-room blackboard on which he had 
written 'Faster, Higher, Stronger' before comparing his partnership with Papin 
to the Ferguson-Queiroz relationship at Manchester United. "That's with me as 
Ferguson," he added ominously, although a better comparison for Papin and Lens 
is actually Kevin Keegan and Newcastle. At the end of his best week as a coach, 
Papin made good on his promise to buy dinner for the whole squad on Sunday 
night.

The timing of the fixtures also helped: Nancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nancy> fielded an under-strength side for 
the cup tie, while Lyon were missing half a team through injury: captain 
Juninho Pernambucano, Sidney Govou - in the form of his life - and three 
centre-backs (Cris, Cleber and Patrick Müller), which is why midfielder Mathieu 
Bodmer, outjumped for the second goal, had to play there.

Lyon's January transfer moves have been baffling: they sold Nadir Belhadj to 
Lens, only for him to set up the first goal in a man-of-the-match performance 
against them on Sunday (another former Lyon player, themushroom fanatic 
<http://ericcarriere.sports.fr/fr/toutsavoir/vie/region.asp> Eric Carrière, 
found, um, much room to set up their third with a quickly-takenfree-kick 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VeVXrOg8Jk>); they brought in forward César 
Delgado from Rosario, but have not yet sold Fred or Milan Baros (although both 
might be in England by the end of the week); they signed defensive midfielder 
Marc Crosas on loan from Barcelona but he is not eligible for the Champions 
League so they are now looking at Nice's Ederson; and they are trying to get 
Jean-Alain Boumsong from Juventus to solve the centre-back crisis. Good luck to 
them with that.

All of which might explain why Bordeaux are now within touching distance of 
the champions. Fernando Cavenaghi scored his fifth goal in as many games with a 
neat lob from Henrique's pass, and (a different) Fernando doubled the lead 
after David Bellion's shot was parried. Bordeaux held on to win2-1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnVt718DUxg> despite Franck Jurietti's red card 
just before half-time (another refereeing storm, as Damien Ledentu waited such 
a long time before brandishing the red that it seemed TV evidence had helped 
his decision - but he insisted that his assistant had seen and told him about 
Jurietti's kick-and-slap routine on Martin Douillard).

"We have enough quality in the team to beat Lyon," said Cavenaghi, while 
Henrique added, "we've put pressure on Nancy and now we need to consolidate 
second place and then hunt downLyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon>
."

They really believe they can do it and, if they do, it would represent an 
amazing coaching debut for Laurent Blanc, not least because he told L'Equipe 
this week that he leaves the training sessions to his assistants and believes 
that "physical preparation and tactics are a load of nonsense". Psychology is 
more his bag. "The most important quality for a manager is knowing how to 
manage his group, and that's the only reason I chose this profession: to deal 
with a group, and to improve them," Blanc said.

That's exactly what Frédéric Antonetti is doing at Nice, who extended their 
unbeaten run to 11 and moved up to fourth place with a 1-0 win over Nancy. 
Antonetti is a fiery Corsican who has built a side in his own image: a rag-tag 
group of rejects (typical signing: 36-year-old centre-forward Lilian Laslandes) 
which will be a home from home for their new arrival from Bolton, Gerald Cid. 
Despite missing Bakari Koné and Joseph-Désiré Job on African Cup of Nations 
duty, and losing on-field general Cyril Rool (the record-holder for Ligue 1 red 
cards - 21 and counting - and inspiration behind best-selling T-shirt'Sex, 
Drugs and Cyril Rool' <http://www.cahiersdufootball.net/article.php?id=1646>) 
through injury, David Hellebuyck'sturn and shot 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6o--Q6bRcLk> from distance won them the game.

Elswewhere, Marseille made light of Mamadou Niang's absence on Senegal duty 
and beat Valenciennes3-1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C99MUNxQtLo&feature=related> thanks to a 
Djibril Cissé double. His return to form, apparently, is down to his wife's 
pregnancy and he has now gone back to referring to himself in the third person. 
"There's an obvious difference between a good Djibril and a less good Djibril 
but now we're verging on the old Djibril," said annoying Djibril.

This time last year Lille were preparing for a Champions League knock-out tie 
with Manchester United while Claude Puel was being tipped to one day replace 
Arsène Wenger; now, only goal difference is keeping them out of the relegation 
zone and a 1-1 draw against second-from-bottom Sochaux was only welcome because 
they played with 10 men for 85 minutes after Mathieu Debuchy was sent off. 
Still, it might have felt like nine had their summer signing Patrick Kluivert 
started.

It's double-action in Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> this week, with midweek 
and weekend fixtures. Lyon face Lorient and then a derby with Saint-Etienne, 
while Bordeaux play the same teams but the other way round. What better way of 
seeing if the pretenders can overcome the champions? As Lyon's only fit 
centre-back Sébastien Squillaci said, "We're going to have to buck up our ideas 
and quickly, because this week could turn out to be crucial."

Results, Week 21: Lorient 1-0 PSG, Le Mans 1-2 Bordeaux, Marseille 3-1 
Valenciennes, Toulouse 1-1 Caen, Metz 1-4 Monaco, Saint-Etienne 2-0 Rennes, 
Auxerre 1-1 Strasbourg, Sochaux 1-1 Lille, Nice 1-0 Nancy, Lens 3-0 Lyon.
 