
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and Japan kick off a summit 
on Thursday aimed at reaching a deal over a group of small islands that have 
prevented the countries from formally ending their second world war hostilities.


Kuril islands missiles should not spoil Putin's visit, Russia tells Japan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/missiles-on-islands-should-not-spoil-putins-visit-russia-tells-japan>
Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, will host the Russian president, Vladimir 
Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, in the former’s 
ancestral city of Nagato in hopes of achieving a breakthrough over the 
territory off Japan’s northern coast seized by Soviet troops in 1945.

The four islands are known as the Southern Kurils in Russia and the Northern 
Territories in Japan, and the dispute has been athorn in relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/09/russia-kuril-islands-dispute-japan>
 for more than seven decades.

Abe would like to seal a deal as soon as possible as Japanese former residents 
are ageing and dwindling in number.

Despite months of preparation the outlook is not good, with both sides 
recently damping down expectations of major progress.
Kurils <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/nov/2016-11-23T15:58:33.html>
“I want to go into this summit with determination to end the issue in my 
generation,” Abe told former residents earlier this week, suggesting an 
agreement remains distant.

Putin, a judo fan who is making his first visit to Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> in over a decade, said he wanted to 
end the “anachronism” of the two countries not having a second world war peace 
treaty. “But how to do this is a difficult question,” he told Japanese media.

For Abe the issue is also a legacy from his late father, Shintaro, who took 
the lead in negotiations with Moscow as a foreign minister but died in 1991 
after pushing for talks.

The summit in western Japan is the latest attempt to draw a line under the 
second world war since Japan and the Soviet Union began discussions in 1956.

In Nagato, Abe and Putin are expected to focus on territorial and peace treaty 
issues, a Japanese foreign ministry official said.

Trump’s relationship with Russia – what we know and what comes next
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/donald-trump-russia-vladimir-putin-us-election-hack>
The two leaders will then move to Tokyo on Friday for more talks and a joint 
press appearance before attending an economic forum.

Abe has looked to eke out concessions by dangling the prospect of major 
Japanese investment in front of Moscow, which is mired in economic crisis.

But few believe Putin is likely to cave to Japanese demands to hand back at 
least some control over the islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/29/japan-protests-russian-base-disputed-kuril-island-chain>
, especially after Donald Trump’s election as president of the United States 
last month.

The New York real-estate baron has vowed to improve ties with Russia, where 
the economy has reeled under US sanctions against Moscow over Ukraine and the 
impact of falling oil prices.
 