
There are only 11 days left until the US presidential election between Hillary 
Clinton and this microwaved fondue of a man named Donald Trump. If you don’t 
know that there’s an election, that it’s next month, and that it could 
drastically alter the fate of the human race, then you are truly a lost soul 
and are beyond help. Also, why are you reading the Guardian? Shouldn’t you be 
watching your cousin set off illegal fireworks in your driveway or preparing 
for your latest court appearance?

Framing Trump: a look at the bizarre art inspired by the Republican candidate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/17/art-inspired-by-donald-trump>
If you’re bored of stuff blowing up or recently acquitted and do want to be 
reminded that there’s an election that you can and should vote in, then allow 
me to recommend the following celebrity public service announcements. Some of 
them are amusing. Some are deeply condescending. All of them will inspire you 
to participate in your nation’s future. After all, that’s why we have 
celebrities. They’re like a once-every-four-years alarm clock for democracy.

At the end of this list, I’ve written a very brief script for my own PSA, 
which I have thus far been denied funding for by various media outlets 
including the Huffington Post, Fusion, and the Home Shopping Network. Please 
email me or DM me on Twitter if you’d like to fund this worthy cause.

5) Leonardo DiCaprio’s Vote Your Future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhYgGudYJQI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhYgGudYJQI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhYgGudYJQI&media=>
This video is the gold standard for voting PSAs, which makes it the least 
appealing of the bunch. We’ve seen famous people in front of a plain backdrop 
making earnest appeals before. This is pretty junior varsity-level stuff, 
though That 70s Show star Wilmer Valderrama almost starts crying when 
considering how xenophobic and racist people can be toward Latino migrant 
workers in this country. Also, Moby appears for an uncomfortably long stretch 
looking like a mortician and pleading for sensible gun control measures. This 
isn’t particularly creative, which is why it’s in last place, but I don’t 
disagree with any of the sentiments. Just try harder next time. Add a CGI bald 
eagle or a photoshop ofDonald Trump as a baby 
<http://static.yourtango.com/cdn/farfuture/7qe5fZtgFra1xYP7H7j1VSeaVSq5MagKdaok_Q0ls7g/mtime:1470242083/sites/default/files/baby_trump.jpg>
. People love that stuff.

4) Joss Whedon’s Save the Day PSA
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiaMaeNK_gqs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiaMaeNK_gqs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiaMaeNK_gqs&media=>
Because of Joss Whedon’s power and influence in Hollywood, he was able to get 
some real notable names to participate, includingScarlett Johansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson> and Robert Downey Jr. Mark 
Ruffalo’s here sporting a tasteful V-neck T-shirt with multiple necklaces. 
James Franco has grown a mustache that makes him look like a down-on-his-luck 
truck driver considering transporting meth across state lines to make ends meet.

'Isn't anybody going to stop me?' 30 songs protesting a President Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/19/anti-trump-30-days-30-songs-project-musicians>
Save the Day is very meta and acknowledges the absurdity of its premise, plus 
all the cliches that make Vote Your Future so ponderous. Then, it pivots into a 
hard partisan message about voting against Trump, which led toan even worse 
response video from conservatives <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jHLdYuzXqPI> 
that got less than half a million views compared to the original, which was 
seen 7.5m times. I’m sure those are all unique views too, because why would you 
watch this video more than once … unless you’re a writing a blogpost about it. 
In which case, I mean, you have to watch it over, and over, and over, and over.

3) Lin-Manuel Miranda and The Tonight Show’s Hamilton’s America Wants You to 
Vote
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnOt-RfpIOos&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnOt-RfpIOos>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnOt-RfpIOos&media=>
Again, it’s just some celebs telling you to vote over serious-sounding music. 
I had to give this one the edge purely because it is the only video in the 
history of man to feature both Nas and House speaker Paul Ryan. Unless there’s 
a Fourth of July cookout hosted by Diddy and Newt Gingrich that I don’t know 
about.

2) Helen Mirren’s No Regrets
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTkFOWZQsCVw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTkFOWZQsCVw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTkFOWZQsCVw&media=>
Dear old Dame Helen doesn’t want Americans to suffer the same painful remorse 
that Great Britain is currently dealing with over the Brexit referendum. So, 
she’s bravely sat herself in front of a plain backdrop while sad piano music 
plays in order to remind you of the gravity of this situation. The video was 
produced by the Clinton campaign, for a channel called “Humanity for Hillary”. 
For some reason, it’s unlisted on YouTube, so you can only find it if you have 
the link handy. I’ve ranked this one second because I’m pro-Dame Helen and it 
seems like it will appeal to the Guardian audience. I pander so willingly and 
with such enthusiasm that I really should have been a politician. Or a 
celebrity.

1) Ben Affleck’s Hey New Hampshire, Let’s Vote
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYMEYncwzG_M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYMEYncwzG_M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYMEYncwzG_M&media=>
At last, the gold standard, and I don’t mean that thing Ron Paul was always 
yammering about <http://www.ronpaul.com/tag/gold-standard/>. We’ve got Affleck 
doing a Boston accent and wearing a very unflattering puffy vest. There’s some 
solid trolling of the New York Knicks. It moves briskly and it made me 
genuinely laugh more than once. One of cinema’s greatest crimes is not 
utilizing Affleck’s comic chops more frequently. I chuckled many times at films 
like Armageddon, Pearl Harbor, Reindeer Games, Mallrats, Daredevil, Gigli, The 
Sum of All Fears, and Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, but at no time were 
those laughs intended by the filmmakers. I beg of you, America: Make Ben 
Affleck Funny Again.

And now, what you have all been salivating over. It’s my own personal voting 
PSA. Obviously, since this is just a script, you will have to use your 
imagination a bit, but I trust that you can envision this sumptuous visual 
spectacle in your mind’s eye:

FADE IN:

INT. AN EMPTY, WHITE ROOM – DAY

Dave Schilling sits in front of a white background. Depressing music plays.

DAVE

I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but, there’s an election in 11 days. 
Yeah, I know. It’s been terrible. That guy from The Apprentice is running. He’s 
already been caught on tape bragging about groping women against their will. 
Also, he’s suggested suspending the democratic process so that he can be 
awarded the presidency without a single vote being cast. He’s also emboldened 
his supporters to publicly threaten an armed resistance if Hillary Clinton 
wins. Plus, there’s a Lethal Weapon remake on Fox starring Damon Wayans and 
some guy you’ve never heard of. This has been a horrible year for our country. 
I’m so sorry that you had to live through this, plus endure Wolf Blitzer 
narrating the whole thing from the Situation Room. If you want to bury yourself 
in five feet of sand instead of voting, I won’t blame you. Look, it’s almost 
over. You should call your mom. She misses you.
 