
The Sydney Roosters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-roosters> 
claimed top spot with a gutsy 12-10 win over Brisbane but they have paid a 
massive toll with Jared Waerea-Hargreaves’ season over.


They are also expected to be without halfback Mitchell Pearce for several 
weeks after he suffered a suspected hamstring tear.


Both were taken off in the opening 20 minutes but Trent Robinson’s side still 
managed to grind out a memorable win that saw them leap above the Broncos to be 
within touching distance of a third-straight minor premiership.


Waerea-Hargreaves was assisted from the field in the 12th minute when his knee 
buckled under him in a tackle. Soon after, their problems were compounded when 
Pearce was helped from the field. Both were sent for MRIs immediately and 
Waerea-Hargreaves was ruled out for the season.

Souths sweat over Inglis scan results after defeat to Bulldogs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/22/souths-rabbitohs-greg-inglis-bulldogs>
Despite losing two of their key men, the Tricolours dominated the opening half 
but were unlucky to only lead 8-0 at the break. They couldn’t convert their 
pressure into points after they bombed it four times, either when they were 
over the stripe or with the line open.

The 19,137-strong crowd made their feelings known when Blake Ferguson was 
controversially denied by the video referee, when it was ruled Brendan Elliot 
got a fingertip to it fielding a James Maloney bomb.


However, they finally cracked the Brisbane line in the 30th minute when they 
put it through hands for Elliot to cross over.


The Broncos sparked the game to life five minutes after the break when Ben 
Hunt and Justin Hodges found the Roosters short. A Corey Oates try in the 61st 
minute got the Broncos back to within two and the Roosters bench was reduced to 
two for the final 12 minutes when Kane Evans was taken from the field for a 
concussion test.

However the Roosters held on bravely, repelling several Broncos attacking 
chances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Frampant-sharks-bounce-back-with-big-win-over-tigers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c384e06ed6f6e012afcba9f234ecdb123a6d71d%2F0_17_2919_1752%2F2919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Waerea-Hargreaves%20injury%20blow%20sours%20Roosters'%20win%20over%20Broncos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Frampant-sharks-bounce-back-with-big-win-over-tigers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Waerea-Hargreaves%20injury%20blow%20sours%20Roosters%27%20win%20over%20Broncos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Frampant-sharks-bounce-back-with-big-win-over-tigers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c384e06ed6f6e012afcba9f234ecdb123a6d71d%2F0_17_2919_1752%2F2919.jpg>
 Tinirau Arona tackles Curtis Sironen during the match between the Cronulla 
Sharks and the Wests Tigers at Remondis Stadium on Saturday. Photograph: Craig 
Golding/AAP 
Elsewhere, Cronulla returned to the winner’s circle with a 40-18 win over 
Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> at Remondis 
Stadium.


After being hammered at home by Melbourne on Monday, Cronulla survived a 
second-half fightback from the Tigers on Saturday to record a 
seven-tries-to-three win.


Shane Flanagan’s Sharks momentarily jumped above the Storm into fifth place on 
the ladder, equal on points with fourth-placed South Sydney, who boast a 
superior points differential with two rounds to go.


Cronulla made a perfect start to the second half when winger Valentine Holmes 
scored just after the resumption of play to seemingly put the Sharks out of 
reach at 24-6.


But the Tigers stayed in the contest, fighting back with tries to Martin 
Taupau and Curtis Sironen to get within a converted try.


Holmes extinguished the comeback when he scored his second try, picking up a 
loose ball to go 60 metres to score next to the posts. Then Wade Graham and 
fullback Michael Gordon, who was one of the Sharks’ best, both scored late 
tries.


Gordon finished the day with 16 points, kicking a penalty goal and five from 
six conversions.


The Sharks went to the half-time break leading 20-6, following a dominant 
opening from the hosts. Jason Taylor’s side hardly had their hands on the ball 
in the first half and, when they did, they usually dropped it.

Luke Lewis opened the scoring after four minutes when he steamed onto a flat 
pass from Jack Bird. The Tigers hit back against the run of play with Tim 
Simona scoring. The try came one tackle after halfback Luke Brooks produced a 
one-on-one steal before setting off on a 95-metre run. Cronulla answered with 
tries to Sosaia Feki and Michael Ennis.

The defeat leaves the Tigers on 18 points, equal with the last-placed Gold 
Coast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Frampant-sharks-bounce-back-with-big-win-over-tigers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F204040cf2ede993a618fc07b69eacf1547b93bd2%2F126_19_2874_1724%2F2874.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Waerea-Hargreaves%20injury%20blow%20sours%20Roosters'%20win%20over%20Broncos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Frampant-sharks-bounce-back-with-big-win-over-tigers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Waerea-Hargreaves%20injury%20blow%20sours%20Roosters%27%20win%20over%20Broncos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Frampant-sharks-bounce-back-with-big-win-over-tigers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F204040cf2ede993a618fc07b69eacf1547b93bd2%2F126_19_2874_1724%2F2874.jpg>
 Kyle Feldt scores a try during match between the New Zealand Warriors and the 
North Queensland Cowboys at Mt Smart Stadium on Saturday. Photograph: Anthony 
Au-Yeung/Getty Images 
Elsewhere, co-skipper Matt Scott is confident North Queensland have the depth 
to cope should they lose prop James Tamou to injury.


The Cowboys overwhelmed the Warriors 50-16 in Auckland on Saturday night to 
get their campaign back on track after two successive losses.


They overcame the concession of three early tries to grab nine of their own, 
with winger Kyle Feldt getting a hat-trick.


But the win was blighted by injuries to Tamou (neck) and five-eighth Michael 
Morgan (ankle) in the first half.


Tamou, taken to hospital as a precaution, is expected to travel back with the 
team on Sunday.


Scott said Tamou would be a massive loss if he was sidelined.

“There’s guys like Ben Spina and Ben Hannant and two guys that didn’t play 
tonight in Sam Hoare and Scott Bolton,” Scott said. “We’ve certainly got the 
depth to cover him but, if he doesn’t play, we’re going to miss him.”

For the Warriors, the defeat continued their dismal run since they climbed 
into the top four. They have lost all six matches since then to be facing a 
fourth straight season without finals football.
 