
Beer is thicker than water in Bavaria,but it has to come with the right label 
on the bottle. Bayern Munich’s did not. FCIngolstadt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ingolstadt>, their hosts on Saturday, have a 
different beverage sponsor so the visiting neighbours from the capital down 
south, just 71km away, were banned from celebrating their championship win with 
traditional drinks on the pitch.

RB Leipzig’s Ralf Rangnick injures hamstring in promotion celebrations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/09/rb-leipzig-ralf-rangnick-hamstring-celebrations>
Talking of which, there wasn’t much by way of a piss-up in the dressing room 
either. As Süddeutsche Zeitung noted,Thomas Müller waving a plastic bottle of 
water around <https://twitter.com/FCBayern> on the official post-match photo 
was rather emblematic of the “business-like” nature of the party.

After the disappointment of the Champions League exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/bayern-munich-atletico-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
 on Tuesday nightthe successful defence of the Meisterschaft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/bayern-munich-win-bundesliga-title-ingolstadt>
, an unprecedented fourth in a row in the Bundesliga, was little more than a
Trostpflaster, a band aid of solace that will “help close the wounds”, as 
Karl-Heinz Rummenigge said.

Bayern’s mood should improve in time for the trophy celebration at the Allianz 
Arena next week, which might well double up as a plebisciteon the Pep Guardiola 
reign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/atletico-madrid-diego-simeone-bayern-pep-guardiola-champions-league>
. The coach and supporters never really developed close ties with each other in 
Munich, so it will be interesting to see if there is some kind of emotional 
détente to go with the – by and large – very measured analysis of his three 
years in charge.

The best take, as expected, has come from the football writer, author and top, 
top translator Ronald Reng. He told Deutschlandfunk – not to be confused with 
Jürgen Klopp’s favourite station, Radio Deutschland – that “many have 
paradoxically blamed Guardiola for making Bayern so good that their games were 
boring and also disliked that he stages football as a strategic game, in a cold 
search for planned perfection, because they love football (differently): as a 
fight, as a battle”.

More Pep talk will follow next week, when your columnist will brave the 
festivities in Fröttmaning trying to evade people with giant glasses. In the 
meantime, the focus must shift from the pinnacle of domestic achievement to the 
other end of the scale.

For all the complaints of the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> being dead – mostly 
voiced by those without a dog or god in the fight, it has to be said – the 
clamour to stay alive has never been greater. Promoted Ingolstadt were already 
safe before the 2-1 defeat by the champions but fellowAufsteiger Darmstadt 98 
escaped the drop in the most dramatic fashion.

Atlético Madrid are a team made for suffering as title bid ends so close to 
line | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/09/atletico-madrid-team-suffering-title-bid-ends-levante-diego-simeone>
Sandro Wagner, the Musketeer-moustachioed striker who had been deemed surplus 
to requirements at Hertha BSC and forced by the coach, Pal Dardai, to train by 
himself in the summer, shooting at an empty goal, scored the winner for the 
Lilies seven minutes from time in a 2-1 victory at the Olympic Stadium.

Wagner’s close-range volley buried Hertha’s Champions League dreams and Dardai 
was so disappointed that he accused many of his “son-in-law type” players of 
lacking aggression, of being too nice and “perhaps too intelligent”. Well, 
maybe he should not have let Wagner go.

The 28-year-old recently voiced the popular opinion that footballers, even at 
Bayern, were “underpaid” and won more friends by provocatively celebrating his 
winning goal right next to the Hertha supporters, chest-thumping wildly and 
“dancing around like a batty child with aBockwurst in front of the lion cage” 
(Tagesspiegel).

Needless to say the crowd bit back;  irate fans later tried to get close to 
the former Germany international <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UGHC4RC3P0Q> 
but stewards held them back. Wagner was booked for his off-the-pitch antics but 
kept putting the boot in, a little too literally. The referee, Felix Brych, 
sent him off for an ill-timed lunge four minutes later. He watched the end of 
the game on a TV screen, surrounded by journalists, welling up as Darmstadt’s 
survival was confirmed.

“It’s like the eighth wonder of the world,” his team-mate Marcel Heller said. 
Dirk Schuster’s team have managed to stay up with a minuscule wage bill of €15m 
thanks to uncompromising defensive work, dead-ball efficiency and Wagner’s 
goals. “Fourteen goals, for a newly promoted side, not bad for a useless 
player, is it?” Wagner said. “Tell them [the fans]that I only had a go at those 
upstairs who thought that I was useless,” he told a Hertha steward.

Wagner could still be out of the Bundesliga next season – he is eyeing a move 
to a Premier League club in need of a good old-fashioned centre-forward with 
suspect facial hair.

Luca Toni exits pursued by deserved fanfare and tears in fair Verona | Paolo 
Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/09/luca-toni-exits-verona-retires-serie-a-juventus>
Fifteenth-placed Eintracht Frankfurt believe they have gone one better than 
their Hessian rivals 98 by “following in the footsteps of the 99 team”, as 
their coach, Niko Kovac, said. In 1999 Eintracht had saved themselves with four 
wins in their final four games. Their 1-0 win on Saturday against the 
runners-up Borussia Dortmund was a slightly flattering affair, but who cares?

A hat-trick of three-pointers has given the Eagles a fighting chance of 
avoiding relegation. All they need is a draw in the final match of the season, 
against Werder Bremen, who are directly below them in 16th place. A point for 
the northerners would, however, spell the end of 41 years in the top flight for 
VfB Stuttgart.

The Swabians have flirted so often with disaster in recent years that many 
thought they would escape once more – they were 10th not long ago. But a 
disastrous run of one point in seven games meant hundreds of supporters were so 
upset after the latest reversal, a 3-1 home defeat against Mainz, that they 
swarmed on to the pitch after the final whistle. The captain, Christian 
Gentner, and sporting director, Robin Dutt, the architect of VfB’s demise, had 
to placate the masses with mea culpas while the World Cup winnerKevin 
Grosskreutz, a January arrival, cried tears of shame and embarrassment 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hy64b3X6pSM>.

On Monday reports suggested neither Dutt, the coach, Jürgen Kramny, nor the 
president, Bernd Wahler, will be in office next season; the advisory board is 
inclined to put the VfB icon Karl Allgöwer, 59, in charge off the rebuilding 
effort, most likely in the second division.

Stuttgart’s demise echoes that of the former powerhouses Werder and HSV, but 
of all the big, traditional clubs that have steered into trouble in a league 
populated by smaller, sharper operators below the super heavyweights of Bayern 
and Dortmund, their fall has been the most brutal. Onlynine years ago they were 
champions of Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/may/21/europeanfootball.schalke>.

Results


Ingolstadt 1-2 Bayern, Frankfurt 1-0 Dortmund, Schalke 1-1 Augsburg, Gladbach 
2-1 Leverkusen, HSV 0-1 Wolfsburg, Stuttgart 1-3 Mainz, Köln 0-0 Bremen, 
Hannover 1-0 Hoffenheim, Hertha 1-2 Darmstadt.
 