
By teatime on Saturday, Wakefield Trinity could be out of Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/sheffield-eagles-wakefield-trinity-qualifiers-super-8s-match-report>
 after 18 seasons in the top flight. The Wildcats’ rollercoaster will take a 
dramatic turn in the tackily titled Million Pound Game at Belle Vue, when 
Trinity face Bradford Bulls in the winner-takes-all clash. Victory will bring a 
whoop of relief for Wakey’s beleaguered fans. Lose and they will not only 
plummet down into the Championship but be terrified of what is around the next 
bend.

Having served notice on Belle Vue, Saturday was potentially the last ever game 
at the old place that has seen rugby in three centuries. Chairman Michael 
Carter assumed their landlords, the Bank of Ireland, would lower their rent 
demands. It was not a game of bluff, more like Russian roulette. Last week, the 
Bank blinked. Agreement is close, apparently, and Wakefield expect to stay put 
after all.

Trinity own everything at Belle Vue but the land itself. I am told they had 
planned to strip it bare: selling every last seat, steel girder and concrete 
lump for whatever they could get. They were even going to sell off the top six 
inches of pitch, one of the few elements at the crumbling ground that is still 
top class. A million memories were to become hardcore.

Brian Smith keen to keep Wakefield’s focus off ‘Million Pound Game’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/brian-smith-wakefield-million-pound-game-bradford-sheffield>
That tragedy has been put on hold. The town is not exactly loud and proud of 
its ancient arena: there is not a single signpost for the ground on the way in 
from the M62 and no one can argue Belle Vue is not in terrible condition. It 
looks basic on TV but, all is revealed when you see it without a crowd to cover 
up the mess. The terraces are a hotchpotch of patched-up cement, there is paint 
flaking off the walls, and it looks ready to throw in the towel.

With the adjoining bowling centre, offices and Wimpey (and their car parks) 
all closed, it is a major site that is ripe for housing development. However, 
Belle Vue is not in the most salubrious part of Wakefield and has potential as 
the site for a redeveloped stadium. On the edge of town, it is easily reached 
by car from the east and south and from two train stations. It could be 
transformed with new stands, just like Hull KR and Widnes have been.

It is hard to argue that Super League would not be better off with Bradford 
rather than Wakefield, though. Trinity are run on a skeleton staff: just five 
full-time employees outside of the playing side. Bradford are by far the bigger 
club with vastly more potential and relatively recent success. But they have 
been as shambolic as Wakefield in the last few seasons, on and off the pitch. 
Whatever happens, West Yorkshire is guaranteed to have just four clubs inSuper 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> again next year. In only 
two other seasons has its representation been so low since Wakefield joined the 
supposed promised land in 1998.

Wakefield Trinity fans face nervous week after losing to Sheffield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/sheffield-eagles-wakefield-trinity-qualifiers-super-8s-match-report>
Both sides go into the decider off the back of shocking results in last 
weekend’s dead rubbers against the Qualifiers’ bottom two clubs. Bradford were 
humiliated by Halifax at Odsal on Saturday, conceding 10 tries, so Wakefield 
knew they would be at home in the decider beforethey were humbled at Sheffield 
on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/sheffield-eagles-wakefield-trinity-qualifiers-super-8s-match-report>
. Those shock results, coupled with Leigh’s spanking at Widnes, left the 
Centurions bottom of the eight qualifiers. Seeing Wakefield v Bradford for the 
final Super League berth is no surprise but who would have predicted Leigh’s 
remarkable meltdown in late July?

Clubcall: Oldham Roughyeds

Seventh time lucky! Having lost six Grand Finals in the last eight seasons, 
Oldham finally won promotion back to the Championship. Having won all but three 
of their games all season, Scott Naylor’s team have improved to become top dogs 
and proved it in the Promotion Final, when 1,400 fans packed into their rather 
basic Whitebank abode to see them beat Keighley. The ground has 
(understandably) been deemed unfit for the Championship, so the Roughyeds will 
most likely return to Oldham Athletic’s Boundary Park, once home to the Super 
League Bears.

Having swatted away North Wales Crusaders yesterday, Keighley, who have done 
remarkably well in the dark shadow cast by Danny Jones’ death, now face Swinton 
Lions in Sunday’s play-off final at Widnes, with the winner joining Oldham in 
replacing Doncaster and Hunslet in the second tier next year.

Foreign quota

No Helmets has spent the last fortnight on holiday in Campania in south-west 
Italy, something of a league-free zone apart from me going to the localtabacchi 
in my London Broncos top and a bloke wandering along Maiori prom in a 
Warrington Wolves polo shirt. It was eventually cool enough to give my Italy 
rugby league jersey an outing, where it attracted several intrigued sideways 
glances on a visit to Salerno’s derelictStadio Vestuti 
<https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stadio_Donato_Vestuti>, a crumbling Fascist-era 
art deco sporting arena, where rugby union is still played despite the pitch 
having more gravel then grass.


Rugby union has a strange presence here – a widespread middle-class pastime 
and fashionable cultural label, it only pops up in the mainstream when Italy 
play. None of the three national sports papers cover rugby in any great depth 
and hardly mentioned the Rugby (union) World Cup until Italy played. Suddenly, 
the Corriere dello Sport then devoted a couple of pages to it. No wonder 
Italy’s rugby league defeat in Russia (that saw them finish third in the 
European Championship B) didn’t earn a mention anywhere.

Goal-line drop-out

Ryan Hall seals Leeds top spot with last-gasp try against Huddersfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/huddersfield-leeds-super-league-match-report>
It is rather ironic that the new play-off system should start in a Super 
League season when the race for the League Leader’s Shield reached its most 
thrilling climax. That three teams all had a reasonable chance of lifting the 
Golden Hubcap going into the final round, and forRyan Hall to win it for Leeds 
in the last second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/huddersfield-leeds-super-league-match-report>
 of the regular season on Friday night, made for superb entertainment. My 
colleague Aaron Bower rightly described it as “an Agüero moment”.

If that was the actual championship title on the line in the 
first-past-the-post era, it would have been awesome for the sport and a 
remarkable Judgement Night spectacle for Sky. However, in that case, I suspect 
one or two of the top four may have been left behind – or broken away – as the 
pressure mounted. As it is, we’ve had two successive seasons when the League 
Leader’s Shield has been on the line for several teams in the final week. 
Thankfully, with Wigan v Huddersfield in the first semi-final on Thursday and 
Leeds v St Helens on Friday to decide who goes to Old Trafford, we are in for 
more treats.

Fifth and last

Club of the month may be South West London Chargers 
<http://www.pitchero.com/clubs/southwestlondonchargers>, who have achieved a 
remarkable third successiveHarry Jepson Trophy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Jepson_Trophy> – the national Tier 4 
title. Born from the ashes of two dominant amateur clubs – West London Sharks 
and South London Storm – the Chargers train in Clapham. Clearly, national 
championships are rather like omnibuses around there.

Among their coaching staff and a bit-part player is former Scotland A 
international Richard Knight, whose work took him to Massachusetts this summer. 
Ineligible to play there, instead he helped coachBoston 13s 
<http://boston13s.com/> to their inaugural US championship, too. Two national 
titles in one summer? That takes some beating.

The 13s are coached by former Gateshead Thunder stalwart Robin Peers, with the 
mainly American squad strengthened by a couple of useful imports, including 
former France hooker Kane Bentley, who scored a hat-trick in the final. Two of 
the 13s – Curtis Goddard and club skipper Marcos Flegmann, who also plays union 
for Mexico – were rewarded with call-ups for the US national team and played in 
their first ever home defeat to Canada last week in Philadelphia.

Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/nohelmetsreq> and
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/nohelmetsrequiredbook>
 