
The Wakefield chairman, Michael Carter, has confirmed that the full-back Kevin 
Locke has been released by the club after they completed their investigation 
into an off-field incident concerning the former New Zealand international.

Locke was dropped by the Wildcats earlier this month alongside his team-mates 
Reece Lyne and Tim Smith after the latter was charged by police with failing to 
provide a sample for analysis and driving without due care and attention 
following an incident in Hull. Lyne has since returned to the club but the 
club’s investigation involving Smith is still ongoing.

Carter revealed that Locke, who signed for Wakefield on a short-term deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/03/kevin-locke-wakefield-super-league-relegation>
 in June after leaving Salford Red Devils, has now left the club and is 
expected to take up a deal with the NRL club Melbourne Storm in 2016.

Wakefield's future remains uncertain as they prepare for Super League play-off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2015/sep/29/wakefield-trinity-super-league-play-off-bradford-bulls>
“Kevin won’t play for Wakefield Trinity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wakefieldtrinity> Wildcats again,” said 
Carter. “We’ve concluded the case involving him, shook hands and gone our own 
ways. He’s now back home with his son; it was just one of those things, sadly. 
He picked up a shoulder injury anyway and would have been doubtful for the 
games he’d missed due to this matter, so we were focusing on playing without 
him anyway.

“I’m led to believe Kevin is back in Australia already, so let’s face it, he 
was never going to be playing this weekend regardless.”

When asked about the club’s investigation into scrum-half Smith, Carter 
confirmed that the process is still to be concluded. “The situation with Tim is 
still ongoing, I believe he’s in court on Wednesday and his case is still 
ongoing, so I don’t think anything will be resolved from a club perspective 
before the weekend and the game against Bradford,” he said. “It’s still very 
sensitive and I’d just prefer to concentrate on what’s ahead of us.”

Carter also confirmed the club are expecting a sellout at Belle Vue on 
Saturday forthe Million Pound Game against Bradford Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/brian-smith-wakefield-million-pound-game-bradford-sheffield>
, which willdecide whether the Wildcats remain in the Super League for 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/no-helmets-required/2015/sep/29/wakefield-trinity-super-league-play-off-bradford-bulls>
 or are relegated to the Championship. “The attendance of the ground at the 
moment is just short of 8,000,” he said. “Tickets for the first two days are 
going really well and we’ve both sold around 2,000. We’re halfway to being sold 
out and I’d urge anyone who hasn’t got a ticket yet to get one straight away so 
they don’t miss out.”
 