
In June, the people of Wales voted for the UK to leave the European Union. As a
Welsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government>, we fully 
respect the result.

The UK government is responsible for negotiating the UK’s exit with the EU. 
The Welsh government’s role in that process is to ensure Welsh interests are 
fully taken into account as we seek to agree a common UK negotiating position. 
We will also continue to engage with the EU directly to ensure our interests 
are fully protected until we leave.

As the first minister, Carwyn Jones, has said many times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/09/first-minister-demands-full-role-for-wales-in-any-brexit-deal>
 over the course of the last six months, while the people of Wales voted to 
leave, they did not vote for Wales and the rest of the UK to suffer as a 
result. Indeed, many people voted to leave because they were given assurances 
that the UK would be better off outside the EU, that decisions about the UK 
would be taken in the UK – that we would “take back control” from Brussels, and 
that more money would be invested in our NHS and in other public services.

The senior UK politicians who made those promises now hold senior positions 
within the UK government. As a Welsh government, we are determined to ensure 
they deliver on those promises. The people ofWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> expect no less.

But we’re also clear that the people of this country did not vote to put jobs 
at risk by making it harder for Welsh and UK companies to buy and sell goods 
and services with what is the world’s largest trading bloc. People did not vote 
to allow the UK government to use Brexit as a means of rolling back devolution, 
by returning to Westminster control over our farming and agriculture 
industries, our environment, our fisheries and other matters that have been 
devolved to Wales since 1999. Where it makes sense for Wales to work with the 
other UK nations on matters of common interest, we will. But devolution is the 
settled will of the people of Wales. In the referendum, the people of the UK 
voted for decisions affecting the UK to be made in the UK. The people of Wales 
have voted twice, in referendums in 1997 and 2011, that decisions affecting 
Wales should be made in Wales, by politicians elected by the people of Wales.

Brexit plans in disarray as high court rules parliament must have its say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
So let me be clear – Brexit will happen. We are not in the game of trying to 
undermine the democratic will of the people of Wales by trying to block Brexit. 
But we will continue to ensure Brexit happens in a way that respects the laws 
and conventions of the UK’s constitution.

Unfortunately, there’s little sign of that happening so far.

The sole legal question before the supreme court is simple – can the UK 
government, as a matter of constitutional law, withdraw the UK from the EU 
without an act of parliament providing prior authorisation to do so?

The view of the high court is that it cannot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
. Our view as a Welsh government is that it cannot.

The UK government wants to use the crown prerogative to invoke article 50 of 
the treaty onEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, but it 
doesn’t want the UK parliament to have that say.

If Brexit really is about “taking back control”, then the spectacle of the UK 
government trying to override the UK’s constitution in this way is a very bad 
start.

In the supreme court, we will seek to reinforce the importance of 
parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law – core, established principles of 
our constitutional law. On parliamentary sovereignty, the high court’s judgment 
quotes from the lateLord Bingham of Cornhill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2010/sep/11/lord-bingham-of-cornhill-obituary> 
that “the bedrock of the British constitution is … the supremacy of the crown 
in parliament”.

So my view is that an act of parliament is required for the UK government to 
trigger Brexit.

This isn’t about “in” or “out”. It’s about elected representatives shaping the 
process for leaving the EU

This is an important constitutional principle that has profound implications 
for Wales. This is because giving notification under article 50 will inevitably 
result in the modification of the legislative competence of the National 
Assembly and the powers of the Welsh government under theGovernment of Wales 
Act 2006 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/32/pdfs/ukpga_20060032_en.pdf>. This 
should be authorised by the UK parliament through primary legislation.

Any modification of the National Assembly’s legislative competence by primary 
legislation passed by the UK parliament would engage theSewel Convention 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legislative_Consent_Motion>, under which the 
Assembly’s consent would be sought to any changes to its legislative competence.

The link between the historical principle of parliamentary sovereignty and the 
Assembly as a modern, devolved legislature is clear. As parliament has enacted 
the scheme of devolution in Wales, it should be for parliament and not the 
executive to oversee any changes and to do so with the assent of the 
democratically elected National Assembly for Wales. The wider constitutional 
relationships that have been established and continue to develop should not be 
bypassed. Indeed, one of the challenges posed by the UK leaving the EU will be 
to develop more effective relationships between the UK government and the 
devolved administrations, on the basis of mutual respect for each other’s 
rights and responsibilities.

So this case isn’t about “in” or “out”. It’s about people’s elected 
representatives – both in Westminster and in Wales – having the opportunity to 
shape the process for leaving the EU, and to ensure that the interests of our 
constituents and their businesses are properly represented in the negotiations 
that follow.
 