
The Welsh government is being urged to open talks with Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> in an attempt to secure continued 
access to European funding after Brexit, under a plan by Plaid Cymru.

The party believes it can take a leaf out of Norway’s book. The country gets 
EU funding despite not being a member, thanks to a partnership with Sweden.

“The Welsh government cannot afford to play ‘wait and see’ with Wales’s future 
relations with our nearest neighbours and must think creatively in order to 
further Wales’s interests post-Brexit,” said the party’s external affairs 
spokesman, Steffan Lewis.

He made his call for a new Celtic Sea alliance on the first of two days of 
biannual talks at the British-Irish parliamentary assembly in Cardiff.

It says that the Belfast agreement provides for bilateral deals even if the UK 
quits the EU. Lewis believes such an alliance could mitigate the economic 
impact of Brexit onWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> and Ireland, 
which is already being hit by the fall of the pound.

The exit from the EU could have devastating consequences on the economy of 
Wales, where the vast majority voted for Brexit.

It is the single biggest beneficiary of EU funds in Britain, with £2.7bn 
earmarked in the present round of funding. This includes allocations to farms, 
the European Social Fund, the Horizon science and research fund and the 
European Regional Development Fund, which accounts for the lion’s share of 
money at £1.8bn.

Ireland is already feeling the brunt of the Brexit vote following the drop of 
sterling. Britain is the country’s single biggest trading partner and exports 
are already hit, particularly in food and agriculture.

Several mushroom farms in Ireland have already taken a hammering  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/plunging-pound-puts-irish-mushroom-farmers-in-the-shade>
because of the exchange rate and last month political leaders warned of the “
incalculable consequences” Brexit would have on the Irish economy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/irish-pm-calls-brexit-summit-to-confront-looming-crisis>

Brexit also poses an opportunity for Wales, with the devolved government 
expected to redouble efforts to lure Irish business.

There are already strong trade links between the two countries, with several 
major Irish food processing plants in north and south Wales, and it is widely 
felt that the only way Irish exporters can soften the Brexit blow is to have 
manufacturing offshoots in Britain.

Lewis: “It is necessary for that to be formalised between the governments of 
Wales and Ireland through an agreement that could establish a Celtic Sea 
alliance, focused on collaboration between the two nations but especially the 
western regions of Wales and the eastern regions of Ireland.”

There may also be an opportunity for Ireland and Wales to dip into EU 
inter-region funds, known as Interreg.

Norway and Sweden share €73m (£62m) from Interreg  
<http://ttp://www.interreg-sverige-norge.com/in-english/>funds for programmes 
designed to protect vulnerable border regions, in terms of environment, 
employment and social cohesion.

The notion that Wales could continue to benefit from EU funds comes as similar 
attempts are made in sectors such as education and science, which are heavily 
dependent on EU funds.

British universities are considering plans to open branches inside the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> to soften the blow of 
Britain’s exit.

University leaders fear Brexit will make student and staff recruitment much 
more difficult, cutting off EU research and funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/22/uk-universities-mull-eu-campuses-in-new-era-of-uncertainty?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
and probably constricting the flow of EU students, who have been the fastest 
growing proportion of young undergraduates.

Funding in scientific research often flows from collaboration  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/12/uk-scientists-dropped-from-eu-projects-because-of-post-brexit-funding-fears>
with institutes across Europe, and elite universities feel they will be 
excluded from cross-border consortia long before Britain quits the EU.



 