
Welsh undergraduates from the poorest families will receive maintenance grants 
of up to £11,000 a year in return for taking on the full cost of university 
tuition fees, asWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> overhauls its 
student funding.

Kirsty Williams, Wales’s education secretary, announced 
<http://gov.wales/newsroom/educationandskills/2016/plans-published-for-new-welsh-student-finance-system-that-provides-for-all/?lang=en>
 that the country’s universal £5,100 tuition grant is to be scrapped and 
replaced with a mix of generous means-tested benefits and loans based on 
students’ family incomes from September 2018.

“We are looking to introduce the most generous and progressive system anywhere 
in the UK. If you want to go to university, this system will allow you to do 
so,” said Williams, the sole Liberal Democrat cabinet member in the Cardiff 
assembly’s coalition government.

Tuition fees: fall in mature and part-time students 'threatens social mobility'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/30/tuition-fees-report-fall-mature-part-time-students-threatens-social-mobility>
“I am proud to confirm our intention to deliver the first system in the UK 
that is consistent, progressive and fair in its support for full- and part-time 
undergraduates, and for postgraduate students,” she said.

The new regime, which will apply only to students ordinarily resident in 
Wales, will see students from families earning under £18,000 a year, or who had 
previously been in care, receiving up to £8,000 in grants, a figure equivalent 
to the “national living wage”, based on 37.5 hours a week over a 30-week 
academic year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fwales-unveils-means-tested-university-grants-of-up-to-11000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47fed36b204d9822ac752e42a8e75347b67e5d2b%2F0_732_1896_1137%2F1896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wales%20unveils%20means-tested%20university%20grants%20of%20up%20to%20%C2%A311%2C000%20a%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fwales-unveils-means-tested-university-grants-of-up-to-11000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wales%20unveils%20means-tested%20university%20grants%20of%20up%20to%20%C2%A311%2C000%20a%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fwales-unveils-means-tested-university-grants-of-up-to-11000%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47fed36b204d9822ac752e42a8e75347b67e5d2b%2F0_732_1896_1137%2F1896.jpg>
 ‘We are looking to introduce the most generous and progressive system anywhere 
in the UK,’ said Kirsty Williams. Photograph: Tim Ireland/PA 
Williams said the government would largely adopt the recommendations of a 
review of student funding published in September, which argued that the current 
regime – which has protected Welsh students from the imposition of £9,000 
tuition fees and loans since 2012 – failed to directly help those from the 
worst-off households.

The existing universal tuition fee grant, costing the government about £250m a 
year, had been available to all Welsh students, including those who travelled 
to other parts of the UK to study.

The Welsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government> estimates that 
about 70% of students will be eligible for a portion of means-tested grants, 
with the level of benefit tapered down to a maximum income of £59,000.

Just about managing? In towns like Pontypool that’s a dream | Aditya 
Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/just-about-managing-pontypool-south-wales-poverty-post-industrial-truth-britain>
All students will receive a universal maintenance grant of £1,000, regardless 
of family income, and will be able top up grants with loans.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> studying in London would 
receive a 25% boost to their maintenance grants, so that those from the poorest 
families would receive a maximum of £11,000.

Unlike other parts of the UK, the funding will also be available to part-time 
and postgraduate students as well as those studying full-time.

“Academic ability should determine whether you go to university, not your 
social background. Students from Wales will be supported to meet their daily 
living costs, something they continually tell us puts them off going to 
university,” Williams said.

The announcement enjoyed broad cross-party support, with both Conservatives 
and Plaid Cymru welcoming the move.

The new funding formula had been outlined by Prof Ian Diamond 
<http://gov.wales/topics/educationandskills/highereducation/review-of-he-funding-and-student-finance-arrangements/?lang=en>
, vice-chancellor of the University of Aberdeen, in a review commissioned by 
the Welsh government.

The new formula could be ready for students starting in September 2018, 
depending on thegovernment’s consultation 
<https://consultations.gov.wales/consultations/support-funding-for-students-resident-in-wales>
, Treasury approval and the ability of theStudent Loans Company 
<http://www.slc.co.uk/> to administer the scheme.
 