
For many people, January is the most miserable time of the year; after a 
period of overindulgence, it’s a month for hibernating, saving money and 
sobering up. Others see it as an opportunity for a fresh start; a chance to 
become fitter, happier and more productive.

January is a busy month for recruiters too, as many people hunt for new jobs 
in the hope of lifting their back-to-work blues. More than half of the UK 
workforce will be looking for a new job in 2017, according to asurvey 
<https://www.investorsinpeople.com/sites/default/files/IIP%20Job%20Exodus%20Trends%20-%202017%20employee%20sentiment%20poll.pdf>
 [pdf] by Investors in People – while a quarter of UK workers are already 
actively applying for new roles.

When the evenings and mornings are dark and cold, it can be hard to find the 
energy to get out and network. Likewise, many people know they want a new 
career, but are unsure where to start. There is also a chance that wanting to 
throw in the towel might be a temporary or seasonal feeling, making it hard to 
know whether it is a better idea to stay put.

So if you are feeling dissatisfied at work, join us on Wednesday 11 January 
from 1–2.30pm GMTfor a live chat with a panel of career experts. We’ll be 
discussing:

 * Whether it is time to quit and find a new job, or work for yourself

 * How you can make your existing role more challenging, and progress

 * Tips on how to change career in the new year

 * How to find new opportunities at work

The panel

Sarah Byrne is a core member of the Careershifters 
<http://www.careershifters.org/> team, an organisation which helps people 
change career into work that’s right for them. She has worked in the career 
change field since 2010.

Lydia Fairman is an HR and resourcing specialist who owns Fairman Consulting 
<http://www.fairmanconsulting.co.uk/>. Fairman also offers free CV advice, 
interview guidance and careers blogs to help job seekers succeed.

Andrew Fennell is the director of StandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/blogs/cv-writing-advice-blog/41315012-7-easy-cv-formatting-tips-that-will-get-you-more-interviews>
, a London-based CV writing service. Fennell previously worked as a senior 
recruitment consultant across multiple industries.

Sophie Graham is a careers adviser for the National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>, specialising in 
matching young people and graduates to careers. Graham also works for the 
National Careers Service Helpline.

Jon Gregory is a job search, application and interview specialist, with 
experience in business reorganisation and recruitment. He is the author of 
Winning That Job, editor ofwin-that-job.com <http://win-that-job.com/>.

Lisa LaRue is a career coach at CareerWorx <http://www.careerworx.co.uk/>, 
specialising in career change strategy. She is a registered career development 
professional and has over 18 years’ experience helping people plan and manage 
their careers.

Lis McGuire is a CV writer and the founder of Giraffe CVs 
<http://www.giraffecvs.co.uk/>. She recently published her first book, Ace Your 
CV, Elevate Your Career, helping job seekers to increase career confidence and 
open interview doors.

Victoria McLean, CV writer and interview coach, is the founder of CityCV.co.uk 
<http://www.citycv.co.uk/>. She is a former recruitment manager at Goldman 
Sachs and Merrill Lynch, and is a multiple prize winner in the global CV 
writing industry awards.

Corinne Mills is the managing director of Personal Career Management 
<http://www.personalcareermanagement.com/>, a leading career coaching and 
outplacement company. She has written the best-selling career books, You’re 
Hired: How to write a brilliant CV and Career Coach.

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever:create a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, tweet us
@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions 
tosarah.shearman@theguardian.com <mailto:sarah.shearman@theguardian.com> who 
can post them for you.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 