
Like the Olympics, interest in the civil service tends to peak every four or 
five years in moments of high political drama, such as the 2010 general 
election, when cabinet secretary Sir Gus O’Donnell guided the nation into its 
first postwar coalition government.

 And with no shortage of high political drama since 23 June this year, 
politicians and civil servants have been thrown into turmoil and career changes 
by the EU referendum result.Amid all the uncertainty, civil servants are as 
keen as everyone else to find out what the government’s policy is on the Brexit 
negotiations. Keener, in fact, since it is they who must see the whole thing 
through. As Sir Simon Fraser, former former under-permanent secretary at the 
Foreign Office who left in July 2015 for a job with consultancy Flint Partners, 
says: Brexit is now the only game in town for the civil service.

Whether or not they work for one of the main Brexit-focused departments, 
includingDavid Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis>’s 
Department for Exiting the EU, any aspiring civil servant would look at the 
emerging Brexit negotiations and say “I need to be across this”, Frasertold an 
audience of his former colleagues 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/blog/14823/simon-fraser-discusses-whitehall-and-negotiating-brexit/>
 at the Institute for Government thinktank earlier this week. “If you want to 
make a career as a civil servant in the next five years, this is the issue in 
town,” he said.

The task of Whitehall this autumn is to get their heads down and do some hard 
policy thinking.
Sir Simon Fraser 
The civil service is already drafting in support for the Brexit negotiations, 
includingformer UK ambassador to Denmark David Frost  
<https://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/news/boris-johnson-drafts-former-fco-europe-director-special-adviser>
at the Foreign Office. In June, Melanie Dawes, permanent secretary at DCLG,said 
 
<http://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/news/civil-service-brexit-unit-departments-must-be-ready-give-staff-new-eu-team-says-dclg>
government departments had to be willing to give up their “brightest and best” 
to work on the UK’s exit from the EU. Star Whitehall insider Ollie Robbins, 
formerly of the Home Office, the Cabinet Office, the Treasury and No 10, is 
heading up the new Department for Exiting the EU as its permanent secretary, 
while safe pair of hands Martin Donnelly, who formerly ran the business 
department, has set up the new Department for International Trade, which isnow 
recruiting 
<http://www.govopps.co.uk/global-search-launched-to-recruit-permanent-secretary-for-department-for-international-trade/>
 for a top civil servant.

Fraser warned that the talks would be incredibly difficult, tough and complex. 
The EU would seek to dissuade other countries from leaving by making it 
“absolutely clear there is a price tag attached” to departure. But he believes 
the UK has some strong cards in its hand.

Brexit negotiations will be in four phases. First must come the divorce and 
separation, under the triggering of Article 50, then the negotiations over the 
future relationship between the UK and the rest of the EU. But other 
negotiations must also take place at the same time, including an interim deal 
to span the time taken for the first two negotiations, and trade negotiations 
with the rest of the world.

Civil servants  have been asked to assess the impact of a wide range of Brexit 
scenarios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/30/divisions-emerge-as-whitehall-draws-up-brexit-scenarios>
, with reports expected to be fed into the Brexit department run by Davis.

Fraser said ministers and politicians would need “hard-headed pragmatism” to 
succeed, but said they can count on the loyalty and professionalism of the 
civil service. He also said prime minister Theresa May was rightto announce the 
date for triggering Article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, as it would give civil servants and ministers time to formulate their 
negotiating position. “She has played her hand well,” he said. “The task of 
Whitehall this autumn is to get their heads down and do some hard policy 
thinking.”

Fear of UK civil service paralysis over EU negotiations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/fear-of-uk-civil-service-paralysis-over-eu-negotiations>
But at a time when civil service numbers have been slashed, there is deep 
concern across Whitehall. The civil service is at its smallest size since the 
second world war, employing about 392,000 full-time staff – an 18% drop since 
the coalition government came to power in 2010. Dave Penman, director general 
of the FDA union that represents the most senior civil servants, asked Fraser 
whether the level of cuts could threaten the success of the Brexit 
negotiations. “Clearly we have got to look at that,” responded Fraser, saying 
if the UK wants to be effective globally, not just in the Brexit negotiations, 
it must recognise the resources needed. “I am on record as saying that 
hollowing out the civil service threatens our diplomatic network, for instance.”

In June, Lord Kerslake, the former head of the civil service, called on the 
government to begin a rethink of cuts to staffing levels. “If they’re going to 
get through this mammoth negotiation, they are going to have to increase 
resources for a period of time – and they ought, logically, to put a stop on 
haemorrhaging people,” he said.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 