
We’ve all heard the phrase “fake it, ‘til you make it” – but developing 
professional confidence isn’t as simple as putting on a brave face. Whether 
it’s asking for a pay rise or finding your voice in meetings, a lack of 
confidence is listed as one of the biggest factors holding people back in their 
careers.

However, research <http://uk.prweb.com/releases/2016/09/prweb13706606.htm> 
released last month from Crunch has found that a new source of inspiration is 
helping people to overcome workplace nerves. The study of UK employees found 
that the rise of strong and powerful female role models – particularly the 
growing number of political leadership figures such as Theresa May and Nicola 
Sturgeon – is inspiring greater confidence at work. A third of women reported 
feeling more confident to speak their minds, while one in 10 felt more 
confident when haggling or negotiating a deal.

How to improve your confidence and ambition at work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/improve-confidence-ambition-at-work>
Inspiring role models and mentors can be a great source of confidence, but 
there are plenty of other practical ways people can use to boost self-belief in 
their skills. Here are five tips people can use to confidently get ahead at 
work:

1 Develop a plan and implement it

Being more confident is an incredibly broad brief to meet and it’s not 
surprising that a lot of people don’t know where to start. The best strategy 
for tackling confidence issues is just like approaching any other challenge – 
break it down into measurable, achievable goals and give yourself a deadline.

Worried about finding your voice in meetings? Why not set yourself a target to 
raise three points at your next staff meeting. When you achieve it, build on 
that number the following month. One of the best ways to stay on top of your 
development goals is if you have someone supporting you. These goals could be 
something you raise as a target with your line manager in development meetings, 
or even just a goal you set with your friends or partner.

2 Develop your own brand of confidence

Confidence isn’t a one-size-fits-all attribute – develop your own type of 
confidence

Professional confidence isn’t always about being the loudest person at a 
networking event or dominating brainstorming sessions in the office. On the 
contrary, confident employees typically tend to listen more than they speak, 
because they see interactions as an opportunity to soak up new ideas.

Confidence isn’t a one-size-fits-all attribute, because everyone struggles 
with different confidence issues, whether it’s conquering public speaking or 
dealing with difficult personalities. Finding your own brand of confidence 
often comes down to identifying your personal roadblocks, and developing 
methods or tools for overcoming them.

3 Celebrate what you’re good at

One of the biggest traps that people lacking in confidence fall into is 
dwelling on the negatives. Tracking your success is a great way to restore 
balance in the way you think about yourself. Having a record of these workplace 
wins is also a great asset when you’re approaching an appraisal, or considering 
asking for a pay rise.

Seven ways to boost confidence at a job interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/aug/19/seven-ways-to-boost-confidence-at-a-job-interview>
When you’ve identified the areas you’re strong at, why not look for ways to 
develop them even further. Can this become your specialism? Having a topic or 
skillset you own as your area of expertise is a great way to boost confidence 
and self-belief.

4 Say yes

Ever get that feeling you’re a bit of a fraud at work and it’s just a matter 
of time until people twig? It’s what’s described asimposter syndrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/jul/04/feel-like-a-at-work-remember-we-cant-all-be-master-criminals>
 and it’s common among high-achieving people who are convinced, despite the 
evidence, that they don’t deserve their success. That fear of being found out 
means that people are less likely to put themselves forward for new experiences 
and challenges. The best way to overcome this is to tackle it head on. Saying 
yes to new challenges might take you out of your comfort zone, but it’s the 
only way to keep growing and developing professionally.

5 Find positive role models

A powerful role model can make a huge impact. There’s so much to be learned 
from strong, inspiring leaders – from their methods for handling conflict to 
their body language and oration skills – in a huge range of sectors and 
professions. If you’re keen to discover more it’s well worth checking out the 
speaker lineup at events likeTedX 
<https://www.ted.com/about/programs-initiatives/tedx-program> and SheSays 
<http://weareshesays.com/>.

How to... beat shyness and boost confidence at work
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2001/may/12/jobsadvice.careers1>
Finding a professional mentor is a great way to learn even more from leaders 
in your workplace or more broadly in your sector. Many jobs offer development 
programmes with senior team members, and most cities have networking mentorship 
programmes available to get involved with. These are the perfect opportunity to 
ask questions and learn directly from people who understand your situation and 
want to help you develop.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice.
 