
The painter is flying above the Alps in a Bristol Fighter. It is the autumn of 
1918. He is sitting in the rear observer’s seat, trying to get the dogfights 
down in rapid watercolour but the water in the paint keeps freezing at this 
altitude, no matter how hard he tries to warm it with his breath. The paper is 
nearly ripped from the drawing board by the sheer force of the slipstream.

War artists have worked in many horrendous conditions, but Sydney Carline 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sydney_Carline>’s experiences were particularly 
unusual. For Carline was not just a painter, he was also a pilot in the world’s 
first airborne conflict. He often had to perform both roles at once, at 
enormous risk to his life. Some of the images in this startling exhibition were 
actually made while manning Vickers machine guns and even while flying a 
Sopwith Camel with his knees.

Carline (1888-1929) was much admired in his short lifetime by more famous 
peers such asPaul Nash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/06/paul-nash-tate-britain-review-observer-laura-cumming>
 and CRW Nevinson, but his work has been stinted ever since. He was a 
successful cartoonist and sculptor, as well as a painter, and master of drawing 
at the Ruskin School of Art in his 30s. He painted aeroplanesattacking the Sea 
of Galilee <http://www.iwm.org.uk/collections/item/object/4389>, the fated 
bridge at Mostar <http://artuk.org/discover/artworks/mostar-herzegovina-21275> 
and theIraqi desert in 1919 <http://www.iwm.org.uk/collections/item/object/4521>
, based on flights made during and after the first world war. The focus at the 
newly reopenedEstorick Collection <http://www.estorickcollection.com/about.php>
, however, is very specific:British forces in Italy 1917-18 
<http://www.estorickcollection.com/exhibitions/>.
 Austrian Prisoners being driven towards the Italian Lines, 1918 by Sydney 
Carline. Photograph: Courtesy Imperial War Museum 
This is such a forgotten aspect of our history that many people, the curators 
surmise, don’t know that British troops fought – and died – in their thousands 
alongside Italian forces during the Great War. Carline shows English officers 
riding through a village near Vicenza to the fascination of local children, 
exhausted soldiers resting high up in the mountains, bombed renaissance 
villages and the citizens of Padua evacuated between Austro-Hungarian 
bombardments.

But perhaps the most surprising images here are those made while darting 
through the sunlight on the way up to some terrifying encounter with a Red 
Baron, or hanging in the bright air 20,000 feet above the snow-capped Alps 
below. Delicate watercolours, made on the wing, show rapturous Italian sunsets 
dotted with distant biplanes like flitting dragonflies. Oil paintings of 
Sopwith Camels,dark against the Asiago plateau 
<http://www.iwm.org.uk/collections/item/object/4378>, emphasise the eerie 
similarity between trailing smoke and cloud.

The canvas is rough as sacking, the oil paint laid flat and emphatic as the 
stark truths Carline is clearly determined to record. But one senses a tension 
between his artist’s mind and his role as pilot in the turbulence of history. 
He is fascinated by the thrilling light of an Alpine dawn; the beauty of the 
target markings on British aircraft; the shape of biplane wings and propellers.
 Carline’s charcoal drawing of his injured flying partner, Captain Moody, 
being helped from his aircraft, October 1918. Photograph: Courtesy Imperial War 
Museum 
On the ground, he produces quickfire drawings of pilots clambering from their 
aircraft or being stretchered across the field. During the decisive Vittorio 
Veneto campaign in 1918, launched along a line between Venice and Bormio, 
Carline flew with a certain Captain Moody, firing off two whole drums of 
ammunition at the Austro-Hungarian planes both above and below. Moody was badly 
hit, but kept flying and returned the aircraft safely to base. A poignant 
charcoal drawing shows him shouldered by two colleagues from the plane, just 
before he fainted from blood loss.
 Two Gunners in the Royal Field Artillery in a Donkey Cart, Asiago Front c. 
June 1918, photographed by Ernest Brooks Photograph: Courtesy Imperial War 
Museum 
There are two parts to this show. The Estorick is also displaying the work of 
Ernest Brooks <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernest_Brooks_%28photographer%29> 
and William Joseph Brunell, official war photographers on the Italian 
frontline. Brooks had been a soldier himself in the Boer war – he was held in 
great respect by other official artists, includingFrank Hurley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frank_Hurley> and Robert Capa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/robert-capa> – and his images zero in 
on the experiences of the British Tommy, bartering for fruit, marshalling 
messenger dogs, marching into Venice.

Related: Battle in heaven: the first world war in Italy – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2017/jan/12/first-world-war-italy-pictures-photography>

But it is Brunell’s work that captures the strangeness of this unexpected 
alliance, which some Italians resented because they believed it was prolonging 
the conflict, and others cherished for the British support. Brunell shows the 
encounter between kilted Highlanders and Venetian carabinieri, between British 
infantrymen and Italian beauties, between the two nations: hesitant, 
occasionally suspicious, always intrigued. He shoots images from high above – 
often noticed by his subjects: the observer observed – and from a perfectly 
calculated distance. His photograph of the Northamptonshire Yeomanry crossing a 
river on horseback is like a 19th-century history painting worked in grisaille.

Most affecting of all is a portrait of an Austro-Hungarian prisoner of war, 
isolated and almost in close-up, all his fearful bewilderment condensed in that 
moment. Like Carline’s painting of Austrian prisoners trudging by dusk towards 
an unknown fate, accompanied by a single Italian soldier, there is the sense of 
absolute alienation, of poor young men trapped in bloodshed, not even able to 
speak each other’s language.
 William Joseph Brunell’s photographs of an Austro-Hungarian soldier taken 
prisoner by the British, early November 1918. Photograph: Courtesy Imperial War 
Museum 
The Estorick Collection <http://www.estorickcollection.com/> reopens this week 
with a new conservatory and entrance, with new light flooding through windows 
that are no longer shuttered and through ingenious glass walls. The four 
galleries of its permanent collection have been rehung so that all of its28 
Morandis <http://www.estorickcollection.com/permanent/Giorgio_Morandi.php>, for 
instance, now hang in one marvellous room. Since its inauguration in 1998, the 
Estorick has become internationally famous as one of the world’s greatest 
collections of 20th-century Italian art. So this show is something of a 
departure. But it is perfectly chosen for this moment. For these rare 
depictions of Italy and the Italians a century ago, made by the British, united 
by war, are an elegiac celebration of the relationship between the two 
countries.

• War in the Sunshine: The British in Italy 1917-1918 is at the Estorick 
Collection, London N1 until 19 March 
<http://www.estorickcollection.com/exhibitions/>
 