
Britain’s biggest supermarket has warned that dearer food prices triggered by 
the plunge in the value of the poundwill have a lethal impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/tesco-boss-food-price-inflation-lethal-struggling-millions-matt-davies>
 on poor families worst affected by the expected jump in inflation over the 
next two years.

Although a price war among the leading food retailers has so far blunted the 
impact of more expensive imports on grocery bills, Tesco’s UK chief executive, 
Matt Davies, said rising prices would be “toxic” for consumers if stores found 
that they had to pass on extra costs.

Official figures from the Office for National Statistics showed the annual 
inflation rate rising from 0.6% to 1% in September, its highest for almost two 
years.

The ONS said the cost of living had yet to be much affected by the drop in the 
value of the pound seen since the EU referendum, but theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, the International 
Monetary Fund and City economists believe that inflation will rise above the 
government’s 2% target in early 2017 and will reach at least 3% by the end of 
the year.

Researchers at the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8699> thinktank, said the decision by the 
government in the 2015 summer budget tofreeze welfare benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2015/jul/09/reaction-summer-budget-conservative-george-osborne-politics-live>
 for the whole of the current parliament meant that 11.5 million families would 
be an additional £2 a week worse off as a result of higher than anticipated 
inflation.

The IFS said that families already stood to lose £260 a year as a result of 
George Osborne’s attempt to reduce the UK’s welfare budget, but they would now 
see their real incomes drop by £360 a year.

Davies said: “Everybody should be very, very clear how damaging food inflation 
is to the economy, to retail businesses and manufacturing businesses and how 
lethal it could be for millions of people struggling to live from week to week.”

He spoke out after Tesco became embroiled in a public spat with one of its 
main suppliers, Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
, after the maker of brands including Marmite and Persil demanded an across the 
board 10% rise in prices in light of the devaluation of the pound after the the 
EU referendum.

The two companies reached an agreement on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
 after it emerged that Tesco was running low on stocks of more than 20 popular 
Unilever brands because the supplier halted deliveries when the supermarket 
would not agree to its price demand.

Davies, who was speaking at the Big Debate conference organised by grocery 
industry body IGD, said it was clear there were inflationary forces in the UK 
after the Brexit vote but would not say whether they would feed through to 
price rises on supermarket shelves.

“Our role is to do everything we can do to prevent food inflation which is not 
good for business and highly toxic for consumers,” said Davies, who joined 
Tesco from car parts and bicycle retailer Halfords 18 months ago.

City analysts warned that the jump in consumer prices last month marked the 
first of many increases that would push inflation towards 3% next year.

Some said it was clear weaker sterling was having an effect, especially on the 
rising cost of imported clothes and footwear, though the ONS played down the 
overall impact, saying there was no “explicit evidence” it was having a 
significant impact on consumer prices.
Inflation chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-18T11:28:33/embed.html>
Andrew Sentance, a former member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy 
committee, which sets interest rates, said: “Higher import prices are feeding 
through to consumers because of the fall in sterling since the EU referendum.


“This latest rise, however, is just the tip of the inflationary iceberg that 
is coming our way.”

Inflation <https://www.theguardian.com/business/inflation> hovered around zero 
during 2015 but has been on a gentle upward trend since the turn of the year. 
Analysts had been expecting a slightly smaller increase to 0.9% in September, 
but stressed that further increases were in the pipeline in coming months as 
last autumn’s falls in energy prices ceased to drag down the annual inflation 
rate.



The increase in the cost of living was widely forecast after an 18% fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/fall-in-sterling-is-a-welcome-change-says-mervyn-king-brexit-vote>
 in the value of sterling since the Brexit vote on 23 June.

The ONS said food prices dipped slightly in September and the cost of 
household goods also fell. But this was more than offset by higher petrol costs 
relative to last year and clothing, especially womenswear.

Last week, the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, said the Bank could 
tolerate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/prices-to-continue-rising-warns-bank-of-england-governor>
 “a bit” of an overshoot against its 2% inflation target to help economic 
growth and employment.








 