
The Warriors will miss the NRL finals series for a fifth consecutive season 
after two lateWests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> 
tries gave the side a controversial 30-24 win in Auckland. Five-eighth Mitchell 
Moses and centre Kevin Naiqama scored in the 76th and 79th minutes to break the 
Warriors’ hearts. Both sides required a victory at Mt Smart Stadium to stay in 
the finals hunt after losing two games on the bounce and they produced an 
exciting end-to-end spectacle.

Sharks notch resounding win, late Panthers field goal shatters Titans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/nrl-round-25-saturday-roundup> 
However two controversial disallowed try decisions against the Warriors for 
obstruction – and the Tigers’ late tries, both after the Warriors failed to 
control the high ball – meant the Sydney-based outfit hold out for at least a 
week longer. For the Warriors, an improved performance will count for naught 
after a strong mid-season run was ruined by disappointing losses to the 
Rabbitohs and Cowboys.

An inauspicious opening period sprung into life in the seventh minute when 
Tigers fullback David Nofoaluma was found to have fumbled a Manu Vatuvei 
grubber. Second rower Bodene Thompson strolled over from the resulting scrum to 
put the Warriors in front against his former side.

The Warriors put their defensive woes against the Rabbitohs and Cowboys behind 
them in the opening passages, hitting the Tigers with quick line speed. One 
particularly brutal Albert Vete tryline tackle knocked the ball right out of 
Tigers skipper Aaron Woods hands.

However the Tigers drew level in the 19th minute when young gun Luke Brooks 
made a line break before prop Sauaso Sue barged over from a resulting play. The 
Tigers hit the lead six minutes later after the Warriors gifted good field 
position with back-to-back penalties and Woods crashed over under the posts.

The Warriors hit back with two tries in two minutes. Prolific centre Solomone 
Kata crossed after the Warriors created an overload on the left flank, before 
stalwart Simon Mannering returned his side to the lead at 18-12 with a try when 
centre Blake Ayshford palmed a Shaun Johnson bomb back.

Kata then wasted a golden opportunity to extend his side’s lead when the ball 
was punched out of his hands as he went to score, before having a try 
disallowed on the half-time buzzer for obstruction.

The match erupted in the 56th minute when Tigers winger Josh Addo-Carr dashed 
70 metres to cross and level the scores again. A try to returning utility 
Tuimoala Lolohea put the Warriors back in front in the 65th minute, before the 
Warriors had another try ruled out for obstruction two minutes later.

Sue scored his second try to level the scores yet again, before the last-gasp 
tries to Moses and Naiqama – both following poor defence from kicks – left the 
Warriors to ponder what might have been yet again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnrl-round-25-sunday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe369ce794ef89a26b5ab1d4a5fda5e04ce2b131d%2F0_77_4326_2595%2F4326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warriors%20out%20of%20NRL%20title%20hunt%20as%20Wests%20stay%20alive%20with%20victory%20in%20Auckland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnrl-round-25-sunday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warriors%20out%20of%20NRL%20title%20hunt%20as%20Wests%20stay%20alive%20with%20victory%20in%20Auckland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnrl-round-25-sunday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe369ce794ef89a26b5ab1d4a5fda5e04ce2b131d%2F0_77_4326_2595%2F4326.jpg>
 Greg Inglis celebrates scoring what was a contender for try of the season 
during Souths’ win over the Knights in Newcastle. Photograph: Darren Pateman/AAP
South Sydney extended Newcastle’s miserable club record to 17 straight losses, 
thrashing the Knights 34-12 at Hunter Stadium later on Sunday. Rabbitohs 
halfback Adam Reynolds was back to his devastating best, pulling the strings on 
four South Sydney tries, while fullback Greg Inglis produced a candidate for 
four-pointer of the season when he touched down millimetres inside the 
dead-ball line to open the scoring.

Conversely the only highlight for the Knights came when Jake Mamo produced a 
brilliant individual try late on to set up a farewell conversion for retiring 
backrower Jeremy Smith. But it was too little to late for the Knights who were 
out-muscled and out-classed.

The Knights, who as well as farewelling 36-year-old Smith were celebrating the 
club’s Old Boys Day, had every reason to be up for the clash in front of 15,212 
vocal fans but it was Souths who jumped out of the blocks, Inglis latching onto 
a deft Reynolds grubber just inside the dead-ball line to score. The kick had 
bamboozled young Knights winger Cory Denniss and despite two other Knights in 
the area, Inglis got there first, touching down in mid front-flip.

Souths cruised to a 16-0 half-time lead, thanks to Inglis and fellow 
tryscorers Alex Johnston and Cody Walker. After the break it looked like more 
of the same when Aaron Gray muscled his way through some poor Knights defence 
to make it 22-0 but 10 minutes later the Knights were on the board after 
debutant Dylan Phythian jumped in at dummy-half and reached out to score.

The momentum was short lived, however, with South Sydney star Sam Burgess 
crossing next to the posts after he somehow managed to swivel out of a Sione 
Mata’utia tackle. Alex Johnston completed the rout when he touched down in the 
corner to make it 34-6 in the 65th minute. The loss means Newcastle now own the 
seventh-longest league losing streak of all time and the longest of theNRL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> era.
 