
Warrington produced a blistering performance to move joint-top of the Super 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> by thrashing Castleford 
56-12 at the Halliwell Jones Stadium.

Most of the damage was done in the first half as the rampant Wolves, who boast 
the competition’s only remaining 100% record, ran through the feebleCastleford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> defence for seven tries.

Four more followed after the break as Warrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> moved level with neighbours 
Widnes, who they face in an intriguing derby next week.

The tries were shared out but Chris Sandow, Tom Lineham and Ben Currie all 
finished with two apiece while closer inspection may yet see Matty Russell 
credited with a double. Russell definitely scored one and may have a claim to 
another initially awarded to Kurt Gidley, who also kicked six goals.

Warrington led 38-0 at the break and might have had more had Rhys Evans not 
fumbled diving over the line and Lineham had one chalked off for a forward pass.

Widnes march on with a win at Wigan and take two-point lead at top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/wigan-warriors-widnes-vikings-super-league-match-report>
The procession started after just five minutes as Sandow wrong-footed the 
defence with a clever grubber kick and followed up to touch down.

A second try quickly followed as Kevin Penny went over on the left and Lineham 
scored another on the opposite side.

There was conjecture over who claimed the fourth after a charge by Ashton Sims 
pushed the Tigers defence back. Gidley was initially credited with the score 
but Russell and Brad Dwyer also emerged from a pile-up over the line.

There was no debate over who got the next as Russell forced his way through 
some poor tackling to reach the line and Ryan Atkins was then sent over for a 
simple score.

Worse followed for Castleford as Sandow broke from the resulting restart to 
spark a brilliant counter-attack that Currie finished off.

Sandow jinked through for another in the first minute of the second half 
before Cas finally stirred to set up the former Warrington star Joel Monaghan’s 
first try in Tigers colours.

Gadwin Springer sped through a gap to further reduce the arrears but normal 
service was resumed soon after the hour as Dwyer twisted his way out of a 
tackle and crashed over. Lineham brilliantly claimed a high kick in the corner 
to grab his second.

The pace of the game slowed in the latter stages after stoppages for injuries 
to Dwyer and the Castleford pair Andy Lynch and Matt Cook, but there was still 
time for Currie to race over for his second.
 