
The Challenge Cup final next weekend is being talked up as the most 
anticipated in years – and if Hull FC and Warrington serve up a finale as 
dramatic as this we are in for a real treat.Rugby league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugbyleague> is yet to give the new Wembley 
a final that proves to be an absolute classic, but with the league’s top two 
making it there – and both sides heading to the stadium off the back of wins – 
there is a feeling that could all change this year.

Although Hull and Warrington both won their final test before the journey to 
the capital, they did so in very different ways. Hull had the envious position 
of sitting back and watching the weekend’s action unfold afterthrashing 
Catalans Dragons 44-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/hull-fc-catalans-dragons-super-league-match-report>
 on Thursday night, whereas Warrington had what many would consider a good 
warmup for a final, being pushed every step of the way by Castleford.

Wigan Warriors brush aside St Helens with Anthony Gelling hat-trick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/wigan-warriors-brush-aside-st-helens-with-anthony-gelling-hat-trick>
The Super 8s has been devoid of a real thrilling contest in the opening three 
weeks so, in many ways, this felt like a fitting hors d’oeuvres ahead of 
Wembley next week.

Jack Hughes’s try, seconds before the hooter, snatched victory from the jaws 
of defeat for the Wolves, who had trailed thanks to a Luke Gale drop goal, two 
minutes from time, which had looked to have kept Castleford’s top-four hopes 
alive.

The Tigers have made a mockery of the notion that some teams have nothing to 
play for in the Super 8s. Already victorious against Wigan and Hull in the 
opening fortnight, they had looked poised to make it three from three until 
Hughes’s last-gasp try.

“I thought it was a good way to warm up for the final,” Tony Smith, the 
Warrington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> coach, said. “I’ve 
got some decisions to make about my team for Wembley and to get the top-four 
spot sewn up too, that’s a big positive.”

London Broncos look to show off new identity as Leeds Rhinos visit Ealing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/london-broncos-resurgent-andrew-henderson-super-league-leeds-rhinos-ealing>
Castleford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castleford> had defended 
admirably in the opening quarter before eventually being breached by Joe 
Westerman’s try, but that was as good as it got for the Wolves in the opening 
half, as Castleford’s game management began to take hold of proceedings. They 
levelled when Denny Solomona’s try was converted by Gale, before the scrum-half 
added two penalties either side of the break to put the visitors in front.

The second half followed a similar pattern to the first, with Castleford 
holding the Wolves at bay before Rhys Evans’s try in the corner made it 10-10. 
With the game level, both sides pushed for a late winner via a drop goal, and 
although Chris Sandow hooked two attempts wide, Gale did not miss with two 
minutes of the game remaining, to make it 11-10.

But Warrington, refusing to be beaten, rolled the dice from the kick-off, 
regathering and keeping the ball alive long enough for Sandow to loop a pass 
wide for Hughes to touch down and, like Hull, secure their place in the 
play-offs before their Wembley showdown on Saturday.
 