
The Warrington <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> forward Ben 
Currie will not play for club or country against this season after suffering a 
serious knee injury that could rule him out of action for nine months.

Wigan’s Ben Flower given two-match ban and £300 fine for reckless tackle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/wigan-ben-flower-super-league-ban-warrington>
Currie was injured during Warrington’s Super League defeat to Wigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/wigan-warrington-ben-flower-red-card>
 last Friday, and although the club were initially hopeful over the severity of 
the problem, scans have shown that the 22-year-old has suffered a torn anterior 
cruciate ligament.

He will miss Warrington’s remaining fixtures this season, beginning with their 
trip to Hull this Friday which will determine the winners of the League 
Leaders’ Shield. Currie will also miss England’s Four Nations campaign this 
autumn after being widely expected to earn his first call-up to the national 
side following an impressive season at club level.

“Our worst fears have come to fruition,” said Tony Smith, the Warrington 
coach. “He’s torn his ACL off the bone. He’s on his way to London as we speak 
for repair. I believe that will involve a graft back on to the bone.

“The minimum recovery would be six months but I reckon it will be close to 
nine months. It’s a big blow for the young man. It’s come at a time when he’s 
playing some big games for his club and he’s also been pushing for that 
international jersey.”

Smith has backed the forward to come back stronger from the injury, saying: 
“He’s sensible and he understands that for those sort of injuries it’s not 
career-ending anymore. Once upon a time it would be.

“He’s getting on with things and understands he’ll come back to have a 
fantastic career with an opportunity for all those things he’s missing out on 
now.”

Smith will also have to try and win the League Leaders’ Shield on Friday 
without the Australian half-back Kurt Gidley who has been left out due to a 
hamstring injury. That could mean a recall to the side for the former Hull 
winger Tom Lineham as Smith prepares a major reshuffle of his backline.

The Hull coach Lee Radford has contrasting fortunes on the injury front as he 
is able to call on the services of the experienced forward duo Mark Minichiello 
and Frank Pritchard. The pair missedlast weekend’s victory at Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/mahe-fonua-keeps-hull-fcs-treble-alive-with-late-try-against-wakefield>
 but will return to Radford’s side as Hull aim to finish top of the Super 
League for the first time in the competition’s history
 