
Declan Patton admits he faces a nervous wait to find out if he has done enough 
to fulfil his childhood dream of appearing for his hometown club in aSuper 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> Grand Final this weekend.

Patton, 21, had been largely consigned to reserve grade at Warrington this 
season, but a knee injury to Chris Sandowfollowing the Challenge Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/hull-warrington-challenge-cup-final-match-report>
 defeat against Hull has enabled Patton to form an impressive pairing with Kurt 
Gidley, which has taken Warrington to their first Grand Final in three years 
courtesy ofvictory against St Helens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/warrington-grand-final-st-helens>
 on Thursday night.

Warrington come from behind to beat St Helens and reach Grand Final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/warrington-grand-final-st-helens>
Sandow could yet be fit for the game against Wigan on Saturday as Warrington 
hunt a first Super League title but, even if he is, Patton is hopeful he has 
done enough to be given the nod after helping the Wolveswin the League Leader’s 
Shield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/warrington-hull-league-leaders-shield>
 and reach Old Trafford within the space of a fortnight.

“It’s been a mad couple of weeks,” he said. “It’s been tough for the most part 
this year but to be back in for the important games like this, I’m living the 
dream. You can never be sure if you’ve done enough to stay in the team. I’ve 
tried to give my all, I’ve got a lot to work on but only the boss knows whether 
I’ve done enough.”

At first glance there are not many similarities between Warrington’s new‑look 
half-back pairing: 13 years apart in terms of age and hundreds of games apart 
in terms of career experience, but they will play together in their Grand Final 
if Patton gets the nod from Tony Smith.

Patton admitted the input of Gidley had been vital for his career. “Kurt has 
worked well with Chris all year and it’s been hard to come straight in and do a 
job, but Kurt has been brilliant,” he said.

“We’ve still got a lot to work on, but he’s helping me massively. Playing with 
Kurt has been incredible; he teaches me a lot of stuff you don’t really see.”

Having watched Warrington’s two previous Grand Final appearances – which both 
ended in defeat – as a fan, Patton is conscious of the fact he could have the 
chance to play a part in history if selected.

“You think about it when you’re younger, growing up watching Warrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/warrington> and dreaming of playing in a 
Grand Final,” he said.

“If I keep my place it’ll be a dream come true. We had our under-19s Grand 
Final in 2013 the day after the big one, so we watched on in the hotel: and we 
both got beat by Wigan. It wasn’t a great couple of days. With coming up short 
there a couple of times there not too long ago, we’ll be going there hugely 
determined and desperate to get it over the line.

“I can only imagine what it’s like being involved if I get picked: hopefully 
it happens and Tony gives me the nod.”
 