
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> held “candid” 
talks with Chinese president Xi Jinping on the knottiest disputes between the 
nations, the White House said on Saturday, as the president’s final trip to 
Asia began with a difficult altercation between diplomats at the airport.

The talks ranged across the most sensitive issues between the world’s two 
largest economies: China’s aggressive claims in the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea, hacking and cybersecurity, and 
human rights and religious freedom, among others.

Breakthrough as US and China agree to ratify Paris climate deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
Obama urged Xi to abide by the ruling of an international court against 
China’s claims in the sea – a ruling that Beijingpromptly rejected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 in July. The Hague ruled in favor of claims by the Philippines over the 
territory, where China has been expanding its military andbuilding islands 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/07/30/world/asia/what-china-has-been-building-in-the-south-china-sea.html>
.

They also spoke about cybersecurity, and Obama similarly asked Xi to fulfill 
his obligations in a bilateral deal to protect against hacking between the 
nations. The discussion followed recent hacks pertaining to the US presidential 
election,blamed on Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/29/cozy-bear-fancy-bear-russia-hack-dnc>
, and a national security hack last year, allegedly conducted by Chinese 
operatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/10/chinese-national-security-officials-hack>
.

According to the White House, Xi and Obama agreed to implement a 2015 deal on 
cybersecurity and not “conducting or knowingly supporting cyber-enabled theft 
of intellectual property for commercial gain” – an issue that hasreached the 
campaign trail <https://www.donaldjtrump.com/positions/us-china-trade-reform> 
in the US. They similarly discussed drug trafficking, and the White House 
praised new Chinese efforts againstthe country’s growing market of synthetic 
drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/synthetic-opiates-drug-laws-w-18-fentanyl>
.

After the meeting, Obama described the talks in wary but respectful terms – a 
reflection of US-Chinese relations during his two terms – with many 
disagreements hanging between them.

“What I think we have been able to achieve is a practical and constructive 
effort where our interests intersect,” he said. “We will have candid 
conversations about some of those differences, issues like human rights, or 
cyber or maritime. But our teams have been engaged they have worked very well 
and diligently together.”

The presidents spoke for over three hours and found accord on at least one 
issue: the 2015 global Paris climate deal, to which Obama and Xiformally 
committed the US and China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
 on Saturday.

“Yes, diplomacy can be difficult and progress on the global stage can be 
slow,” Obama said, before insisting that progress was possible. “Some day we 
may see this as the moment when we decided to save our planet.”

The presidents also spoke about human rights and basic freedoms, and despite 
Obama’s praise for American and Chinese diplomats, disagreements over one such 
freedom boiled over before talks even began.

Members of the Chinese delegation objected angrily to the presence of American 
reporters – China hasbroadly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jan/21/press-freedom-body-calls-for-eu-sanctions-against-chinese-media>
censored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/chinese-magazine-challenges-government-censorship-organ>
 the pressfor years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/china-journalism-reporters-freedom-of-speech>
 – and as soon as the reporters who travel with Obama disembarked from Air 
Force One, one Chinese official began shouting demands to White House staff 
that American press be removed from the scene.

 A White House official defended the press’ right to be there, and the Chinese 
official yelled back, “This is our country,” according to the travelling press.

The man then cast his ire at two of Obama’s senior advisers, Ben Rhodes and 
Susan Rice, who only vaguely explained the spat to reporters: “They did things 
that weren’t anticipated.” Arguments continued through security into the 
Chinese state house, and one Chinese official helping the US delegation grew so 
angry that he began to shout at security and some of his colleagues.

“You don’t push people. No one gave you the right to touch or push anyone 
around,” he yelled, according to the travelling press, who said that other 
American and Chinese officials soon intervened.

“Stop, please,” a foreign ministry official pleaded in Chinese. “There are 
reporters here.”

The dispute carried on even over how many reporters could watch the presidents 
go for a garden walk together. A Chinese official tried to limit press 
coverage, saying: “That is our arrangement.” This prompted a White House 
official’s retort: “Your arrangement keeps changing.”

Most of the reporters were kept in a lobby, but two White House press members 
were eventually allowed to watch the leaders walk through a garden. “I don’t 
think the weather will be as good tomorrow as it is today,” Xi said there, 
before changing the topic to tea.
 