
Oxfam’s latest report claims that income inequality has reached a new global 
extreme 
<http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/an-economy-for-the-1-how-privilege-and-power-in-the-economy-drive-extreme-inequ-592643>
, exceeding even its predictions from the previous year. The figures behind 
this claim are striking – just 62 individuals now hold the same wealth as the 
bottom half of humanity, compared with 80 in 2014 and 388 in 2010. It appears 
that not only have the global elite weathered the financial crisis, but their 
fortunes have collectively improved.

We’ve been conned by the rich predators of Davos | Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/19/davos-super-rich-wealth-inequality>
Our objections to inequality, the report notes, are not driven simply by a 
desire to improve our own material standard of living. Rising inequality is one 
of the surest signs of the failure of economic growth to make things better for 
us all. The accompanying decline in the income shares of the bottom 50% since 
2010 suggests that although governments across the world have been quick to 
tout their role in bringing about a global “recovery”, the rewards of that 
recovery have been very selectively spread.

It would be foolish to pretend wealth inequality is a product of the liberal 
capitalism of the past couple of hundred years. Peppered throughout recorded 
history areexamples of exceptional wealth 
<http://time.com/money/3977798/the-10-richest-people-of-all-time/> deriving 
from the spoils of empire and warfare – the Roman emperor Caesar Augustus is 
thought to have controlled the equivalent of $4.6tn – one-fifth of the total 
wealth of the empire. The richest man in history, according to Time magazine 
was Mansa Musa, the king of Timbuktu, who ruled from 1280 to 1337 when his 
kingdom was the biggest producer of gold in the world. His wealth, says Time, 
is beyond calculation: [he was] “richer than anyone could describe”.

Historical figures show how important military and legal force was for wealth 
accumulation, from the lands of Genghis Khan in the 13th century (once the 
largest empire in history), to the Chinese emperor Shenzong, who possessed up 
to 30% of global GDP at the height of his power in the 11th century.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Foxfam-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F18%2F1453129930891%2FKP_1451066_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxfam%20report%20shows%2062%20billionaires%20are%20as%20wealthy%20as%20half%20of%20world%20population%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Foxfam-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxfam%20report%20shows%2062%20billionaires%20are%20as%20wealthy%20as%20half%20of%20world%20population%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Foxfam-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F18%2F1453129930891%2FKP_1451066_crop_640x360.jpg>
Oxfam report shows 62 billionaires are as wealthy as half of world population - 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/18/oxfam-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-video>
Wealth accumulation in noncapitalistic societies was often predicated on 
forced seizure – a process known as “primitive accumulation”. The most famous 
instance was theEnglish enclosure movement 
<http://www.thelandmagazine.org.uk/articles/short-history-enclosure-britain> of 
the 18th and 19th centuries, which paved the way for the expansion of many 
great landed estates.

But is inequality inevitable in human society? In the late 19th century, 
evolutionary anthropologists such asHenry Maine 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Henry-Maine> and Lewis Morgan 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Lewis-Henry-Morgan> suggested that the 
human societies of their time may have evolved from less complex forms of 
clan-based societies into more complex class-based societies.

And in 2009 Elinor Ostrom was awarded the Nobel prize 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/educational/nobelprize_info/ostrom-edu.html> for her 
work on “common-pool” systems – societies in which resources were pooled for 
the good of the community, in ways often at odds with our modern conception of 
private property.

Ostrom’s work demonstrated that, where conditions were favourable, these 
systems, such as fisheries, irrigation systems, common grazing and forests, 
thrived – perhaps better than similar systems maintained through top-down 
organisation. Discussioncontinues today 
<https://dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/contentguidelines> as to whether these forms 
of social organisation were widespread throughout much of human history and 
whether our more “unequal” forms of modern society may have evolved from this 
egalitarian base.

The jury is also very much out on the question of whether human societies have 
always been capitalist. While many argue that certain features of capitalist 
societies were present throughout all of human history (Adam Smith’s famous 
statement on the human propensity to “truck, barter, and trade 
<http://adamsmithslostlegacy.blogspot.co.uk/2008/04/propensity-to-truck-barter-and-exchange.html>
”), the institutions that together make up modern capitalism were not.

In the feudal societies of the Middle Ages for example, the ability of any 
individual to accumulate material wealth was largely constrained by the amount 
of “things” they could reasonably possess. While there wereforms of credit 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b054423q> and developed money systems, there 
were nonetheless some “absolute” limits on what one could physically amass 
(usually depending on direct coercion).

Today the accumulation of wealth does not depend solely on material goods, or 
claims on real assets such as property, means of production such as industrial 
plant and infrastructure – or indeed people (in the US during slave-owning days 
the possession of slaves constituted a sizeable portion of one’s capital).

Inequality isn’t inevitable, it’s engineered. That’s how the 1% have taken 
over | Suzanne Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/19/inequality-inevitable-1-per-cent-growth>
The economist Thomas Piketty points out 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2014/05/economist-explains> 
that much wealth in classical literature seems to derive from rent-generating 
property in the hands of a limited number of people. But today,our fractional 
reserve banking systems 
<http://www.learningmarkets.com/understanding-the-fractional-reserve-banking-system/>
 mean that much of our money supply does not exist in physical form. Paper 
money is just a small portion of a bank’s balance sheet, with liabilities in 
the form of debt constituting much of the remainder.

One of the chief innovations of the last century, and indeed one of the key 
culprits involved in rising inequality identified by Oxfam, is the growth ofan 
industry of tradable intangible assets 
<http://ser.oxfordjournals.org/content/13/3/417> in the form of financial 
instruments. Indeed, deregulation of the financial industry has been one of the 
most significant processes feeding into rising inequality in recent years.

The years after the Great Depression of the 1930s were also ones of regulatory 
reform. TheUS Glass-Steagall Act 
<https://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/banking/glass-steagall-act-explained/> of 1933 
kept commercial and investment banking largely separate, whiletight controls 
were maintained <http://www.univ-paris13.fr/cepn/IMG/pdf/wp2008_09.pdf> on 
foreign transactions in many European countries.

But much of this was swept away during the late 20th century. Before the 
financial crisis, the repackaging of high-risk mortgages and their subsequent 
trading on financial markets offered an ideal opportunity for capital-endowed 
investors to make sizable profits while ultimately hedging the immediate risk 
on to homeowners.

Little is today beyond the reach of investment markets, from mortgages to 
carbon emissions, to speculation on the future performances of companies. 
Whether or not the world has ever been as unequal before, we can at least say 
that the opportunities for wealth accumulation today are radically different 
from those of the past.

Part of the problem in establishing precisely whether the world has ever been 
as unequal is that we simply lack the data. The best estimates derive from the
World Top Incomes study <http://www.wid.world/>, the earliest of which for the 
UK dates to 1918. On this basis at least – where data can be compared between 
countries and where methods of calculation are standardised – we can say that 
things have scarcely been this unequal since before the second world war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fwealth-inequality-unequal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1db9fb22d891665bc8a8b5f3c9f6d79ed0dad428%2F0_0_668_455%2F668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Was%20there%20ever%20a%20time%20when%20so%20few%20people%20controlled%20so%20much%20wealth%3F%20%7C%20Eoin%20Flaherty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fwealth-inequality-unequal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Was%20there%20ever%20a%20time%20when%20so%20few%20people%20controlled%20so%20much%20wealth%3F%20%7C%20Eoin%20Flaherty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fwealth-inequality-unequal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1db9fb22d891665bc8a8b5f3c9f6d79ed0dad428%2F0_0_668_455%2F668.jpg>
 Always on top: fluctuating fortunes of the UK’s super rich. Photograph: World 
Top Incomes Study, Author provided 
But we should not compare on the basis of value alone. After all, we can 
scarcely argue that life under the direct coercion of feudalism, or wealth 
generated through the exploitation of natural resources by colonising empires, 
was much preferable. But a backward glance through human history does confront 
some common myths about the society we inhabit today. Ours is not the only 
historical form of social organisation, nor is the current economic order 
beyond our control.

If we can clearly identify 
<http://www.asanet.org/journals/ASR/Oct12ASRFeature.pdf> how decisions taken by 
governments around taxation or financial regulation, for example, have 
facilitated rising wealth inequality, then we can be ever more certain that 
society has the potential to change this. Knowing the factors that continue to 
drive inequality today – and the myths that claim the world must inevitably be 
this way – means we can also challenge it.

 * Eoin Flaherty is a lecturer in sociology at Queen’s University Belfast. A 
version of this article first appeared onthe Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/was-there-ever-a-time-when-so-few-people-controlled-so-much-wealth-53350>
 