
Watford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> have completed a deal 
for the Belgian defender Christian Kabasele and are also expected to confirm 
the purchase of Nigerian striker Isaac Success for a club record fee of £12.5m.

Kabasele, who is part of Belgium’s squad for Euro 2016, has moved from Genk on 
a five-year deal 
<http://www.watfordfc.com/news/article/2016-17/160701-christian-kabasele-signs-for-watford-fc-from-genk-3163701.aspx>
 for an undisclosed fee.

The 25-year-old played 81 times for Genk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/krc-genk>, scoring seven goals, after 
signing for the Belgian Pro League side in 2014.
Watford FC (@WatfordFC) 
OFFICIAL: Belgian defender Christian Kabasele, 25, joins from Genk. More info: 
https://t.co/JX1HImtqSA <https://t.co/JX1HImtqSA> #watfordfc 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/watfordfc?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/Avlv3SPugY 
<https://t.co/Avlv3SPugY>
 <https://twitter.com/WatfordFC/status/748819934948433920> July 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/WatfordFC/status/748819934948433920> 
Meanwhile, Success, who scored scoring six goals in 30 appearances for Granada 
as they narrowly avoided relegation from La Liga last season, will sign a 
five-year deal at Vicarage Road.

The move was confirmed on Thursday on Granada’s official Twitter feed, with 
the striker expected to provide competition for Troy Deeney and Odion Ighalo – 
the subjectof a £38m offer from Shanghai SIPG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/watford-turn-down-38m-odion-ighalo-shanghai-sipg>
.

“Today is a bittersweet day for me, because through this letter, I want to say 
goodbye to the best fans that you can have, of my colleagues, of all workers in 
the club who have both supported me since I arrived in Granada, in addition to 
this city ​​that has given me everything,” Successwrote in a farewell letter 
<http://www.granadacf.es/noticia/carta-de-despedida-de-isaac-success> to the 
club’s supporters.

“Now I begin another professional stage, which would not have been possible 
without my learning and development in Granada.”

Watford completed the signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/watford-liverpool-agreement-jerome-sinclair-transfer>
 of the former Liverpool striker Jerome Sinclair on Thursday, with their new 
head coach Walter Mazzarri due to start work next week.
 