
Watford have named Giuseppe Sannino as their new head coach just two days after
Gianfranco Zola resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/gianfranco-zola-resigns-watford-manager>
 from the position.

The Italian Sannino, who had been out of work since being sacked by Chievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> in November, revealed on Tuesday 
that he was due to fly to England.

The Hornets have wasted little time in entrusting him with the task of 
replacing the former Italy and Chelsea forward Zola, announcing the appointment 
on their website.

Sannino, 55, has spent 17 years coaching clubs such as Siena, Palermo and 
Verona and brings assistant coaches Francesco Troise, Giovanni Cusatis and 
Paolo De Toffo with him to Vicarage Road.

The Sky Bet Championship club's owners, the Pozzo family, are Italian, and 
Watford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> retained strong links 
with the country during Zola's tenure, loaning a host of players from the Serie 
A club Udinese last season.

The former Chelsea striker Zola revealed on Monday that he would be stepping 
down from his position after a run of nine matches without a win left Watford 
13th in the table.

That poor sequence put the Hornets eight points adrift of the top six during a 
season where they were expected to challenge for promotion following last 
term's play-off final defeat to Crystal Palace at Wembley.

In an open letter addressed to Hornets supporters, Zola said: "I feel that it 
is in the best interests of the team that somebody new is given the chance to 
bring the success which we have all hoped for and worked very hard for.

"It is for a variety of reasons, and not just over one matter or one moment, 
that I feel this is the right decision for me, in the best interests of the 
club â€“ and I know I can trust you, the supporters, to respect my decision 
fully."

Sannino was quickly installed as the favourite to succeed Zola and the new 
manager will take charge of his first game on Saturday for the trip to Ipswich 
before Watford close out the year with two home games against Millwall and 
Queens Park Rangers.
 