
Watford have completed the signing of the Spanish international midfielder 
Mario Suárez fromFiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina>. 
The 28-year-old has signed a four-and-a-half-year deal at Vicarage Road and 
joins for an undisclosed fee, understood to be around £4m.

The transfer was confirmed on the club’s website after Watford had progressed 
into the fifth round of the FA Cup with a1-0 win at Nottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/nottingham-forest-watford-fa-cup-match-report>
.

Watford’s Odion Ighalo strikes late to end Nottingham Forest Cup dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/nottingham-forest-watford-fa-cup-match-report>
Suárez started his career at Atlético Madrid before loan spells at Real 
Valladolid and Celta Vigo, and completed a permanent switch to Real Mallorca in 
2008. He made 64 appearances for Mallorca before returning to Atlético two 
years later in a deal worth €1.8m.

Back in Madrid, where he spent one season under the current Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> manager, Quique Sánchez Flores, 
Suárez played 180 games in five years and won La Liga, the Europa League and 
the Copa del Rey. Suárez joined Fiorentina last July where he made 13 
appearances, scoring one goal.

“I am very happy to be here because it is a dream come true to play in the 
Premier League,” Suárez told the official club website. “I am very excited with 
the project of the club, to be trained again by Quique and to start playing for 
Watford.”

Flores said on Thursday that Suárez’s imminent arrival was a statement of 
intent by Watford, who lie 10th in the Premier League with 32 points from 23 
games following their promotion from the Championship last season.

“I think the amazing news for Watford is that we have the possibility to 
convince players to come here,” Flores said. “It means Watford is improving a 
lot in the last years. The players are really clever and they have a lot of 
information.

“Before they come to Watford they know everything – the owner, the players, 
the squad, the staff, the fans – so, when they decide ‘OK, I want to go to 
Watford’ it is because the conditions are really good. There are a lot of teams 
in the Premier League with a lot of history so if they decide to come here it 
is amazing for us.”
 