
Wayne Bennett, the England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-rugby-league-team> coach, is keen 
for his club side Brisbane to be involved in the World Club Series, saying the 
Broncos would be fully behind coming to England to play in the tournament 
despite growing discontent from rival NRL clubs about the concept.

A number of Australian sides, including this year’s Grand Final runners-up 
Melbourne Storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/rugby-league-melbourne-storm-world-club-series-2017-nrl>
, have said they will not come to England and play in next year’s series, with 
the Storm in particular against the idea of participating in what they consider 
to be nothing more than a friendly against Super League opposition as part of 
the expanded competition.

Wigan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wiganwarriors> will still face 
Cronulla Sharks in the World Club Challenge in the annual battle of the sport’s 
two major champions, and initially, it had looked like the format would revert 
back to the traditional one-game event.

However, Bennett said if Brisbane were invited, they would happily take part. 
“We would be keen to travel,” he said. “I spoke to Nigel [Wood, the RFL chief 
executive] on Monday night and told him that the whole concept has got the 
club’s backing.

“We love coming over, we’ve enjoyed it in the last couple of years as a club 
and we’re also trying to host one here in the pre-season. But if that doesn’t 
come to fruition and there’s a vacancy to come over to England we will 
certainly go.

“The other clubs have all got their reasons I’m sure but we don’t find it 
interferes with our season really.

“ We’ve played in a Grand Final, gone for the World Club Series and started 
the following year well, so I can’t find a fault with it.”

The series, which is expected to run for a third season as planned in 2017, 
could yet see a Super League side – likely to be Hull or Warrington – travel to 
Australia and take onNRL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nrl> opposition.

Bennett, speaking from his Brisbane base before his arrival in England later 
this week for theFour Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations>, 
also revealedSam Burgess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-burgess> is one 
of two contenders to become his first captain of England.

He is on the hunt for a new captain after the current captain, Wigan’s Sean 
O’Loughlin, was not considered for the tournament because of injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/jonny-lomax-wayne-bennett-england-rugby-league-squad>
.

Bennett, who has worked with Burgess in the past, said the 27-year-old will be 
in the running following his return to the 13-man code from his controversial 
spell in rugby union with Bath last year.

“The captain will be one of two players: James Graham and Sam Burgess,” he 
said. “They’re the two in the category when it comes to the leading contenders 
but I want to talk to the RFL chairman [Brian Barwick] and Nigel when I arrive 
this weekend to see who it will be. I want to hold off and see their view on 
that before I decide who it is. But they’re certainly the two leading 
contenders.”

Media speculation in Australia had suggested Bennett was considering picking a 
number of Australian-born players for theFour Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/four-nations>. Although there were no such 
inclusions in his final 24-man squad, Bennett said he would have no issue with 
doing so if he felt they were the right people for the job.

“I was considering any player that was eligible for England, whether they were 
Australian-born, Australian-based or English,” he said. “The speculation didn’t 
faze me in any way but it got out of control here: it was purely media-driven 
in Australia. At the time I said nothing about it but I’ll pick the best 24 
players to play for England in my opinion. If they happened to be 
Australian-born, I would have stood by that.”

Bennett also revealed he is interested in England travelling to the southern 
hemisphere to take part in the growing mid-season round of international 
fixtures next year. Alongside the traditional Anzac Test between Australia and 
New Zealand, Samoa and Fiji also break from league action to play fixtures and 
he said it would be encouraging if England could be involved as his plans for 
next year’s World Cup gather pace.

“There’s an opportunity for England to come and be a part of that,” he said. 
We’ve got a great opportunity where we can play more Test matches – it’s not 
going to be perfect but we can play more international games.”

The RFL will confirm its new sponsor for Super League on Wednesday, with 
bookmaker Betfred understood to be taking over from First Utility. The 
governing body will also confirm the long-awaited replacement for Blake Solly 
as the Super League general manager on Thursday, with an external appointment 
expected.
 