
Wayne Coyne of the Flaming Lips has said that Kesha’s fear of the producer Dr 
Luke prompted her to cancel a proposed collaboration with the band. Kesha sued 
Dr Luke – real name Lukasz Sebastian Gottwald – forsexual and physical assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/15/kesha-pop-music-history-svengalis>
 this month, but Coyne claims he saw evidence of the friction between the pop 
star and her svengali more than a year ago.

“The stuff that [the Lips and Kesha] did together was just spectacular,” Coyne 
told Radio.com 
<http://radio.com/2014/10/22/wayne-coyne-kesha-project-dr-luke-abuse-claims-interview/>
. “I think we did like four or five songs, and then Kesha would remind me, 
‘Wayne, I can’t put this music out. Dr Luke will kill me.’ I was like, ‘Oh! I 
didn’t know!’”

At the height of their collaboration, in early 2013, Coyne was unabashed in 
his enthusiasm. “[Kesha’s] funny, she’s humble. She’s badass,” he said in a
Reddit AMA 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/1blwsv/iam_wayne_coyne_from_the_band_the_flaming_lips_ama/>
. Following a one-song team-up on the Lips’Heady Fwends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/26/flaming-lips-heady-fwends-review>
 compilation, the artists were allegedly working on a full-length album called 
Lip$ha. “We just went to her house, and it was just her and us,” Coyne 
recalled. “There wasn’t anybody else there, there wasn’t anybody telling us 
what to do. It was our songs, and we recorded until about four in the morning, 
and then we went home.”

“I don’t know Dr Luke at all, but when [Kesha and I] speak, I [know] there 
[was] some anxiety about their relationship,” he went on. “I think she would 
like to have the freedom to do more things in that spirit ... Where it’s not 
producers producing her.”

Coyne still hopes the Lip$ha material will see the light of day, even “if it 
takes five years to come out”.Kesha <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kesha> 
just needs to become “the king of her own destiny”, as Miley Cyrus has been 
able to do. “I don’t really know the situation – only they do – [but] I hope it 
works out,” he said.

Dr Luke has filed a countersuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/15/kesha-pop-music-history-svengalis>
 following Kesha’s allegations, calling her claims an “outrageous fiction that 
will go down in flames”. On 21 October, the producer’s lawyers produced a 
deposition from 2011, in which Kesha swore that he “never made sexual advances 
at me”. “Unfortunately, protecting abusers out of fear happens all too often 
with battered women,” the singer’s lawyers replied. “[Luke] threatened to 
destroy Kesha’s life and the lives of her family if she didn’t cover up his 
sexual assaults.”

The court case continues.
 