
Twenty-eight years ago, the Dalai Lama asked composer Philip Glass to 
inaugurate a cultural centre in New York. The result was theTibet House 
<http://tibethouse.us/>, dedicated to preserving the country’s unique culture. 
It also subsequently kicked off a series of annual benefit concerts; the 
latest, the 25th, takes place on 5 March at Carnegie Hall.

“Philip Glass and Laurie Anderson  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/13/laurie-anderson-landfall>are 
there, and the house band is Patti Smith’s backing band. That’s pretty 
overwhelming and pretty exciting,” said Wayne Coyne, whose band the Flaming 
Lips will be playing. “Just those three elements alone were enough for us to 
get excited.”

Glass has curated the show from its inaugural night in 1980: “We began very 
simply withSpalding Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/dec/26/1>, 
Laurie Anderson, Allen Ginsberg and myself.” Since then, it has evolved into a 
must-see event with artists of all stripes teaming up. Last year’s show brought 
together Iggy Pop and New Order to perform Joy Division’s Love Will Tear Us 
Apart.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVf2l9fujhco&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVf2l9fujhco>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVf2l9fujhco&media=>
This year’s line-up promises equally jaw-dropping moments with the Flaming 
Lips on a roster that includes New York legends Debbie Harry, Patti Smith and 
Anderson. Also on the roster are celebrated Tibetan musicianTenzin Choegyal 
<http://www.tenzinchoegyal.com/>, country hotshot Sturgill Simpson 
<http://sturgillsimpson.com/>, and Canadian roots musician Ashley MacIsaac 
<http://www.ashleymacisaac.com/>. “Of course, I’ll be there playing, too,” said 
Glass.

Chuck Close, Maggie Gyllenhaal, Peter Sarsgaard, Uma Thurman and Arden Wohl 
are the evening’s honorary chairs, tasked with bringing in talent and money. 
“It’s an impressive list,” notes Glass. “This is a benefit concert, so no one 
gets paid, not even the organisers. But we have a great list of alumni and a 
lot of them want to come back.”

“We did it in 2011,” said Coyne, “and once we did we sort of fell in love with 
Philip Glass and his charming, loving way. We loved being in the presence of 
the sort of family of people that do those events.” So when Glass called about 
this year’s concert, the Flaming Lips were in. Coyne is putting out feelers to 
artists likePhantogram’s Juliana Barwick  <http://www.juliannabarwick.com/>to 
perform with them. “We might want to doShe’s Leaving Home 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vc1OlLAMWDI>, a song by the Beatles that came 
out on this Sgt. Pepper’s remix last year.” Coyne might even see if his 
occasional collaborator Miley Cyrus 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1690824/wayne-coyne-miley-cyrus-did-all-the-drugs-and-made-this-nsfw-movie-with-moby/video/>
 is around. “She might come. I wouldn’t want to say yes or no,” said Coyne. 
“She has three or four charities that she’s the head of and she has events she 
has to do for them. She’s already recording music and doing a thousand things, 
but if she’s in New York, yeah, maybe.”

If Cyrus does make an appearance, she will join alumni including Lou Reed, 
Michael Stipe, the National, Vampire Weekend and many more artists who have 
played the concert to help raise awareness for the plight of Tibetans whose 
culture has been at risk of extinction. “When I was in India in 1966, there 
were 200,000 Tibetans living in tents, scattered around,” said Glass. “That was 
the beginning. Those of us who knew about it took up the cause. Frankly a lot 
of people didn’t know what Tibet was. No one knew there was a military invasion.
Tibet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tibet> House was one of the ways that 
we could raise awareness of the independent Tibetan people and culture. Now, it 
serves as a cultural base for Tibetans living abroad.”

As the Tibetan community in the United States, and around the world, has 
become more established, the concert has evolved. “We’ve done so many concerts, 
that it’s become a kind of annual event for people to get together and make 
music. It’s become part of the annual events that make up New York,” said Glass.

“Part of what’s fun and appealing about it – and also stressful – is that it’s 
a performance and you get nervous when you get around these big artists,” said 
Coyne. “Laurie Anderson is someone you’ve known about your whole life and I’ve 
never been in the room the same time she’s been in the room. Playing with 
Philip last time, well, he’s just a unique musician. You’ve only practised a 
few times together, so it’s nerve-racking! As a musician, you want it to be 
good, but you never know until you’re in it.”

 * The Tibet House concert is at Carnegie Hall, New York, on 5 March. Details 
here 
<https://www.carnegiehall.org/SiteCode/Purchase/SYOS/SeatSelection.aspx?startWorkflow=true&quickBuy=false&quantity=0&eventId=22102> 