
Of course we should be building starter homes for first-time buyers. A number 
of us in the House of Lords were fiercely opposed to the government’s 
multibillion-pound programme of discounted starter homes for sale being 
delivered at the expense of affordable homes for rent. But we were in favour of 
help for first-time buyers as an additional strand in the quest to build a 
million new homes over the course of this parliament.

Now the all-party parliamentary Group (APPG) on housing and care for older 
peoplehas called  
<http://www.housinglin.org.uk/Topics/browse/Design_building/HAPPI/?&msg=0&parent=8649&child=10165>
for the government to turn its attention to promoting new housebuilding for 
older people. As well as starter homes, the UK needs “later homes”. Not least 
because those who “right-size” – move into the right-sized property for their 
household’s needs – free up family homes for the next generation. Building 
homes that are tailor-made for older people – easy to manage, with space and 
light, fully accessible and in the right location – meets the requirements of 
two households, one older, one younger.

Our report, Housing our ageing population: positive ideas 
<http://www.housinglin.org.uk/Topics/browse/Design_building/HAPPI/?&msg=0&parent=8649&child=10165>
 
<http://www.housinglin.org.uk/Topics/browse/Design_building/HAPPI/?&msg=0&parent=8649&child=10165>
– brought together for us by theHousing Learning and Improvement Network 
<http://www.housinglin.org.uk/> – points out that the government gets multiple 
benefits from enabling older people to enjoy better health and wellbeing in new 
homes. These include significant savings in NHS and social care spending. And 
those who have moved into age-exclusive, attractive new homes talk not just of 
the savings in outgoings – and often the release of cash to spend on other 
things – but the social life that banishes loneliness too.

Better housing can help tackle the crisis of loneliness in older people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/may/05/housing-crisis-loneliness-older-people-isolation-transport>
So why is the UK so different from the US and most other European countries in 
terms of its housing output for those of us in our extended middle age? Why are 
we averse to moving until a health crisis forces us out when an earlier move 
could ensure our independence, in a place of our choosing, for the rest of our 
days?

For many, there are emotional attachments to a family home and its 
neighbourhood. But the APPG discovered that eight million people over the age 
of 60, living in seven million homes, were interested in downsizing if the 
right home was available. The problem is that with all the emphasis on young 
buyers, housebuilders are just not building for this huge market.

Our recommendations


Our report sets out a number of ideas about how all the stakeholders involved 
could get us to that tipping point when moving home later in life becomes the 
norm.

We want our housing minister to take the lead in securing support across 
government to boost output of housebuilding for older people. We recommend 
stamp duty exemption for those over pension age who right-size. The incentive 
for the Treasury is that each such purchase would triggers a chain of three 
moves that would stimulate the wider economy.


We advocate an extension of the help-to-buy scheme, currently only available 
to the young, to help those buying new property in older age. We also call for 
the Department for Work and Pensions to ensure its policies for capping housing 
benefit do not deter investment in extra care and specialist housing for older 
people. And we want local authorities to ensure their local plans recognise the 
changing demographic of their areas and prioritise housebuilding for this age 
group.

As well as a recommendations for housebuilders, developers and housing 
associations, our report urges all of us to reimagine life as we grow older, 
considering our future needs in a positive light. Right-sizing can help us gain 
the most in our later years and we need to insist – not just for ourselves but 
for our children and grandchildren – that barriers are lifted and opportunities 
enhanced for a national programme of later homes.


Lord Best is a crossbench peer and chair of the APPG on housing and care for 
older people. He was president of the Local Government Association from 2007-16.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
 