
Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> is about so much more 
than having a roof over your head. A decent home means having somewhere to feel 
safe and secure, somewhere warm and dry that improves health rather than 
compromising it, an environment where children can focus on learning to help 
them get on in the future.

The Welsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government> is committed 
to making this a reality for everybody. That is why the first minister has 
announced that we will introduce a bill to abolish the right to buy within the 
next year.

The introduction of the right-to-buy policy in 1981 has led to Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> losing more than 138,000 of its social 
housing stock. That represents a 45% reduction and forces many vulnerable 
people to wait longer for a home. In addition, the Welsh government is 
committed to continue investing £100m every year to ensure our homes are safe, 
warm and energy efficient and I do not want this investment lost to the private 
sector. Decisive action is needed to protect our social housing to make sure it 
is available for those who need it most.

Only one in 10 homes sold under right to buy are replaced in England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/24/right-to-buy-homes-sold-england-councils>
Some may see our plans as stifling social mobility. This is not our intention. 
Not everyone can take advantage of the private housing markets and many 
families, including the vulnerable, depend on us to provide a safe, secure and 
affordable home. Research indicates a significant number of homes bought under 
the right-to-buy scheme have ended up in the private rented sector, which 
usually costs local people more to rent and costs the public purse more in 
terms of higher housing benefit.

We know our supply of homes is under considerable pressure and we have already 
committed to providing a total of 20,000 additional affordable homes during 
this term of government. It’s clear that joint working with partners such as 
registered social landlords, local authorities and housebuilders is essential, 
as is freeing up land sites for development for all tenures of housing.

Of course, it’s not just about the numbers but also the type of new homes we 
build. We have to ensure they meet current needs but also those we may face in 
future – an ageing population, increasing pressures on health and social care, 
our changing climate, increasing fuel poverty and the need to meet carbon 
reduction targets.

Plans to end right to buy are accompanied by action to help home ownership 
through schemes such as help to buy, which do not reduce the social housing 
stock. We are investing up to £290m in a second phase of the shared equity loan 
scheme, which will aim to support the construction of more than 6,000 
additional new homes by 2021, significantly boosting Wales’ building industry 
and making home ownership achievable for thousands more families.

These ownership schemes are doing an excellent job of helping people to get on 
the property ladder, but while owning a home is the aim for many, my priority 
is ensuring everybody in Wales has a decent place to call home and access to 
all the opportunities that brings.

Carl Sargeant is the cabinet secretary for Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Children in Wales.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you every 
Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>

 