
Our older applications on Windows, Blackberry 10, and older versions of iOS 
and Android no longer work.

If you’re using a 1.x or 2.x version of these apps please upgrade to our newer 
apps (Windows <https://www.microsoft.com/store/apps/9wzdncrfj2pr>, Android 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.guardian&hl=en_GB>, iOS 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/the-guardian/id409128287?mt=8>), or use our 
fully mobile-optimised website to continue to enjoy the Guardian on your phone.

How do I upgrade my app?

If you’re running any of the operating systems below, you can upgrade now:

 * Windows 10: Upgrade to our new app in the Windows Store 
<https://www.microsoft.com/store/apps/9wzdncrfj2pr>.

 * Android 4 and above: get the app in Google Play 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.guardian&hl=en_GB>.

 * iOS8 and above: download from the Apple App Store 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/the-guardian/id409128287?mt=8>.

What if I can’t upgrade my app?

If you are on an older operating system, or running Blackberry 10, then please 
start to use our fully-optimised site:www.theguardian.com 
<http://theguardian.com>. You can easily add it to your homepage for fast 
access. This offers a richer, better, and more reliable experience than our old 
apps.

Why have you done this?

Our old apps were released a long time ago (in technology terms) and our 
expectations, and the expectations of our readers, have substantially evolved. 
These apps could-not deliver the varied experiences, interactive content, 
modern designs or, critically, reliable operation that we expect from all of 
our products.

In addition, our old apps were built on older technology that could not be 
upgraded or maintained. At some point they would fail, and we wanted to close 
them in an orderly way and, more importantly, make it clear to readers in 
advance about how to continue to enjoy Guardian journalism.

Lastly, our newer apps and website offer a better and more reliable 
experience. They support new interactive editorial formats likeThe Minute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2016/feb/01/the-campaign-minute-your-daily-dose-of-election-insight>
 -our new experimental mobile briefing, give a better overview of the news, and 
have more advanced features that allow you to follow your favourite writers and 
series and get instant updates on stories you care about. In addition, they’re 
universally responsive and work across all screen-sizes, so whether you visit 
theguardian.com on an HTC Desire, or our app on an iPad, the experience will 
always be great. We believe that they are the best way to discover and read our 
content.

How can I change the new apps to suit my needs?

There are a number of ways you can personalise the newer Guardian app to suit 
you. This includes making the homepage more of a list like the old apps (
settings> edit homepage > condensed layout) , changing the sections and topics 
you see when you start, customising which notifications you receive, or 
changing the text-size to make your reading experience better.

I still have a subscription: what should I do?

Please contact userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>

Feedback

We always value your feedback, so please email us at 
apps.feedback@theguardian.com <mailto:apps.feedback@theguardian.com>, or tweet 
us@guardianMobile <https://twitter.com/guardianmobile> 
 