
As a “delicate” child, it was deemed by my elders that I should go to “
special” school. I wasn’t disabled and had my own way of managing the world. I 
could climb steps, ride a bike and even run in short bursts. But off I went on 
the “special” school bus, to the Hangerswood School for the Physically and 
Mentally Handicapped. A 20-mile journey with other kids, who I assumed were 
delicate – and “handicapped”.

On the school minibus, I had my first experience of abusive language. The 
helper wore lots of make up, and she’d call us spastics or variations on that 
theme, a cigarette always hanging between her heavy red lips. The driver 
constantly adjusted his trousers, and liked to slap the helper on the bottom. 
He announced every day, “how’s all my little handicaps this morning?”

There didn’t seem to be a language that reflected my own reality as a disabled 
teenager

UK Disability History Month (UKDHM) launches today, and its theme is language 
and disability. As mentioned onthe UKDHM website <http://ukdhm.org/>, 
“handicapped” is no longer an acceptable label. The word, which means to have 
an imposed disadvantage, has different suspected origins. The worst of these is 
the concept of “cap in hand”, the notion that sinners, especially disabled 
people, must beg to survive.

My childhood was plagued with the notion that I was an “invalid” because I was 
delicate: definition – easily broken. I had no internal sense of being easily 
broken, or what that meant as I trembled through a difficult adolescence, 
hugging to my heart an obsession with my own words.

This was also the era of “flid”. The word related to thalidomide, as in people 
living with birth defects as a result of their mother taking the drug during 
pregnancy. There was also the expression “having an eppy”, which would come 
with the mimicking of “flid” hands and a “retard” face, to mock a person with 
learning difficulties.

In among all this ugly language, two things happened to me. Firstly, anger 
found a happy outlet as I grew to understand feminism and socialism. Secondly, 
and not so happily, I split myself off from the idea of a disabled identity. 
This highlights to me now one of the most damaging impacts of negative language.

Growing up against a backdrop of disempowering terminology, why on earth would 
I have wished to identify with people who were referred to as “crippled 
spastics”?

I condemned myself by denying part of who I was – because there didn’t seem to 
be a language that reflected my own reality as a disabled teenager. In no sense 
did my identity connect to any of the labels I knew or which were given. At age 
18, living with my mother in rural Buckinghamshire, I was still called “flid” 
and “spaz”. Patted on the head and patronised, occasionally spat at, especially 
once I became a wheelchair user.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fits-time-to-stop-calling-disabled-people-inspirational-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20time%20to%20stop%20calling%20disabled%20people%20'inspirational'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fits-time-to-stop-calling-disabled-people-inspirational-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20time%20to%20stop%20calling%20disabled%20people%20%27inspirational%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fits-time-to-stop-calling-disabled-people-inspirational-video&media=>
It’s time to stop calling disabled people ‘inspirational’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/sep/07/its-time-to-stop-calling-disabled-people-inspirational-video>
Sociologists write extensively about difference, and the idea that “the other” 
prompts fear, exclusion and even aggression. But I stopped caring as much in 
1976 whenthe Sex Pistols said “fuck” to Bill Grundy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1976/dec/03/greatinterviews>. The 
rebel in me awoke and I finally met other disabled artists who were interested 
in words and language, including my own. From the early 1980s, disability arts 
started a quiet revolution and others joined the party, which still goes on 
today.

Our society remains jittery today over the question of whether to use the 
phrase “disabled people” or “people with disabilities”. In the UK we lean 
towards “disabled people”. Under the social model of disability – the 
barriers/rights approach – disabled people see themselves as those who 
experience barriers within society. We fight against the disabling features of 
everyday life that are imposed on us – specific barriers to travel, say, or 
communication – and realise that the impaired functioning of our minds, bodies 
and senses is a separate issue. “People with disabilities” is a phrase often 
used by those who understandably want their humanity to be seen first, who 
don’t want be condemned by their impairment. The debates go on. For me however, 
I am now happy to call myself and to be called a disabled person, which puts me 
in the company of some fine comrades and allies sharing a fight to dismantle 
the disabling society.

Does this government want to punish us for being disabled? | Jane Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/government-punish-us-disabled-disability-cuts>
I believe language brings personal power and magic. Writing is my living and 
my passion. These days, disabled writers, activists and academics attempt to 
influence the forthcoming generations, fighting off the argument from the right 
that this is “political correctness gone mad”, the outlook that “an imbecile is 
an imbecile dammit”.

You’d have to be on another planet not to know that words such as retard, 
psycho and cripple are offensive on a par with the “n” word. Although this 
raises the interesting point of language reclamation. I often call myself a 
crip when I’m among other crips, and I use it comfortably. In December, for 
UKDHM, I’ll be performing with actorLiz Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jun/21/disability.socialcare> and 
others at a cabaret event we’re calling “the criptastic event of the year!” In 
the process, we’ll subvert every word, label and stereotype we can.

• Penny Pepper is performing in Return to the Workhouse Cabaret 
<http://chatspalace.com/events/return-workhouse-cabaret/>, on Saturday 3 
December, at Chats Palace in Hackney
 