
The new site has been conceived to give you, our readers and collaborators, 
the best possible ways to discover, engage with and share our stories.


 We have started with the basics: we want to provide you with a delightful 
reading and viewing experience, no matter which device you are using.

More than half of our traffic in Australia now comes from people using mobile 
devices, and so we want the act of reading or viewing the Guardian’s journalism 
to be consistent, familiar and pleasurable regardless of the size of screen 
being used.

We want to make it compelling for you to engage with our journalism, to 
discuss with us, share it with others and then to easily find more articles, 
videos, live blogs, interactives or photo galleries that are relevant to you.

Emily Wilson, the editor-in-chief of Guardian Australia says: “We’ve just 
moved up to number six in Australia’s Nielsen Online Ratings of news sites and 
we’ve also just hired a new bunch of first-class reporters. We now have three 
bureaux, and reporters in six states and territories. Our aim is provide a 
world-class national and international news service to Australia, and the new 
site is going to help us do that.”

Around a third of all visits to the Guardian contain a view of the homepage 
<http://theguardian.com/au> which is why we also spent many months completely 
rethinking the function and design of our homepage and of our section 
homepages, such asopinion <https://www.theguardian.com/au/commentisfree> or 
economy <https://www.theguardian.com/au/business>.

From studying how our readers are using our site every day, we realised that 
the Guardian’s homepage has to fulfil two main functions at once: It has to 
make it very easy for you to quickly scan the current news agenda and it has to 
provide you with intuitive ways of discovering the enormous breadth and depth 
of our award-winning journalism from Australia and around the world.

News website homepages are often not structured in ways that would cater to 
typical user journeys, but they rather mirror the internal organisation of a 
newsroom into sections and departments.

After many months of talking to our readers and after studying what was really 
happening on our beta homepage each day, we decided to take a very different 
route and have created a new set of building blocks which we call ‘containers’.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2F-sp-new-website-guardian-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1416977901079%2F453097f5-96f3-4d3a-9276-4d7385467024-2060x670.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20new%20Guardian%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2F-sp-new-website-guardian-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20new%20Guardian%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2F-sp-new-website-guardian-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1416977901079%2F453097f5-96f3-4d3a-9276-4d7385467024-2060x670.jpeg>
 The opinion and analysis container on the Australia news page. Photograph: 
theguardian.com 
The homepages and each article page are made up of various such containers. 
These do exactly what their slightly technical name suggests. They ‘contain’ 
words, pictures, videos, graphics and data. Our editors can group them together 
flexibly and within minutes by topic, by story type, by tone or by importance.

So instead of building one big page according to a rigid template - news here, 
features there, big picture, little picture and so on - our editors can create 
modular homepages and article pages to create a representation of what is 
important each and every day. And within each container, our editors can easily 
assign different levels of visual volume and different styles to each story.

Our new homepage also gives you new visual clues about the relative importance 
that each story has and about the tone of a story: A new and easy to learn 
colour scheme indicates whether you are about to click on a news story, on an 
opinion piece, a feature, a review or a piece of analysis.

Containers can move and flow through the page as the news agenda shifts. They 
can highlight breaking news, present a multi-part investigation or guide you 
towards a new columnist we’d like to introduce you to, an enticing image 
gallery or an entertaining video. They bring our editorial voices to life in 
more ways than ever before.

On our opinion homepage, we will also curate the best opinion journalism of 
other Australian and international publications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/au/commentisfree#what-we're-reading> for you each 
day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2F-sp-new-website-guardian-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417034552560%2F5224ef1d-cf3e-4bf5-ae41-88bd4915e58a-2060x259.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20new%20Guardian%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2F-sp-new-website-guardian-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20new%20Guardian%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2F-sp-new-website-guardian-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417034552560%2F5224ef1d-cf3e-4bf5-ae41-88bd4915e58a-2060x259.jpeg>
 The container model allows us to aggregate journalism from other organisations 
Photograph: theguardian.com 
Our editors can also take any container from a homepage and make it part of an 
article page so that it can enhance your reading experience there.

A host of new design features have been included in the redesign: from new 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2014/nov/26/chris-bowen-budget-video>
 andgallery pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2014/nov/25/ferguson-the-day-after-protest-in-pictures>
, new-looklive blogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2014/nov/26/tony-abbott-under-pressure-to-dump-defence-minister-politics-live>
 that balance at-a-glance summaries with constant updates and comments, to a 
new type and a new iconography.
 Our site offers new ways to engage with our journalism. 
The navigation bar at the top and bottom is now consistent across the site, 
making it easier to learn and find the Guardian’s different sections. When you 
click the ‘all sections’ menu at the top right of this page, you can see all of 
the Guardian’s sections and all their sub-sections in one joint view.


While designing and building the new Guardian site, we have shown the beta 
version to around 5% of our total desktop audience andasked them for their 
thoughts <https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/theguardian-au-edition-feedback> and 
opinions.

We’re immensely grateful for the now more than 40,000 comments we have 
received during this beta phase, whether in person through testing sessions, 
through online user surveys, or comments posted in our discussion threads and 
via social media.

We’ve listened to what you’ve had to say – and we’ve developed the site with 
your thoughts and input front of mind. If you are interested in the main themes 
that emerged from your comments, we have createdthis summary of user feedback 
for you <http://next.theguardian.com/blog/your-feedback-answered/>. 

Of course we can’t please everyone. But we hope, over time, all our readers 
will appreciate the changes we’ve made and understand the reasons why we’ve 
made them: to offer you the best possible experience of Guardian journalism and 
to deepen our relationship with you, our readers.

This launch isn’t the end of our journey, it’s just the beginning and our team 
of in-house designers, journalists, engineers and developers can’t wait to add 
more functions over the coming months. In fact, we will keep adding changes 
every day and will continue toask you for your feedback 
<https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/theguardian-au-edition-feedback>. 
 