
Built with our journalism at its heart, the new Guardian website has been 
conceived to give you, our readers and collaborators, the best possible way of 
discovering, engaging with, and sharing our stories.

We have started with the basics: we want to provide you with a delightful 
reading and viewing experience, no matter which device you are using.

About half of our traffic now comes from people using mobile devices, and so 
we want the act of reading or viewing the Guardian’s journalism to be 
consistent, familiar and pleasurable regardless of the size of screen being 
used.
 Our site offers new ways to engage with our journalism. 
We want to make it compelling for you to engage with our journalism, to 
discuss with us, share it with others and then to easily find more articles, 
videos, live blogs, interactives or photo galleries that are relevant to you.

Globally, around a third of all visits to the Guardian contain a view of the 
homepage which is why we also spent many months on completely rethinking the 
function and design of ourhomepage <https://www.theguardian.com/us>, and of our 
section homepages such asopinion <https://www.theguardian.com/us/commentisfree> 
ortechnology <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/technology>. 

From studying how our readers are using our site every day, we realised that 
the Guardian’s homepage has to fulfil two main functions at once: it has to 
make it very easy for you to quickly scan the current news agenda and it has to 
provide you with intuitive ways of discovering the enormous breadth and depth 
of our award-winning journalism from around the world and across a wide range 
of topics and authors.

Homepages of news sites often are not structured in ways that would cater to 
typical user journeys, but rather they mirror the internal organisation of a 
newsroom into sections and departments.

After many months of interviewing our readers and after studying what was 
really happening on our homepages each day, we decided to take a very different 
route and have created a new set of building blocks which we call “containers”.

Each homepage and each article page is made up of various such containers 
<http://next.theguardian.com/blog/container-model-blended-content/>. These do 
exactly what their rather technical name suggests. They ‘contain’ words, 
pictures, videos, graphics and data. Our editors can group them together 
flexibly and within minutes by topic, by story type, by tone or by importance.

So instead of building a page according to a rigid template - news here, 
features there, big picture, little picture and so on - our editors can use 
flexible containers to build a representation of what is important about each 
and every day. And within each container, our editors can easily assign 
different levels of visual volume and different styles to each story.
 The opinion ‘container’ on the Guardian website 
Our new homepage also gives you new visual clues about the relative importance 
that each story has and about the tone of a story: a new and easy to learn 
colour scheme indicates whether you are about to click on a news story, an 
opinion piece, a feature, a review or a piece of analysis.

Containers can move and flow through the page as the news agenda shifts. They 
can highlight breaking news, present a multi-part investigation or guide you 
towards a new columnist we’d like to introduce you to, an enticing image 
gallery or an entertaining video. They bring our editorial voices to life in 
more ways than ever before.

Our editors can also take any container from a homepage and make it part of an 
article page so that it can enhance your reading experience.

Many new design features have been included in the redesign: from new video 
<http://next.theguardian.com/blog/video-redesign/> and gallery 
<http://next.theguardian.com/blog/gallery-redesign/> pages, new-look live blogs 
<http://next.theguardian.com/blog/liveblog-redesign/> that balance at-a-glance 
summaries with constant updates, to a new typeface and a new iconography.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Foct%2F29%2F-sp-welcome-to-the-new-guardian-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414551862528%2Ffceed724-241a-4e91-ac55-05dbb19abc44-1020x784.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20new%20Guardian%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Foct%2F29%2F-sp-welcome-to-the-new-guardian-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20new%20Guardian%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhelp%2Finsideguardian%2F2014%2Foct%2F29%2F-sp-welcome-to-the-new-guardian-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414551862528%2Ffceed724-241a-4e91-ac55-05dbb19abc44-1020x784.png>
 Our new-look galleries 
The navigation bar at the top and bottom is now consistent across the site, 
making it easier to learn and find the Guardian’s different sections. When you 
click the “all sections” menu at the top right of this page, you can see all of 
the Guardian’s sections and all their sub-sections in one joint view.

We’re immensely grateful for the 26,000+ comments we received during the beta 
test <http://next.theguardian.com/blog/making-beta-better/> of this new site, 
whether in person through testing sessions, through online user surveys, or 
comments posted in our discussion threads and via social media. We’ve listened 
to what you’ve had to say – and we’ve developed the site with your thoughts and 
input front of mind.

Of course we can’t please everyone. But we hope, over time, all our readers 
will appreciate the changes we’ve made and understand the reasons why we’ve 
made them: to offer the best possible experience of Guardian journalism and to 
deepen our relationship with you, our readers.


We will continue to ask for your feedback 
<https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/theguardian-us-edition-feedback>. This launch 
today isn’t the end of our journey, it is just the beginning and our team of 
designers, journalists, engineers and developers can’t wait to add more 
functions over these next months to come.
 