
Items from Toys R Us, rooms at luxury hotels, entrance to the prestigious 
Plage Goéland in Cannes and payments to a company specialising in luxury yacht 
equipment have been charged to cards held by members of theWelsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government>.

Over the past five years spending on 237 procurement cards held by Welsh civil 
servants has averaged £1.5m a year, raising concerns about their use.

The first breakdown of spending, for 2015/16, reveals that £279.90 was spent 
at Toys R Us, £103.91 at Victoria’s Secret and £832.81 at Ikea, despite the 
government having a contract with a furniture and office supply company.

The 259-page list from the Wales Audit Office <https://www.audit.wales/> 
reveals that Welsh government credit cards were used on three occasions to pay 
for rooms at the Hotel New Otani in Tokyo, at a total cost of £1,450.76. The 
luxury hotel features manmade waterfalls, a golf driving range, tennis courts, 
the largest hotel pool in central Tokyo and a traditional Japanese garden.

Other hotel charges made on the cards include £9,043.79 on rooms at the 
five-star Raffles hotel in Beijing, whosewebsite 
<http://www.raffles.com/beijing/> says it has been “for nearly a century been 
the choice of visiting royalty and diplomats, VIPs and film stars”.

The cards were billed on two occasions for the €10 entry fee to the private 
Plage Goéland beach in Cannes.

We're scrapping right to buy in Wales to protect vulnerable families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jul/06/wales-government-right-to-buy-policy-social-housing>
A Welsh government spokesman said the Victoria’s Secret charge was a 
“fraudulent item” and the money had been returned. He declined to say when the 
purchase was challenged and the issue resolved.

The spokesman said a payment to the luxury yacht equipment supplier Yachtshop 
was for fenders for one of the government’s fishery protection vessels. The 
Toys R Us charge was for a training game for a staff workshop. The hotel fees, 
he said, “relate to promotional activity to sellWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> abroad”.

A spokesman for the Welsh Conservatives questioned the government’s response 
and said the payments were a telling insight into what the cards were being 
used for.

He said: “How was the Victoria’s Secret payment made? When was it returned? 
Today? I think the fraud thing highlights how easily these cards can be 
misused. Did a staff member accidentally use this card and, if so, how often 
does that happen?

“Also, it is interesting that the best hotels in the world are being used for 
promotion. And £290 for a staff training game? What game costs that much and 
meaningfully contributes to staff training?”

The Welsh shadow finance minister, Nick Ramsay, said: “Huge sums of public 
money continue to be spent on Welsh government credit cards, with staff having 
racked up £7.5m in bills since 2011.

“While we accept that procurement cards have a role to play in reducing the 
bureaucratic cost of processing small claims, the number of staff with access 
to them continues to grow and some of the claims involved are eye-watering and 
require explanation.

 “Millions of pounds are being spent on these cards, and the public needs to 
have confidence that the system isn’t being abused and that the taxpayer is 
getting value for money,” he added.

Welsh government plans new law to protect workers' rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/welsh-government-plans-new-law-to-protect-workers-rights>
A Welsh government spokesperson defended the spending. “The use of procurement 
cards is common across all central government departments in the United 
Kingdom. They are an efficient way of ordering and paying for small-value goods 
and services, and reduce administration costs. Procurement cards also provide 
flexibility, particularly when staff are travelling and last-minute costs need 
to be incurred,” the official said.

“All purchases made on procurement cards are reviewed and approved 
retrospectively by line managers, and subject to regular audit. As a result of 
our rigorous internal audit processes, we are content that transactions are in 
line with Welsh government business objectives.”

Lee Canning, Wales coordinator for the TaxPayers’ Alliance, said the spending 
was shocking. “Taxpayers’ money is meant to pay for essential services. 
Hard-pressed families across Wales will be shocked to the core that part of a 
huge £7.5m procurement card bill, which they will be picking up, has gone 
towards luxury items and expensive hotel stays that many cannot afford 
themselves,” he said.

“When times are hard and every department is having to find necessary savings, 
this level of profligacy is utterly irresponsible and disrespectful … People 
expect their taxes to pay for hospitals and roads, not to be wasted on lingerie 
and luxuries.”
 