
Welsh Labour and Plaid Cymru <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/plaid-cymru>
 have had “extremely useful” talks following an extraordinary impasse in which 
both parties put forward their leaders as candidates to lead the government.

 Though Plaid has only 12 members to Labour’s 29,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/welsh-labour-plaid-cymru-accusations-assembly-standoff>
the nationalists managed to force an unexpected tie thanks to backing from the 
Tories and Ukip.

 Formal talks opened to try to find a way forward after both sides accused the 
other of arrogantly trying to get its leader elected.

 A joint statement issued on Friday evening said: “We have had a number of 
meetings today and they have been extremely useful. We are confident that we 
can find a way forward that will result in the successful nomination of a first 
minister next week. We will continue to work over the weekend, and look to 
resume formal talks on Monday.

Welsh assembly standoff leaves voters baffled
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/welsh-assembly-standoff-plaid-cymru-labour>
 “As it is important to take these talks through on a confidential basis, we 
won’t be making any more comment at this stage.”

Party sources said the talks had been undertaken “in a spirit of cooperation” 
with a view to the formation of aLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> minority government as opposed to 
being formal coalition talks. If the stalemate cannot be resolved the Welsh 
people face the prospect of another election.

Before the talks, the Plaid AM Simon Thomas had said he expected that the 
incumbent first minister,Carwyn Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/carwyn-jones>, would in due course become 
first minister.

Thomas said: “It’s more than likely he will be the first minister but for us 
to be able to support that we want to understand in what way will he work, what 
will he do first 100 days, his priorities.”

Thomas said some were obvious, such as the steel crisis and helping to keep 
the UK in the EU. But he said Plaid wanted to hear what Labour intended to do 
in other areas that were key during the campaign such as health and education.





The impasse has left some voters confused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/welsh-assembly-standoff-plaid-cymru-labour>
, with some wrongly believing Plaid has hatched a with its sworn enemies, the 
Tories and Ukip.

Both parties accused the other of arrogance. Plaid said Labour was arrogant to 
assume Jones would be first minister without reaching out to other parties; 
Labour said Plaid was arrogant to put forward a candidate for first minister 
even though it won only a fifth of the seats.

Thomas accepted that voters had been left puzzled. But he compared it to when 
Gordon Brown was defeated at the general election in 2010 and there was 
confusion until thecoalition between the Tories and the Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/13/coalition-britain-in-12-charts>
 was formed.

“This is the first time this has happened,” said Thomas. “You can look at it 
as part of the growing process of the assembly becoming an actual legislative 
parliament. We are learning on the job.”

Thomas said it was clear that Ukip, which won seven of the 60 assembly seats, 
had already changed the dynamic. “They are not there to play by the usual 
rules, which is fair enough. That is their choice.”

The assembly has in the past been accused of being boring and predictable. “We 
needed livening up a bit,” said Thomas. “As long as it doesn’t look too silly.”

Meanwhile Ukip’s leader, Nigel Farage, suggested that Neil Hamilton, elected 
last week as leader of the Ukip assembly members, may be too old to be a 
frontline politician.


Former Tory MP Hamilton, 67, reignited his political career when he first won 
a seat on the assembly then successfully challenged the Welsh party leader, 
Nathan Gill, for the leadership of its assembly group.

But his return was met with hostility by the national party leader – 15 years 
his junior – who said the treatment of Gill had been “unjust and an act of deep 
ingratitude”.


In a fresh attack, Farage questioned whether Hamilton was young enough to take 
on the role. “I personally was not particularly in favour of Mr Hamilton’s 
return to the frontline, aged nearly 70. But there you are, he’s there, people 
have voted for him,” he told LBC radio.

 “I think it is difficult to return to frontline politics after a 20-year gap 
when you are getting on a bit in years. But there you are, perhaps he’ll 
surprise me.”


Farage added: “One thing I will say: he is utterly committed to this EU cause 
and he has been since the 1960s.”

 