
Welsh Labour and the nationalists Plaid Cymru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/plaid-cymru> have accused each other of 
arrogance following an extraordinary impasse over who will be the country’s 
next first minister.

Labour won 29 of the 60 seats at last week’s assembly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/labour-wales-plaid-cymru-takes-rhondda-plaid-cymru>
 and it had been widely assumed its leader and the current first minister, 
Carwyn Jones, would head a minority government.

But though Plaid Cymru won only 12 seats it put forward its leader, Leanne 
Wood, forward for the first minister’s job on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/carwyn-jones-leanne-wood-tied-welsh-first-minister>
 and thanks to support from the Conservatives andUkip, which won seats at the 
assembly for the first time, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/10/ukip-group-neil-hamilton-elected-lead-welsh-assembly-wales>
 the vote was tied.

Plaid Cymru's Leanne Wood most popular leader in Wales, says poll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/25/plaid-cymru-leanne-wood-most-popular-leader-in-wales-poll>
The unprecedented situation leaves the assembly in limbo. Talks will take 
place between the parties but if no way forward is agreed, a new election may 
have to be called.

Alun Davies, the Labour assembly member for Blaenau Gwent 
<http://senedd.assembly.wales/mgUserInfo.aspx?UID=225>, said with 29 seats his 
party had the right and mandate to govern. He said: “How we do that is an 
entirely different question. We need to be more open, transparent, inclusive. 
We have to reach out.”

Speaking on BBC Radio Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, Davies 
said Plaid should take a hard look at what it had done.

He said: “A week ago people were told categorically by Plaid Cymru that if 
they voted for Plaid there would be no circumstances in which Plaid would work 
with or come to arrangements or understandings with either the Conservatives or 
Ukip. It’s taken less than a week.”

Plaid overtook the Tories as the second biggest party on the assembly. But 
Davies pointed out they still had only a fifth of the 60 seats.

He said: “Yesterday you saw Plaid Cymru put forward two members as presiding 
officer running the national assembly and then attempt to run theWelsh 
government <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government> as 
well. All that on 12 elected members. I think that smacks of an arrogance that 
the people of Wales simply will not tolerate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwelsh-labour-plaid-cymru-accusations-assembly-standoff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb14517cf5888aabb65fdbbdcaa512b8e69355b91%2F498_179_894_1117%2F894.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welsh%20Labour%20and%20Plaid%20Cymru%20trade%20accusations%20in%20assembly%20standoff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwelsh-labour-plaid-cymru-accusations-assembly-standoff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welsh%20Labour%20and%20Plaid%20Cymru%20trade%20accusations%20in%20assembly%20standoff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwelsh-labour-plaid-cymru-accusations-assembly-standoff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb14517cf5888aabb65fdbbdcaa512b8e69355b91%2F498_179_894_1117%2F894.jpg>
 Carwyn Jones. 
“I’m not interested in playing these games. I’m interested in delivering for 
the people who voted for me last week. I’m interested in the future of the 
steel industry, in creating jobs, in investing in infrastructure. I don’t want 
to be sitting in Cardiff Bay twiddling my thumbs, waiting for Plaid Cymru to 
get off their high horse.”

Before the election, polling put Leanne Wood as the most popular leader in 
Wales. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/25/plaid-cymru-leanne-wood-most-popular-leader-in-wales-poll>
 A former probation officer, she was one of the star performers during last 
year’s UK general election campaign, winning fans for slapping down Ukip’s 
Nigel Farage during a leaders’ debate. Any perceived link to Ukip and the 
Tories now may harm her image.

Wood was not available for comment on Thursday morning. 

The Plaid AM Simon Thomas <http://www.english.simonthomas.plaidcymru.org/> 
said the party had acted as it did to “check” Labour. He said: “We did offer 
Labour the chance to delay this vote to allow for proper talks to take place. 
It was Labour’s arrogant decision to press ahead. They assumed they would march 
back into government and they have been checked.

“The first thing we want to achieve is that Labour is checked and reminded 
that it doesn’t have a majority and has to work with other parties. The second 
thing we want is proper discussions. We’ve heard a lot of talk from Labour 
about their programme of government. What programme of government? They don’t 
have a mandate simply to press ahead with their manifesto.”

He told BBC Radio Wales: “Simply turning up at the assembly and nominating 
Carwyn Jones without a word over what sort of government he will be leading, 
what programme he will be putting together, I think that is simply not good 
enough and it is not respectful of all parties in the assembly.

“It’s about Labour recognising that they will need the support of other 
parties almost on a daily basis. They can’t simply expect to put together the 
sort of programme and arrogant and lazy government that we’ve had for the last 
five years.”

The assembly was adjourned on Wednesday following the impasse. Thomas said he 
did not think anyone wanted another election – the end point if no agreement 
can be made. He said the big political focus now ought to be keeping Wales in 
Europe.

Thomas said relations were tested between Plaid and Labour when a senior 
Labour figure described the nationalists’ previous co-operation as a “cheap 
date”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/16/cheap-date-remark-stubs-out-proposed-welsh-vaping-ban>
 “I think since then we’ve been keen to ensure anything we do with Labour or 
any other parties is really screwed down,” he said.

The number of votes for Jones and Wood on Wednesday was tied on 29 each 
(neither the presiding officer nor the deputy votes). Had Kirsty Williams, the 
last remaining Liberal Democrat in the assembly, voted with Plaid and the 
Tories, Wood would have become the first minister despite Labour being by far 
the largest party.

Ukip won seven seats at the assembly and by backing Wood is already making 
good on its promise to shake up what it sees as a “cosy” assembly.

Labour has led the devolved government ever since it was established, but 
never had a majority.

The Government of Wales Act 2006 prescribes that a first minister must be 
elected within 28 days of polling day or another election must be called.
 