
A renowned conductor has claimed that cuts to school budgets mean Wales is at 
risk of losing its reputation as a land of song and has called on the Welsh 
government to do more to ensure that children learn to sing and play 
instruments. Addressing assembly members,Owain Arwel Hughes 
<http://www.owainarwelhughes.co.uk/biography.html>, the founder of the Welsh 
Proms, warned that music in Wales was at a crisis point.

He said: “We are supposed to be a musical nation, but something is radically 
wrong. We are at a crisis point. No question at all.Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> don’t have instruments, so that 
in itself is a crisis. Playing is going down, singing is going down, choirs are 
going down. That’s a crisis.”

 Arwel Hughes was invited to speak to members of the assembly’s culture 
committee, 
<http://www.assembly.wales/en/bus-home/committees/Pages/Committee-Profile.aspx?cid=445>
which has launched an inquiry into music in educationafter a public poll in 
which it asked citizens what they were most concerned about 
<http://www.assembly.wales/en/newhome/pages/newsitem.aspx?itemid=1656>. He has 
conducted some of the world’s greatest orchestras, including the Royal 
Philharmonic, and was a director of the National Youth Orchestra in Wales.

Arwel Hughes said he and the youth orchestra travelled widely. “Because they 
were so good, we were selling Wales. If the players aren’t coming through, how 
do we sellWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> as a musical nation? 
Impossible.” He told the committee that fewer people were auditioning for the 
youth orchestra than ever before. “That is really, really sad.”

The conductor argued that music taught young people about discipline and 
working together. “If you are learning an instrument, the first thing you learn 
is self-discipline – the hours and hours of practice. That’s a discipline you 
don’t get from anywhere else. You don’t get it from sport.Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/music> is an important part of a child’s 
development.

 “Only a certain percentage go into the profession because it’s tough. But 
they become teachers, doctors, lawyers. They’re good at that because they’ve 
had the discipline of learning an instrument and being part of an orchestra or 
choir.”

Music, and singing in particular, has long been an important part of Wales’ 
cultural life. Its male voice choirs, opera singers and sporting crowds are 
famed across the globe. Its national youth orchestra was the first of its kind. 
From Tom Jones and Shirley Bassey to Manic Street Preachers and Cerys Matthews, 
Wales has also produced some of the most beloved pop and rocks stars.

Arwel Hughes said he had met musicians who had told him that if they had not 
learned an instrument, they would have ended up in prison.


Many had begun to play just because an instrument was available at school. 
“Very often I’ve asked someone: ‘Why have you learnt the double bass?’” They 
told him: “Because that was the instrument that was there in the school at the 
time.”

 He said music had also been shown to have health benefits, which was 
particularly important when the NHS was in such difficulty. “Without music 
we’re going to have people getting ill. The therapeutic value of music is 
known.”

 In England the Department for Education funds “music education hubs” to the 
tune of about £75m a year. 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/music-education/music-education-hubs>These can 
be groups of organisations – such as local authorities, schools or voluntary 
groups – that work together to create joined-up music education provision.

Education is a devolved area, and Arwel Hughes called for a similar hub scheme 
for Wales. “Everybody should have equal opportunity. Funding has got to be 
found. The government has got to put money into this. It’s vital.

A Welsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government> spokesman 
said: “We remain committed to teaching music and all pupils are required to 
study the subject up to 14. We expect all pupils to be given the opportunity to 
gain experience of a wide range of musical disciplines. We also have in place a 
£20m programme to support schools to use creativity to inspire learners and 
raise attainment.

“Creativity will be at the heart of our new curriculum, where the arts in 
education will not be a luxury or added extra, but a core component. While 
music services are the responsibility of local authorities, we are committed to 
creating a new national endowment for music fund and will make an announcement 
on this later this year.”
 