 The gloves came off yesterday in the battle for seats in the new National 
Assembly for Wales as the Welsh Conservative Party attacked what it called the 
'linguistic apartheid' of the Welsh nationalists and claimed that people would 
leave the principality 'in droves' should Plaid Cymru come to power.
Speaking at the launch of the Conservative election manifesto in Cardiff, Rod 
Richards, leader of the party's assembly campaign, said the policy of 
nationalist-controlled Gwynedd county council in employing only Welsh speakers, 
or those who undertook to learn the language, threatened the social harmony of 
Wales.Plaid Cymru <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/plaid-cymru> had gone 
too far, he warned.

 He also criticised government policy over the teaching of Welsh in schools. 
He said the right to decide whether children should be taught the language to 
the age of 16 was an example of the party's approach to fairness in education. 
'We want to offer choice to those parents who believe that compulsory Welsh for 
the two years before GCSEs is not appropriate for their children.'

 Plaid Cymru immediately accused the Tories of using the Welsh language as a 
political football. 'This negative attitude must be seen as a sign of 
desperation,' said the Angelsey MP Ieuan Wyn Jones.

 The Tory programme, Fair Play For All, is the first to be unveiled for the 
60-seat Assembly for which elections will be held on May 6.

 Forty members will be chosen on the first-past-the-post system in each of the 
existing Westminster constituencies, with a further 20 being chosen by 
proportional representation from party lists in five electoral regions based on 
European Parliament constituencies.

 Among Tory pledges are more help for Welsh farmers including pressure to lift 
the beef on the bone ban and the development of better flood warning and 
prevention schemes.
 