
The Labour-led government in Wales is to introduce legislation aimed at 
countering what it sees as harmful changes to workers’ rights in the 
controversial newTrade Union Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2016/15/contents/enacted>, the Guardian 
understands.

The first minister, Carwyn Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/carwyn-jones>, is expected to announce 
plans on Tuesday for a new law aimed at preserving rights for public sector 
workers that he believes the Westminster government’s law endanger.

 The Conservative government’s reforms to trade union law are designed to make 
it harder for strikes to be held and have been attacked as“draconian”  <http:// 
http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jun/21/public-sector-workers-trade-unions-unison>
by workers, union officials and opposition politicians.

New rules on the threshold needed to be reached before a strike can be called, 
on the way subs can be collected and on the time that employees can spend on 
union activities have been of particular concern to theWelsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government>.

In March, Jones called for the law to be scrapped. At that time he said: “This 
bill is damaging, divisive, intrudes on the delivery of public services inWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> … implementation of the bill will lead 
to a confrontational relationship between employers and workforce.

 “It contrasts sharply with the constructive social partnership approach in 
Wales – valuing the workforce, supporting public services and encouraging 
enterprise.”

The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government in Wales 
has always argued that it has a much more positive relationship with workers in 
the public sector than the UK Tory government or the previous Tory-Lib Dem 
coalition. During the assembly election campaign in the spring Jones was keen 
to emphasise that there were no strikes involving young doctors in Wales.

 His attitude to the trade union reform has been backed by the nationalist 
party, Plaid Cymru, which described the reforms as “Dickensian and 
undemocratic”, and the Lib Dems.

The UK government claimed the act, which became law in May, brought in 
“modernising reforms” that protected the public from undemocratic industrial 
action. <https://www.gov.uk/government/news/trade-union-act-becomes-law>

It said the legislation would ensure industrial action only ever goes ahead 
after a ballot turnout of at least 50%.

 In important public services, including in the health, education, transport, 
border security and fire sectors, an additional threshold of 40% of support to 
take industrial action from all eligible members had to be met for action to be 
legal.

It is believed the Welsh government will try to get its new law onto the 
statute books within 12 months

The UK government argues that employment rights are a matter for the UK 
parliament, not the Welsh, under the devolution settlement.

 A UK government spokesman said: “The Trade Union Act relates to employment 
rights, duties and industrial relations, all of which are clearly reserved 
matters for the UK parliament under the Welsh devolution settlement.”

• This article was amended on 28 June 2016 to include a quote from the UK 
government.


 