
The Labour-led Welsh government is to introduce a bill on Monday that aims to 
reverse the impact of theUK government’s controversial Trade Union Act 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/trade-union-act-becomes-law>.

If the bill becomes law, key restrictions on public-sector trade unions on the 
Welsh side of the border will be reversed.

The Trade Union Act 2016 brought in new rules such as the threshold needed 
within the public sector before a strike can go ahead, the way subscriptions 
are collected and the time that employees can spend on union activities.

UK government ministers argued the changes meant the public’s rights were 
balanced against those of trade unionistsbut workers, opposition politicians 
and union leaders have called them draconian. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/the-guardian-view-on-the-trade-union-bill-unprincipled-and-unnecessary>

Related: The Guardian view on the trade union bill: unprincipled and 
unnecessary | Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/the-guardian-view-on-the-trade-union-bill-unprincipled-and-unnecessary>

Areas such as the NHS, education, the fire service and local government are 
devolved, so they come under the responsibility of theWelsh government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government>.

Welsh Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> ministers in the 
Cardiff government are worried that the Westminster act will undermine its 
relations with the public sector and have been working with unions and 
employers to find ways of reversing its measures.

The Welsh local government secretary, Mark Drakeford, said: “We have always 
said that the Trade Union Act was unnecessary and would lead to more 
confrontational relationships between employers and workers, undermining rather 
than supporting public services and the economy.

“Social partnership is founded on respect for the work of trades unions and 
the rights of their members. InWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, 
employers and the trade union movement work together constructively. We are not 
prepared to let the Trade Union Act undermine the approach we have built on 
this side of the border.

“Not only is the act damaging and divisive but it interferes with devolved 
policy and the powers held by the National Assembly for Wales. This bill seeks 
to ensure the damaging provisions of the UK act do not apply to public services 
in Wales.”

Wales TUC’s general secretary, Martin Mansfield, welcomed the bill. “This 
hugely important bill is about protecting the ability of unions, employers and 
the Welsh government to work in partnership in devolved Welsh public services,” 
he said.

“The Welsh government is today putting partnership into practice. The Welsh 
way works in preventing disputes and industrial action. Without this bill, the 
UK Trade Union Act would turn back the clock on devolution and threaten to 
undermine our existing social partnership approach.”
 