
The London Classic, which finishes at Olympia this weekend and can be viewed 
free and live online, is also the final event of the chess Grand Tour, which 
Wesley So is poised to win. The 23-year-old American, a former Filipino, has 
been improving steadily and is now on a roll. So reached the super-elite 2800 
rating during the tournament, is up to No4 in the live rankings and has become 
a serious prospect to challenge forMagnus Carlsen’s world crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/magnus-carlsen-overcomes-sergey-karjakin-to-retain-title>
 in 2018.

Leonard Barden on Chess
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/sergey-karjakin-war-words-garry-kasparov-world-chess-championship-magnus-carlsen>
Carlsen won the 2015 Grand Tour but, although he played the two speed events 
in Paris and Brussels, he was not an overall contender this year while his 
title challenger, Sergey Karjakin, did not compete at all. The US champion and 
world No2, Fabiano Caruana, could not match So’s pace but he did produce one 
moment of magic featured in this week’s puzzle.

So’s impressive performance included a crushing win over Bulgaria’s Veselin 
Topalov, who was dreadfully out of form in London. Black’s gameplan looks a 
touch simplistic – crash through on the h file – but it proved highly 
effective. White could defend by 15 Nxc6! and 16 h4 while 18 Be2? was the worst 
among four bishop retreats. Further mistakes followed and the white king was 
overwhelmed.

Veselin Topalov v Wesley So

1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bc4 Bc5 4 c3 Nf6 5 d3 a6 6 a4 d6 7 Bg5 Ba7 8 Nbd2 h6 9 Bh4 
g510 Bg3 O-O 11 O-O Nh7 12 h3 h5 13 d4 exd4 14 Nxd4 g4 15 hxg4? hxg4 16 Nxc6 
bxc617 e5 d5 18 Be2? Qg5 19 a5 f5 20 exf6 Nxf6 21 Ra4 Rf7 22 Re1? Nh5 23 Bxg4 
Nxg324 Re8+ Kg7 25 Rxc8? Bxf2+ 26 Kh2 Qe5! 27 Kh3 Ne2! 0-1

The £20,000 British knockout championship has been the other main Olympia 
event and its final between Nigel Short, 51, and David Howell, 26, was a clash 
of generations, the oldest UK elite grandmaster against the youngest. Short 
missed two wins in a marathon first game, then won the fourth as he cashed in 
an extra endgame pawn before Howell hit back in the fifth by trapping Short’s 
queen. Short then won game six in 51 moves to clinch the match, 3.5-2.5, and 
the title.

The Olympia festival has been hugely popular, with most tournaments sold out 
and a total entry close to 2,000. Below, IM Richard Bates brilliantly defeated 
his French opponent in the Fide Open.

White errs by 9 Bxf6? conceding the bishop pair, though Black fails to play 
the thematic Bg5 and White could exchange by Nxe7 with equality. Bates’s 
dynamic 16...e4!? opens up the centre and after White misses the resource 19 
Bxc6 bxc6 20 f4! the floodgates to his king are sprung by 19...d5! At the end 
26 Kf2? (Ke2) allows a old-style king hunt with 32 fxg6 ep Qh6 mate at the end 
of it.

Bilel Bellahcene v Richard Bates

1 e4 c5 2 Nf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 Nxd4 Nf6 5 Nc3 a6 6 Nb3 e5 7 Bg5 Be7 8 Qd2 O-O 9 
Bxf6?! Bxf610 Rd1 Be7 11 Nd5 Nc6 12 g3 Bg4 13 Be2 Bh3 14 Qd3 f5 15 Bf3 Bg5 16 
exf5 e4!?17 Bxe4 Re8 18 Ne3 Kh8 19 c3? d5! 20 Qxd5 Bxe3 21 fxe3 Qe7 22 Nc5 Rad8 
23Qc4 b5 24 Qe6 Qxc5 25 Rxd8 Rxd8 26 Kf2? Rd2+ 27 Kf3 Ne5+ 28 Kf4 Rf2+ 29 Kg5 
Qxe3+30 Kh5 Bg4+ 31 Kh4 g5+ 0-1

The world’s youngest ever IM is competing at Olympia. Though not in his best 
form, the 11-year-old Indian still produced this smooth miniature.

Ramesh Praggnanandhaa v Toni Riedener

1 e4 c5 2 Nf3 d6 3 c3 Nf6 4 Be2 Nc6 5 d4 cxd4 6 cxd4 d5 7 e5 Ne4 8 Nc3 Qa5 9 
0-0 Nxc310 bxc3 Bg4 11 Rb1 b6 12 Bb5 Rc8 13 c4 e6 14 cxd5 exd5 15 Bd2 Qa3 16 
Rc1 Bd717 e6! fxe6 18 Ne5 Qd6 19 Qa4 1-0

3473 1...Re8!! and if 2 Qxe8 Qc1+ 3 Qe1 d2 and White is helpless. The game 
ended2 Rxb7+ Qxb73 Qxe8 Qb1+ and White resigned because of 4 Qe1 c2! 5 g8Q Qxe1+
6Kxe1 c1Q mate. If 2 Nxb2 Rxe1+ 3 Kxe1 cxb2 4 g8Q b1Q+ 5 Kd2 Qc2+ 6 Ke3 Qe2+ 7 
Kf4 Qxf2+8 Ke4 Qd4+ 9 Kf5 d2 and wins.
 