
Wests Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> coach Jason 
Taylor believes his star fullback James Tedesco is ready to play State of 
Origin football for NSW.

Taylor played down Tedesco’s hopes of playing interstate rugby league last 
year.

Stephen Dank loses part of defamation challenge over NRL peptide stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/14/stephen-dank-loses-part-of-defamation-challenge-over-nrl-peptide-stories>
But the 23-year-old presented an irresistible case in the Tigers round two 
36-22 win over Manly at Leichhardt Oval on Monday night, with three tries in a 
man-of-the-match performance.

Blues great Andrew Johns, speaking on Triple M, said Tedesco would handle the 
step up to Origin and Taylor agreed.

“Yep, absolutely. We talked about that this time last year and I didn’t think 
he was,” Taylor said.

“He played every minute of every game last year and in my opinion, that’s a 
really easy decision.

“There’s not many better finishers in the game.”

With St George Illawarra coach Paul McGregor indicating he could move Josh 
Dugan back to fullback, after the Dragons’ underwhelming start to the season, 
Tedesco and the Blues’ incumbent custodian could be locked in a battle for the 
NSW No 1 jersey.

Parramatta Eels launch internal investigation into NRL salary cap issue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/parramatta-eels-launch-internal-investigation-into-nrl-salary-cap-issue>
Dugan was named as the Blues’ best player last season and if coach Laurie 
Daley is unwilling to move him from the back, Tedesco could play on the wing 
given Brett Morris is unlikely to play in the 2016 Origin series due to a knee 
injury.

Tedesco also declared himself prepared for Origin after the win over Manly.

“I think I am ready,” Tedesco said.

“I just want to continue that form and if I do get that call-up I’ll take it 
with both hands.

“Coming into last year I had three or four seasons but only played a handful 
of games coming off serious surgeries. This year coming into pre-season the 
body was feeling really good.”

Tigers halfback Luke Brooks said Tedesco could add another dimension to the 
Blues’ attack.

John Hopoate and NRL enter bizarre social media tit for tat over coaching ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/11/john-hopoate-and-nrl-enter-bizarre-social-media-tit-for-tat-over-coaching-ban>
“He has really come on as a ball player at fullback,” Brooks said.

“That is an area NSW have struggled with and I really think he could add 
something for them there.”

Blues captain Paul Gallen also endorsed Tedesco’s NSW selection credentials if 
he maintains his current run.

“If Josh Dugan stays in the centres, there’s every chance someone like him or 
a Moylan could jump out at you,” he told the Big Sports Breakfast.

“The way he played last night, if he can keep that form for the next 10 weeks 
there’s no doubt that he is a possibility of being there.”
 