
West Ham have been frustrated in their attempts to sign Carlos Bacca but 
remain confident of sealing a deal to sign the Colombia striker fromMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan>.

Bacca, who moved to Italy from Sevilla last summer for €30m despite interest 
from Liverpool, has been told he can leave San Siro after West Ham’s £26m offer 
was accepted last week.

Sam Allardyce ready to mentor successor if appointed England manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/england-fa-sam-allardyce-sunderland>
Yet after failing in their attempts to sign Michy Batshuayi when the Belgium 
strikerjoined Chelsea instead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/chelsea-announce-signing-michy-batshuayi>
, co-chairmen David Sullivan and David Gold have yet to make a breakthrough 
over proposed personal terms with Bacca’s agent, who arrived in London on 
Monday for talks. However, it is understood that despite his initial reluctance 
to leave Milan, the 29-year-old is now open to the idea of joining Slaven 
Bilic’s side.

Last month, Bacca’s agent told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/west-ham-carlos-bacca-open-leaving-milan>
 that his client was keen to play in European competition next season after 
Milan failed to qualify after their seventh-placed finish in Serie A. West Ham, 
who also finished seventh in the Premier League, will discover their opponents 
in the Europa League third qualifying round when the draw is made on Friday.

Despite Milan’s disappointing season, Bacca scored 18 goals in the league to 
end the campaign as Italy’s third top scorer, behind Napoli’s Gonzalo Higuaín 
and Paulo Dybala of Juventus.

Bacca scored 34 goals in 71 appearances for Sevilla, having joined from the 
Belgian side Club Brugge in 2013. He arrived in Europe at the age of 24 having 
spent his formative years at Barranquilla-based Atlético Junior, where heworked 
as a bus driver’s assistant 
<http://www.marca.com/2013/07/14/en/football/spanish_football/1373828751.html> 
to supplement his income.

There were also reports in France on Monday night that West Ham have made an 
approach for Swansea’s Bafétimbi Gomis, the France striker who has also been 
linked with Marseille.

Earlier on Monday, the club announced the season-long loan signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/west-ham-united-besiktas-gokhan-tore-loan>
 of the Besiktas winger Gokhan Tore.
 