
West Ham have signed Havard Nordtveit, with the Norway international joining 
on a free transfer fromBorussia Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiamoenchengladbach> on 1 July.

The 25-year-old midfielder has agreed a five-year deal and will return to 
England having left Arsenal for Germany in 2010. Nordtveit can also play as a 
central defender and becomes West Ham’s second signing following the deal for
the Valencia striker Toni Martinez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/22/west-ham-confirm-signing-striker-toni-martinez-valencia>
.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the final day of the season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/premier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season>
With 28 caps for Norway, Nordtveit also brings European experience having 
played in the Champions League for Mönchengladbach this season.

He helped André Schubert’s side to a fourth-placed finish but is now ready to 
test himself in the Premier League having never made an appearance for 
Arsenal’s first team despite captaining their reserve side.

“It has always been a dream for me to play in the Premier League and now I 
have a big opportunity to do that for West Ham – I cannot wait to start,” he 
said.

“This team has something special, a spirit in the team that I can fit into. I 
will work hard and hopefully I can get some good moments at this club. I’m a 
player who can play many roles on the pitch but I’m from Norway so maybe a 
little bit more running, tackles and try to spread a few balls around me.

“I’m looking forward to showing what I can do but hopefully I have something 
to help West Ham achieve even more.”

With West Ham moving to the Olympic Stadium, it could prove to be a busy 
summer in terms of transfers – with the co-chairman David Sullivan confirming 
last week that a new striker is high on the agenda.

“We put in a bid today for €30m for a player and other bids will be going in,” 
he told Sky Sports News. “We are going to make a £20m or £25m bid for a player 
in England this week. So whatever happens, we’ll bring a top striker in.”

West Ham Ladies’ charity match at Upton Park in June remains in doubt 
following a fans’ vote on whether it should go ahead.

West Ham said nearly 12,000 supporters had voted on the matter, with 52% in 
favour and 48% against. The club added that, due to that slim majority, the 
organisers would now discuss the results in more detail before making a final 
decision.

West Ham Ladies had proposed a 5 June match at Upton Park against a West Ham 
All Stars team of former players and famous fans, with entrance free but 
supporters attending being encouraged to donate to the women’s side on the day.

The club announced over the weekend that, with feedback having shown some 
supporters feltlast Tuesday’s 3-2 Premier League win over Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/west-ham-manchester-united-premier-league-report-upton-park>
 should be the last public match at Upton Park, they were running a poll to 
gauge fan opinion on whether the charity game should take place.
 