
The resignation of Lucy Pearce 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/brighton-argus-editor-lucy-pearce-hands-in-resignation-weeks-after-taking-over-from-mike-gilson/>
 after just two weeks as editor of the Brighton Argus took many observers by 
surprise.

It is possible to view her decision as a slap in the face for the Argus’s 
owner, Newsquest/Gannett. But it should also be seen as a slap in the face for 
the entire newspaper industry.

On the face of it, Pearce’s appointment was a wonderful story. A woman of 28 
had landed the key editorial post at a daily paper. Reputed to be the youngest 
person ever to get the job, she was also reported on the Argus website to be
“Newsquest’s youngest editor.” 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/14958755.Argus_s_first_female_editor_takes_the_helm/>

At the time, she was quoted as saying: “I am hugely passionate about the Argus 
and the community it serves.” Not passionate enough, however, once another job 
offer came along.

An inside source who worked closely with Pearce during her time as head of 
content told me she was “a cracking journalist” and that her departure was “a 
real shame.”

The real shame is that, having attained an editorship, she should prefer to 
accept an offer to be a PR. What does that say about the state of modern 
journalism?

On hearing the news, a former national paper editor who is now a PR registered 
his sadness. In acknowledging that it has long been common for veteran 
journalists to switch from poacher to gamekeeper, he was astonished that a 
relative newcomer should make such a move.*

It’s what you do at the end of your journalistic career, he remarked, not at 
the beginning. But times are changing fast. It’s where we are... and where we 
are going.

There is no longer kudos in becoming an editor, especially at local and 
regional level. Editors of papers with fast-falling circulations - the Argus 
barely sells 10,000 copies nowadays - have been robbed of their status.

They lack the influence they once enjoyed among the political and business 
communities of the towns and cities their papers serve.

Many of them rarely, if ever, leave the office. They are little more than 
super chief subs and/or news editors. With young and inexperienced staffs, 
several spend most of their time as in-house journalism tutors.

Staff turnover is also a problem. Low pay drives away both the young and the 
old. A great deal more can be earned in PR, a major lure for men and women 
trying to support their families amid the wage freezes imposed by corporate 
owners.

Then, of course, there are the poor prospects in an industry everyone 
recognises as having an uncertain, and potentially terminal, future.


Pearce’s career trajectory indicates the direction of travel for some of the 
UK’s best young journalists. She began her career at the Dorset Echo in 2009, 
moving two years later to theSouth West News Service <http://swns.com/>, the 
news agency responsible for producing so many good reporters.

Pearce thrived in her year there and, in 2012, joined the Argus as assistant 
news editor. She was promoted to be head of content in 2014, a job involving 
both editorial and commercial duties.

When Mike Gilson was relieved of the editorship in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/dec/08/brighton-argus-editor-departs-but-does-newsquest-really-care>
 after just two years at the helm, having failed to convince Newsquest of the 
need to re-focus the ailing Argus, Pearce was the natural choice to succeed him.


She had been supportive of Gilson, noting at the time of his going that “our 
team of talented and hard-working journalists” had delivered on his pledge to 
revitalise the Argus.

But Pearce has preferred to revitalise her life by accepting a position as 
“communications and engagement manager” at Legal & General (not as “head of 
communications”,as previously reported 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2017/news/regional-dailys-youngest-ever-editor-quits-weeks-into-job/>
).

She will be an internal communications manager in the mature savings business 
division. She will not act as anexternal PR. 

Doubtless, the move makes financial sense, and I am not being in the least 
critical of her for seizing such an opportunity. What I am lamenting is that 
journalism is now playing second fiddle to PR.

If our trade cannot retain such bright prospects as Lucy Pearce then it 
suggests that our future, already bleak, is utterly hopeless.

*The original posting wrongly said “gatekeeper”!
 