
10pm: Polls close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/04/local-elections-2016-explained-voting-on-5-may>

It will be difficult to beat the drama of the shock 10pm survey that predicted 
the Tory majority at the general election. Politicians will start hitting the 
airwaves, making forecasts and managing expectations.

Midnight: Result from the English bellwether town of Nuneaton

 An early test for Labour will be results from Nuneaton & Bedworth council in 
the West Midlands. The area’s three MPs are all Conservative – including the 
key marginal of Nuneaton – but the council is firmly controlled by Labour.
Labour needs to retain its councillors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/04/labour-battles-to-retain-local-power-harlow-carlisle-platform-2020>
 to show it is still dominant at a local level.


From 1am: Welsh declarations begin

Wales should provide a spot of good news for Labour. The party is expected to 
keep control of the regionalassembly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welsh-assembly-government>, albeit with a 
reduced number of seats. Constituency seats are scheduled to start declaring 
from 1am with Merthyr Tydfil and Rhymney at 1am, a solidly Labour seat. 
However, many in Welsh Labour would maintain they are doing well in spite of 
Jeremy Corbyn, who was asked to stay away from the campaign in its final days.

From 2am: SNP wins in Scotland start rolling in


 Constituency seats in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/26/scottish-parliament-control-income-tax-welfare-spending>
 will start declaring by the early hours of Friday morning, with the SNP 
expected to take nearly every single constituency seat starting with 
Cunninghame South. Pay close attention at 3am to Dumfriesshire, previously 
Labour held but which now looks like an SNP-Tory battle, and at 3.30am to 
Edinburgh Southern, which is Labour’s best chance of gaining a constituency 
seat.

Early hours: Two new Labour MPs elected

There are two Westminster byelections, both in safe Labour seats. In Ogmore, 
south Wales, the contest comes after Huw Irranca-Davies stepped down to run for 
the Welsh assembly. In Sheffield Brightside the incumbent new MP Harry Harpham 
died earlier this year. Both are almost certain to elect the Labour candidates 
as their MPs: Harpham’s widow, Gill Furniss, is standing in the Sheffield seat 
and Welsh councillor Chris Elmore in Ogmore. Armchair psephologists will want 
to see how far Labour maintains its share of the vote.

3am: The Tory v Labour battle in swing seats across England

The English council results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/local-elections> will reveal whether 
Labour is making a recovery in swing seats it failed to win in 2015. Councils 
to watch for are Crawley, Stevenage, Plymouth, Dudley, Exeter, Southampton, 
Thurrock and Bolton, which are all announcing at around 3am. The Lib Dems will 
hope to show good results from Eastleigh, due to announce its results at about 
2am, former seat of Chris Huhne which also went blue at the general election.

From 5am: The Tories may have leapfrogged Labour in Scotland

The second part of the Scottish elections – the results from the list system, 
will start to come through at around dawn. That will give a good breakdown of 
how the parties have done. At this point, it should be clear whether Labour or 
the Conservatives are in second place; given Labour’s historical dominance, 
third place would be an extraordinary result.

From 7am: Ukip may have its first assembly members

The Welsh list system results are likely to be in by now, showing the assembly 
members elected based on alternative votes. Watch here for how well Ukip is 
doing. The expectation is that Farage’s party will post gains of up to seven 
assembly members after it stood candidates for the first time. Former Tory MPs 
Mark Reckless and Neil Hamilton could be among those to take seats for Ukip.

10am: Police and crime commissioners elected on a low turnout

It is easy to forget that about 40 police and crime commissioners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police-and-crime-commissioners> are being 
elected at the same time across the country. Many people still do not know what 
they are, four years after the coalition introduced them as new elected 
representatives overseeing police forces. The candidates are a mixed bag and 
there are likely to be a few independents elected overnight as well as those 
from traditional parties; although the result from South Yorkshire, after the 
Hillsborough verdict on the conduct of the force, is one to keep an eye on.

From mid-morning: Liverpool and Salford declare their mayoral results

 Two more places where Labour is in pole position In Liverpool, the incumbent 
Joe Anderson is expected to hang on easily and Paul Dennett is likely to hold 
the mayoralty for Labour in Salford. Bristol is not expected to announce until 
later on Friday – here the Labour candidate faces a tricky fight to dislodge 
the current independent mayor, George Ferguson.

11am: More English council results dribble through

It will be fairly clear by now whether Labour has lost councillors, held its 
position or made progress in theEnglish council elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/04/election-labour-thursday-westminster>
. Results such as Cannock Chase come through at 12am, which is another Labour 
council with a Tory MP that it had targeted in 2015. Two Yorkshire ones to 
watch are Kirklees and Calderdale, which the Conservatives have their eye on.

The team around Corbyn are saying Labour will do well to make any gains and to 
hang on to control of councils where voters opted for a Tory MP at the general 
election. But Labour MPs opposed to Corbyn feel the party should be well ahead 
and wiping the floor with the Conservatives by putting on more than 400 
councillors given the poorly received budget, tax credits U-turn and 
controversy over academisation of schools. A key question is how much of this 
difference of opinion will be aired in the media.

From 1pm: Lib Dems have a chance to show a revival

Lib Dem are focusing on the traditional strongholds such as Cheltenham 
(results expected at lunchtime) which fell to the Tories in 2015 for the first 
time since 1992. Eyes too will be on Watford (due to finish at about 4pm), 
which has a Tory MP but a Lib Dem mayor. If they go backwards in these areas, 
it will be a sign the party is fading away. If they hang on at a local level, 
there is hope yet for Tim Farron to rebuild.

3pm: London assembly results start declaring

London does not start counting until Friday, and the first results for the 
assembly are expected to emerge. London is thought of as a Labour city, where 
support for Jeremy Corbyn – a north London MP – is particularly strong. But 
there are still jitters within the party about whether it will make progress in 
terms of assembly seats.

5pm-10pm: Sadiq Khan probably becomes London mayor for Labour

Another bright spot for Labour is likely to be regaining the city from eight 
years of Conservative rule under Boris Johnson. The timing of the declaration 
here is likely to be early on Friday evening, but could be longer depending on 
whether any boroughs need to recount. IfKhan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> does not win, from having a 
double-digit poll lead, this will be a major upset that could even trigger an 
attempt to depose Jeremy Corbyn. The Conservatives have run a relentless 
campaign trying to associate Khan with Islamist extremists, while activists are 
worried that the wider row about Labour’s handling of complaints of 
antisemitism could have harmed their support.


Evening and weekend: The fallout 

The scale of Labour relief or anger will crystallise after the London mayoral 
result. Corbyn supporters will have already been on the airwaves to defend the 
results as a boost for the leader. If the party falls short of winning seats, 
his opponents will be pointing to Corbyn’s comment earlier in the week that 
Labour would not lose councillors.A coup against Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/03/jeremy-corbyns-critics-abandon-hopes-of-leadership-challenge>
 is unlikely at this point, but there could be some minor shadow ministerial 
resignations if it there is a really bad result for the party.

Any seat losses will be seen as less significant for the Conservatives because 
the governing party generally does badly in local elections – althoughScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> may be an exception – when voters 
tend to take their chance to give the government a kicking. The smaller parties 
around the country will be hoping to edge forward, except the SNP which hopes 
to maintain its hegemony.
 