
When it comes to our journalism, we want to hear from you wherever you are and 
in the easiest way possible. You can now use WhatsApp to share your experience 
and perspective of news stories with the Guardian. We will be using WhatsApp to 
open up particular topics to find out more about what is happening on the 
ground and how you have been affected.


How will it work?

If you already use WhatsApp, you will have the app downloaded to your phone 
and will be aware ofWhatsApp’s own terms and conditions 
<https://www.whatsapp.com/legal/>. If not, you can download the app 
<https://www.whatsapp.com/download/> for free onto your device. 

You can add the Guardian on WhatsApp as a contact by adding the number +44 
(0)7867 825056.

We will be opening and monitoring the WhatsApp as a channel around particular 
news stories - you’ll see us promote the WhatsApp number in our live coverage 
and elsewhere ontheguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/> and social networks. 
We’ll ask you to include a keyword or tag in your message so we know which 
topic it refers to.

If you share a story, photo or video with us via WhatsApp on this story, a 
team of journalists monitoring the channel will receive it. We may contact you 
via WhatsApp for more information about your account and we will endeavour to 
use the messages we receive to inform our reporting, including featuring 
pictures, text and videos that you have sent ontheguardian.com 
<http://theguardian.com/> and other Guardian platforms. If we contact you and 
you do not wish to hear from us further please reply with “opt out”.

Sharing stories, images and videos with the Guardian via WhatsApp is subject 
to these guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2015/aug/12/guidelines-for-contacting-the-guardian-on-whatsapp>
. Please read them before taking part.

Your Data

When you use WhatsApp to communicate stories to the Guardian, we will receive 
your phone number and the public username you have set up. In some 
circumstances we may retain these details to contact you at a later date in 
order to follow up a story. Otherwise your details will not be kept for longer 
than necessary. We will not publish your WhatsApp contact details or use them 
for marketing purposes.

In light of possible vulnerabilities in WhatsApp’s encryption systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/13/whatsapp-backdoor-allows-snooping-on-encrypted-messages>
, please exercise caution if you intend to communicate confidential material 
using this app. For advice on secure communication with the Guardian seeHow to 
contact the Guardian securely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
 