
What is the Pension Protection Fund?


Officially, it’s a government-sponsored lifeboat for collapsed pension 
schemes, but it is seen by some as a dumping ground for tycoons shaking off 
their liabilities. Now a decade old, it provides cover for 11 million workers 
with final salary-style pension schemes. So far it has bailed out 800 failed 
schemes with 222,000 members, at a cost of £1.8bn.

Sir Philip Green must sort out the BHS pension mess
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/apr/25/sir-philip-green-must-do-more-to-sort-out-the-bhs-pension-mess>
So taxpayers are on the hook for the £571m hole in BHS’s pension scheme? 

Not really. Bailouts are paid for by a levy on all businesses that still have 
these pension schemes, not the taxpayer. Last year the PPF told companies to 
cough up£574m  
<http://www.pensionprotectionfund.org.uk/DocumentLibrary/Documents/ARA_1415.pdf>
to put into the rescue pot. Only if the PPF itself failed would taxpayers 
probably have to pick up the tab.

So I run a small business and have to subsidise yachts in Monaco?


Arguably, yes. Many business owners are hopping mad at how much they have to 
pay into the PPF. For example, Sussex-based Southern Testing provides ground 
testing services for construction companies, and has a £5m turnover. Last year 
its PPF levy tripled to £25,000, equal to a quarter of the total bill for 
providing pensions to its workers, and more than its corporation tax bill. Its 
boss, Morris Stevenson, accuses other companies of dumping liabilities on to 
the PPF and is angry he may have to pick up part of the bill for the failure of
BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>.

Might BHS sink the protection fund? 

Unlikely. BHS’s pension deficit is only the sixth or seventh largest to go 
into the pensions lifeboat in terms of value, although with 20,000 workers 
affected, it is in the top five in terms of the number of people.

The PPF is financially healthy, having built up a large surplus in recent 
years. In 2014-15 the surplus was £4.8bn, making BHS affordable for now. What’s 
more, the way the PPF calculates liabilities means the bailout is likely to be 
closer to £200m to £300m, not the £571m quoted as the “hole” in the BHS fund.

Can they go after former boss Sir Philip Green for the money?

BHS collapses into administration as rescue deal fails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
Yes, but whether they will have any success is another matter. The pensions 
regulator said it was “undertaking an investigation into the BHS pensions 
scheme to determine whether it would be appropriate to use ouranti-avoidance 
powers 
<http://www.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/regulate-and-enforce/our-powers.aspx#acting>
”. It has legal powers to pursue those “deliberately attempting to avoid their 
pension obligations”. But it will inevitably involve lengthy court actions.

In 2014, after a six-year legal battle, the pensions regulator won a £184m 
case involving nearly 2,500 formerLehman Brothers 
<http://www.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/press/pn1429.aspx> bankers based in the 
UK. But a legal battle with ITV over the £62m deficit of Boxclever, the TV 
rental firm, continues 13 years after the company went bust.

What will BHS workers actually get?


The bad news for the thousands of current and former BHS employees under 
retirement age is that they will have their pension entitlements cut. What’s 
more, the PPF offers limited protection against inflation, and this will 
particularly affect BHS “lifers” (see later).

 BHS workers will receive “compensation” based on 90% of what their pension 
was worth at the time it became insolvent – ie they will lose 10%. The maximum 
they can receive is also capped. These caps vary depending on the recipient’s 
age and are recalculated every year. For example, as of 1 April 2016, the most 
someone aged 65 can get is £33,678 per year. Entitlements rise in line with 
inflation each year – again subject to a cap.

If BHS can fold, then how safe are M&S and John Lewis? | Mary Dejevsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/25/bhs-marks-and-spencer-john-lewis-department-stores>
What about anyone who retired early?


They will generally receive 90% of their entitlement based on what their 
pension was worth at the time. The earlier someone retired, the lower the 
annual cap is set, “to compensate for the longer time you will be receiving 
payments”, said the PPF.

What about retired BHS workers already receiving pensions?


They should get their full pension with no deductions. “We will also generally 
pay 100% compensation to those who have retired on legitimate ill-health 
grounds, regardless of age, and those receiving a pension in relation to 
someone who had died at the time that the employer went bust,” says the PPF. 
Future inflation-linked rises are capped at a maximum of 2.5% a year.

What about the new freedoms on pensions that took effect a year ago?


The changes introduced in April 2015 do not apply to the PPF. Members will 
still receive a regular payment from the organisation rather than a lump sum.

 