
Many businesses that supply the goods and services we use every day understand 
that they have a role to play in keeping global warming in check. Their profits 
depend on it. The long term rise in global temperatures will change where and 
how we extract raw materials and produce the many things we take for granted, 
from the grapes crushed to make wine to the cotton spun to make the shirt you 
are wearing.

Nearly 400 companies and nonprofits signed a letter 
<http://www.lowcarbonusa.org/> last week urging president-elect Donald Trump to 
stay in the Paris climate agreement and support policies that combat global 
warming. The list covers a wide range of industries and includes Ben & Jerry’s, 
Patagonia and Sierra Nevada Brewing. It also contains surprising signatories: 
companies that aren’t known to take part in environmental initiatives, such as 
Tiffany & Co, Monsanto and Staples.

We asked people from a handful of brands who signed the letter why they voiced 
support for the Paris agreement, and how they address climate change in their 
business.

Monsanto 

Phil Miller, vice president of global corporate affairs

Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> has a 
significant impact on agriculture, and agriculture can be a significant part of 
the solution to address climate change. Modern agricultural innovations can 
help with both adaptation to and mitigation of climate change.

With the help of external experts, Monsanto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/monsanto> has developed carbon neutral 
crop production models to share with the broader agriculture and climate 
modeling communities. These models demonstrate the potential of a crop 
production approach, which builds soil carbon in amounts equal to or greater 
than the total amount of carbon emitted to grow and harvest those crops. We 
signed the recent letter because we believe climate change is real and a 
potential threat to global food security.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd838e9cad49fe1f345ee7b2d775593fd389e1c%2F2272_4_2638_1582%2F2638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd838e9cad49fe1f345ee7b2d775593fd389e1c%2F2272_4_2638_1582%2F2638.jpg>
 Iowa cornfield in July. Photograph: Alamy 
New Belgium Brewing

Jenn Vervier, director of sustainability & strategy

I did not hesitate to sign New Belgium onto the letter urging the incoming 
administration to honor the Paris climate accord. It’s the planet’s best chance 
to avoid the most catastrophic effects of climate change. As brewers, we are 
dependent upon agricultural cycles and so climate change is a direct threat to 
our industry. Like all businesses, we depend on economic stability.

But most importantly, as humans, climate change imperils our way of life. All 
the work we’ve done at New Belgium for the past 25 years to be environmental 
stewards – while at the same time growing our company – seems almost irrelevant 
given the prospect of US inaction. If the Trump administration walks away from 
efforts to protect our planet, it will be tantamount to lighting the match that 
finally sets it fully aflame.

Individuals, businesses, political leaders – we all need to raise our voice 
loudly on this. Time is running out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a0832a354ebf6c39f0049e14d8d8c949948ab6%2F0_169_5120_3074%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a0832a354ebf6c39f0049e14d8d8c949948ab6%2F0_169_5120_3074%2F5120.jpg>
 Late afternoon drinks on a New York roof garden bar.
 Photograph: Alamy 
Staples

Jake Swenson, director of sustainable products & services

As the climate continues to change, it will affect our direct operations, our 
customers, our suppliers and ultimately the products we sell. For one example, 
the forests of landowners who sell wood to our paper product suppliers could be 
adversely impacted by increasing risks of fires, drought and/or insect damage 
from rising temperatures.

In 2010, we set a goal of reducing our total carbon emissions by 50% by 2020, 
and we’re halfway there, with a 28% reduction through 2015. By aggressively 
pursuing energy efficiency and shifting to renewable and cleaner energy 
sources, we can save money while reducing our carbon emissions at the same time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d1c349fd482a2eb3bcecba1e8601dfad4b84482%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d1c349fd482a2eb3bcecba1e8601dfad4b84482%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 A home office with laptop, smartphone and digital tablet.
 Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
General Mills

Jerry Lynch, chief sustainability officer

The climate affects most of what we do, from how much rain falls on a farmer’s 
fields to how much energy it takes to heat and cool our production facilities. 
And our choices, from how we ship our ingredients to how our suppliers plow 
their fields, have an impact on the climate. We believe – and scientists agree 
– that in order to halt or slow climate change, we need to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions

We are working toward sustainable emissions levels by 2050 and reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions by 28% by 2025. We’re also focusing our efforts on 
something many of us take for granted, but farmers never do: dirt. Healthy soil 
is alive – and it works hard for our planet. It contains the nutrition crops 
and wildlife need. It holds water, even through the drier times. It holds onto 
gases that would otherwise contribute to climate change. That’s why we’re 
helping farmers grow good, clean dirt – because that’s where a healthy planet 
starts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc71a8ab744d1603206f893bea93c14987134d4c5%2F0_163_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc71a8ab744d1603206f893bea93c14987134d4c5%2F0_163_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Tesco Opens First Of Its “Fresh And Easy” Stores In Los Angeles.
 Photograph: David McNew/Getty Images 
Fetzer Vineyards

Josh Prigge, director of regenerative development

The wine industry is particularly vulnerable to climate change because we 
depend on specific climates to produce quality grapes for our wines. Any 
changes in these climates can directly impact the quality and yield of the 
fruit that we bring to our winery.

We farm all of our nearly 1,000 acres of vineyards in Northern California 
organically. Not only does this practice – sometimes referred to as 
regenerative agriculture – help soils retain vital moisture during dry periods, 
it also retains more carbon in the soil, thus helping mitigate the effects of 
climate change.

We have been taking concrete steps to implement smart climate practices for 
decades. We were the first winery in California to operate on 100% renewable 
energy, in 1999, and the first winery in the world to publicly report and 
verify our greenhouse gas emissions to the Climate Registry, in 2005.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79d9d2cc8996226a6b2edcff20a913e999c78cfa%2F0_86_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79d9d2cc8996226a6b2edcff20a913e999c78cfa%2F0_86_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Workers empty bins of freshly picked cabernet sauvignon wine grapes in 
California. Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images 
Saunders Hotel Group

Tedd Saunders, chief sustainability officer 

Saunders Hotel Group has already been impacted by carbon-fueled extreme 
weather. Our hotel in New Haven, Connecticut was pummeled and flooded by 
Hurricane Sandy and then the blizzard Nemo, which dumped three feet of snow on 
our property. Both times we lost power for six days and had considerable lost 
revenue, canceled events and major food spoilage.

We have been helping lead the world’s largest service sector industry – travel 
and tourism – on sustainable business practices since 1989, but we are ramping 
up our efforts to meet the internationally agreed upon science-based goals. In 
addition to installing EV charging stations at our Lenox Hotel and other 
properties, and a co-gen power plant and CNG (compressed natural gas) vans at 
our Comfort Inn & Suites Boston/Airport, we have dozens of energy efficiency 
and water conservation initiatives in place. We also buy local goods to reduce 
transportation impacts, offer carafes of filtered water in The Lenox 
guestrooms, encourage guests and team members to use public transit, green cabs 
and rental bikes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffec3e9cd5e67a7a1ff7f3b307bf786495aa98d7d%2F0_251_5120_3293%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffec3e9cd5e67a7a1ff7f3b307bf786495aa98d7d%2F0_251_5120_3293%2F5120.jpg>
 Myrtle Beach in South Carolina popular vacation destination. Photograph: Alamy 
Eileen Fisher

Amy Hall, director of social consciousness 

Climate change is a critical business issue for Eileen Fisher. Water scarcity 
affects the crops that provide fibers for our clothing and the dye houses that 
process the fabrics. Energy sources affect our decisions about shipping 
materials and goods around the globe. These are no longer future risks, but 
rather present-day concerns. Companies like Eileen Fisher can no longer afford 
to continue conducting business as usual.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F154086145be138efdc186f5ff79848f570fca131%2F0_0_4548_2730%2F4548.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F154086145be138efdc186f5ff79848f570fca131%2F0_0_4548_2730%2F4548.jpg>
 Gino Celli at his farm near Stockton, California during a drought. Photograph: 
Rich Pedroncelli/AP 
DuPont Industrial Biosciences

Jan Koninckx, global business director for biofuels

DuPont’s belief in the importance of taking prompt, coordinated and strong 
action to address climate change is why we were a founding member of the US 
Climate Action Partnership and why we have invested substantial resources in 
renewable energy, including hundreds of millions of dollars to construct a 
state-of-the-art commercial cellulosic ethanol facility.

Not only is cellulosic ethanol a critical technology to decarbonizing the 
transportation sector and lowering greenhouse gas emissions, it has the added 
benefit of reducing our dependency on foreign oil, revitalizing the rural 
economy and bringing lasting opportunities to farmers across America.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e1856bfe94fb9bb10a0552fbecb7440f82b26ab%2F0_0_3504_2336%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e1856bfe94fb9bb10a0552fbecb7440f82b26ab%2F0_0_3504_2336%2F3504.jpg>
 A driver filling up a tank with biofuel in Berkeley, California.
 Photograph: David Paul Morris/Getty Images 
Autodesk

Lynelle Cameron, senior director of sustainability

Climate change will affect everything that our millions of customers design 
and make – from consumer products to cars to buildings and even the design of 
whole cities.

With the design technology available today, customers now have the ability to 
understand the energy – and therefore climate – implication of everything that 
gets made. Customers can use our software to design clean energy solutions that 
mitigate climate change, including simulating wind turbines and micro 
hydropower turbines. Beyond working with our customers to address energy 
concerns, we have also committed to all seven We Mean Business commitments, 
including our latest effort to power our business with 100% renewable energy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc60998347fd067b797eca54087bda9cf9757357d%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc60998347fd067b797eca54087bda9cf9757357d%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 Car designer working on a computer illustration of a Nissan electric car. 
Photograph: Jeremy Sutton-Hibbert 
Levi Strauss

Anna Walker, senior director of policy and advocacy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c958f423ea1d9876c900aaab78d31785220a1a2%2F774_0_1770_2212%2F1770.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c958f423ea1d9876c900aaab78d31785220a1a2%2F774_0_1770_2212%2F1770.jpg>
Apparel production depends on access to raw materials and natural resources. 
As a 160-year old American company, we must do our part to combat climate 
change to allow us to be a successful business for another 160 years. Our goal 
is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 25% in our direct operations and grow 
our renewable energy purchases to 20% by 2020.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7c5487871a7dde773ceecfb532d6375d21c2dde%2F0_605_5392_3235%2F5392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20businesses%20want%20Trump%20to%20know%20about%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftrump-business-climate-change-paris-emissions-cop21%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7c5487871a7dde773ceecfb532d6375d21c2dde%2F0_605_5392_3235%2F5392.jpg>
 Solar panels at a visitor’s center in Death Valley, California.

 Photograph: Warming Images/REX Shutterstock  