
You will have gathered by now that the fashionable way to wear your coat this 
winter is not just unbuttoned, but falling off your shoulders. The way it might 
be if you got home and then remembered, halfway through taking your coat off, 
that you’d left your phone in the car. Or if you were arriving at the opera and 
had arranged your mink stole to warm your upper arms without obscuring your 
diamond necklace.

I mean, I’m sorry, but – really? Even by fashion’s standards, this is madness, 
and that is saying something. And if it didn’t make much sense when it was on 
the catwalk in March, or first seen in glossy magazines in early September, 
then it makes a whole lot less sense now, when you put your coat on because you 
are cold rather than to model it as an objet d’art.

There is an alternative catwalk-approved look which will save you from 
catching your death this winter. The half-zip tracksuit top worn under a coat 
was a staple of winter’s catwalk collections, and is the last word in practical 
draught-exclusion. Sportswear integrated into your “smart” wardrobe has been a 
theme in style for a while now, and this is the logical next step for a trend 
that started with wearing trainers to work, and led into tracksuit bottoms on 
the fashion week front row.

What I wore this week: corduroy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/21/what-wore-week-corduroy-jess-cartner-morley>
The danger with this look is that it is too sensible to be instantly 
recognisable as being worn with style intent. If you are 23 with dip‑dyed pink 
hair and a curated earring selection, then it will be immediately obvious that 
you are referencing the Burberry catwalk andDeutschland 83 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/04/fashion-in-deutschland-83>
. But if you are 43 and normal-looking then it may appear as if you are wearing 
it to – shudder – keep warm.

There’s no failsafe way round this, short of a drastic dip-dye job. But you 
can send fashion signals, starting by making sure the tracksuit top looks sharp 
(digging out the fleece you wore to death last time the boiler broke isn’t 
going to cut it) and making sure the coat is a clean and classic trench, 
peacoat or Crombie. Oh, and do the zip up before you leave the house – not to 
keep warm air in, but because that’s the look.

• Jess wears: trench coat, £89.99, zara.com <http://www.zara.com/>. Top, £60, 
topshop.com <http://www.topshop.com/?geoip=home>. Trousers, £295, by Vince, from
matchesfashion.com <http://www.matchesfashion.com/womens>. Boots, £120, 
dune.co.uk <http://www.dunelondon.com/>. Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and 
makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes Management.

 