
Crystal Palace

For one season only, Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> experimented with writing 
two lines of information below each player’s name in the team lineup in the 
matchday programme. Something along the lines of: “Back in form with a goal at 
Norwich following a lean spell.” Inane? Possibly. Try writing them for every 
player 21 times a season.


The aim by the end was to think of something to write about Phil Barber that 
didn’t contain the words, “Mr 110%…” It wasn’t until Mark Bright accosted me at 
the club’s Mitcham training ground to find out why I thought that he’d been out 
of form prior to his aforementioned goal at Norwich that I realised that the 
players actually read those lines. They may have been the only ones.

As a 15-year-old, trying to explain to your hero that he hadn’t actually been 
out of form, just unlucky, was not the most pleasant of tasks. He tended to get 
more general comments about his remarkable aerial ability from that point on. 
Either that or point out (if only to him) that he was one half of the explosive 
Wright-Bright partnership that was taking Division One by storm.

How was I meant to concentrate on my GCSEs when I had these thoughts on my 
mind? That was my excuse. When Palace were promoted to the top flight in 1989, 
I answered an advert in the local paper for an “enthusiastic schoolboy” to 
assist after school in the publications department at the club. The payphone by 
the head teacher’s office had never come into better use and my “enthusiasm”, 
which consisted of phoning the department repeatedly until someone answered 15 
minutes before they were due to open, beat off all other challengers.

My reward? Lots of coffee making, photocopying and photo sorting but, also, an 
official club pass which allowed me to access all areas, including both 
dressing rooms. What followed was two years that gave me a privileged insight 
into the workings of the club at the most successful time in their history.

Highlights were numerous: Ian Wright trying to sell me a pair of his size 
seven Nike boots which were, even at that age, three sizes too small, on the 
proviso that the leather was “stretchy”; Steve Coppell calling me “Tony” for 
six months before I had the confidence to correct him; ironing a Subbuteo pitch 
before a game between Geoff Thomas and Andy Thorn that was televised on the 
local Croydon Cable TV channel and being referred to as “the groundsman”; 
playing for the staff football team at Selhurst Park alongside Coppell; playing 
pool on a weekly basis with Mark Dennis (who never seemed to be fit and was, 
therefore, an incredible pool player).

Two tasks, in particular, stand out. One concerned Palace’s Clubcall service 
that was updated daily with “news, views and interviews” – all for just 39p a 
minute. On one occasion, the manager of the publications department asked me to 
record the League Cup third round draw on a tape cassette and then load it on 
to the Clubcall system. This was the first time I’d ever done this but problems 
loomed – the biggest being that the draw was at the end of Midweek Sports 
Special, it was a school night and I usually went to bed at 10pm.

The inevitable happened and sleep consumed me but I awoke panicked at the 
thought of my manager calling the Clubcall service and getting no new news. The 
only way out was to creep down to use our house phone at 3am – I’d been up all 
night weighing up my options – putting some of the balls from our minisnooker 
table into a bag and then pretending to draw two myself before announcing, in 
my most formal voice, that Palace had, in fact, drawn Leyton Orient. I was 
praised for my conscientiousness by my unknowing manager.

The best job could, actually, quickly turn into the worst depending on the 
team’s performance on the pitch. For one season I was asked to sit on the 
television gantry to watch the home games at Selhurst Park, which provided the 
best view of the action. The reason? Immediately after games, I would rush down 
to the home changing room and hand a copy of the game on videotape to Coppell.

When Palace won, all was sweetness and light but one League Cup defeat against 
Leicester springs to mind when the video failed to record. My knock on the 
changing room door had clearly interrupted a dressing down and no simile can 
adequately explain just how pursed Coppell’s lips became as I told him the news 
that the video hadn’t recorded in front of the chastened players. Some of them 
should certainly have been thanking me considering the way they’d just played.
Tom Maslona <https://twitter.com/tommymas4>

Coventry City
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwhen-saturday-comes-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fworking-football-clubs-coventry-city-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddfeeb36850d98e589bbb3a1ef5115505b5abf9a%2F0_0_3368_2336%2F3368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20two%20interns%20learned%20from%20working%20at%20football%20clubs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0in%201989-90%20and%202014-15&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwhen-saturday-comes-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fworking-football-clubs-coventry-city-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20two%20interns%20learned%20from%20working%20at%20football%20clubs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0in%201989-90%20and%202014-15&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwhen-saturday-comes-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fworking-football-clubs-coventry-city-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddfeeb36850d98e589bbb3a1ef5115505b5abf9a%2F0_0_3368_2336%2F3368.jpg>
 The Coventry fans were happy to be back at the Ricoh but they weren’t always 
impressed by the club’s Twitter account. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
As part of a college placement I worked for a year as an unpaid communications 
assistant atCoventry City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> in 
2014-15. The move coincided with the return to the city’s Ricoh Arena after a 
year’s exile in Northampton. It was a whirlwind daily routine of tweeting from 
the club’s account, filming training sessions that might
or might not be uploaded onto the official website and writing for the 
matchday programme, specifically the “visitors” section.

When you read these profiles, spare a thought for someone who wrote that a 
club won the LDV Vans Trophy in 1993 only to be informed, in multiple indigent 
messages online, that it was 1992. Once I got past the constant Twitter 
harassment (such as being asked to “kill yourself” after accidentally 
identifying the wrong player who had missed a chance) it was an enjoyable 
experience, knowing that thousands of people are hanging on your every word for 
updates.

As we know, Twitter gives everybody a voice, and some get very loud indeed 
when they are holding forth about their football team. Such as those who send 
tweets to the club’s account as if they are speaking to Coventry City as an 
entity. Believe me, Steve and Gary, we really want to “sort it out” but short 
of pulling on a pair of Golas, scaling down the press box and belting one in 
from 30 yards, what are we to do?

It was always a thrill to encounter some players at the training ground every 
day who I’d only ever seen before on TV. I’m inclined to think that some didn’t 
realise I was there for the whole season and assumed that I was someone’s 
younger brother, occasionally mooching around the practice pitches. Some 
members of the squad were quiet and unassuming, some loud and brash, some 
seemed to care, some didn’t.

Striker Frank Nouble, now playing in China, was always a lively presence and 
couldn’t keep still when talking to the press after his winning goal against 
Gillingham on the club’s return to the Ricoh in September 2014, while 
goalkeeper Reice Charles-Cook could be cut out for a media career – a free-kick 
challenge filmed for the club’s TV channel had him doing a convincing 
impression of YouTube performer KSI with joke commentaries over players’ 
attempts and spoof interviews. In contrast, asking Scottish winger Jim O’Brien 
to speak to the local press after a heavy defeat was the hardest task I have 
yet had to face in my short media career.

Team talks are a waste of time – and I heard hundreds of them as a professional
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog/2016/aug/02/team-talks-waste-time-footballer-manager>
Two memories of my time at Coventry stand out. One was when a work experience 
teenager came in for the day and offered to use his iPhone to film a post-match 
interview with someone in the squad for the in-house TV channel, Sky Blues 
Player. He seemed to do a good job, standing in the right place and recording 
everything. Only afterwards did he start to look worried. It turned out that 
midway through, the iPhone ran out of battery. Not wanting to stop the player 
in full flow, he pretended to keep filming all the way through to the end; the 
half interview was never broadcast.

The other leads to an admission that I nearly did considerable damage to 
Coventry City’s reputation without realising. Twitter is a useful thing to have 
on an iPhone but not when you accidentally pocket-tweet a series of random 
letters and numbers when you’re out at 2am. The message, such as it was, got 
retweeted several times along with various complaints, with people bemoaning 
that “This is what our club has become #Shambles,” before being deleted. And no 
one knew where it had come from or who was responsible. Until now.Tom Bloomfield
 <https://twitter.com/TJ_Bloomfield>

• This article appeared first in When Saturday Comes <http://www.wsc.co.uk/>
• Follow WSC <https://twitter.com/WSC_magazine>, Tom Maslona 
<https://twitter.com/tommymas4> and Tom Bloomfield 
<https://twitter.com/TJ_Bloomfield> on Twitter
 