
If you go by the fashion industry calendar, autumn starts at the beginning of 
September; if you set your watch by nature, it’s all about when the leaves 
turn. But truly, the point when autumn gets real is when you have to get up and 
ready for the day while it’s pitch dark outside and getting dressed seems a 
much less inviting option than getting back under the duvet.

At this point, all the plans you had back in those halcyon days of early 
September for a directional new season look based on crisp shirting and 
trousers cropped above the ankle bone go out of the window, because the only 
thing you want to wear is a jumper. This primal appeal is the reason I buy too 
much knitwear, finding myself drawn like a sucker to those neat, pretty 
coloured stacks that are everywhere at this time of year, stockpiling polo 
necks the way other people do Heinz soup. When the apocalypse comes, I’m your 
girl if you’ve got a spare penknife or torch to trade for Gap cashmere.

For now, when it’s not the actual apocalypse but just a bit chilly and 
miserable, the challenge is to keep a soupçon of new-season snazziness in your 
wardrobe on days when getting dressed feels like a chore to be got out of the 
way as quickly as possible so you can have some toast. And I’ve got an idea. 
The answer is to get dressed the wrong way round: put your jumper on first, 
then a slip dress. It’s a thing, in fashion, now. I’ve never mastered the white 
T-shirt under a slip dress, which is the summer version of this (you had to be 
a 90s supermodel to pull that one off) but this autumnal equivalent is more 
flattering, especially if you choose a polo neck as your base layer.

What I wore this week: the updated power dress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/23/what-i-wore-this-week-updated-sheath-dress>
I don’t wear spaghetti strap dresses to work, even on hot summer days (not 
judging, just not personally wild about a naked shoulder in the office, and 
with a spaghetti strap you can sometimes inadvertently give a full frontal 
armpit view that’s quite intimate) so this gives dresses that normally get 
airtime on a sunny Saturday a new, chilly-Monday lease of life. It’s cosy 
enough for autumn, but with a reminder of summer jollity. And most of all, it’s 
right for now.

•Jess wears jumper 
<http://www.joseph-fashion.com/knitwear/cashair-high-neck-top/invt/w6101290705150>
, £245, joseph.co.uk.Velvet slip dress, £49, topshop.com 
<http://www.topshop.com>. Court shoes 
<http://www.dunelondon.com/aiyana-pointed-toe-high-heel-court-shoe-0085503940110291/>
, £75, dunelondon.com.Copper chair 
<http://www.grahamandgreen.co.uk/isaac-iron-chair-in-copper>, £89, 
grahamandgreen.co.uk

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 