
Corduroy makes you look intellectual. You can add a slim volume of poetry 
peeking out from a blazer pocket if you wish, but this probably labours the 
point. Just the fabric itself has enough of a campus-dwelling, 
Woody-Allen-watching vibe.

But like Woody Allen, corduroy doesn’t quite mean what it once did. Thirty 
five years ago, wearing a corduroy jacket meant something quite different 
(maverick anti-establishment) to wearing a tweed jacket (old duffer.) But that 
distinction is lost on anyone who is under about 35. Wearing cord and wearing 
tweed are now more or less interchangeable. Both mean: old person, or person 
who likes to spend time in the countryside, or person who reads actual physical 
books.

You want to own the brainy aspects of wearing corduroy, while cutting the 
pipe-smoking bit off at the pass. First, you need to be a bit careful with the 
brightly coloured stuff. Yellow or red corduroy looks fabulous in J Crew 
adverts but the effect that in your head was “Jenna Lyons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/may/26/profile-jenna-lyons-j-crew>
 throws autumnal Brooklyn brunch party” can wind up closer to Toad of Toad Hall 
once you factor in windblown messy hair and the sensible shoes you changed into 
having realised jewelled sandals weren’t all that practical in late October.

What I wore this week: velvet | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/07/what-wore-week-velvet-jess-cartner-morley>
Admittedly, corduroy culottes, which I am wearing here, have a vaguely plus 
fours air to them which isn’t a million miles from Toad Hall. I’ve tried to 
mitigate this with the aid of a frilly white shirt. Whether it helps or hinders 
I’m not sure, but I’m going with it, because I think that another thing you 
have to avoid is the corduroy-and-jumper combination. A shirt is better, even 
if you wear a tunic jumper on top, or a polo neck underneath. Wearing corduroy 
trousers with a crewneck jumper kills your style credentials, because it 
suggests an overly literal approach to getting dressed, as if you either take 
all your fashion cues from the weather forecast (“Today it will be cold. 
Therefore I will wear warm, practical clothes”) or from whatever you can find 
in the dog basket. Corduroy can make you look clever. But only if you think it 
through.

• Jess wears ruffle top 
<http://www.uterque.com/gb/ready-to-wear/shirts-and-blouses/frilled-poplin-top-c1261017p7581505.html?color=250&listId=parrilla_ready_to_wear%2Fshirts_and_blouses&listPosition=4>
, £75, uterque.com.Cords 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.com/uk/catalog/productdetail.jsp?id=5123387334500&category=SEARCH+RESULTS>
, £46, urbanoutfitters.com.Heels 
<http://www.dunelondon.com/aiyana-pointed-toe-high-heel-court-shoe-0085503940110291/>
, £75, dunelondon.com.Chair <http://www.grahamandgreen.co.uk/cafe-chairs>, £75, 
grahamandgreen.co.uk


Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 