
In August 1960 a promising but amateurish young band travelled to Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg> in the back of an Austin 
minivan. They had come to seek fortune in the vibrant underground music scene 
emerging from the city’s crumbling docklands. It was hard work for these young 
men in the viceland of the Reeperbahn, Hamburg’s bristling red-light district.


They gigged almost every night, hostage to the whims of their employers: “Mach 
schau…mach schau (make a show),” was the mantra dictated to them by the owner 
of the Kaiserkeller, one of the nightclubs in which they played. And though at 
first they earned little and slept in a dingy room beside the ladies’ toilets 
of the Bambi Kino, a seedy movie theatre, they would go on to become megastars.

The band’s name was, of course, the Beatles, and they had come to Hamburg from 
another great seafaring town, Liverpool. Seventeen years later, with the group 
dissolved andBeatlemania 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beatlemania_%28musical%29> just opened on 
Broadway, a footballer named Kevin Keegan made the exact same trip, albeit in 
rather more glamorous circumstances.

Like the Beatles, he came in search of a fortune. John, Paul, George, Stuart 
and Pete had swapped Mersey for Elbe to take advantage of the higher pay in 
Hamburg and it was no different for Keegan. While playing forLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, his reported annual salary 
was £12,000. At Hamburger Sport-Verein, whom he joined in 1977, he would earn 
£250,000 a year after endorsement deals.

Even in those pre-Bosman days, Keegan knew his value. He had insisted on a 
£500,000 release clause in hisLiverpool  
<http://www.thesefootballtimes.net/#%21the-captain-before-the-armband/cmg6>
contract, encouraging suitors to offer a larger wage packet given the 
relatively reduced transfer fee. Well before the 1976-77 season began, his 
intention to leave Anfield was clear. Liverpool’s chairman at the time, Sir 
John Smith, did not stand in his way.

“Selfish and self-centred are perhaps not the right words,” opined Bob Harris, 
one of Keegan’s many biographers. “But he was very much his own man. He knew 
what he wanted to do and how he was going to do it and would fight for that.”

By the closing stages of that campaign, the only unresolved matter was where 
he would end up. There had been rumours of several European giants showing 
interest. “But the glamorous clubs of Spain did not see him as an exotic enough 
talent, while the technicians ofItaly  
<http://www.thesefootballtimes.net/#%21football-against-the-tide/cui>were 
undecided,” explains Ian Ridley inhis 2008 biography of Keegan 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Kevin-Keegan-Intimate-Portrait-Footballs/dp/1847394000>
.

With the continent’s flashiest sides dithering, up stepped HSV. The German 
club was swimming in cash thanks to significant investment from Japanese 
manufacturing kingpins Hitachi, and the person spending it was general manager 
Dr Peter Krohn. It was Krohn’s decision to pursue Keegan and he was willing to 
reach deep into the club’s coffers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fkevin-keegan-hamburg-liverpool-ballon-dor-bundesliga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417523170059%2F1ae71ab8-ae86-4db5-8d3b-80049bb9aa06-1724x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Kevin%20Keegan%20went%20to%20Hamburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fkevin-keegan-hamburg-liverpool-ballon-dor-bundesliga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Kevin%20Keegan%20went%20to%20Hamburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fkevin-keegan-hamburg-liverpool-ballon-dor-bundesliga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417523170059%2F1ae71ab8-ae86-4db5-8d3b-80049bb9aa06-1724x2040.jpeg>
 Hamburg show off their new signing. Photograph: Colorsport/Rex/Colorsport/REX 
For Keegan, a footballer not shy of putting his own interests first, it was a 
simple equation: HSV wanted him and could afford to give him what he asked for, 
so he accepted their offer. He was keen to capitalise on every opportunity 
presented to him, and the deal tabled by Krohn allowed him significant room to 
manoeuvre when it came to the additional revenue to be made by commercialising 
his image. In that regard, Keegan was a pioneer.

“He had the first ‘face deal’ with his club, giving a degree of image rights 
control,” writesBarney Ronay in The Manager 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Manager-Absurd-Important-Football/dp/0751542792>. 
“He put his name to everything from the freshly launched and moribund Patrick 
boots, to a frightening and didactic TV road safety campaign.” But, for all his 
newfound material wealth, Keegan’s first few months in West Germany would prove 
difficult.

“Going to Germany, it was a tough one,” said Keegan in a recent interview. 
“Five or six years at Liverpool and I’d run my race there. I just fancied a 
challenge, and Germany was my challenge.” For a young man accustomed to the 
smoky cosiness of Anfield’s Boot Room, the unfamiliar atmosphere of Hamburg and 
HSV would take some getting used to.

To start with, his first home in Germany, an ugly hotel room on the outskirts 
of the city, was certainly not as bad as the Bambi Kino had been for the 
Beatles, but was marginalising nonetheless. Only when he had moved into a 
farmhouse outside the city did Keegan begin to settle.

On top of that, he faced isolation from his new team-mates. The squad he came 
into was a strong one, proud of its success up to that point and wary of this 
funny-looking newcomer. It was also a group destabilised after the departure of 
popular coach Kuno Klotzer.

Klotzer had led HSV to a Cup-Winners’ Cup victory in 1977, but was ditched by 
Krohn in favour of the louche globetrotter Rudi Gutendorf. Artur Rotmil, 
writing for World Soccer that year, noted that “the players specifically asked 
the management not to break up the winning side, but to keep them together for 
next season. But now, not only is the team torn apart, not only did Klotzer 
leave, but with Gutendorf another ‘showman’ has appeared alongside the 
megalomaniac and flamboyant Dr Krohn.”

Like Gutendorf, Keegan was seen as Krohn’s man; a flash and expensive addition 
to an unpretentious, artisanal side. During those nervous early days, said 
Hunter Davies in 1999: “Players wouldn’t pass the ball to him, jealous of the 
salary Hamburg had to pay to get him from Liverpool. Then he’d been sent off in 
a friendly and was suspended for eight weeks.”

Keegan’s poor form on the pitch didn’t help his integration. A personal low 
point had been the European Super Cup final when Liverpool, led by his 
replacement Kenny Dalglish, destroyed HSV 7-1 on aggregate. By the half-way 
stage of theBundesliga 
<http://www.thesefootballtimes.net/#%21rb-leipzig-success-before-tradition/c1xq8>
, his new team lay in 12th place and had already crashed out of the Cup 
Winners’ Cup. A dream move was beginning to seem more like a nightmare for the 
Yorkshireman.

But it would soon turn sweeter. Come the end of the 1977-78 season, Keegan’s 
form had turned around despite mixed results for HSV, who finished ninth in the
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>. His 
performances improved to such an extent that he was awarded the Ballon d’Or 
later that year – absurdly, rules excluding foreigners meant he was not 
eligible to become German Player of the Year.

Things were also beginning to change for HSV. The loud Krohn was replaced by 
Gunter Netzer, a man Deutsche Welle described as “theclassic playmaker 
<http://www.theoriginalcoach.com/#%21death-of-the-classic-number-10/cru9> with 
business sense”. Netzer was a footballing legend and a playboy with an 
entrepreneurial streak. He had become involved with HSV after offering to run 
the club’s magazine. Instead, Die Rothosen hired him as general manager.

“When he came, the great age of HSV began,” Felix Magath 
<http://www.thesefootballtimes.net/#%21the-felix-magath-before-felix-magath/c22fr>
, a midfielder for the Hamburg side, would later remark. With Netzer at the 
helm, the sleeping giant of HSV truly awoke. Since the foundation of the 
Bundesliga in 1963, they had not won the title, their most recent win coming in 
1960 when the championship was still decided as a tournament between the top 
two sides from each region. Nearly two decades without being national champions 
was hard on a club known as “The Dinosaur” for its long-standing prominence 
within German football.

To help rectify that, Netzer brought in the drunken Yugoslav disciplinarian, 
Branko Zebec, as head coach for the 1978-79 season. This duo would oversee the 
arrival of players of great calibre, such as Horst Hrubesch (the 
“Header-Beast”) and, later, a post-Cosmos Franz Beckenbauer. Together, they 
solidified the coaching and administrative side of things.

Seemingly the only problem Netzer couldn’t solve was the fans, for in the 
stands, an unsavoury element was beginning to make itself heard. The
Aktionsfront Nationaler Sozialisten, a neo-Nazi group based in Hamburg, was 
founded the year Keegan came to Germany and almost immediately began to recruit 
among the disenchanted on the Volksparkstadion’s West Terrace. As a result of 
their presence, HSV came to represent the far-right of Hamburg, and pitched 
battles between the club’s fans and their left-wing counterparts were common.

Despite growing concerns off the pitch, the team was coming together under the 
rigid, systematic approach of Zebec. The addition of the target-man Hrubesch 
allowed Keegan to flourish – to some extent Hrubesch-Keegan was Toshack-Keegan 
revisited; Kleine und Große rather than Little and Large. With the imaginative 
Magath prompting behind these two, HSV now possessed one of the most lethal 
forward lines in the league.

Keegan’s second season in Hamburg started with a 3-0 demolition of Borussia 
Monchengladbach, at the time one of Europe’s best sides. Keegan missed a 
penalty but the win was an indicator of what was to come. Thrashings of 
defending champions Koln, as well as Hertha BSC, Schalke, Dortmund and Fortuna 
Düsseldorf would follow, and by the time HSV beat Bayern Munich 1-0 in 
December, their title credentials were clear.

In the New Year, Keegan cut loose. He was instrumental during the run-in, 
scoring 11 goals in the last 12 games of the season, combining wonderfully with 
Hrubesch and Magath. From 10 March to 9 June the team did not lose a match, 
almost three months undefeated. When they finally succumbed to Bayern in the 
final round of the season, HSV were already Bundesliga champions.

Keegan, who had been integral to the drive, had made himself a legend in 
Germany. He won the Ballon d’Or again that year and the HSV fans christened him
Mächtig Maus (Mighty Mouse). The day of the Bayern defeat, his first single, 
Head Over Heels in Love <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3MnMskejuvc>, was 
released. Hamburg, it seemed, had fallen in love with Keegan, as it had with 
the young English musicians who had recorded their first single in the city all 
those years before.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3MnMskejuvc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3MnMskejuvc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3MnMskejuvc&media=>
The following year, HSV’s industrious attacking team was unleashed on Europe. 
They cruised through the early rounds against Valur and Dinamo Tbilisi before 
encountering a tougher opponent in Hajduk Split of Yugoslavia. Away goals got 
Hamburg through after a 3-2 defeat in Split had given them a scare.

In the semi-final awaited a Real Madrid side containing “Black Lightning”, the 
Englishman Laurie Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/25/west-brom-three-degrees-book-extract>
. A 2-0 defeat at the Bernabéu left HSV reeling, but the loss merely served to 
set up one of this team’s hallmark performances. Given license to do so by 
Zebec, the German side took off the handbrake in the return leg. They played 
the match at full tilt, with only one thing in mind: scoring goals. Against a 
defence shielded by Vicente del Bosque, Keegan and HSV ran riot, swarming all 
over the Madrid outfit from the moment the game began. Less than 20 minutes had 
passed and the deficit had been erased through goals from Kaltz and Hrubesch.

With HSV still pouring forward, Cunningham pulled one back, but it was for 
nothing. The players walked off at half-time with the score reading HSV 4-1 
Real Madrid. Full-time brought a 5-1 finish, a 5-3 aggregate win for HSV. That 
night, they had played “football from another planet”. It was, as described by 
Netzer: “the funniest and best thing I’ve ever seen from HSV.” The team he had 
sculpted would contest the 1980 European Cup final against Brian Clough’s 
Nottingham Forest.

Central to it all was the little man from the north of England, a scampering 
dribbler with a bubble-perm taking on and beating Europe’s best. As much as 
anyone else, Keegan was the catalyst for HSV’s rise. Yet, in his typically 
forward-thinking way, he was already pondering the next step. As it had been 
for his Liverpool career back in 1977, the European Cup final would be a 
curtain call for Keegan at HSV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fkevin-keegan-hamburg-liverpool-ballon-dor-bundesliga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417523692252%2Fb099f09a-3f58-4580-ab50-5db6e48798df-2060x1669.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Kevin%20Keegan%20went%20to%20Hamburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fkevin-keegan-hamburg-liverpool-ballon-dor-bundesliga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Kevin%20Keegan%20went%20to%20Hamburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fkevin-keegan-hamburg-liverpool-ballon-dor-bundesliga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417523692252%2Fb099f09a-3f58-4580-ab50-5db6e48798df-2060x1669.jpeg>
 Hamburg’s fans show their appreciation to Keegan. Photograph: Colorsport/REX 
By now his popularity was such that he was the face of BP as part of their 
sponsorship of HSV. It emerged that in order to confirm the BP deal he had 
turned down moves to several other clubs during contract renegotiations before 
the 1979-80 season, including HSV’s future opponents in the 1980 final. The 
rebuffed approach from Clough to Keegan during a joint stint as TV analysts, 
writes Ian Ridley, “came in the gents’ toilets at London Weekend Television”.

But, significantly, the same £500,000 release clause that had allowed Keegan 
to depart Liverpool had been inserted into his new HSV contract. Midway through 
the season, when it became clear he wanted out of Hamburg, the big clubs again 
came sniffing. Long before the European Cup final, it was announced that Keegan 
would not sign for Juventus (Keegan’s wife feared kidnap in Italy),Barcelona  
<http://www.thesefootballtimes.net/#%21luis-suarez-footballs-raging-bull/c1u07>
or Liverpool (who turned down the opportunity to re-sign him), but for Laurie 
McMenemy’s Southampton. Keegan, again, had surprised.

His swansong at HSV, the final against Forest, would not end in glory. Hamburg 
flooded forward once more in all-out attack, but they met a disciplined Forest 
side and Peter Shilton, who was in inspired form.Mächtig Maus did his best as 
always, scurrying everywhere on the pitch in search of victory, but it was 
Clough who had the last laugh.

“To the last, Keegan ran and ran, goaded and coaxed, but it was all to no 
avail for Hamburg”, was the summation ofDavid Lacey in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidlacey> the day after Forest’s 1-0 win.

With HSV finishing as runners-up in both European Cup and Bundesliga in 1980, 
the 1979 league title would be the last club medal Keegan would ever win as a 
player. He didn’t get the send-off his wonderful time at the club deserved but 
he remains one of Hamburg’s most beloved adopted sons. Like the floppy-haired 
musicians who thrilled the rainy old city in the sixties, Keegan made himself 
part of Hamburg folklore.

• This article appeared first on These Football Times 
<http://www.thesefootballtimes.net/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Luke 
Ginnell <https://twitter.com/heavyfirsttouch> on Twitter
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 