
Spanish football at the turn of the Millennium was genuinely competitive. 
Thrashings were rare, shock results were a regular occurrence and trophies were 
deserting the traditional powerhouses in favour of the distant provinces. The 
1999-2000 season was the pinnacle of this as the league trophy went to Galicia, 
the Pichichi Trophy went to Cantabria and the Zamora Trophy for best goalkeeper 
wound up in the Basque city of Vitoria-Gasteiz. It was the last time that 
domestic silverware completely eluded Spanish football’s big two, and it was a 
season in which the underdogs ruled supreme, while three previous league 
champions were sent tumbling out of the top flight and into the Segunda 
Division.

This unsettling of the usual pecking order wasn’t to everyone’s taste. The 
campaign was a cocktail of shocks and scandal, and to this day nobody is quite 
sure whether it was one of Spanish football’s finest hours or most comical 
episodes. To muddle minds further, almost inexplicably a season when the big 
clubs seemed to veer from one disaster to another also served up an all-Spanish 
Champions League final, the first time that two sides from the same country had 
ever met in European football’s showpiece occasion. A sure sign that Spanish 
football was flourishing you might have thought, but it only adds to the 
mystery of quite how the Primera División title ended up in the country’s 19th 
largest city.

Nobody really saw either the continental success or domestic surprises coming. 
The previous year had finished with an orthodox Barcelona-Real Madrid top two 
in La Liga but neither had made any impression on the Champions League, with 
Barcelona going out in the group stage andReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> humbled by an Andriy 
Shevchenko-inspired Dynamo Kyiv in the quarter-finals.

The traditional curtain-raiser for the 1999-2000 season saw defending league 
champions Barça take on Copa del Rey holders Valencia for the Supercopa de 
España. Valencia were clearly on the up with Gaizka Mendieta pulling the 
strings from midfield but had undergone a managerial change in the summer with 
Mallorca boss Héctor Cúper coming in to replace Atlético-bound Claudio Ranieri, 
so they were still to some degree an unknown quantity. If Valencia could juggle 
the demands of European and domestic football, they were viewed as perhaps the 
only team with any chance of breaking up the domination ofBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> and Real Madrid, who had 
between them claimed the league title in 14 of the previous 15 seasons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aa30be425e6dcdf885ce669581922b543edcd33%2F0_49_2259_1356%2F2259.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season's%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season%27s%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aa30be425e6dcdf885ce669581922b543edcd33%2F0_49_2259_1356%2F2259.jpg>
 The Barcelona team that won the league in 1998-99. Photograph: Paul 
McFegan/Sportsphoto 
However, up against Louis van Gaal’s star-studded Barcelona side that included 
Luís Figo, Patrick Kluivert, the De Boer brothers and future managers Pep 
Guardiola and Luis Enrique,Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> were still clear underdogs for 
the tie. A late Claudio López goal at the Mestalla decided the first leg in 
favour of the hosts but it was the second leg when they really set the tone for 
a season of surprises.

Three times Barcelona took the lead at the Camp Nou only for their defensive 
deficiencies to be quickly exposed by a Valencia side that had scored seven 
goals on two winning visits to the stadium in the previous campaign. A 3-3 draw 
gave Valencia the first silverware of the season and offered the first inklings 
that the tide of power might just be beginning to alter course.

Over in the capital, Real Madrid had been busy investing heavily following an 
unsuccessful year but, this being the pre-galáctico era, it was done in a more 
balanced and less headline-grabbing way. Michel Salgado and Iván Helguera 
arrived to supposedly bolster an embarrassingly leaky defence and their side 
was largely made up of members of a relatively uninspiring Spanish national 
side. The additions of Steve McManaman and Geremi didn’t exactly capture the 
imagination around the Santiago Bernabéu but the incoming Nicolas Anelka, at 
the time regarded as the hottest young striker in Europe, looked set to provide 
genuine competition for Raúl and Fernando Morientes up front.

The league campaign started routinely enough with Real Madrid winning away at 
Mallorca, who had been the surprise package of the previous season, while 
Barcelona won 2-0 at home to Zaragoza. ADeportivo La Coruña 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna> side that had also 
been fairly active in the transfer market topped the table after the opening 
round of fixtures with an impressive 4-1 win over Alavés but Barcelona would be 
on top before too long, after winning their opening three games of the season 
to cement their billing as title favourites. Any hopes of a title challenge 
from Valencia appeared to be up in smoke after they contrived to lose their 
opening four league games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03985328b75c88aeb0d7774e84f45309b69222f9%2F0_36_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season's%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season%27s%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03985328b75c88aeb0d7774e84f45309b69222f9%2F0_36_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Nicolas Anelka joins John Toshack at Real Madrid. Photograph: Paco Campos/AP 
The peculiarity of the season began to show in the fourth round of fixtures. 
Barcelona sunk to a surprising 2-1 defeat in the Basque Country at Alavés, who 
had only stayed up on the final day of the previous campaign, while newly 
promoted Rayo Vallecano won at Celta Vigo to assume an unlikely top spot; they 
would retain their strong form over the opening few months of the season. From 
that point on the shocks would come thick and fast and, with each passing week, 
it seemed the belief of the minnows grew and grew while the giants of Spanish 
football found new ways to implode.

In week six, Valencia headed to the Bernabéu with just a point to their name. 
They defied the odds to put in a stunning first-half display and race into a 
3-0 lead. Fernando Morientes pulled two back for Real Madrid but Valencia held 
on for all three points and, although further slip-ups meant they were too far 
back to challenge for the title, they remained a thorn in the side of the top 
clubs all season – and dangerous opponents for anyone on their day as many 
elite European clubs would soon find out.

The following week was el clásico and John Toshack’s side went to Barcelona 
desperate for a result to really kick-start their season. A lively game 
displayed both sides’ attacking prowess but defensive frailties in almost equal 
measure as goals from Rivaldo and Figo – in his final season at Barcelona 
before his infamous switch – were cancelled out by a brace from Raúl for the 
visitors, who secured a 2-2 draw.

It wasn’t a disastrous result for Real Madrid by any means but it didn’t prove 
to be any kind of springboard either and, by the end of October, the white 
handkerchiefs were out in force at the Bernabéu as Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink 
netted twice as a struggling Atlético Madrid side claimed the derby spoils with 
a 3-1 win in their neighbour’s backyard. It extended Real’s winless run to 
eight league matches and the only mild surprise was that it took another few 
weeks for Toshack to be given his marching orders.

His replacement was Vicente del Bosque, a man who personified Real Madrid, 
having played for the club over 400 times and been associated with it in 
various capacities for over three decades. Del Bosque was an inexperienced, 
perhaps even reluctant, manager and his only real long-term experience of the 
position had come in the late 1980s when he had led Real Madrid’s reserve team 
for three years.

If fans were hoping he would be the immediate solution they would be sadly 
mistaken. With just a month to go until the end of a century in which Real 
Madrid had been the dominant force in both Spanish and European football, they 
were in a state of crisis, and on 3 December 1999 they suffered one of their 
most humiliating defeats.

Remembering Florentino Pérez's Pavones, the players Real Madrid forgot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2015/jan/29/remembering-florentino-perez-pavones-real-madrid-zidane>
Two goals from Aston Villa reject Savo Milosevic and a brace from the anything 
but prolific forward Juanele led to an almost unbelievable final score of Real 
Madrid 1–5 Real Zaragoza. It was the biggest away win all season inLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> and one that left Real 
Madrid in 17th place after 14 games and – as was the case for Valencia – their 
title dreams already looked as good as over.

With their rivals in a state of utter disarray, you would have thought 
Barcelona had an open passage to a third successive title. Indeed, when they 
demolished Athletic Bilbao 4-0 in week nine to go top of the table, the Catalan 
press was busy building up Van Gaal’s team as the champions elect. However, 
while Real Madrid were going through their autumn horror show, things wouldn’t 
prove much brighter for Barcelona. Next up was a trip to the Riazor but they 
were caught cold by two clinical finishes from Depor’s summer signing Roy 
Makaay inside the opening 20 minutes and, despite a goal from Rivaldo in the 
second half, they couldn’t prevent a 2-1 defeat. It proved the start of a 
miserable four-match losing streak in the league as Barça lost every game in 
November and shipped eight goals in defeats to Málaga, Mallorca and Valencia.

Faced with the prospect of the ill-fated second group phase in the Champions 
League, Van Gaal had little choice but to rotate his squad and blood talented 
academy graduates Xavi and Carles Puyol with increasing regularity. However, 
serious question-marks were lingering over several of their more experienced 
defenders. That series of poor defensive showings and another 3-2 defeat at 
bottom club Sevilla in December left the Dutch boss struggling to decide upon a 
regular back four – a problem that would haunt him for the rest of the season.

Fifteen matches in, Spain’s Primera División looked as though it had been 
turned on its head. It was an all-Galician top two with Deportivo leading the 
way from Celta Vigo, while Zaragoza, Rayo Vallecano and Alavés completed a top 
five that nobody could possibly have foreseen.

Of the surprise quintet it was unquestionably Depor who had been the most 
impressive. Makaay had provided them with a real cutting edge in the final 
third and would go on to score 26 goals in all competitions that season. The 
arrivals of Victor Sánchez and Slavisa Jokanovic in midfield were proving the 
ideal complement to the flare of Depor’s sizeable Brazilian contingent, which 
included Mauro Silva, Djalminha, Flávio Conceição and Rio de Janeiro-born Spain 
international Donato.

Their win over Barcelona had instigated a seven-match winning run in the 
league that saw Depor assume a commanding position at the top of the table. By 
New Year’s Day, they had a six-point lead over Zaragoza, who had moved up to 
second after a 2-1 win over Depor in the final game of 1999. More 
significantly, the Galicians still held a nine-point advantage over Barcelona 
and 13 points on Real Madrid, who had ended the year with a couple of 
morale-boosting wins to move away from the doomsday scenario of a relegation 
battle.

La Liga was set for an intriguing second half of the campaign. All of a sudden 
it was Deportivo, a side that had never won the title, were being talked about 
as the team to beat. They were by no means the finished article, though, and 
were also prone to the odd defensive horror show of their own. In keeping with 
the pattern of the season, the leaders would put in a series of abject displays 
in early 2000 and it seemed as though the status quo could yet be restored.

They started the New Year with a 3-0 home defeat against lowly Racing Santander
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/racingsantander> and began to lose the 
plot completely on the road, losing five successive away matches at Alavés, 
Real Valladolid, Numancia, Málaga and Barcelona. In any ordinary season, such 
form would have seen them lose serious ground on all of their rivals, but it 
was already abundantly clear that this was no ordinary campaign.

At the Riazor they had quickly got back to winning ways and a dazzling display 
from the eccentric Djalminha helped burst a resurgent Real Madrid’s bubble with 
a crushing 5-2 win in early February. It was another woefully inept showing 
from Del Bosque’s men as Depor spurned several glaring opportunities that 
should have made the scoreline even more emphatic.

While Rayo Vallecano and Celta Vigo had faded out of contention, Zaragoza and 
Alavés had very much stayed the course and with 10 games to go there were still 
five clubs in with a realistic chance of winning the title. Deportivo remained 
in pole position with a four-point advantage over an Alavés side that had 
quietly sneaked into second place. They lacked the exciting attacking players 
of the other top teams, but unlike the rest of the division, they could rely on 
a sturdy defence. They finished the campaign with the best defensive record in 
La Liga, in no small part down to the heroics of Argentinian goalkeeper Martín 
Herrera, who played all 38 games.

Such was the unpredictability of the season that it was impossible to rule out 
the Basque club, who only a decade earlier had been playing in the wilderness 
of Spanish football’s regional fourth tier. They’d already completed the double 
over champions Barcelona and were a point better off than the Catalans as a 
result, but with Zaragoza and an improving Real Madrid also now only five 
points off top spot, it was still very much all to play for.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c7b25fe06274c8907e2c0b87c8fdf52be75e40e%2F0_0_1900_1348%2F1900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season's%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season%27s%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c7b25fe06274c8907e2c0b87c8fdf52be75e40e%2F0_0_1900_1348%2F1900.jpg>
 Vincente Del Bosque in charge of Real Madrid. Photograph: Remy de la 
Mauviniere/AP 
Depor’s defeat at Barcelona, who had bounced back well from a heavy 3-0 loss 
in el clásico in February, appeared a critical moment in the season, especially 
when Barça won their next two matches against Málaga and Valencia. However, 
“Super Depor”, a nickname they were beginning to live up to, responded well 
with 10 goals in three successive victories of their own, including their first 
away win in eight attempts against a Sevilla side that looked doomed to 
relegation.

A five-match winless run all but killed off any hopes of an unlikely Alavés 
title success, while Real Madrid were held to three successive draws to stem 
their revival under Del Bosque. Zaragoza were still looking strong and were 
arguably the most impressive all-round unit with a better defensive record than 
Barcelona, Real Madrid and Deportivo, while long-serving midfielder Santiago 
Aragón and Paraguay international Roberto Acuña were helping to feed Milosevic, 
who scored 21 league goals in the most prolific season of his career.

Just when Zaragoza appeared to be gathering a head of steam, Real Madrid 
gained revenge for their thrashing earlier in the season by winning 1-0 at La 
Romareda in week 33. Meanwhile, serious cracks were once again appearing over 
in Barcelona. They suffered two 3-0 league defeats in the space of a week, the 
first coming at home against a Samuel Eto’o-inspired Mallorca, prior to another 
abysmal performance at Real Oviedo. That made it 11 league defeats for the 
Catalans, ordinarily far too many to be anywhere near title contention, yet 
they remained the closest challengers to Deportivo.

Barça’s loss in Asturias gave Deportivo the chance to move eight points clear 
with victory in the capital against Rayo Vallecano. However, their travel 
sickness returned with a bang as they went down 2-1 in Vallecas. Although they 
retained their advantage at the top, Depor were doing little more than limping 
towards the finish line in a title race than nobody seemed to want to win.

The pressure wasn’t just being felt in A Coruña though. Real Madrid appeared 
to have sorted their defensive problems out at last and had been on an 11-match 
unbeaten run in the league while progressing to the Champions League 
semi-finals with victory over holders Manchester United. In a topsy-turvy 
season, they ran into trouble against relegation threatened Racing Santander. 
Two strikes from Salva Ballesta, who would end the season as top scorer in La 
Liga with 27 goals, helped Racing to a shock 4-2 win at the Bernabéu, surely 
extinguishing Real Madrid’s title hopes for good.

For once, the other three sides in the hunt all won but another Deportivo away 
defeat in the Galician derby at Celta Vigo next time out handed yet another 
lifeline to the chasing pack. Barcelona this time took full advantage with a 
3-0 win at the Vicente Calderón to all but relegate fallen giants Atlético 
Madrid, title winners only four years earlier but gripped by criminal 
investigations and severe financial problems. Barcelona had cut Depor’s lead to 
just two points with three games to go.

For Barcelona, the league title was all they had left. They had exited the 
Copa del Rey in farcical circumstances when the club refused to play their 
semi-final second leg against Atlético Madrid, complaining that a clash with 
international fixtures had left them with only 10 eligible players. It was 
another embarrassing episode for both the club and the football authorities, 
and it didn’t reflect well on the organisation of Spanish football as a whole.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ac4847e08346f5d360af758e7c6482d02cca74%2F0_0_1294_1696%2F1294.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season's%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season%27s%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ac4847e08346f5d360af758e7c6482d02cca74%2F0_0_1294_1696%2F1294.jpg>
 Deportivo players celebrate on the final day of the season. Photograph: 
Santiago Lyon/AP 
The following week three Spanish teams lined up in the Champions League 
semi-finals, with Barça travelling to Valencia and Real Madrid taking on Bayern 
Munich. Anelka, who endured an otherwise dismal solitary season in the Spanish 
capital, scored in both legs to lead Del Bosque’s men to a 3-2 aggregate win 
and an unlikely European final given their woeful opening to the campaign. 
Meanwhile, Valencia’s penchant for humbling the Catalans continued as they 
thumped Barcelona 4-1 at the Mestalla in the first leg of their semi-final with 
Angulo scoring twice to all but book their place in the final.

Those events meant Barcelona’s home game with mid-table Rayo Vallecano in week 
36 of La Liga became crucial as it offered Van Gaal’s side the chance to go top 
of the table for the first time since October. Three points would have piled 
the pressure on an inexperienced Deportivo team, especially given what had 
happened six years earlier. The 1993-94 season had finished in unbelievable 
drama on the final day with Deportivo’s Miroslav Dukic missing a last-minute 
penalty that would have clinched the title for the Galician club.

His failure to convert handed Barcelona the crown, and that memory hung over 
the Riazor going into the final three games of the campaign. Fortunately for 
Depor, this time around they were being handed favours from the unlikeliest of 
sources. Barça’s must-win home game with Rayo turned into yet another calamity 
when a brace from the brilliantly named Bolo led Rayo Vallecano to a shock 2-0 
victory, infuriating fans at the Camp Nou but dealing a huge boost to Deportivo 
and Real Zaragoza who met the next day in the unlikeliest of potential title 
deciders.

An understandably tense Riazor looked on as the teams played out an 
entertaining 2-2 draw, a result that wasn’t really good enough for Zaragoza but 
still moved them above Real Madrid, who dropped to sixth having been beaten at 
home by Alavés the previous day. Incredibly, with two games to play, there were 
still six sides in with a mathematical chance of winning the league – and that 
included a resurgent Valencia who, as well as reaching the Champions League 
final, had put together five consecutive league wins to move into the top four.

It was still very much in the hands of Deportivo who, despite winning only 
once on the road since the turn of the year, had now spent almost six unbroken 
months in top spot and were determined to hang on. A jittery 0-0 draw in 
Santander in their penultimate game was mirrored by Barcelona, who missed 
another chance to close the gap with a goalless draw at Real Sociedad to ensure 
the title race would go to the final weekend. Zaragoza’s 3-2 victory over 
Málaga ensured they would also be in with a sniff come the final day, but the 
other three teams were now too far back and left to battle it out for a top 
four finish.

On the final weekend, Deportivo couldn’t really have picked a kinder fixture 
in their bid to become the first Galician side to win the Primera División 
title. They hosted Espanyol, who were in mid-table with nothing to play for, 
but crucially did have a Copa del Rey final the following weekend to focus on. 
Cynics could also throw in that they weren’t likely to lose any sleep over the 
fact that a Depor win would ensure their city rivals Barcelona would finish the 
season without a trophy.

With temperatures soaring, the Riazor was expectant and hungry to banish the 
ghost of Dukic once and for all. Depor got off to a dream start too when 
37-year-old veteran Donato headed in from a corner to give them the lead in 
just the third minute. Donato had been Depor’s trusted penalty taker in the 
1993-94 season but was substituted off just 15 minutes before the end of the 
final game, leaving the Yugoslavian to take and miss the decisive spot-kick. It 
was apt that he should find himself on the scoresheet on the final day six 
years on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ad2181e293cee0fa42860491bc61ec3d5271799%2F0_0_2048_1406%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season's%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season%27s%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ad2181e293cee0fa42860491bc61ec3d5271799%2F0_0_2048_1406%2F2048.jpg>
 Deportivo La Coruña fans celebrate winning the title. Photograph: EPA 
It wasn’t long before Deportivo were 2-0 up as Makaay made his way through a 
sea of confetti to fire home a killer second goal and really get the party 
started on the Galician coast. Only a draw was needed to clinch the trophy and, 
despite the odd nervy moment after the break, there was no stopping Super Depor 
this time around. Six years on from their day of despair, fans spilled on to 
the Riazor pitch at full-time once more, this time in celebration of an 
incredible title triumph.

Elsewhere, and by now somewhat predictably, Barcelona slipped up, drawing 2-2 
at home to Celta Vigo. The same went for Zaragoza, who lost 2-1 at Valencia, 
but both sides secured a top-four finish as a result of final day defeats for 
both Alavés and Real Madrid.

The bottom three had already been decided before the final day with Sevilla, 
Atlético Madrid and Real Betis the unlikely trio filling those places. That 
meant three of Spain’s best supported clubs, all of whom were former champions, 
were relegated, and Espanyol’s victory over Atléti in the Copa del Rey final 
the following week rounded off an unprecedentedly bad domestic season for the 
country’s traditional powers.

However, there would still be a happy ending for Real Madrid, who put aside 
the misery of a fifth-place finish in La Liga to beat a Valencia side that 
barely turned up in the final of the Champions League in Paris. Indeed, of all 
the dramatic occurrences of the 1999-2000 season, perhaps the most significant 
event in terms of Spanish football was the birth of the managerial career of 
Vicente del Bosque, a man who a decade later would lead Spain to World Cup 
glory, but might never have been given such a chance in management had Real 
Madrid not made such an abysmal start to the campaign under Toshack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F377f991e0a42b7f676685e97bc260c37e1eed8b9%2F0_165_3600_1983%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season's%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20La%20Liga%20was%20just%20as%20unpredictable%20as%20this%20season%27s%20Premier%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fla-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F377f991e0a42b7f676685e97bc260c37e1eed8b9%2F0_165_3600_1983%2F3600.jpg>
 Fernando Morientes and Raúl celebrate after Real Madrid’s victory over 
Valencia in the Champions League final in 2000. Photograph: Shaun 
Botterill/Getty Images 
The season will always be remembered as the year Super Depor ruled supreme, 
but few connected with the club look back upon the class of 2000 as their 
greatest team. The side that finished second in 1994 was much better 
defensively and lost only four games compared to the 11 defeats inflicted on 
Irureta’s championship winners. Meanwhile, the arrival of the iconic figure of 
Juan Carlos Valerón in the summer of 2000 arguably took Depor to another level 
and they would better their title-winning points tally in three of the 
following four seasons, while also becoming a genuine force in Europe, but they 
were unable to secure another Primera División crown.

Few can argue that Deportivo didn’t deserve to win the league that year, 
especially given they topped the table for almost the entire campaign. However, 
it is also abundantly clear that they benefited from what was an absolute freak 
season. Since three points for a win was introduced in 1995, no other side has 
won La Liga with a points tally as low as the 69 that Depor mustered.

That Barcelona still managed to second was fairly miraculous given that they 
suffered 12 league defeats. Only twice in the club’s history have the Catalans 
lost more league matches in one season and it sparked big changes at the club 
with Van Gaal departing and president José Luís Núñez succumbing to fan 
pressure and resigning after 22 years in the role. The new faces at board level 
and in the dugout failed to lift the gloom and the 1999-2000 season marked the 
commencement of a period of decline for Barcelona. They would have to wait 
until 2005 to get their hands on silverware again, their longest barren run 
since the end of the Spanish Civil War.

The age of information is denying football fans the joy of the unknown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2015/dec/07/premier-league-football-age-information-unknown>
Over in the capital, Real Madrid’s European glory had helped mask their woeful 
campaign in La Liga, which remains their worst showing in Spain’s top flight 
since 1985. That fact wasn’t lost on opportunistic businessman Florentino Pérez 
who also highlighted financial mismanagement at board level and replaced 
Lorenzo Sanz as president in an election just weeks after Real Madrid’s eighth 
European Cup win in Paris. Soon after his election, he would rock the football 
world by coming good on his promise to secure the controversial signing of Luís 
Figo from Barcelona, adding yet another sour dimension to their eternal rivalry.

It concluded a tumultuous 12 months in Spanish football. The 1999-2000 season 
was a one-off and, for all the contrasting viewpoints, few can argue that it 
was one of the most fascinating and ultimately significant periods in the 
country’s football history. It was an era long before the brilliance of Lionel 
Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo, before tiki-taka and even the Galácticos, and a 
time when no single player or style of football ruled supreme.

It was a campaign that re-ignited La Liga, made smaller clubs believe and 
forced Barcelona and Real Madrid into some serious soul-searching, which 
sparked new policies at both clubs that have shaped so much of what we’ve 
witnessed since.

• This article appeared first on These Football Times 
<http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow Mark Sochon <https://twitter.com/tikitakagol> and These Football Times
 <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> on Twitter
 