
My mother didn’t like swearing around children, and operated a complete ban 
around me until I was 16. As a result I find swearing big and clever, and funny 
too, particularly since moving to the US, where no one knows how to do it. 
Brits may lag in every other category, but we are still undeniable world 
leaders in making even minor-league swear words like “tit” sound amusing.

The question of swearing and children is one I struggle with. It’s not like 
smoking, or even yelling, which is ugly and ineffective. Swearing, on the other 
hand, is ugly but funny, and it’s a pleasure I increasingly don’t know whether 
or not to deny myself. And that’s when I even have a choice.

A recent book on the subject by Benjamin K Bergen, a professor of cognitive 
science, suggests that swearing in front of children is less bad than we think. 
“Children’s minds,” he writes, inWhat the F: What Swearing Reveals about our 
Language, our Brains and Ourselves 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/29101497-what-the-f>, “are resilient to 
profanity.” He goes on to debunk a 2010 study that suggested all swearing 
around children constitutes “verbal abuse”.

This seems obvious. But it depends, says Bergen, on the context. If I swear 
casually with friends within my kids’ earshot, it’s not a big deal; if I swear 
into their faces, it is. But what about the middle way? I don’t swear at my 
children, but I do sometimes swear alongside them; I do parallel swearing. When 
they do something infuriating, which is a phase we’re in at the moment, I pick 
up whatever they’ve thrown, muttering furiously like Yosemite Sam. They eye me 
warily. I feel guilty. The cycle reboots.

Baby talk: the script 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fwhen-ok-to-swear-in-front-of-children-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F479671041806056dbf490cd496ff42ccc64f4b53%2F0_102_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20it%E2%80%99s%20OK%20to%20swear%20in%20front%20of%20children%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fwhen-ok-to-swear-in-front-of-children-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20it%E2%80%99s%20OK%20to%20swear%20in%20front%20of%20children%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fwhen-ok-to-swear-in-front-of-children-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F479671041806056dbf490cd496ff42ccc64f4b53%2F0_102_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 There’s only so much baby talk one can handle. Photograph: Linda Nylind for 
the Guardian 
Once a week I take my 20-month-olds to the baby gym, where a man called Mr 
Steve teaches them to sing and dance. Mr Steve is in his mid-30s, and I’ve only 
ever heard him use baby talk. Several times I have tried to nudge him out of 
character. Last week, for example, when my child squawked, I said to her, 
archly: “You sound like a prehistoric bird,” then looked meaningfully at Mr 
Steve. Clearly my choice of the word “prehistoric” was not for the baby but for 
the adult, a reminder that we are adults, and have more than four words – 
bubbles, dance, jump and ball-y – at our disposal. I thought he might smile, 
but he just turned to the baby and quacked like a duck.

What, I wonder, would happen if I just busted out and asked him what he 
thought of the election. Or about his plans for the future. Or said anything to 
him not in the exclamatory mode.

It’s no good appealing to the other mothers; we’re none of us there to make 
friends and by tacit agreement talk only about the babies. All that leaves me 
with is trying to trade withering glances with my own children, who invariably 
give me a severe look along the lines of: behave yourself and stick to the 
script – if you break persona, we’re all out of a job.

Dial S for salvation 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fwhen-ok-to-swear-in-front-of-children-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d355cde4b9a3c85b397258b9460d0dde291a04f%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20it%E2%80%99s%20OK%20to%20swear%20in%20front%20of%20children%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fwhen-ok-to-swear-in-front-of-children-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20it%E2%80%99s%20OK%20to%20swear%20in%20front%20of%20children%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fwhen-ok-to-swear-in-front-of-children-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d355cde4b9a3c85b397258b9460d0dde291a04f%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Salvation is at hand… Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
It’s never the big things that push you over the edge: it’s the tiny tipping 
points. This morning, the Salvation Army were supposed to collect some bags of 
clothes from my apartment, and I missed their call by a minute. When I called 
back, the guy said too bad, they’d left. While this was happening the toast 
burned, so that as the babysitter walked in, I was in mid-sweary meltdown.

Then the clothing dispatcher rang back and said that, actually, they were 
still in the building. I was so pathetically grateful that I instantly switched 
tones and, like a parody of an English lady said: “Thank you so much and so 
sorry for the earlier trouble.”

The babysitter raised an eyebrow but carried on wiping my child’s face. Now 
I’m back to square one. I think the swearing is fine; it’s the fake cheer I 
find really offensive.
 