
By its very nature, alternative music should be the forefront of 
open-mindedness; a bastion of cultural progression and free-thinking 
creativity. But the recent pairing of Wayne Coyne and Miley Cyrus has probably 
made the most progressive music fan wince. The Flaming Lips frontman originally 
joined the singer on stage during her Bangerz tour earlier this month, holding 
a large inflatable balloon spelling Fuck Yeah and exposing a sea of teenage 
girls to the space rock charms of Yoshimi Battles the Pink Robots. Since then, 
however, the pair have joined forcesin the studio 
<http://instagram.com/p/liwFjPJXro/> for what’s said to be a cover of the 
Beatles’ Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/miley-cyrus-hits-the-studio-with-flaming-lips-20140316>
.

But what else happens when leftfield-leaning acts get in on the mainstream? 
Here’s some of the most mismatched collaborations in music.

Weezer & Jermaine Dupri

If the below video is anything to go by, neither of these two men were 
genuinely exalted with their decision to collaborate with one another. While 
there may be some mutual appreciation buried deep down between Dupri and Cuomo, 
their relationship for Can’t Stop Partying feels more like the result of two 
mums who decided to pair up their sons to play with one another based on the 
fact that they are the same age and both quite like playing football, rather 
than two artists sensing a strong creative synergy. It doesn’t sound like Cuomo 
was that pleased with the finished results either. The lyrics toCan’t Stop 
Partying <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2nKNhNifp6M&feature=kp>were written by 
Dupri and given to Cuomo, who proceeded to essentially start from scratch 
again: “He came in with this total ‘Woohoo, we’re partying’ type of vibe,” said 
Cuomo, according to weezerpedia. “And it wasn’t 100% right for me so I wrote 
some different chords and changed some melodies and gave it a little bit of 
dark undertone to it. So it had some complexity.”
Reading on a mobile? Click here to watch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5t_B5koFx5Y> 
Beyoncé & Tricky 

In what will go down as possibly the most excruciating onstage Glastonbury 
guest appearance of all time, Beyoncé’s ill-fated collaboration with trip hop 
pioneer Tricky was a moment in time that the 46-year-old will be haunted by 
forever. Amid the former Destiny’s Child frontwoman’s headline set, Tricky 
stood on stage in front of a mic for the longest two minutes and 12 seconds in 
existence, and proceeded to do very little else: “I was backstage smoking weed, 
bored out of my mind. I used to live round the corner [in Bristol] so I’ve been 
bunking into Glastonbury since I was about 14,” Tricky toldthe Guardian after 
the stage-freeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/23/tricky-i-dont-believe-death-exists>
. “Then all of a sudden there’s 100,000 people out there, there’s bright lights 
and dancers, and I’m: ‘Oh fuck.’ I was petrified.”
Reading on a mobile? click here to watch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FGp2mZr9SVg> 
Usher & Afghan Whigs

“Give it up for Afghan Whigs, ladies and gentlemen!” said Usher at last year’s 
SXSW, a sentence that nobody, not even Russell Grant could have anticipated 
previously. The band played a version of the R&B singer’s hit crossover single 
Climax, before the Whigs backed him while he sang the rock group’s Somethin’ 
Hot,Sinkane’s Runnin <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Axgv-xW8B6c&feature=kp> 
and finished off with Usher’s OMG. The fusing of sounds sort of works, if 
you’re into fairly meandering pop rock which sounds as if it was somewhat 
unrehearsed. Still, the two musical forces appear to be enjoying the show a bit 
more than the throng of slightly disappointed and solitary Whig fans.
Reading on a mobile? Click here to watch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HxCi7lRpBwo> 
Michael Jackson feat. Slash 

Michael Jackson and Slash. Pop and rock working in perfect harmony, surely? 
The songGive Into Me <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJ7qXHjxj_0>, featuring 
the Guns N’ Roses guitarist – is by no means an absurd collaboration: Jackson’s 
sincere passion is backed by Slash’s visceral shredding to make the ultimate 
wind machine moment in music. However, the video below perhaps shows a little 
less creative harmony. Slash, lost in a guitar solo while on stage with the 
King, makes the foul mistake of indulging in his fret work for a little longer 
than is required. Jackson, bereft of dance moves which warn the singer to stop 
what he’s doing, eventually gets the help of two roadies to usher the guitarist 
off stage.
Reading on a mobile? Click here to watch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9lxN7x8JVKM> 
Do you have any more to add to the list? Let us know in the comments below. 
 