
‘This month’s Black Friday bargain blitz is going to be bigger than ever!” So 
ran a headline. Black what? Bargain what? I had to GoogleBlack Friday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday>because I couldn’t remember 
if it was the1987 crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2007/oct/17/blackmonday> or when 
sterling plunged out of ERM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/13/black-wednesday-20-years-pound-erm>
 in 1992.

Neither, it turns out – they’re Black Monday and Black Wednesday. Could it be 
the dayZayn Malik left One Direction 
<https://www.facebook.com/onedirectionmusic/posts/869295683125227>? Or the day 
the release of a Christmas advertisement by a large retail store made headlines 
in every outlet in the country and what we used to call “the news” rolled over 
and died?

But, no. Black Friday does not mark the day John Lewis chose to release its 
£7m campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tvandradioblog/2015/nov/06/john-lewis-christmas-advert-who-is-moon-hitler>
 and ascend to dizzying new levels of corporate smuggery. (A spokeswoman for 
the firm suggested it will raise awareness of the plight of lonely, elderly 
people that… oh you know, I can’t even be bothered. Most people over the age of 
11 have a rough idea what advertising is for.)

In fact – thank you, Wikipedia 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Friday_(shopping)> – Black Friday is “the 
Friday following Thanksgiving” and in the US is “regarded as the beginning of 
the Christmas shopping season”.

And while I know that we’ve taken the concept of Halloween, as celebrated in 
suburban New Jersey, into our chilly British hearts, I don’t believe we’ve 
actually co-opted Thanksgiving yet? Have we? In which case, how can the “day 
after Thanksgiving” be a thing?

And yet, here we are with the bold claim that it’s the biggest “ever”, ie 
“since we imported this shallow and vacuous marketing gimmick about two seconds 
ago”. But then, in some ways, there is something to be said for shallow and 
vacuous marketing gimmicks so crass they make the Argos catalogue look like the
I Ching. Because while adverts might have bled into news, at least we know 
they’re adverts (not news), unlike an awful lot of what goes on social media 
and pretty much all ofInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>.

John Lewis Christmas advert 2015: raising awareness for Age UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/06/john-lewis-christmas-advert-age-uk>
So while most of us over the age of 11 know what an advert looks like, on 
Instagram, the fastest-growing social network in the world, the fastest-growing 
demographic is children and young teenagers. Instagram doesn’t release figures, 
but just ask a tween. They’ll tell you, if they’re not too busy uploading 
selfies.

Adverts on Instagram don’t look like adverts, they look like people. People 
who are wearing things they’ve been given, or photographing things they’ve been 
given, or being paid to wear or eat or display in their homes more or less 
anything that can be placed inside a stylised frame and pumped out to their 
thousands of followers.

Essena O’Neill, an Australian teenager, made a splash last week by 
recaptioning her Instagram selfies toreveal the truth behind the pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/03/instagram-star-essena-oneill-quits-2d-life-to-reveal-true-story-behind-images>
. In one, she wears a backless white dress and runs her fingers through her 
tousled blonde hair: “I didn’t pay for the dress, took countless photos trying 
to look hot for Instagram, the formal made me feel incredibly alone.”

She struck out at the “contrived perfection” of Instagram’s hollow heart, but 
that’s not even the half of it. The invisible money spent on invisible 
advertising that nobody knows is advertising dwarfs John Lewis’s £7m.Danielle 
Bernstein <https://instagram.com/weworewhat/?hl=en>, a 23-year-old Instagrammer 
with 1.3 million followers, has been one of the few to reveal the figures – she 
explained this year that she gets paid up to$15,000 for a single Instagram post 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/danielle-bernstein-the-fashion-blogger-who-makes--15-000-per-instagram-post/>
.

It might look like pretty pictures, but Instagram is consumerism on a scale 
that makes one long for the hallowed sacred space of the Boxing Day sales. As 
Essena O’Neill points out, Instagram doesn’t do pain or fear or loneliness. If 
you’re lonely, your best hope is that a large corporate will come along and 
patronise you in its seasonal campaign. The kids are not just uploading 
selfies, they’re being gulled. We all are. #corporatemugs.

Enough of the public shaming over poppies 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fon-instagram-every-day-is-black-friday-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa32e5ab385fd293b682d389ed5374db88ded64e0%2F0_0_2334_2066%2F2334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20did%20people%20on%20Instagram%20become%20walking%20adverts%3F%20%7C%20Carole%20Cadwalladr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fon-instagram-every-day-is-black-friday-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20did%20people%20on%20Instagram%20become%20walking%20adverts%3F%20%7C%20Carole%20Cadwalladr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fon-instagram-every-day-is-black-friday-social-media%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa32e5ab385fd293b682d389ed5374db88ded64e0%2F0_0_2334_2066%2F2334.jpg>
 Sienna Miller falls foul of the poppy police on The Graham Norton Show. 
Photograph: Matt Crossick/PA 
Was it for this that a generation of young men lost their lives in the 
Flanders mud? So that one day a pretty young woman could be pilloried for 
failing to wear the correct decorative memorial item? The annual outcry over 
whichnewsreaders are or aren’t wearing a poppy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/notesandqueries/query/0,,-200964,00.html> – pretty 
much all of them apart from Jon Snow, who has taken a stance against “poppy 
fascism” – has now broadened to include anyone at all. Last week, Sienna 
Miller. This week, who? Kim Kardashian? Peppa Pig? The cast ofAnimal Hospital?

Miller was forced to respond to criticism that she hadn’t worn one when she 
appeared onThe Graham Norton Show by suggesting it was “a little extreme”. 
Extreme? A public shaming that included theSun dredging up a former defence 
minister, Sir Gerald Howarth, who obligingly said: “There should be no excuse 
for not wearing one so we can honour the war dead.”

It does make you wonder how many former defence ministers the reporter called 
before landing on Sir Gerald, It does make you wonder how many former defence 
ministers the reporter called before landing upon Sir Gerald. But it also makes 
you wonder if Miller’s real crime was to be young, pretty, female and, a week 
after Halloween, available for a public pillorying?

One long arm of the law for the rich…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fon-instagram-every-day-is-black-friday-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35b8e691b67249868575f1cfdf057ced12c70808%2F0_0_3339_4236%2F3339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20did%20people%20on%20Instagram%20become%20walking%20adverts%3F%20%7C%20Carole%20Cadwalladr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fon-instagram-every-day-is-black-friday-social-media%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20did%20people%20on%20Instagram%20become%20walking%20adverts%3F%20%7C%20Carole%20Cadwalladr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fon-instagram-every-day-is-black-friday-social-media%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35b8e691b67249868575f1cfdf057ced12c70808%2F0_0_3339_4236%2F3339.jpg>
 A Metropolitan police office: for hire, if you’ve got the money. Photograph: 
RTimages / Alamy 
So this is how the future works. There will be cuts to basic services. There 
will be fewer social workers and nurses and police officers. But as George 
Osborne says: “We are all in this together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2012/oct/08/george-osborne-tory-conference-video>
.”

Yet I’m alerted to an item in last week’s Ham & High, the newspaper that 
serves Hampstead and Highgate, two of London’s most expensive postcodes, that 
the residents arecrowdfunding 
<http://www.hamhigh.co.uk/news/crime-court/hampstead_residents_to_raise_cash_for_their_own_exclusive_police_force_as_crime_turns_more_violent_1_4247670>
 a private police force. Only it’s not private. It’s not some heavies with a 
dog and a van – they’re raising money to buy three Metropolitan police officers 
and a sergeant, and in four weeks have raised £180,000.

But then, crowdfunding in a neighbourhood where the average house price 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/house-prices/Hampstead.html> (terrace) was 
£2,095,464 last year or £3,598,514 for a semi-detached is never going to have 
the same challenges as some places. This, however, is not the most astonishing 
thing . T – that the rich will get their own fleet of private coppers while the 
rest will have no choice but to doff our cap at muggers and hope for the best. 
It’s that a Met spokesman explained: “Local authorities can currently fund 
their own police under the MOPAC MetPatrol Plus Scheme, whereby police officers 
are purchased by London boroughs on a buy-one-get-one-free basis 
<http://www.hamhigh.co.uk/news/crime-court/camden_police_chief_slams_hampstead_s_plans_to_fund_their_own_officers_1_4262412>
.”

It’s bogof, like at Boots with shampoo. Buy a Met policeman and get one free. 
If that sounds like the punchline to a joke, it isn’t. It’s a loophole that a 
local lawyer, Jessica Learmond-Criqui, who chairs theFrognal and Fitzjohn’s 
Safer Neighbourhood panel 
<http://content.met.police.uk/Team/Camden/FrognalandFitzjohns>, has discovered 
in the Police Act. In fairness, she is showing a canny consumer’s sense in 
leading the campaign to raise £200,000 a year to fund three officers, with 
three free ones thrown in.

Why stop there? Will Hampstead have its own riot police? Why not a prison and 
a couple of tanks? We’ll be paying half, after all. And they may need them, if 
– when, surely, when – the peasants start revolting.
 