
There’s always something for British football to wring its hands about. Ten 
years ago it was foreign owners in “our” game. Before that, foreign players. In 
the 1980s, among other things, it was the “talent drain” of managers heading 
off to foreign lands was troubling the fretters of the nation.

“I hope Spain has now had its fair share as far as Everton is concerned,” 
huffed then Toffees chairman Philip Carter in 1987. “It is a real problem for 
British football and there are moves afoot to liberalise the situation even 
further … it should be of great concern to those involved with our national 
game.”

Carter was speaking after Howard Kendall, having just won his second league 
title with Everton, had left Goodison Park to take charge ofAthletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao>. Russell Thomas wrote in 
the Guardian that Kendall’s move “confirms the most depressing trend in British 
football: the drift of talent, player and managerial, to the continent,” while, 
in the Times, Stuart Jones said Kendall’s departure represented “another 
disturbing signpost. It points to the continuing decline of individual talent, 
whether it be on the pitch or on the periphery of it.”

How Howard Kendall saved his job at Everton and won the FA Cup in 1984
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2015/oct/20/howard-kendall-everton-fa-cup-1984>
Of course, British and Irish managers moving to Spain was nothing new. The 
early history of many Spanish clubs is littered with names such as Patrick 
O’Connell, Arthur Johnson, Robert Firth and Frederick Pentland, the latter 
known as “The Bowler Hat” because of his favoured headgear. Indeed, the rough 
Spanish equivalent of “gaffer” is “mister”, which partly came about due to the 
early prevalence of British coaches in the country.

However, 1987 seemed to be the peak of a minor exodus, inspired by the huge 
success of English teams in Europe, success that was then stymied by the 
five-year ban after Heysel. British coaches were tempted abroad with the 
promise of, among other things, continental competition, although the lifestyle 
and salaries probably helped too.

Kendall’s move to Spain was at least partly inspired by the English ban from 
Europe. “Would I have stayed if we hadn’t been banned?”he said in an interview 
<http://thesetpieces.com/interviews/howard-kendall-class-85/> earlier this 
year. “Probably, yes. We would have been involved in Europe again. But when 
your top players are allowed to leave, as Trevor Steven and Gary Stevens did, 
it takes some rebuilding.”

Kendall managed Bilbao for two seasons; Terry Venables won the league with 
Barcelona; Jock Wallace took charge of Sevilla for a while; and Ron Atkinson 
had a brief spell asAtlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> boss. Colin Addison took 
Celta Vigo up from the second tier then served as Atkinson’s assistant, taking 
over upon his dismissal, while John Mortimore, Chelsea stalwart of the 50s and 
60s who won the league twice in two spells with Benfica, had a year in charge 
of Real Betis. In the summer of 1987, seven of the 20 managers in the Spanish 
top flight were British.

Of those who joined the exodus, John Toshack is the daddy of them all, 
spending a total of 17 seasons in Spain withReal Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> (three times), Real Madrid 
(twice), Deportivo la Coruna and Real Murcia. Toshack, once thought to be a 
shoo-in for the Liverpool job, left his homeland after life at Swansea soured, 
relegation to the Second Division starting the wilderness years that eventually 
left them in the fourth, where he had lifted them from in the first place. 
Toshack first went to Portugal and Sporting (turning down Aston Villa) and then 
to Sociedad, where he became their first ever non-Basque manager. Indeed, one 
of the problems he had to face was the club’s policy that all players had to 
come from the Basque region.

“It so happens that all my best defenders are left-sided, but you just have to 
adapt,” he said in an interview in February 1988. “We started the season with a 
squad of 20 players, 10 of whom had virtually no First Division experience and 
that was that. Any problems have to be solved as best you can.” The non-Basque 
policy was relaxed in 1989, when Toshack recruited John Aldridge as the club’s 
first ever foreign player.

Toshack was a huge success at Sociedad, winning the Copa del Rey but perhaps 
as importantly endearing himself to the locals. “Toshack has done so much for 
Real Sociedad,” Spanish journalist Luis de Andia, who covered Toshack for 
Diario Vasco, told the Guardian. “His big triumph is that he is now regarded as 
a Basque and they cannot give you a greater accolade.”

In a March 1988 profile of the big Welshman headlined “A Genius Shunned”, the 
great Brian Glanville wrote: “In three years, Toshack has utterly transformed 
the demoralised team he found when he arrived, and all the great Spanish clubs 
ofBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> and Madrid are 
said to want him. One in the eye, surely, for all those English clubs who might 
have engaged him before he took off, a disappointed man, for Portugal.”

“They’ve been great to me and I’m in no rush to come home until I’ve tried to 
do a lot more for them,” said Toshack in 1988, but a year later he moved to 
Real Madrid, winning the title there before returning to Sociedad in 1991, and 
again in the 2001-02 season.

The appeal of leaving British football, in something of a state during the 
late 1980s, would seem relatively obvious, but some still held the attitude 
that England was still the best place to be and anyone leaving was chasing 
cash. In reporting Kendall’s impending move to Bilbao, the Times rather 
sniffily noted that the Basque club would “pay a signing on fee of 45m pesetas 
(£220,000) should Kendall decide to place financial security at the top of his 
priority list.” However, the challenge of succeeding in a different environment 
was clearly a powerful factor for some.

“I decided when I came over that I wanted to make fundamental changes in the 
way Barcelona played,” Terry Venables, who won the title with Barça and lost 
the 1986 European Cup final on penalties, told Hugh McIlvanney in 1985. “It 
wasn’t easy. Apart from the obvious difficulties of altering the formation, the 
playing system and the attitudes of the team, I had to do it without the 
knowledge of the language. Mind you, those restrictions may have encouraged me 
to concentrate on essentials, to simplify what I was getting across to the 
fellas.

“There were many other changes I worked for, such as what we call pressing the 
ball, which means hustling the opponents in possession with three or four 
players at one time and trying to rob him in parts of the field where we could 
counter-attack fast and effectively – instead of falling back and only winning 
the ball when their whole team is in front of you. If you can win it halfway 
through their team you have only maybe five guys to get past to reach goal. It 
sounds childishly simple but when you can get the chaps doing it life becomes a 
lot easier out there.”Gegenpressing, clearly, was not a Kloppian invention.

Kendall almost replaced Venables at Barcelona in 1986, but after that move 
collapsed he went to Bilbao, despite being second choice behind Kenny Dalglish. 
“Many people were surprised at my choice of club,” he wrote inhis autobiography 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Love-Affairs-Marriage-Life-Football/dp/1909245062/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1446025212&sr=8-1&keywords=howard+kendall>
. “Athletic Bilbao were not a Barcelona or a Real Madrid, but they were a 
formidable club with a great history and proud tradition, very much like 
Everton.”

Kendall lived at the training ground during his early days in Spain, which 
might sound a little grim, but he seemed to enjoy it thoroughly. “Every morning 
I was simply going downstairs and getting changed and going out on the training 
ground,” he wrote. “It was fabulous.”

They finished fourth in Kendall’s first campaign, which was quite a success 
given that they only avoided relegation in a play-off the previous season. He 
stayed for another season and a bit, before he and the club mutually decided to 
part ways (and it really did sound mutual, the Bilbao president throwing 
Kendall a going away party) in 1989, during which time he turned down a move to 
Newcastle, a significant pull given they were his hometown club.

When managers were sacked, they were welcomed home with a shrug, sympathy and 
words of comfort. When Barcelona dismissed Venables, a few games into the 
1987-88 season and a little more than a year removed from losing in the 
European Cup final having also won the league, David Lacey wrote in the 
Guardian: “History will show that in a long line of famous names who have come 
and gone at the Nou Camp, Venables has done better than most. He has been 
Barcelona’s longest serving post-war manager and, impressive though their 
credentials were, his immediate predecessors, Cesar Menotti and Udo Lattek, 
could not win the championship … Barcelona have not solved anything by 
dismissing Venables.” That last point wouldn’t prove entirely correct; after 
interim spells by Luis Aragonés and old faithful Carles Rexach, Barça’s next 
manager was Johan Cruyff, who did pretty well there, on balance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fbritish-football-managers-ruled-spain-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4b6bc32e98411861daa16e6d9d9336616c1874b%2F0_113_3072_1845%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20British%20football%20managers%20thrived%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fbritish-football-managers-ruled-spain-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20British%20football%20managers%20thrived%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fbritish-football-managers-ruled-spain-liga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4b6bc32e98411861daa16e6d9d9336616c1874b%2F0_113_3072_1845%2F3072.jpg>
 Ron Atkinson enjoys the Spanish sunshine. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the 
Observer 
Atkinson probably got the roughest end of the Spanish presidential stick, 
employed as he was by Jesús Gil, the “eccentric” Atlético owner who had a nice 
sideline in industrial manslaughter; in 1969, 58 people died after an apartment 
block built by Gil’s construction firm collapsed, a later investigation 
revealing that the building had been thrown up without fripperies such as 
architects and plans, plus – a minor detail, this – the cement hadn’t properly 
set when people were allowed in. He was given a five-year prison sentence, but 
received a pardon from General Franco. You can always rely on your mates to get 
you out of trouble.

“Jesús was a big man, around 6’5” built like a fighting bull with a larger 
than life personality – almost beyond the normal rules of sanity,” said 
Atkinson, inviting pot/kettle comparisons. “Controversy was his favourite, 
almost obsessive, game and did he love hogging those headlines. He strutted 
around and left me with the impression of what Benito Mussolini must have been 
like in his early days of power.”

When Atkinson arrived in Madrid, he recruited Colin Addison as his assistant, 
who had been his No2 at West Brom and had some success in Spain himself, having 
won promotion with Celta Vigo, in theory to provide some stability. The problem 
there was that Gil, who Atkinson nicknamed “Mad Max”, didn’t exactly place a 
premium on such things. Atkinson was only in charge for 15 games before Gil 
sacked him, something he apparently only discovered through Addison, who was 
installed in the top job. “Perhaps I was too honest,” said Atkinson at the 
time, “and kicked too many backsides at the club. Certain people behind the 
scenes didn’t like that one little bit. They are not used to straight talking.”

Such straight talking was apparently absent in the transition from assistant 
to manager. “What happened is very unfortunate,” said Addison at the time. “I 
have since spoken to Ron and there is no animosity.” But apparently this wasn’t 
a view shared by Atkinson, who in his autobiography questioned the speed with 
which Addison accepted the job, implying that his former trusted right-hand man 
had stabbed him in the back. Addison, though, paints a slightly different 
picture.

“We knew something was up when Jesus phoned me in our hotel one night,” said 
Addison a few years ago 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/football/2995870/On-the-Spot-Colin-Addison.html>
. “I told him I didn’t like the fact that he was ringing me and not Ron, and as 
soon as I put the phone down I told Ron immediately. ‘I’ve just had Mad Max 
on,’ I said. That night, over a beer, Ron knew what was coming and told me to 
take the job if I was offered it. He never put that in his book. Instead, he 
claimed the first thing I did when the offer came was moan to him that I had 
not been given any more money. I think Ron was hurt by the episode, but it 
saddens me when I think that he called me to help him with his autobiography.”

Footgolf: it's harder than it looks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-set-pieces-blog/2015/oct/23/footgolf-harder-looks-sport>
Language was another hurdle to overcome. When Jock Wallace, the Rangers great 
and former Leicester manager, took over at Sevilla, there were inevitable 
concerns about communication, which would eventually spell the end for him in 
Spain. “As long as there is an interpreter I’ll be fine,” Wallace, known as 
‘Mister Wolla’ by the players, said. “After all, I had trouble being understood 
in England when I was with Leicester!”

To combat the problem, he hired a Leicester restaurateur named Raymonde 
Fernandez as his translator, and also employed the services of a US-born 
bullfighter to teach him the language. The initial signs on that score were 
good, with his assistant Domingo Perez quoted in Jeff Holmes’s bookBlue 
Thunder: The Jock Wallace Story 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Blue-Thunder-Jock-Wallace-Story/dp/1909626325/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1446023999&sr=8-2&keywords=jock+wallace>
: “Jock has no trouble with Spanish at his team briefings. But when he talks in 
English we all get a bit lost.”

However, the communication barrier was enough that, despite the club awarding 
him a new two-year contract at the end of his first season, he was sacked 
before the following campaign could even start. The club cited language 
problems as the key reason for his dismissal, although a falling out with star 
player Francisco was also said to be a factor.

Like all fashions, eventually prevailing attitudes changed and the Brits 
dispersed. Atkinson and Wallace were sacked, Addison went the same way a few 
months later before taking charge of Cadiz and CD Badajoz. Kendall returned to 
take over at Manchester City and eventually went back to Everton (twice), 
Mortimore returned to Portugal in 1988, while Venables rocked up at Tottenham. 
Only Toshack remained, and although others have travelled that path over the 
years, none have done so in quite the numbers they did in those days when Spain 
was enamoured with the British “mister”.

• This is an article from The Set Pieces <http://thesetpieces.com/>
• Follow Nick Miller and The Set Pieces <https://twitter.com/thesetpieces> on 
Twitter
 