
A prawn importer suspected of deliberately evading biosecurity controls to 
bring infected produce into the country is expected to face criminal charges as 
authorities try to contain awhite spot disease outbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/green-prawn-imports-suspended-amid-white-spot-diseas-outbreak>
 in Australia.

But prawn producers say the indefinite import ban has come too late: the 
government’s own agricultural quarantine agency, Biosecurity Australia,warned 
six years ago that the risk of the disease being introduced to Australia by the 
importation of green (raw) prawns was high. 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/07/Final_prawn_IRA_report_7_Oct_09_(1).pdf>

Announcing the indefinite suspension of green prawn imports into Australia 
after the outbreak of the white spot disease in Queensland, the agriculture 
minister and deputy prime minister,Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, said criminal 
charges were being pursued against one importer, while four more were being 
investigated.

“Australia’s $358 million prawn industry must be protected and not put at risk 
by the careless and selfish acts of a few,” Joyce said.

White spot disease was detected 
<https://www.daf.qld.gov.au/animal-industries/animal-health-and-diseases/white-spot-disease-detected-in-southern-queensland>
 in prawns in Australian farms for the first time a month ago. The disease is 
not harmful to humans – the cooking process eliminates white spot – but it can 
rapidly kill massive populations of shrimp and could devastate Australia’s $360 
million prawn industry.


Green prawn imports suspended amid white spot disease outbreak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/green-prawn-imports-suspended-amid-white-spot-diseas-outbreak>
Samples from all consignments of imported green prawns must be sent for 
testing to ensure they are free from white spot under Australian quarantine 
laws.

But it is believed at least one importer was deliberately selecting only 
healthy prawns from consignments that were known to be infected with white spot 
and sending those to be tested.

White spot disease has hit five farms near the Logan river in Queensland’s 
southeast, and has been detected in wild prawns in the river itself.

Prawns worth tens of millions of dollars, which were being raised in ponds at 
the infected farms, have had to be destroyed since the white spot disease was 
confirmed last month.

Joyce said the disease could devastate Australia’s prawn industry if it took 
hold in the country.


“We are doing everything in our power to make sure we deal with this and try 
and nip this in the bud,” he said, announcing the import suspension.

But prawn farmers say the government should have acted years ago to stop the 
importation of raw prawns, after it was warned the risk of them bringing the 
disease into Australia was high.

A 2009 risk assessment by Biosecurity Australia 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/07/Final_prawn_IRA_report_7_Oct_09_(1).pdf> 
found that without proper safeguards, there was a high likelihood that diseases 
carried by imported raw prawns could spread to Australian populations.


“The likelihood of release of white spot syndrome virus via the unrestricted 
importation of non-viable, farm-sourced, frozen, uncooked, whole prawns 
intended for human consumption is estimated to be high,” the report said.

Rather than banning imports, Biosecurity Australia chose to strengthen 
quarantine rules to mitigate the risk.

A ban was also imposed on imported uncooked prawns being used for bait, 
because infected raw prawns can spread white spot to animals that eat them, 
even if they have been frozen first.

Biosecurity officials are yet to establish how the white spot disease came to 
be in the Logan river area.

But prawn disease experts have said one possibility is that infected imports 
intended for human consumption have been used as bait.

The Australian Prawn Farmers Association board member Nick Moore has welcomed 
the import suspension, but says it is akin to shutting the gate after the horse 
has bolted.

Queensland prawn farmers face huge losses over white spot disease outbreak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/13/queensland-prawn-farmers-face-huge-losses-over-white-spot-disease-outbreak>
“Can you imagine deliberately importing a product with a virus that can 
actually infect non-infected stock? You wouldn’t do that,” he told ABC 
television. “This has just taken time for a rather expensive penny to drop.”

 Moore, who also manages a farm that has been infected, said the owners of 
affected properties were each facing losses in the tens of millions of dollars, 
and there was no insurance available while prawns were still being raised.

“There is absolutely no doubt that farmers on the Logan, and any farmer 
affected by this in the future, will be seeking some sort of financial 
assistance,” he said.

“If this industry is to survive, then government intervention — be that state 
or federal — will be absolutely critical.”

The import suspension does not affect cooked prawns because the cooking 
process destroys white spot.

Australian Associated Press contributed to this story
 