
The American chess champion Nazí Paikidze has announced that she will boycott 
next year’s women’s world chess championship 
<http://www.glamour.com/story/meet-the-chess-player-boycotting-the-world-championships-because-of-its-headscarf-policy?mbid=social_twitter_referral>
 hosted by Iran, in protest at the Islamic Republic’s mandatory hijab rule for 
women. In an online petition, she says that she views wearing of the hijab – 
which is compulsory for female visitors in Iran – assupporting the oppression 
of women 
<https://www.change.org/p/stop-women-s-oppression-at-the-world-chess-championship-by-challenging-fide-s-decision>
.

In response to the hijab controversy, Sara Khadem 
<https://www.instagram.com/saraa_khadem/> and Mitra Hejazipour, Iranian woman 
grandmasters 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIDE_titles#Woman_Grandmaster_.28WGM.29>, have 
made clear in interviews withthe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/boycott-of-womens-world-chess-championship-iran-tehran>
 andthe New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/08/opinion/your-boycott-wont-help-iranian-women.html?_r=0>
 that they believe a boycott would be detrimental to women’s sports in Iran. 
The story – which was immediately reduced to a binary between women’s sport 
versus the right to wear what you want – has stirred widespread discussions in 
the media and on social networks.

Boycott of world chess championship 'would hurt women in Iran'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/boycott-of-womens-world-chess-championship-iran-tehran>
My personal experience might be helpful to other chess players considering 
whether or not to follow Paikidze’s example or to support her position. Two 
years ago, I was detained in my home country Iran by themorality police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2014/jun/19/iran-morality-police-patrol>
 for not adhering to hijab standards. I was transferred to a detention centre, 
and what I saw there took me by surprise.


Iranian women are not afraid of these detentions any more. They are usually 
released within a few hours, and afterwards they go back to the same loose, 
half-hearted form of hijab they were wearing before. The morality police have 
been defeated by the daily actions of millions of ordinary Iranian women, and 
this policing is failing to bear the fruit its founders had hoped for. Women 
have challenged the official standards of hijab promoted by the government and 
have pushed boundaries by simply refusing to keep out of public.

Upon my release, I realised that I had not been aware of the significance of 
the daily, uncoordinated, decentralised acts of resistance put up by Iranian 
women.


Iranian women provide opportunities for collective action through their 
everyday defiance of government policies. Their acts of resistance, though 
mainly instinctive and uncalculated, are the most important instruments in the 
development of collective identities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fchess-championship-boycott-iranian-women-iran-hijab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f784afeeebcee01f440f14fbdeb75d72ca26a33%2F1062_0_2562_3202%2F2562.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20benefits%20from%20a%20chess%20championship%20boycott%3F%20Not%20Iranian%20women%20%7C%20Ghoncheh%20Ghavami&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fchess-championship-boycott-iranian-women-iran-hijab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20benefits%20from%20a%20chess%20championship%20boycott%3F%20Not%20Iranian%20women%20%7C%20Ghoncheh%20Ghavami&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fchess-championship-boycott-iranian-women-iran-hijab%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f784afeeebcee01f440f14fbdeb75d72ca26a33%2F1062_0_2562_3202%2F2562.jpg>
 Iranian women are not afraid to not comply to hijab rules. Photograph: Vahid 
Salemi/AP 
Obviously, I recognise Pakidize’s right – and that of every other human being 
– to choose how to dress and I applaud her insistence on her rights as a woman. 
But I believe that her choice to boycott the games is misguided.

A reductionist approach to the mandatory hijab has, in the past, functioned as 
a pretext to reinforce a rift betweenIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> and the west, as well as insinuating 
that Iranian women are passive beings who simply lack the will to improve their 
situation.


Lack of knowledge about the complex networks of Iran’s patriarchal system and 
misunderstanding the issue of gender in Iran has prompted simplistic campaigns 
outside Iran. These campaigns focus solely on the law requiring hijab and 
overlook the activism of Iranian women not just against this oppressive law, 
but also against other forms of prejudice, from social and economic to 
political discrimination. There is the implication that Iranian women need a 
foreign saviour to be liberated from their own country’s rules.


Why so many Iranians have come to hate the hijab
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/iranian-women-hate-hijab-tehranbureau>
It is Paikidize’s right not to adhere to the compulsory hijab, a visible form 
of oppression, but boycotting the event and not traveling to Iran will not help 
Iranian women realise their demands. TheIranian women’s movement for equality 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women%27s_rights_movement_in_Iran> began decades 
ago and Iranian women have endured heavy costs in this path.


As an Iranian woman who fights for women’s rights, I would like to extend an 
invitation to Paikidize to travel to Iran and to see our society with her own 
eyes , so that she can learn and recognise the achievements of Iranian women. 
It is an invitation for her to familiarise herself with the daily lives of a 
nation that, consciously or unconsciously, has not acquiesced to oppression.


Presenting the international community with a one-sided narrative is 
ineffective. In order to fight oppression, we should not act as saviours, but 
stand beside each other in solidarity and sympathy. A boycott is not the way.
 