
He’s the face of the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> as it 
battles to fend off a winter crisis. Smiling reassuringly out of a poster at a 
bus stop near you, Roger Humbles is urging us to make sure we get our 
prescriptions filled in good time for the Christmas holidays and consult a 
pharmacist if we feel peaky.

Crisp white coat, NHS badge, stripey shirt and spotty tie – Humbles looks like 
a pharmacist from central casting. But he’s the real deal: a lifelong 
professional who has run his own high-street pharmacy in Herne Hill, south 
London, since 1999.

He’s also an accomplished jazz saxophonist, having played at Ronnie Scott’s 
and the Royal Festival Hall and toured in the UK and abroad with his own 
quartet as well as many top bands. The pharmacy, he jokes, is just his hobby.

So how did Humbles, a 58-year-old father of three, end up as an NHS poster 
boy? He’s not too sure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2F-pharmacist-doubling-up-new-nhs-poster-boy-winter-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F964226df79bb213087fcc4da5b9fb8d07ce4be87%2F48_45_1768_2653%2F1768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20the%20pharmacist%20doubling%20up%20as%20the%20new%20NHS%20poster%20boy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2F-pharmacist-doubling-up-new-nhs-poster-boy-winter-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20the%20pharmacist%20doubling%20up%20as%20the%20new%20NHS%20poster%20boy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2F-pharmacist-doubling-up-new-nhs-poster-boy-winter-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F964226df79bb213087fcc4da5b9fb8d07ce4be87%2F48_45_1768_2653%2F1768.jpg>
 Roger Humbles is the face of the Stay Well This Winter campaign. Photograph: 
NHS England 
“I’m not seeking to promote myself and although I am a semi-professional 
musician, I’m not comfortable standing up in front of an audience and putting 
myself in the limelight,” he says. “The general consensus is amusement all 
round that I’m actually doing this.”

He may be protesting too much. Last year, he agreed to audition and was chosen 
to play himself in a TV advertisement for a brand of allergy nasal spray (he 
wasn’t paid as that would have been against professional rules).

That performance, which included talking to camera and a very convincing 
sneeze, led to him being used by NHS England as one of four healthcare 
professionals in a Stay Well This Winter poster campaign a year ago, which was 
aimed specifically at older people and others with long-term health conditions.

This winter, he is the sole face of the campaign, now broadened to the public 
as a whole. The clear subtext is to try to ease pressure on hospitals and GPs 
by urging people to ensure they have sufficient supplies of regular medication 
and to go to their local pharmacist for health advice in the first instance.

Humbles thinks more of us are heeding the message about making the pharmacist 
our first port of call and are becoming more aware of the full range of 
services on offer, including – through local agreements in many areas – a 
growing range of medicines that were previously prescription-only.

But he admits that people still have a strong instinct to go straight to their 
GP when they feel ill, even if there is little to be done. “Lots of patients 
will go to the GP if they have a cold, but the GP can’t do anything that we 
can’t do.”

One thing casting a cloud over Humbles’s burgeoning promotional career is the 
threat to the future of high-street pharmacies posed by a 12% cut in their 
overall funding, which started to take effect this month.

Humbles has calculated that his own business will see an immediate 25% drop in 
dispensing fees, rising to 40% by the end of the decade, though this will be 
partially offset by other factors. He will survive, he hopes, but he fears for 
other pharmacies in low-income neighbourhoods that will be unable to cushion 
the blow with revenue from counter sales.

“If it was really a good idea to have a pharmacy cull, the way to do it would 
be to do a needs assessment of each area,” he says. “This will just hit those 
local pharmacies in less affluent areas and drive people to travel to use the 
big chains.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 