
A year ago I predicted that the deficits, shortfalls, waits and safety concerns
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/sep/23/nhs-winter-meltdown-staffing-standards-money>
 that were growing fast at the time would keep growing, putting the NHS under 
insurmountable strain.

Broadcasters and thinktanks were unwilling to make similar forecasts, despite 
the evidence, because they either believed the government’s reassurances or 
were afraid to be seen as negative speculators.

Yet my predictions proved optimistic. The NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> today has bigger deficits, increased 
staff shortages, waiting times not seen for more than a decade, and an utterly 
demoralised workforce, exemplified by the junior doctor dispute.

The NHS cannot escape its financial crisis without more money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/13/the-nhs-cannot-escape-its-financial-crisis-without-more-money>
The hyper-careful General Medical Council recently highlighted how serious the 
situation has become with its unprecedented declaration of “a state of unease 
in the medical profession”.

Three examples demonstrate the steep gradient of decline:

 * In two years, the key performance marker, A&E waits, has worsened from more 
than 95% of patients waiting four hours or less 
<http://www.qualitywatch.org.uk/indicator/ae-waiting-times> to under 90%. The 
number of patients waiting over four hours has doubled – two million in the 
past year, with nearly a quarter of a million in February alone, a 400% 
increase on the February figure five years ago. Figures published this month 
show the numerb of patients waiting in ambulancesoutside A&E for more than an 
hour 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/23/ambulances-wait-nine-hours-outside-ae-amid-epidemic-of-delays/>
, unable to be taken into the hospital, has doubled in a year. 
 * In 2013-14, the NHS deficit was £114m 
<https://www.ft.com/content/e5037e60-32eb-11e6-ad39-3fee5ffe5b5b>. In 2015-16, 
the deficit of a single trust, Barts Health, was £134m andthe NHS deficit was 
£2.45bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/20/nhs-in-england-reveals-245bn-record-deficit>
 – a 20-fold increase in two years. Nearly all trusts finished 2015-16 in a 
deficit and have remained there.

 * The number of delayed discharges from hospital, which have been a big 
problem for years, are also increasing at an alarming rate. The delays are not 
only unpleasant, they waste a lot of money and lead to worse care. This month, 
the Care Quality Commissionsuggested this problem is reaching a tipping point 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/sites/default/files/20161019_stateofcare1516_web.pdf> 
[pdf].

Despite this, news of the NHS meltdown has been buried. It was displaced from 
headlines by the EU referendum, and last winter’s deterioration was concealed 
due to the fact that the NHS broke tradition by not publishing national weekly 
performance information for that period.


The shortfall in money and staff needed to meet demand and the parallel 
shortfall in social care still exist. If nothing is done to arrest this, the 
decline will accelerate. Waits will get longer and some patients will die 
before being treated, while others will become permanently disabled and lose 
their livelihoods. Yet those responsible for the NHS still refuse to act, 
blinded by their own delusional optimism, or perhaps wilful deception.

From paramedic to academic: why I left the NHS frontline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/oct/24/from-paramedic-to-academic-why-i-left-the-nhs-frontline>
From its inception, the NHS worked on a fixed-cash limit, which placed 
limitations on what was provided. Something fundamental changed with the 
Blair/Brown resource injection into the NHS in the early 2000s. The increases 
were undoubtedly generous but accompanied by a foolhardy view that because of 
that practically anything was possible. As John Reid, former secretary of state 
put it: “We’ve given you the money. Now do the job.” He might also have added a 
helpful reminder to use the money wisely.

By 2006, the NHS was in financial meltdown: resources had increased but demand 
had soared. Things were belatedly put back on an even keel by optimising 
deployment of the resource injections. But by the time of the coalition 
government in 2010, it had become impossible to do this. Resources were 
constrained and prices reduced to below cost, but still demand grew.

The final nail in the coffin was the creation of NHS England in 2014, which 
had no responsibility for providers or their viability and sustainability, but 
which had power to buy services at prices that didn’t meet costs at volumes 
that exceeded trusts’ capacity to deliver services punctually and safely.

Sustainability and transformation plans are 'least bad option' for NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/21/sustainability-and-transformation-plans-least-bad-option-nhs>
In 2014, NHS England’s Five-Year Forward View claimed that with an investment 
of £8bn 
<https://www.hsj.co.uk/comment/we-cant-just-do-the-same-again-to-make-22bn-of-nhs-efficiencies/5083816.article>
, the NHS would be able to make up the rest of the £30bn deficit in 
efficiencies – this despite the fact that those who had to find the savings had 
not been consulted. Repeatedly since then, there have been government claims 
(eerily reminiscent of Reid’s) that the NHS has been given what it asked for 
and that should be enough. Not so.

Within a month of the Forward View being published, the NHS entered its worst 
winter crisis in a decade, unforeseen in the document and only eclipsed by the 
next: that of last winter. Two years on, the sunny uplands predicted in the 
Forward View are nowhere to be seen.

Is there a way out? Possibly. To maintain services and meet increased service 
demand, prices must be based on real costs, not buyers’ wishes. If they were, 
capable providers would survive and thrive. Incapable ones could be replaced, 
creating reasonable competition and reducing costs to the minimum safe level. 
If buyers wanted more from their investment they would have to pay more – as we 
do in other aspects of our lives. This would create a self-regulating, 
efficient system. So why don’t we just do it?

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 