
If there’s one thing more valuable to an author than a Richard and Judy 
endorsement circa 2006, it’s a Bill Gates plug circa this week. The man has 
reach, and the luxury of reading time that comes with being a semi-retired 
billionaire. And he has weight. So, while four of the books onhis annual list 
cover 
<https://www.gatesnotes.com/About-Bill-Gates/Best-Books-2016?linkId=31806383> 
predictable if fascinating ground (genetics 
<https://www.gatesnotes.com/Books/The-Gene>, tennis 
<https://www.gatesnotes.com/Books/String-Theory>, electricity infrastructure 
<https://www.gatesnotes.com/Books/String-Theory> and a business memoir 
<https://www.gatesnotes.com/Books/Shoe-Dog>), the fifth is quite interesting, 
not to say timely.

In The Myth of the Strong Leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/03/myth-strong-leader-political-leadership-modern-age-archie-brown-review>
, the renowned British political scholar Archie Brown throws a dozen world 
leaders of the past century into a bag, shakes them up, and watches the nice 
guys rise to the top. Brown debunks the idea that the most successful leaders 
are those who dominate and mould their nations around themselves, as far as 
their political systems allow. “A more collegial style of leadership is too 
often characterised as a weakness,” he writes.

Gates says on his blog that this year’s US election prompted him to pick up 
the book, which was published in 2014. Brown, emeritus professor of politics at 
Oxford University, “could not have predicted how resonant his book would become 
in 2016”, he adds. However,in a separate review on his website 
<https://www.gatesnotes.com/Books/The-Myth-of-the-Strong-Leader>, Gates 
studiously avoids the T-word. He comes closest, perhaps, when he says that the 
ostensibly appealing qualities of “strong” leaders “can be boiled down to a 
belief [that he or she] is the only one who knows what the country needs, and 
the only one who can deliver it”.

Brown, who is 78, is understandably delighted by Gates’s approval, and doesn’t 
mind alluding to Trump. “The myth of the strong leader is alive and well,” he 
says in an email. “It was a major factor in bringing us the looming reality of 
the presidency of a TV star. So I believe that the arguments I make in The Myth 
of the Strong Leader do, as Gates suggests, have a particular resonance right 
now.”

Gates starts his review with the case of the former Spanish prime minister 
Adolfo Suárez. The rightwing minister under Franco reached out to the left to 
form a centrist, democratic government after the dictator’s demise with 
“negotiation, persuasion, and some very adroit coalition-building”. Of US 
leaders, Brown – and Gates – big up Harry Truman, who once said: “I sit here 
all day trying to persuade people to do the things they ought to do without my 
persuading them ... That’s all the powers of the president amount to.”

Putin is the biggest reigning strongman in Brown’s book, but the writer is 
reluctant to assess his growing popularity among rightwing figures including 
Trump, Nigel Farage and Marine Le Pen. It’s also too soon to judge Trump, he 
says. But perhaps we can be premature, and do it anyway, using Brown’s own list 
of the qualities that, he says, make a truly strong president: “Integrity, 
intelligence, articulateness, collegiality, shrewd judgment, a questioning 
mind, willingness to seek disparate views, ability to absorb information, 
flexibility, good memory, courage, vision, empathy and boundless energy.” How’s 
he doing so far?
 