
There were shocks, controversies, rampaging fans and a new discovery in Ligue 
1 last weekend, but an exciting round of action was overshadowed by a 
revelation in a new autobiography that has upset Zinedine Zidane. While 
Grenoble were winning away at Paris St Germain,Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> reeling after another 
refereeing decision went against them, Nantes fans attacking their training 
ground and Lyon unveiling the latest star from their youth academy, Zidane's 
entourage were reportedly doing all they could to prevent publication of an 
enlightening passage from Jérôme Rothen's autobiography.

The offending extract focuses on an incident during the second leg of Monaco's 
2004 Champions League quarter-final win over Real Madrid. Monaco had overturned 
a 4-2 first leg deficit,and were 3-1 up with seconds left to play when Zidane 
tackled Rothen from behind <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=PzS1CdMgYP4>. "It was 
a foul and I went down, admittedly I made a bit more of it, but anyone would 
have done the same, as we were trying to buy some seconds," Rothen wrote. 
"Zidane leant over me and said: 'Get up, you son of a bitch.'"

The expression Rothen claims Zidane used, 'fils de pute 
<http://www.football.fr/footballfr/cmc/scanner/opinion/200839/zidane-pas-si-sympathique_54297.html?popup>
', is a variationon what Marco Materazzi is alleged to have said to Zidane 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2006/dec/22/sport.comment1> before the 
head-butt <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=PLLez12OqlU> that proved the iconic 
moment of the 2006 World Cup final 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2006/nov/26/football.newsstory>. "I was 
surprised but put it down to his frustration, and I expected him to apologise 
at the end of the game, but he said nothing," Rothen continued. "I thought the 
next time we saw each other with the France team he would say sorry, and then 
it would be forgotten, but he didn't and that disappointed me."

Zidane remains one of France's most popular all-time players and it could be 
thatL'Equipe's explanation of his people working overtime to remove the 
extract, rather than the comment itself, that does more to dislodge his halo. 
Then again, it may not help Rothen's case that his book is calledYou're Not 
Going To Believe Me 
<http://www.myfreesport.fr/sports/football/ligue1/0/rothen-tacle-zidane-barthez-lacombe-dans-son-autobiographie-52930.html?xtor=RSS-75>
.

On Sunday night, Zidane shifted the spotlight on to his row with FA president 
Jean-Claude Escalattes, who had accused the France 1998 world champions of 
behaving like a clan in wanting national coach Raymond Domenech replaced by 
Didier Deschamps. "It's completely false and disrespectful to say we tried to 
exert pressure, he hid behind that to keep his man in place,"said Zizou 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2008/20080929_085759_zizou-tacle-escalettes_Dev.html>
, while his interrogator Christophe Dugarry added: "The real clan is the one at 
the federation."

Zidane would have enjoyed a minor victory last weekend when Rothen's PSG were 
victims of the result of the season as Grenoble's golden oldies mugged the 
capital side at the Parc des Princes. Seven of the visitors' starting XI were 
over 30, and their spine of goalkeeper Grégory Wimbée (aged 37), defender 
Maxence Flachez (36), midfielder Laurent Battles (33) and striker Nachim Akrour 
(34) held out against a side whose seven league games have worryingly produced 
just four goals. PSG president Charles Villeneuve, who had defended Rothen when 
Franck Riboud, the chairman of Danone (Zidane's main sponsor) complained about 
the book, asked the winger to put in a decent performance but he did not 
provide one.

Grenoble's motivation comes from being written off at the start of the season. 
The mood in the squad is positive, mainly because the club has so little money 
and so no one is getting paid very much. It wasAkrour, an Algerian 
international who once played for Sutton United and Woking, who smashed in this 
long-range effort <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=90IgwKU405c> to win the game 
1-0. "Nachim could and perhaps should have had a greater career," said coach 
Mécha Bazderavic "He plays and works for the team. He was out of contract last 
season but I kept him on because he's a leader and when he's not around, we're 
all a bit sadder." He also has a habit of scoring important goals, as his
87th-minute equaliser against Sochaux 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=1NwhaxknIQ0> and this even better winner against 
Rennes testify <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=6uuglcbGHCE>.

Marseille dropped more points in their 1-1 draw at Le Mans 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=_KNr7vY87jA>, although they felt they should 
have had all three when Mamadou Samassa's late header looked to have crossed 
the line. "This was daylight robbery and we're starting to get tired of these 
decisions going against us," moaned chairman Pape Diouf. Marseille are still 
furious at being denied a penalty in the draw with Bordeaux and with the 
decisions that went Lyon's way in the 3-2 win over Nice in round five. "If you 
give us four extra points from our two games and take away the three points 
Lyon got against Nice, we wouldn't be so far behind." Computer graphics on 
Canal Plus showed that referee Fredy Fautrel actually called it right and the 
ball did not cross the line in its entirety.

As it is, Marseille are six points behind Lyon, who ended another difficult 
week on a high with a2-1 win over Nancy 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=4QcjxjC_B_M>. Everyone connected to the club had 
something to say: John Mensah went public on being stopped by the police while 
driving his 4x4"and being treated like a criminal" 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/20080924_095847_mensah-s-explique_Dev.html>, 
Fred broke his silence on the personal problems —messy divorce and missing his 
daughter 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/20080925_153438_fred-je-n-avais-plus-envie_Dev.html>
 — that disrupted him last season, whileSidney Govou blamed the club for not 
helping him move in the summer 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/20080925_100945_govou-ca-commence-a-me-gaver_Dev.html>
 and said his relationship with Jean-Michel Aulas was non-existent. Even former 
coachAlain Perrin gave a rare interview <http://darren.blog.canal-plus.com/>, 
admitting that each of last season's double-winning players received a VW 
Beetle for their efforts while he was still waiting for the watch Aulas had 
promised him. All that was forgotten after France Under-21 forward Anthony 
Mounier set up both goals in a man of the match performance for Lyon. Mounier 
is an authentic left-winger who played alongside Karim Benzema for Lyon 
Under-12s and with his direct style, already looks a useful replacement for 
Hatem Ben Arfa.

The closest team to leaders Lyon is now Toulouse, which one France Football 
journalist claimed was an indictment of Ligue 1. "They are worst 
football-playing team ever to be second in France and their only tactic is to 
put ten men behind the ball and take advantage of a mistake." It worked for 
them at Valenciennes, whose goalkeeperNicolas Penneteau's shocking last-minute 
error 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x6wjhl_gignac-0-1-valenciennes-toulouse-li_sport>
 allowed André-Pierre Gignac's speculative shot to seal a 1-0 win.

Down at the bottom, Nantes coach Elie Baup prepared for the game at Caen by 
publicly naming seven players in his 32-man squad that he wanted to release. 
After the game,which Caen won 3-0 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oJ-6y47wJqA>, 
Nantes fans attacked the training-ground and daubed 'Kita Out' slogans on the 
players' cars 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/20080928_145057_une-plainte-deposee-lundi_Dev.html>
. "We can't let people get away with this kind of thing. It's serious, we need 
police protection," said president Waldemar Kita. "I'm afraid for the people 
who work for Nantes and the players are scared too." Kita should be safe: like 
the unpopular director of football Pascal Praud, he lives in Paris. Midfielder 
David de Freitas has sympathised with the fans but it's a situation unlikely to 
tempt their latest transfer target Sylvain Wiltord, a title-winner under Baup 
at Bordeaux. "You can understand the fans being mad, but they're not going to 
kill us," said De Freitas. If he joined this sinking ship, though, Wiltord 
would be mad.

Results: Lyon 2-1 Nancy, Le Mans 1-1 Marseille, Rennes 1-0 Nice, Caen 3-0 
Nantes, Auxerre 3-0 Le Havre, Sochaux 1-1 Lorient, PSG 0-1 Grenoble, 
Valenciennes 0-1Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse>, 
Monaco 0-2 Lille, Bordeaux 1-1 Saint-Etienne.
 