
Procrastination isn't my bag. I hanker after swift decisions, clear direction 
and a strong dose of gumption. So perhaps it's not surprising that up there on 
my movie pedestal are a collection of characters that cut to the chase. That 
two of these are essentially homicidal maniacs is, I assure you, simply an 
unfortunate coincidence and obviously not a characteristic to be admired. But 
their glorious efficiency most certainly is.

My first encounter with the brutal resourcefulness of Louis Mazzini, played 
with such steely nonchalance by the dulcet-toned Dennis Price, was many years 
ago when my grandparents put on what they'd call "proper comedy", in the form 
of the Ealing epic Kind Hearts and Coronets.

I was bowled over. Here was a man with a plan. Yes, OK, it was a fairly 
dastardly plot to bump off every family member who stood between him and the 
title of Duke of Chalfont (his drastic revenge for them snubbing his mother on 
account of her marriage to an opera singer), but the fact remained: it was 
strategically magnificent. Looking down at my colour-coded revision timetable 
and bullet-pointed essay plans, it struck a chord.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fb-4WnfqVvn8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fb-4WnfqVvn8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fb-4WnfqVvn8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b-4WnfqVvn8>

What I admired most about Mazzini was his unflappable calm. Whether popping 
down to the countryside to blow up the mild mannered Henry D'Ascoyne, or 
poisoning the yawn-worthy Reverend Lord Henry D'Ascoyne over a glass of the 
best, he remains cool as a cucumber. There'd be no wild hair-ruffling and 
muttering of expletives if Mazzini's exam paper was a shocker. Oh no. His 
entire demeanour as he executes not only his plan but also pretty much his 
entire family is the epitome of that marvellous wartime maxim "Keep calm and 
carry on". Although, perhaps in Mazzini's case, it's more like "Keep calm and 
carry on killing." Which is obviously taking ruthless efficiency a bit too far.

That Mazzini is also something of an archer (he bumped off balloon-bound Lady 
Agatha D'Ascoyne with a well placed arrow) is another neat coincidence: I, too, 
am often found wielding a bow, although when taking to the shooting line I 
generally try to channel the suave genius of Disney'sRobin Hood 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0070608/>, albeit without the stork rig-out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXfTdnWLMLDA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXfTdnWLMLDA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXfTdnWLMLDA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XfTdnWLMLDA>

But when I am not moonlighting as a toxophilic fox, I am continuing to learn 
from the masters of efficiency. Since striking out into the world of work, I 
have become ever more aware of the need to eradicate faff and say no to 
bumbling. Little wonder then thatMiranda Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/miranda-richardson>'s Queenie is high on 
my list of role models. Here is a woman who knows her own mind. The fact that 
her mind is vaguely unhinged is but a trifle. She is clearly the one wearing 
the pants in that royal court, no matter what the scheming rivals Blackadder 
and Melchett like to think. However while I, too, have been known to offer a 
few firm directions (although without threatening a bit of the choppy choppy), 
I suspect the only traits I truly share with Queenie are an implausibly 
high-pitched voice and a tendency to get a little aerated when obstructions 
appear – a dearth of teabags being a particular bugbear.

Perhaps it is just as well. But cold-hearted killers aside, the girl truly 
after my own heart as deadlines draw near, page plans are torn up and my 
colour-coded to-do list comes a cropper isKate Beckinsale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kate-beckinsale> as the brilliant, brisk 
Flora Poste of Cold Comfort Farm. Orphaned at 19, the quick witted, unemotional 
Flora sets forth to "live off her relatives" at their woeful Sussex abode. 
Bemoaning the barren cows and farren pigs, the sickly stench of the sukebind 
flowers and, of course, Ada Doom's ceaseless cry of "I saw something nasty in 
the woodshed", the entire Starkadder clan is wallowing in a quagmire of chaos 
and misery. Until Flora breezes in.

Forthright and utterly unfazed by all manner of bizarre rural tribulation, she 
quite simply sorts it all out. While I wouldn't be seen dead in some of her 
shapeless vintage togs, there's no denying I'm a fan of her wit and wisdom. 
Whether teaching the young mother of a nascent jazz quartet the nuances of the 
contraceptive diaphragm ("All you need is a little rubber bowler hat to stop it 
happening again"), fixing up weddings ("I've always liked the phrase, 'A 
marriage has been arranged.' When I feel like it, I'll arrange one") or simply 
honing her literary ambitions ("When I am 53, I mean to write a novel as good 
as Persuasion, but with a modern setting") there is no calamity or intrigue 
that Poste with her "higher common sense" cannot iron out. Who wouldn't want to 
be so perfectly phlegmatic?

It's a work in progress – after all those are sturdy shoes to fill – and quite 
frankly sometimes there's nothing for it but to give in to the McCartney/Bowie 
soundtrack in my head and salute another Hollywood hero: Frances Halliday, 
played with aplomb byGreta Gerwig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/greta-gerwig> in Frances Ha. Haphazard and 
hopeful, she tumbles from mishap to mishap, arms flailing, hair flying. But 
make no mistake about it: this girl knows where she wants to go, even if she 
hasn't quite got a grip on how to get there. In the end, she does get there, 
proving that even the sketchiest of stratagems can get things back on track. 
And when life bowls a blinder, that's no cold comfort.

• Why I'd like to be … Nausicaä in Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/11/princess-nausicaa-of-the-valley-of-the-wind-role-model>
• Why I'd like to be ... Julian Sands in A Room With a View 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/10/julian-sands-room-with-a-view-role-model>
• Why I'd like to be … Michael J Fox in Back to the Future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/14/michael-j-fox-back-to-the-future-role-model>
• More from the Role model series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/role-model>
 