
When the British Olympic Association announced in December 2014 that DFS was 
to become the “official homeware partner” for Rio 2016 it was an irony lost on 
few. The bid to host the London 2012 Olympics was successful thanks partly to
some schmoozing in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jul/05/olympics2012.olympicgames> but 
mainly for its mass participation legacy pledges and the promise to “get people 
off the sofa” – hardly the mission statement at DFS headquarters.

But rewind the clock to when the curtain had just come down on London 2012 and 
perhaps the logic becomes clearer. A nation of shopkeepers had sold itself to 
the world, the five-ringed circus was the biggest show in town and it was all 
made possible by Great Britain’s best medal haul for 108 years – an uncanny 
amount of which came in sports where competitors sit down.

From helplessness to hope: inspirational tales of the Refugee Olympic Team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/05/helplessness-rio-hope-olympic-refugee-team>
The Super Saturday trio aside, the British Olympians who captured the 
imagination were largely sedentary. SirsChris Hoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/02/chris-hoy-olympic-gold-team-sprint>
 andBradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/aug/01/bradley-wiggins-olympic-gold>
 on their bikes,Charlotte Dujardin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/09/london-2012-charlotte-dujardin-olympic-gold>
 riding Valegro around Greenwich Park,Ben Ainslie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/ben-ainslie-olympic-gold-great-britain>
 announcing he was “angry, and you don’t want to make me angry” before proving 
exactly why in his dinghy named Rita and Katherine Grainger winning the most 
cathartic of rowing gold medals with Anna Watkins – London 2012 was undoubtedly 
Great Britain’s Games of Thrones (in Wiggins’s case, quite literally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/02/bradley-wiggins-olympic-throne-britain>
).

Of the 29 gold medals won in London, 18 came in sitting-down sports; namely, 
cycling, rowing, equestrianism, canoeing and sailing – the peddlers leading the 
way with a whopping eight – and in total those five sports accounted for 35 of 
Great Britain’s 65 medals. That is not to label Great Britain’s dedicated 
Olympians a bunch of ultra-fit Jim Royles; these sitting sports require supreme 
levels of skill and athleticism – the rower Peter Reed boasts the world’s 
largest ever recorded lung capacity (a staggering 11.68 litres) and it would be 
churlish to paint a picture of Olympic sailors kicking back and soaking up the 
sun.

GB’s sedentary success is not a new phenomenon however but why does it exist 
and is it an increasing trend? At Beijing 2008, no less than 15 of the 19 golds 
were won sitting down – Rebecca Adlington twice, James DeGale and Christine 
Ohuruogu the odd ones out.

In Athens only Dame Kelly Holmes and the most unexpected 4x100m relay success 
prevented a sitting clean sweep while six of Great Britain’s 11 champions in 
Sydney came from the quintet of aforementioned sports.

The percentage of sitting gold medals at each Games is also telling – 55% in 
2000, 67% in 2004, 79% in 2008 and 62% in 2012 – and suggests an awareness and 
a more narrowed focus on the sports Great Britain are best at following the 
nadir of Atlanta 96, when Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsentwon the solitary 
gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/dec/07/50-stunning-moments-steve-redgrave>
. The introduction of National Lottery funding in 1997 is also hugely 
significant – canoes, bicycles, horses, sailing and rowing boats do not come 
cheap and nor do the best coaches – and UK Sport’s attitude towards sports that 
do not show medal potential has becoming increasingly cut throat.

But why those five sports? They are hardly mainstream – although cycling’s 
popularity continues to rocket – and none are particularly accessible. It 
beggars belief that basketball, in 2015 ranked the second most popular sport 
played in the UK by 11- to 15-year-olds, receives no UK Sport funding when all 
you need to play is a ball and a hoop whereas canoeing, rowing, cycling, 
sailing and equestrian, traditionally the preserve of the elite, are the five 
best funded sports, swimming and athletics aside.

But while money alone cannot buy success, spending it wisely plays a major 
part, as proved by luminaries such as Dave Brailsford and Peter Keen, who laid 
the foundations of success at BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> before becoming director of 
performance at UK Sport. Both would point out that while there were 18 cycling 
gold medals on offer at London 2012, 18 in canoeing, 14 in rowing, 10 in 
sailing and six in equestrianism, basketball – not to mention water polo and 
handball which also receive no funding – only offered two.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fteam-gb-sitting-down-sports-rio-2016-london-2012%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02a86dce5b234972807902b9293786dc83d3889f%2F0_0_4601_3226%2F4601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20Team%20GB%20so%20good%20at%20standing%20out%20while%20sitting%20down%20%E2%80%93%20and%20will%20the%20glory%20continue%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fteam-gb-sitting-down-sports-rio-2016-london-2012%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20Team%20GB%20so%20good%20at%20standing%20out%20while%20sitting%20down%20%E2%80%93%20and%20will%20the%20glory%20continue%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fteam-gb-sitting-down-sports-rio-2016-london-2012%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02a86dce5b234972807902b9293786dc83d3889f%2F0_0_4601_3226%2F4601.jpg>
 Pippa Funnell of Great Britain aboard Billy The Biz during an equestrian 
training session. Photograph: Jamie Squire/Getty Images 
Add in the fact China and the USA, the top two in the medals table at the last 
three Olympics, are comparatively weaker in sitting down sports – in London 
only three of their combined 84 gold medals were in canoeing, rowing, 
equestrian, cycling or sailing – and Great Britain’s dominance becomes 
considerably more clear.

It does not, however, explain that while the number of sitting golds won at 
London was unprecedented, the percentage was significantly lower than in 
Beijing. That it was a home Games clearly meant results improved almost across 
the board but it also showed the effectiveness of UK Sport’s funding policy 
that rewards athletes who have plugged away with limited resources, achieved 
success and paved the way for their successors by securing increased funding. 
Sarah Stevenson’s bronze in 2008 was Great Britain’s first in Olympic taekwondo 
but in London there were two, includingJade Jones’s gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/10/jade-jones-olympic-gold-taekwondo>
, and all four competitors have genuine medal credentials in Rio. Similarly 
Beth Tweddle can take a huge slice of the credit for GB’s gymnastics boom and 
the Brownlees are doing the same in triathlon.

So what should we expect in Rio? Taekwondo, triathlon and gymnastics should 
continue to thrive but in the main will there be more of a reliance on sitting 
sports? According to the top end of UK Sport’s target, only 33 of 79 medals 
would come from the five sports compared with 36 from the 65 won in London but 
perhaps the main reason is the improved health that athletics and swimming find 
themselves in. Fail to perform in the Olympics’ two marquee sports and perhaps 
Great Britain will go back to doing what it does best.
 