
How many times have you scoffed at the wunderkind with the six-figure book 
deal? Or the singer with a record-breaking number of nominations for their 
debut effort? It’s not just me, right? So maybe that’s why the subject of this 
week’s column remained in my “yeah, whatever” file for so long. I mean, who 
gets to be good at writingand acting and making music – and at such a young age?

Step forward, Donald Glover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/30/donald-glover-rapper-comedian-martian-star>
. No two ways about it: Glover, 33, had an excellent 2016. I first heard of him 
in 2008, when he was a writer on the Tina Fey workplace comedy30 Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/30-rock>. He was only 23 when he 
was hired – and went on to win three Writers Guild awards for his work on the 
show. Naturally, I felt nothing but impotent jealousy.

Then it turned out he could act, too, playing the hilarious Troy Barnes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4fwcj8NhL1I>, a former high-school jock 
embracing his inner nerd in Community.

His face is cute and elastic, making it a perfect vessel for comedy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ULdm2NLrN4E> (and a handy choice for reaction 
gifs <http://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_m5slk4Db0L1qatt68.gif>). Glover also 
radiates sincerity – even at the height of silliness. There’s something 
particularly soulful about his mien inAtlanta 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MpEdJ-mmTlY>, the critically acclaimed (and 
Golden Globe-winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-full-list-of-winners>
) comedy drama he created and stars in (one of my favourite TV shows of 2016).

His nerd credentials are also solid: he’ll be playing Lando Calrissian in the 
new Star Wars movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/21/star-wars-donald-glover-lando-calrissian-young-han-solo>
, and has a role in 2017’s new Spider-Man 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/donald-glover-joins-the-cast-of-spider-man-homecoming-a7082496.html>
 film. But it’s Glover’s music, released under the pen nameChildish Gambino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/childish-gambino>, I’ve connected to most: I 
loved hisPM Dawn <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P_9U-zkEPAI> and Tamia covers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UfQHEpf2q8k>, but I haven’t stopped playing 
Awaken, My Love! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kp7eSUU9oy8>, a beautifully 
funky and moving album, since it came out last December.

I’m over my envy. Now I’m just in love.
 