
Marjorie Greenfield has many stories to tell about how employers are failing 
to create a workplace that encourages women to excel.

Greenfield, author of The Working Women’s Pregnancy Book, recalls an interview 
with a female pilot who worked for an airline that didn’t allow women to fly 
during the first and third trimesters of pregnancy because of morning sickness 
and fatigue. The first time the pilot became pregnant, she notified her boss 
immediately and was taken off work, despite feeling fine.

So when she was pregnant with her second child, she kept the news secret until 
her second trimester so she could continue working.

The story of the pilot shows the complexity of finding the right approach to 
help employees balance work and pregnancy without making them feel unproductive 
or worse – less competent. Failing to do so could cost employers significant 
money:a new study 
<https://hbr.org/2016/09/the-right-and-wrong-ways-to-help-pregnant-workers> 
found that the more help a pregnant woman received at work, the more she wanted 
to quit her job after her baby was born.

“There are unintended consequences of well intentioned efforts to support 
women,” said Judith Clair, associate professor in the management and 
organization department at Boston College in Massachusetts and co-author of the 
study. “Some of those efforts can backfire.”

Clair and her three co-authors tracked 120 working pregnant women and had them 
fill out weekly surveys about their experiences at work. They then followed up 
with the women nine months after their babies were born to see how the support 
that they received at work while pregnant influenced their career decisions 
postpartum.

The study found that women who received more help were more likely to develop 
negative views about their abilities to be working mothers. The type of help 
mattered. Pregnant women tended to be grateful for practical help, such as 
getting to leave early for a doctor’s appointment, or being allowed to take a 
short nap during working hours.

Why your 'personality' is getting in the way of a promotion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/15/women-workplace-promotions-raises-mckinsey-leanin-study>
More problematic was help that aimed to ease employees’ workload and stress, 
such as being taken off a challenging assignment when the employee felt capable 
of taking it on. The negative reaction reflects a psychological theory called 
the “threat-to-self-esteem” model, in which assistance can sometimes confirm 
the fears of people who already question whether they are performing as well as 
usual.

According to the study, women do worry about their job performance during 
pregnancy and how they will balance competing demands, such as coping with 
morning sickness while still keeping up their workload.

“These worries and challenges set women up for a self-fulfilling prophecy,” 
write the authors of the report. “When help is received, women take this as a 
sign that they can’t keep up any longer.”

These worries aren’t unfounded. The stigma of pregnancy in the workplace 
remains very much alive. Pregnant workers are often seen as a safety risk. 
There are also more insidious factors at play with how people respond to the 
pregnant body, and a belief, often unconscious, that a pregnant woman belongs 
in the home.Studies have shown 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/511799?seq=2#page_scan_tab_contents> that 
pregnant workers are viewed as less competent and dependable – and more caring 
and irrational – than women who are not visibly pregnant.

This prejudice has cost women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/24/maternity-leave-discrimination-54000-women-lose-jobs-each-year-ehrc-report>
 promotions, or even their jobs.

“People still have a lot of stereotypes about whether mothers are good 
workers, and those come into play when women are pregnant,” said Emily Martin, 
general counsel and vice president for Workplace Justice at nonprofit National 
Women’s Law Center. “They may assume, without realizing they’re assuming, that 
once she gets pregnant, her job is not her priority and may treat her 
accordingly, and that’s discrimination.”

The study focused more on the informal interactions between pregnant women and 
their superiors and colleagues rather than company policies and support 
programs for women.

“That’s the part that’s harder for organizations because it requires companies 
to increase awareness of managers and colleagues about appropriate and 
inappropriate interactions,” said Clair. “It’s harder to track those kinds of 
behaviors.”

This little-known state law promotes happy employees and innovative ideas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/03/constituency-statues-workplace-innovation-mit-google-android-apple-facebook-linkedin>
For instance, one of the study participants met with her manager to discuss 
her maternity leave and specified when she planned to return to work. Her boss 
responded by telling her to keep her plans loose because she couldn’t predict 
how she would feel when the baby arrives and starts to make heavy demand of her 
time and energy.

“Her boss was well-meaning, but he was projecting onto this woman and sending 
signals about how she was being viewed, creating an environment where she was 
starting to question herself and how people valued her,” said Clair.

It’s not an easy terrain for companies to navigate, said Clair. The study said 
businesses should instead design programs and management training that allow 
room for their pregnant workers to have more of a say in the kind of help they 
receive.

“What some women truly experience as supportive might be quite different from 
one person to the other, and these aren’t easily resolved tensions,” she said. 
“Organizations should appreciate the complexities and recognize that things we 
think are well meaning might have ill effects.”

The issue gets even more complex in industries where safety and liability are 
overriding concerns, said Greenfield, who is also the director of general 
obstetrics and gynaecology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center. But 
employers don’t have the legal right to decide whether a job is safe or not 
simply because a woman is pregnant, Martin noted. Rather, it’s up to the 
pregnant woman herself to assess the risk unless she has the potential to cause 
harm to people around her – which one could argue was the case with the airline 
pilot.

“Employers should not be assuming that women want changes on the job,” said 
Martin. “If an employer responds to a pregnancy by taking her off big accounts 
or assuming she doesn’t want to travel anymore, even if it’s motivated by some 
desire to help her, that’s a problem.”

While there isn’t research into the costs of retaining pregnant workers versus 
hiring new candidates, studies show that replacing a salaried employee can cost 
a business as much as50% to 60% of the worker’s annual salary 
<https://www.shrm.org/about/foundation/research/documents/retaining%20talent-%20final.pdf>
. The number increases the higher up the position 
<https://www.americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/CostofTurnover.pdf>
, and replacing a top executive can cost a company 213% of annual salary.

Considering women make up nearly half 
<https://www.dol.gov/wb/factsheets/qf-laborforce-10.htm> of the workforce and 
more women areworking while pregnant 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/03/31/working-while-pregnant-is-much-more-common-than-it-used-to-be/>
 than they did 50 years ago, companies need to figure out the most effective 
ways to accommodate pregnant employees.

“If you can make an environment that supports women and help them ease back 
in, they’re going to be more loyal to your institution,” Greenfield said. “The 
bottom line is don’t make assumptions. Talk to the woman about what her needs 
are and be respectful.”
 