
I arrived home the other evening at dusk after a long journey, and stepped out 
of the car to hear a shouting match between blackbirds,one of the most 
beautiful sounds in nature 
<http://www.soundsurvey.org.uk/index.php/survey/wildlife/land_birds/69/521/>. 
In the still calm of a clear March evening three males were fiercely staking 
their suburban territories, belting out sweet and flutey warblings, and in 
doing so, they lifted my travel-numbed mood with a shock-to-the-heart statement 
that spring was finally here.

I could pick out two of them silhouetted on a rooftop and fence, but I didn’t 
really need to – I’ve recognised that sound since school days, when my biology 
teacher took us out on the streets to map all the blackbird territories near 
the school. Those ear-opening lessons marked a turning point in my life. They 
made me a touch wilder – and stoked a curiosity that led me to study biology 
and ecology at university, eventually completing a PhD on ducks.

My first job was doing fieldwork in Oxford’s Wytham Woods, where I was taught 
to recognise common bird songs by my boss. It opened up a whole new dimension 
to the outside world. By tuning into the sonic landscape I could start to 
understand not only who was around, but also what they were up to. An alarm 
call might indicate that I had been spotted, or alternatively that there were 
more real threats in the vicinity. Now I could share in the drama, with all the 
excitement and feelings of wildness that it entailed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrw9xPCFtYw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrw9xPCFtYw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrw9xPCFtYw&media=>
I was becoming immersed in the natural landscape, rather than feeling like a 
tourist somewhere. Learning any language can unlock so much about a place: its 
inhabitants and their personalities; its culture, history, and any dangers. I 
found that exactly the same applies to a natural environment – it becomes far 
more interesting and engaging if you can understand what is going on around 
you. And as I became more wrapped up in all the frenetic springtime activity 
happening in the woods, I started to appreciate it more.

The best thing is that you don’t even need to be out in the countryside

As increasing numbers of us live in cities and spend most of our working lives 
indoors, is it very easy to become disconnected from the natural world.Research 
shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/feb/17/noise-pollution-is-making-us-oblivious-to-the-sound-of-nature-says-researcher>
 that rising levels of background noise from traffic and other human activity 
are making people oblivious to natural sounds, because we are quite simply 
screening it all out. We are conditioning ourselves to ignore the information 
coming into our ears, and as a consequence we are losing the ability to engage 
with the environment in the way we were built to.

I believe we should be taught to recognise birdsong from an early age, 
starting in our own gardens or schoolyards, because if we are wired into the 
natural environment we will grow up with an instinctive awareness of its 
importance to us. Birdsong is well known for its calming effect, perhaps 
because it reminds our ancestral brains that we are in a safe and predator-free 
place, or simply because it tells us that the world is still working. But I am 
not just talking about feeling better after a long journey; rather the fresh 
water, clean air, flood protection, food and countless other vital services we 
expect from nature every day.

Because people have been watching and monitoring birds for so long, they 
provide us with a stark indication of our impact on the countryside. From 30 
years of data over 25 countries, scientists estimate that there are now421 
million fewer birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/02/common-bird-species-sparrow-skylark-decline-europe>
 in the skies of Europe than were in 1980. Bird decline points to losses of 
habitat and gaps in the food chain, and we risk losing ever more unless enough 
of us feel like nature is of direct relevance to us. An emotional response to 
birdsong is a useful reminder of its relevance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3nDLF2fxoWQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3nDLF2fxoWQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3nDLF2fxoWQ&media=>
You already know some common bird songs and calls. Everyone knows what a 
herring gull sounds like – think of the added atmosphere that brings to a trip 
to the seaside. Or the twit-twoo of a tawny owl – it is undeniably exciting to 
hear that sound at night. The best thing is that it takes virtually no effort 
to learn the songs of a few of our most common birds, and you don’t need to be 
out in the countryside – gardens contain much more diversity than modern 
farmland. The most common birds are chatty little things, much more easily 
heard than seen.

Start by opening a window. You will recognise the pretty nasal twittering of a 
robin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nrw9xPCFtYw> even if you didn’t realise 
where it came from, and likewise the mellow fluteyness of a blackbird. Listen 
for the two-tone “teacher-teacher” of thegreat tit 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3nDLF2fxoWQ>. Once you have learned a few 
songs you can start to pick out the unfamiliar ones, which makes those easier 
to learn in turn.

Birds <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/birds> and their songs link my 
two lifelong interests of music and nature. As I finished my doctorate on 
ducks, my band Stornoway recorded our first album Beachcomber’s Windowsill, and 
our new album Bonxie is named after the Scottish colloquial term for the great 
skua. It opens with the sound of brent geese and contains field recordings of 
about 20 other species of birds including skylark, snipe, grouse, greenshank 
and curlew.

If you are thinking of learning a foreign language, why not consider learning 
a local one first: the language of your own garden and countryside. If birdsong 
was taught in our schools like French or German, we would have a new generation 
of wilder children. And this might increase the likelihood of them growing up 
to enjoy the same quality of wildlife that we can.
 