
After years in which the financial markets worried that the British government 
was borrowing too much, it is becoming clear that the government is not 
borrowing enough. This is having serious consequences for pensioners, among 
others.

The symptoms are evident. The government issues bonds when it wants to borrow 
and there is a shortage of long-dated government bonds - long-dated meaning 
bonds with 15 years or more to maturity. The shortage shows up as shortages do 
- in very high prices. When the price of a bond is bid up, the interest it 
yields (the so-called coupon) becomes a smaller proportion of that price - that 
is, its interest rate falls.

British long bonds are now yielding very low rates of interest. The clearest 
way to see this is by comparing them with foreign bonds.

German government 10-year bonds have lower interest rates than their British 
equivalents - nearly 50 basis points (that is 0.5 percentage points) lower - 
largely explained by Germany's current and past record of lower inflation. But 
when it comes to 30-year bonds the British one yields almost one percentage 
point less than the German equivalent. The yield curves cross and the British 
bonds are paying 1 to 1.5 percentage points less than they should.

This is bad news for people who have saved through private pension schemes. 
The money you save in a pension scheme over a working lifetime is used to buy 
an annuity to secure your pension in retirement.

If the bond yields 6%, a nest-egg of £200,000 might give a pension of £14,000 
a year. If the interest rate on long bonds drops to 4.7% (as at present) the 
same savings give an annual pension of only £12,000 a year.

By and large the pension companies will pay the pensioner only what they can 
secure with their own investments. They want safe, long-dated assets to 
underpin those annuities, which means they must hold some of their funds in 
long-dated government bonds. If the government does not borrow and provide 
those safe assets, the consequences are those we see: it gets more difficult to 
save enough for old age.

Another way to look at this is in terms of Gordon Brown's famous golden rule: 
the government should borrow only enough to keep the stock of government debt 
stable in relation to gross domestic product. But the rule implies that it must 
do some borrowing: if GDP is growing, the debt must grow, too, to keep the 
relationship stable. At the moment the government's current budget is in 
surplus and the debt stock, as a proportion of GDP, threatens to fall quite 
quickly. Fortunately, the problem is easy to solve. Some would say the 
government should just borrow more money and spend it.

That may well be sensible. It may make more sense to borrow at 5% to finance 
new hospitals, for example, than to starve the pension funds of bonds while 
paying twice as much for the capital for hospitals by using the notorious 
private finance initiative. Londoners would appreciate some borrowing to 
finance public transport, too.

However, the prudent Mr Brown has his reasons for restraining state spending. 
He could reasonably point out that this is the first Labour government not to 
face a financial market crisis during its first few years in office. Is Mr 
Brown overdoing the caution, though? It is an argument that will run within the 
Labour Party.

Let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that Gordon Brown is right and he is 
spending the right amount for macroeconomic, political and other reasons. He 
can still solve the pensioners' problem by borrowing more. Instead of spending 
the proceeds, however, he could set up a community fund and put the money in 
that. He could appoint independent trustees and they could mandate commercial 
managers to invest the money. The obvious place is in the equity markets.

What's the benefit? Simply this. Over the past hundred years or more equity 
markets around the world have averaged annual returns of 6-7%, plus the rate of 
inflation, decade in and decade out. They don't do it every year. Sometimes 
there are slumps and bear markets when returns are negative. But over the long 
haul the return is remarkably stable.

That means there is an excellent chance that, if British inflation settles 
around the government target of 2.5%, equities will yield, on average, some 8% 
a year over the next 30 years.

Meanwhile, the government can borrow at less than 5%. If it issued, say, £30bn 
worth of bonds, it would make a return of 3.5% on those bonds, or about £1bn a 
year of extra revenue. That could be used to help state pensioners (after all 
the government would already be helping private pensioners with higher annuity 
rates), or it could be used for education or health. It seems too good to be 
true. How can the government create extra revenue from thin air? The answer 
lies in the fact that the government has a monopoly; only it can create the 
entirely safe long-dated assets that people want and institutions need.

At present it is not creating enough. The existing assets are overpriced, 
giving rise to what market men recognise as an arbitrage opportunity. If the 
government uses, instead of wasting, its monopoly and carries out the 
arbitrage, everyone can be better off. The community fund would be a fine 
legacy this government could leave future generations.

 Gerald Holtham is Global Strategist, Norwich Union Investment Management. He 
writes here in a personal capacity and the views expressed are his own.
 