
Who wants to see the living world destroyed? Who wants an end to birdsong, 
bees and coral reefs, the falcon’s stoop, the salmon’s leap? Who wants to see 
the soil stripped from the land, the sea rimed with rubbish?

No one. And yet it happens. Seven billion of us allow fossil fuel companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/keep-it-in-the-ground> to push 
shut the narrow atmospheric door through which humanity stepped. We permit 
industrial farming totear away the soil, banish trees from the hills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/13/flooding-public-spending-britain-europe-policies-homes>
, engineer anothersilent spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/ban-neonicotinoids-another-silent-spring-pesticide-moratorium>
. We let the owners ofgrouse moors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/28/britain-plutocrats-landed-gentry-shotgun-owners>
, 1% of the 1%, shoot and poison hen harriers, peregrines and eagles. We watch 
mutely as a small fleet ofmonster fishing ships 
<http://www.thelandmagazine.org.uk/articles/selling-silver-enclosure-uks-fisheries>
 trashes the oceans.

Why are the defenders of the living world so ineffective? It is partly, of 
course, that everyone is complicit; we have all been swept off our feet by the 
tide of hyperconsumption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/nov/30/climate-change-limit-excessive-consumption>
, our natural greed excited, corporate propaganda chiming with a will to 
believe that there is no cost. But perhapsenvironmentalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/environment> is also afflicted by a deeper 
failure: arising possibly from embarrassment or fear, a failure of emotional 
honesty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fpope-encyclical-value-of-living-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434483150489%2Fdc118516-c92d-467e-8b2a-ce821285091e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we%20fight%20for%20the%20living%20world%3A%20it's%20about%20love%2C%20and%20it's%20time%20we%20said%20so%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fpope-encyclical-value-of-living-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%20fight%20for%20the%20living%20world%3A%20it%27s%20about%20love%2C%20and%20it%27s%20time%20we%20said%20so%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fpope-encyclical-value-of-living-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434483150489%2Fdc118516-c92d-467e-8b2a-ce821285091e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘We have all been swept off our feet by the tide of hyperconsumption, our 
natural greed excited, corporate propaganda chiming with a will to believe that 
there is no cost’. 
I have asked meetings of green-minded people to raise their hands if they 
became defenders of nature because they were worried about the state of their 
bank accounts. Never has one hand appeared. Yet I see the same people base 
their appeal to others on the argument that they will lose money if we don’t 
protect the natural world.

Such claims are factual, but they are also dishonest: we pretend that this is 
what animates us, when in most cases it does not. The reality is that we care 
because we love. Nature appealed to our hearts, when we were children, long 
before it appealed to our heads, let alone our pockets. Yet we seem to believe 
we can persuade people to change their lives through the cold, mechanical power 
of reason, supported by statistics.

I see the encyclical by Pope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/pope-francis-destruction-ecosystem-leaked-encyclical>
, which will bepublished on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/13/pope-francis-intervention-transforms-climate-change-debate>
, as a potential turning point. He will argue that not only the physical 
survival of the poor, but also our spiritual welfare depends on the protection 
of the natural world; and in both respects he is right.

I don’t mean that a belief in God is the answer to our environmental crisis. 
Among Pope Francis’s opponents is the evangelical US-based Cornwall Alliance 
for the Stewardship of Creation, which has written to him arguing that we have 
a holy duty tokeep burning fossil fuel 
<http://www.cornwallalliance.org/2015/04/27/an-open-letter-to-pope-francis-on-climate-change/>
, as “the heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament proclaims his 
handiwork”. It also insists that exercising the dominion granted to humankind 
in Genesis means tilling “the whole Earth 
<http://www.cornwallalliance.org/landmark-documents/the-biblical-perspective-of-environmental-stewardship-subduing-and-ruling-the-earth-to-the-glory-of-god-and-the-benefit-of-our-neighbors/>
”, transforming it “from wilderness to garden and ultimately to garden city”.

There are plenty of senior Catholics seeking to undermine the pope's defence 
of the living world

There are similar tendencies within the Vatican. Cardinal George Pell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/20/cardinal-george-pell-offered-bribe-to-child-sex-abuse-victim-inquiry-told>
, its head of finance, currently immersed in a scandal involvingpaedophile 
priests in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/05/vatican-cardinal-george-pell-abuse-survivor-row>
, is a prominent climate change denier. His lecture to theGlobal Warming Policy 
Foundation 
<http://www.thegwpf.org/images/stories/gwpf-reports/pell-2011_annual_gwpf_lecture_new.pdf>
 was the usual catalogue of zombie myths (discredited claims that keep 
resurfacing), nonsequiturs and outright garbage championing, for example, the 
groundless claim that undersea volcanoes could be responsible for global 
warming. There are plenty of senior Catholics seeking to undermine the pope’s 
defence of the living world, which could explain whya draft of his encyclical 
was leaked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/pope-francis-destruction-ecosystem-leaked-encyclical>
. What I mean is that Pope Francis, a man with whom I disagree profoundly on 
matters such as equal marriage and contraception, reminds us that the living 
world provides not only material goods and tangible services, but is also 
essential to other aspects of our wellbeing. And you don’t have to believe in 
God to endorse that view.

In his beautiful book The Moth Snowstorm 
<https://www.hodder.co.uk/Books/detail.page?isbn=9781444792775>, Michael 
McCarthy suggests that a capacity to love the natural world, rather than merely 
to exist within it, might be a uniquely human trait. When we are close to 
nature, we sometimes find ourselves, as Christians put it, surprised by joy: “A 
happiness with an overtone of something more, which we might term an elevated 
or, indeed, a spiritual quality.”

Exegesis of Pope Francis’s encyclical call for action on climate change | 
Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/21/exegesis-of-pope-francis-encyclical-call-for-action-on-climate-change>
He believes we are wired to develop a rich emotional relationship with nature. 
A large body of research suggests that contact with the living world is 
essential to our psychological and physiological wellbeing. (A paper published 
this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/15/green-spaces-improve-school-childrens-mental-development-study-finds>
, for example, claims that green spaces around city schools improve children’s 
mental performance.)

This does not mean that all people love nature; what it means, McCarthy 
proposes, is that there is a universal propensity to love it, which may be 
drowned out by the noise that assails our minds. As I’ve found while 
volunteering with the outdoor education charity WideHorizons,this love can be 
provoked almost immediately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/07/education-children-not-feral-enough>
, even among children who have never visited the countryside before. Nature, 
McCarthy argues, remains our home, “the true haven for our psyches”, and 
retains an astonishing capacity to bring peace to troubled minds.

Acknowledging our love for the living world does something that a library full 
of papers cannot

Acknowledging our love for the living world does something that a library full 
of papers on sustainable development and ecosystem services cannot: it engages 
the imagination as well as the intellect. It inspires belief; and this is 
essential to the lasting success of any movement.

Is this a version of the religious conviction from which Pope Francis speaks? 
Or could his religion be a version of a much deeper and older love? Could a 
belief in God be a way of explaining and channelling the joy, the burst of love 
that nature sometimes inspires in us? Conversely, could the hyperconsumption 
that both religious and secular environmentalists lament be a response to
ecological boredom 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/19/opinion/our-ecological-boredom.html?_r=1>: 
the void that a loss of contact with the natural world leaves in our psyches?

Of course, this doesn’t answer the whole problem. If the acknowledgement of 
love becomes the means by which we inspire environmentalism in others, how do 
we translate it into political change? But I believe it’s a better grounding 
for action than pretending that what really matters to us is the state of the 
economy. By being honest about our motivation we can inspire in others the 
passions that inspire us.

• When this article was first published George Monbiot was under an 
obligation, to a third party unrelated to the Guardian, to assist the charity 
Widehorizons. This note was added on 1 September 2016.

 