
After 2015 proved lackluster (Truth! Demolition! Our Brand is Crisis!), this 
year’s Toronto film festival arrived with its shoulders heavy. But a diverse 
and rewarding set of films have helped to make it a memorable 10 days, with 
Oscar contenders and offbeat discoveries combining to please both critics and 
audiences.

Damien Chazelle on La La Land: 'Los Angeles is full of people chasing dreams'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/damien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride>
Unlike other festivals, the big award at Toronto is decided by cinemagoers and 
has become a reliable indicator of awards glory. Previous winners have included 
American Beauty, Silver Linings Playbook, The King’s Speech, Slumdog 
Millionaire, 12 Years a Slave, Precious and last year’s Room, which went on to 
score a surprise three nominations at theOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> and a best actress win for Brie 
Larson.

This year’s award has gone to La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land>, an entirely predictable choice 
for anyone who’s seen the film, especially with a big audience. Rather like 
director Damien Chazelle’s last film, Whiplash, it leaves everyone on a giddy 
high from an energetic combination of drama and music, reminding us all of the 
crowd-pleasing power of the recently underused musical genre.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&media=>
La La Land trailer: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone star in musical movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Ever since its premiere at the Venice film festival, its trajectory has been 
smooth, with stellar reviews (the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw was one of many who 
gave it five stars) and awards (as well as today’s success,Emma Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> was named best actress at Venice) 
leading many pundits to name it an early favourite for next year’s Oscars 
(Stone in particular is seen as a lock for the best actress category).

The crossover with audiences and the Academy is also a clear sign that voters 
want to be dazzled rather than depressed.Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
, a devastating drama about a gay black man in deprived Miami, was easily the 
most critically acclaimed film of the festival but was probably too tough for a 
mass audience. And the choice of runners up - feelgood if challenging Disney 
drama Queen of Katwe and Dev Patel’s sweet family tale Lion - suggest that 
traditional still wins out over the new. La La Land might be set in 
contemporary Hollywood but it’s a deliberate hark back to the golden age with 
extravagant set-pieces and a relative lack of cynicism. It’s also a film about 
films with Stone playing a struggling actor and many scenes set on a film lot 
and the Academy is known for their love of self-referentialism (The Artist’s 
sweep was a Hollywood back slap).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&media=>
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
While there are still some major contenders to be screened (Ang Lee’s Billy 
Lynn’s Halftime Walk, Denzel Washington and Viola Davis in Fences, Martin 
Scorsese’s Silence), the festivals have given us a clearer idea of where we 
stand. Some have fallen (Oliver Stone’s Snowden and Rob Reiner’s LBJ are 
looking unlikely) and some have risen (Pablo Larrain’sJackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jackie> and the aforementioned Moonlight) but 
La La Land is currently the one to beat, its resurrection of the musical set to 
play sweetly to the ears of the Academy.
 