
Hacked Off, the organisation that represents people who have been victims of 
press misbehaviour, has fought hard for the implementation of section 40 of the 
crime and courts act.

Its members and supporters recognised that the consultation on whether or not 
the iniquitous provision should be triggered was a sham. They know this 
government will not do it.

But they have battled away all the same, making much of the “myth-making” by 
the bulk of the press industry 
<http://hackinginquiry.org/latest-news/the-governments-consultation-on-leveson-hugh-grants-guide-to-myth-busting-part-two-impress-and-leveson/>
 during its own campaign against section 40.

As I wrote yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2017/jan/10/section-40-david-camerons-ticking-time-bomb-under-the-press>
, the newspapers signed up to be regulated by the Independent Press Standards 
Organisation (Ipso) are far from alone in their opposition to section 40.

Private Eye <https://www.theguardian.com/media/private-eye>, which can surely 
never be accused of being in the pocket of national paper owners and editors, 
is one example.

One of its writers, Francis Wheen, has posted a comment on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10154748779976397&set=a.10150745715611397.459326.668271396&type=3&theater>
 in which he recalls a story that resulted in a legal claim against the 
magazine. “After a five-month legal battle the court of appeal decided that our 
report was in the public interest,” he wrote. “Our costs were reimbursed, and 
we published.”

Had section 40 been in force, however, despite the court’s finding in Private 
Eye’s favour, “we would have had to pay all the costs for both sides – a total 
of £350,000.”

He added: “If this grotesque law is put into effect, we’ll probably be reduced 
to running page after page of cat pictures.” And he illustrated his point with 
a 2013 Eye cover of compliant cats!

Then there is the Financial Times’s case against section 40 
<http://aboutus.ft.com/2017/01/10/ft-response-to-consultation-on-section-40-of-the-crime-courts-act-2013-and-part-two-of-the-leveson-inquiry/#axzz4VN2KAqbX>
, as detailed in the submission to culture minister Karen Bradley by its 
editor, Lional Barber and chief executive, John Ridding.

They argue that the section “should be repealed entirely and not implemented, 
even in any partial, or amended, form.”

In their view, the measure “would inflict disproportionate, unjust and 
potentially disastrous legal costs on newspapers, irrespective of their record 
on the ethical issues which initiated theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>. 


“These pressures affect all news publishers, including global businesses like 
the FT, but they are particularly acute for publishers of local and regional 
newspapers.”


As for their own journalism, Barber and Ridding say their editorial output 
“naturally attracts the ire of some billionaires and captains of industry.”

Should such people complain under the terms of section 40 the FT would be in 
the position of having to pay the costs of “unreasonable or wealthy” opponents, 
who will know that the FT “will almost certainly have to pay that bill 
irrespective of outcome.”

That, they say, “would simply invite unmeritorious litigation that would 
threaten the FT’s journalistic freedom and activity.”

They therefore want the government to ask parliament to repeal section 40. 
Furthermore, they also believe that the second part of the Leveson inquiry 
“should be abandoned, on the grounds that the concerns to which it speaks have 
either been, or are open to being, dealt with by the courts.”

Again, the FT has not signed up to Ipso and it is certainly not beholden to 
papers such as the Daily Mail,Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> and the Sun that have led 
the fray against section 40.

It might be contended, by which I mean it will be contended, that Private Eye 
and the FT could avoid the legal costs problems they highlight if only they 
signed upImpress <https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress>, the regulator 
that has secured official recogniton.

But why should they? If we truly believe our press should be free then surely 
that freedom is best illustrated by abstaining from state-approved regulation?

As for the Guardian (also outside Ipso), it has nailed its colours to the mast 
in today’s editorial,Press laws punish the many for the mistakes of the few 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/the-guardian-view-on-section-40-muzzling-journalism>
.
 