 I have had two meetings with Ron Davies, the Welsh Secretary, over the last 
few months, in which he informed me that if I campaigned against the Welsh 
Assembly proposed by the Government, I would be kicked out of the Parliamentary 
Labour Party. Further, I was warned that if any party members followed my 
example, they too would be expelled from the party. Mr Davies's policy adviser, 
Huw Roberts, then telephoned me once again to tell me that I would be 
disciplined if I insisted on campaigning against the assembly.
Roberts later telephoned the county borough of Blaenau Gwent (the constituency 
I represent) and its leader, Bernard Assinder, again expressing concern that I 
was intending to engage in a campaign against devolution. He indicated that 
this could have a damaging effect on Blaenau Gwent, in that if I were 
disciplined there would be difficulties should the Welsh Office wish to hold 
future discussions with the authority in my presence. Therefore it would make 
sense to talk to Llew about his intentions regarding devolution...

 The threats against me - while disputed by the Prime Minister during Question 
Time in the Commons on Wednesday - are in fact only a duplication of the 
threats reported to have been made by Ron Davies in his press conference of May 
15, or in the briefings which followed it. As David Rose, political 
correspondent at the Liverpool Daily Post, reported, he issued an ultimatum: 
'Back us or we sack you.' An ultimatum that is almost identical to the one I 
received.

 The fact that a full-time party official should also phone me (and, indeed, 
my local authority) indicating the difficulty of my being in attendance at 
meetings between the authority and the Welsh Office is, in my opinion, a breach 
of parliamentary privilege. It must be remembered that I have not been making 
statements on this matter inside Parliament - with the protection that affords 
- but outside Parliament, and hence with no such protection. I do this in 
confidence, in the knowledge that what I have been saying on the subject is the 
truth. Nor am I doubting the statement provided by the leader of Blaenau Gwent 
council to the party chief whip nor would I challege the professionalism of 
David Rose.

 What saddens me about the Prime Minister's statement in the House on 
Wednesday is that no attempt was made to speak to me prior to the debate, and I 
am not aware whether he had read the statement from the local authority that 
morning. I desperately hope the Prime Minister's statement to the House was not 
simply based on a conversation between Ron Davies and himself.

In saying all this, I should add that over the past weeks I have received no 
threat from the Prime Minister's office, from the chief whip, from the general 
secretary of the Labour Party (Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> ), 
or from my constituency party. My complaints are directed against two people: 
Mr Davies and Mr Roberts. My only demand (which I stated to Ron Davies when I 
met him first of all) is that he shows people a similar amount of tolerance as 
was shown him in the devolution campaign of 1979, and the referendum on the 
Common Market. To say that only one side of the argument can be put is like 
saying we will have a football match but only one team will be on the field. If 
this happens, or a statement is not made to the effect that both sides will be 
allowed to be put, then the referendum will become a mockery.

 I appreciate why Mr Davies is somewhat concerned and is making every attempt 
to prevent this debate. Because people in the 'Yes' camp are increasingly 
concerned about their ability to deliver the vote. More and more people are 
saying to me that we do not need a Welsh Assembly now we have a Labour 
government which can begin to tackle the problems of unemployment, low pay, and 
education and health services in decline. They are also saying that to vote for 
the Welsh Assembly is to go down the nationalist road of separatism and all the 
ugliness that goes with it. Some are also of the opinion that with a Welsh 
Assembly we would be scrapping the quango state in Wales but indeed some weeks 
ago Mr Davies announced the new procedures for appointments to those very 
quangos. What must be remembered is that those quangos were introduced through 
primary legislation brought through the House of Commons. This being the case, 
they can be scrapped through that procedure without the great expense of 
setting up a Welsh Assembly.

 The referendum campaign is a challenge to the Labour Party as to whether it 
is serious about extending democracy and allowing the exchange of ideas. It 
would be a sad day in the history of a proud movement if years of debate were 
all of a sudden strangled. In 33 years' and more membership of the Labour 
Party, I have never experienced the kind of intolerance that I have felt in 
recent months. I hope we can put that aside and begin the debate on a most 
important issue: that is, how we should be governed, and indeed how we should 
govern.

 I have always been brought up to believe that problems in the Labour movement 
should be resolved within that movement. But if that doesn't happen, then I 
will have to look for other avenues through which to raise my grievances and 
the Standards and Privileges Committee of the House of Commons is just one of 
those possible avenues.

 I hope it doesn't come to that, but if it does other people must accept that 
responsibility. Because all I have done in the past few days, and will continue 
to do in the months and years ahead, is to speak the truth.

Â• Llew Smith is Labour MP for Blaenau Gwent
 