
Ten years ago this month, I made a series of speeches in New Zealand warning 
of impending doom for journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2006/nov/29/offtonewzealandtodiscuss>
 should the country’s newspapers go to the wall.

It struck me at the time that the situation there for newsprint and its 
publishers was more dire than anywhere else in the English-speaking world.

I thought a small market, without any print penetration from elsewhere (as 
happens, for example, in Ireland), might suffer disproportionately from the 
digital revolution’s disruption.

Ever since, I have been charting the New Zealand’s industry’s gradual 
contraction. In 2012, the leading owner, the Australian-based APN,was 
reportedly seeking a buyer for its Kiwi assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/may/02/mediabusiness-newzealand>
.

It soldiered on, however, and months later it made the familiar switch of 
format from broadsheet to compact at the country’s leading title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/jul/10/newspaper-formats-newzealand>
, the Herald, in the hope of retaining sales.

In 2014, it merged its newspaper division with radio and e-commerce businesses 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/business/news/article.cfm?c_id=3&objectid=11330863> 
to create a unified and separately listed media company, New Zealand Media and 
Entertainment (NZME).

The rebranding, for that is what it was, inevitably fuelled speculation of a 
possible sale 
<http://www.stuff.co.nz/business/industries/10510720/Fairfax-no-comment-on-APN-speculation>
, with Australia’s Fairfax Media as the likely buyer.

Although it was denied at the time, the direction of travel was obvious. In 
May this year, it was revealed that Fairfax and NZMEwere in advanced merger 
talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/new-zealand-one-major-newspaper-group-merger-talks-revealed>
.

This was denied preliminary approval by the country’s commerce (competition) 
commission because of concerns about a press duopoly becoming a monopoly,a 
point I also made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/11/why-a-new-zealand-newspaper-merger-would-be-bad-for-democarcy>
.

However, a significant change at New Zealand media companies 
<http://www.aut.ac.nz/study-at-aut/study-areas/communications/research/journalism,-media-and-democracy-research-centre/journalists-and-projects/new-zealand-media-ownership-report>
 was soon revealed: they had become “exclusively owned by financial 
institutions.” (News Corp dispensed with its shares in NZME soon after it was 
founded).

Now, the majority of New Zealand’s editors are fighting a rearguard action to 
prevent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/new-zealand-media-merger-risks-growth-of-glib-click-bait-coverage-say-editors>
the creation of a mainstream media monopoly.

One of them, former Herald editor-turned-academic, Gavin Ellis, told the 
Financial Times of his concerns 
<https://www.ft.com/content/11f86094-bb67-11e6-8b45-b8b81dd5d080> about job 
cuts and the loss of diversity should the proposed NZME/Fairfax merger be given 
clearance.

The commission is sympathetic. Last month, its draft response to the 
companies’ application noted that it would result in a single business 
controlling 90% of the daily newspaper market, making it “the second highest 
concentration of print media ownership in the world, behind only China.”


But will the commission, in its final March report, deny the move towards 
monopoly? And, if it does, what then for the cash-strapped papers? 
Consolidation may be unpalatable for journalists (and for democracy) but it 
makes commercial sense in a fast-declining market.

Online competition from outside the country reduces the selling power of 
domestic papers. New Zealanders can read all the leading international news 
media outlets, such as the Guardian, BBC andNew York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times>.

They don’t cover internal news, and that should be the major plus for NZ 
papers. The problem, however, is that the continuing flight of advertising from 
print to the web means they are finding it increasingly difficult to fund their 
editorial staffs.


It is noticeable that, in their submission to the commission, the companies 
threaten to cut journalistic jobs if they are not allowed to merge. They say:

“In the absence of a merger, the likely counterfactual is that to maintain 
financial viability each of the parties would need to aggressively consider 
cuts to frontline news functions such as reporting.”

Editors don’t like that one bit, understandably. So what’s to be done? Ellis 
has picked up on two solutions this author has been advocating for some time.

First, consider not-for-profit ownership of newsapers. Second, raise a levy on 
the profiteering social media companies.

He told the FT: “The rapacious aggregators of news should pay a tax, with the 
proceeds flowing through to media companies that create the content they use to 
generate advertising revenues.”

But New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> is not the only 
anglophone country facing such peril. Australia, and particularly Canada, are 
soon likely to be in a similar crisis situation.


Before time runs out, talk about new models of ownership and the taxing of 
digital conglomerates needs to be replaced by action. Democracy demands it. And 
shouldn’t it be the UK that shows the way?
 