
Hello everyone, and welcome to a new episode of News from the World of Old 
Feathers. Sit back and relax, because my, my, we have some new ground to cover.

Colourful feathers are relevant to numerous aspects of avian biology, 
including sexual selection, camouflage and communication. For a long time, the 
answer to the question “What colour were the first birds?” was a rather 
speculative one, as contrary to what creationists or the TV series the 
Flintstones try to tell you, no humans were around in the Mesozoic era when the 
first birds appeared. But the discovery of feathers in avian and non-avian 
dinosaurs, and traces of colour inside those feathers, has massively increased 
our understanding of the early evolution of birds.

Dinosaur brains and other remarkable fossil finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/02/dinosaur-brains-and-other-remarkable-fossil-finds-palaeontology-soft-tissue-birds>
The Jehol Biota <http://palaeo.gly.bris.ac.uk/melanosomes/Jehol.html> from 
Northeastern China has proven to be a fossil treasure trove. Early Cretaceous 
(approximately 131-120 million years ago) in age, the Jehol biota covers a 
period with a high diversity of fossils, including plants, invertebrates, 
dinosaurs and mammals, but it is best known for its exquisitely preserved 
feathered dinosaurs. Over the years, we have seen a highly diverse assemblage 
of avian and non-avian dinosaurs with skeletons preserved fully articulated, 
with visible soft tissue traces and stomach contents, and most stunningly, 
evidence for feathers in both avian and non-avian dinosaurs. These finds have 
contributed greatly to our understanding of the dinosaur-bird transition and 
the rise of early birds, and new discoveries continue to today. The latest 
discovery from the Jehol concerns a new (yet unnamed) species of the basal
enanthiornitine <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enantiornithes> family 
Bohaiornithidae (Peteya et al., 2016).

The specimen displays exceptional feather preservation: the head is surrounded 
by a halo of dark feathers, the flight feathers are clearly visible along the 
side of the body, and two elongated (and probably ornamental) feathers emerge 
from the tail. But what’s most remarkable about this specimen is that the 
feathers contain traces of their original colours, which means that we can 
reconstruct the coloration of this extinct lineage of early birds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwhy-palaeontologists-are-aflutter-over-new-fossil-feather-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1743b18a087ec9d8b97a1b0b25e76fdc52133633%2F0_0_4912_7360%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20palaeontologists%20are%20aflutter%20over%20new%20fossil%20feather%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwhy-palaeontologists-are-aflutter-over-new-fossil-feather-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20palaeontologists%20are%20aflutter%20over%20new%20fossil%20feather%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwhy-palaeontologists-are-aflutter-over-new-fossil-feather-finds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1743b18a087ec9d8b97a1b0b25e76fdc52133633%2F0_0_4912_7360%2F4912.jpg>
 The skull of the new bohaiornithid with feathers clearly visible around the 
head and neck. Inset: elongate three-dimensional melanosomes are visible in 
feathers from the crown. Image courtesy of Jennifer Peteya. 
Upon closer look, Jennifer Peteya and her colleagues noticed that the feathers 
contain three-dimensionally preserved elongated granules. These granules are 
similar in size, shape and chemistry to melanosomes in living birds, which led 
Peteya and her colleagues to believe that the granules in the fossil specimen 
must be melanosomes as well. Melanosomes are organelles in the cells of animals 
that produce melanin, one of the three main categories of pigments inbird 
feathers <https://academy.allaboutbirds.org/how-birds-make-colorful-feathers/>. 

Melanin is visible in feathers (and the skin) of living birds as small 
granules, and produces a range of colours from black to brown and yellow. 
Curious to see if the fossil melanosomes still contained melanin, Peteya and 
colleagues usedRaman <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raman_spectroscopy> 
spectroscopy, a technique in which a sample is illuminated by a laser beam. The 
vibrational spectrum of the light scattered off the sample allows you to 
identify the different molecules in the sample. Peteya and colleagues found 
that Raman spectra of samples of the fossil specimen show two peaks, similar to 
spectra of eumelanin, a melanin pigment found in black, brown and iridescent 
feathers. In addition, the elongated shape and the slight parallel organisation 
of the melanosomes in the fossil samples is also seen in iridescent feathers of 
living birds.

Both the Raman spectra and the organization of the melanosomes in the fossil 
specimen suggest that this extinct bird had iridescent feathers. Althought this 
is not the first finding of iridescent fossil feathers (for instance, see 
Vinther et al., 2010 and Li et al., 2012), it is the oldest evidence of 
iridescent feathers in enanthiornithines. Unfortunately, it is impossible to 
determine the specific hue of the iridescent feathers in this specimen, since 
the nanostructures through which the light scatters, such as layers of 
β-keratin, are not preserved. In extant birds, iridescent feathers play a role 
in sexual selection and display (think of the magnificentbirds of paradise 
<http://www.birdsofparadiseproject.org/content.php?page=61&__hstc=75100365.90864cc0e90079e1d9050acfddc1dc50.1481552123092.1481552123092.1481634647520.2&__hssc=75100365.1.1481634647520&__hsfp=1626589690#_ga=1.21942066.804806162.1481552121>
), and this may have been the case in early birds as well.

From enanthiornithines we hop down the evolutionary tree to a different yet 
equally feathered branch, that of the non-avian theropods, a group of theropods 
that is closely related to, yet not ancestral to living birds. Since the late 
1990s,a steady stream of discoveries 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feathered_dinosaur#cite_note-18> has changed our 
image of dinosaurs from slow and reptile-like to agile and, most surprisingly, 
feathery creatures. The presence of feathers in non-avian dinosaurs is now 
generally accepted, but the evidence for feathers exists as anatomical features 
on the bones (quill knobs on the ulna ofVelociraptor mongoliensis were 
described by Turner et al., 2007), or two-dimensional feather outlines in the 
surrounding matrix (Microraptor gui, Hone et al., 2010), which tells us little 
about how dinosaur feathers looked like in real life.

This is why paleontologists get all excited over pieces of amber with bits of 
animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/15/why-two-tiny-wings-preserved-in-amber-have-palaeontologists-in-a-flap-dinosaurs>
 stuck inside of them: something trapped in tree resin is preserved in the most 
lifelike way. The latest piece of amber that has gotten paleontologists all up 
in a tizzy comes from Myanmar, dates back to the Middle Cretaceous (99 million 
years ago) and contains a part of a small and feathery tail (Xing et al., 
2016). Unfortunately, the original owner of the tail is not preserved with it, 
but based on the preserved length of the tail and the preserved caudal 
vertebrae, the morphology of the vertebrae and several features of the 
feathers, the authors argue that this tail did not belong to an ancient bird, 
but rather to a non-avian dinosaur (a coelurosaur to be precise). This makes it 
the first piece of a dinosaur ever to have been found trapped in amber.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwhy-palaeontologists-are-aflutter-over-new-fossil-feather-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef8083f4076c332b0e2520077f17f44cb063e3d2%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20palaeontologists%20are%20aflutter%20over%20new%20fossil%20feather%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwhy-palaeontologists-are-aflutter-over-new-fossil-feather-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20palaeontologists%20are%20aflutter%20over%20new%20fossil%20feather%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwhy-palaeontologists-are-aflutter-over-new-fossil-feather-finds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef8083f4076c332b0e2520077f17f44cb063e3d2%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The partial tail of a feathered dinosaur that was preserved in amber some 99 
million years ago.
 “The new material preserves a tail consisting of eight vertebrae from a 
juvenile; these are surrounded by feathers that are preserved in 3D and with 
microscopic detail,” says Ryan McKellar of the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. 
Photograph: Royal Saskatchewan Museum/ R.C. McKellar/AFP/Getty Images 
What’s more exciting is that this piece of amber, unglamorously referred to as 
DIP-V-15103, preserves the first evidence of dinosaur feathers in 3D, giving 
palaeontologists a unique look at the structure and function of dinosaur 
feathers, a topic that has been hotly debated since the first evidence for 
fuzzy dinosaurs. The feathers cover mostly the upper side of the tail and are 
rather homogenous in structure. They are formed by a weakly developed central 
shaft (rachis), with alternating smaller branches (barbs) that carry the tiny, 
hooked barbules that also continue along the surface of the rachis. This 
feather microstructure does not quite line up with existing models for the 
evolution of feathers (based on Prum, 1999).

New species of 'weird bird'-like dinosaur discovered in China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/10/new-species-of-weird-bird-like-dinosaur-discovered-in-china-tongtianlong-limosus>
Models of the development of feathers describe the initial evolution of a 
feather from a single hollow cylinder (stage I) to a tuft of keratinous 
filaments (stage II). Stage III represents the formation of a central rachis 
with barbs wearing barbules, either by naked barbs branching of from a central 
rachis (stage IIIa), or by fusion of separate barbs bearing barbules (stage 
IIIb) into a central, naked rachis with barbules limited to the barbs. 
DIP-V-15103 represents a combination of features intermediate between stages 
IIIa and IIIb; the rachis appears to have been formed through fusion of 
individual barbs that already possessed barbules, instead of the fusion of 
naked barbs. This suggests that the evolutionary pathway of feathers in this 
group may have been through stage IIIb. The plumage in this coelurosaur differs 
from that observed in other dinosaurs, which show a reduced rachis with long 
barbs without any barbules, and DIP-V-15103 adds another morphotype to the 
diversity of early feathers.

Bands of pigmentation are visible in the dorsal plumage, which is a chestnut 
brown and darker than the ventral plumage, which is rather pale. A small 
portion of the ventral plumage was available for scanning electron microscopy 
in search of melanosomes, but no such melanosomes were found. If this reflects 
the actual coloration during life, or if any existing melanosomes had degraded 
before preservation set in remains unclear for now.

Well, that’s it for now, folks. At the rate we are going now, feathered 
dinosaurs in glorious technicolour are only a matter of time. I’ll see you next 
time on News from the World of Old Feathers.

References

Hone, DWE, Tischlinger, H, Xu, X & Zhang, F, 2010. The extent of the preserved 
feathers on the four-winged dinosaurMicroraptor gui under ultraviolet light. 
PLoS ONE 5(2): e9223 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0009223>. 

Li, Q, Gao, K-Q, Meng, Q, Clarke, JA, Shawkey, MD, D’Alba, L, Pei, R, Ellison, 
M, Norell, MA & Vinther, J, 2012. Reconstruction ofMicroraptor and the 
evolution of iridescent plumage.Science 335(6073):1215-1219 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/335/6073/1215>.

Peteya, JA, Clarke, JA, Li, Q, Gao, K-Q & Shawkey, MD, 2016. The plumage and 
colouration of an enantiornithine bird from the early cretaceous of China.
Palaeontology 1-17 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pala.12270/abstract>

Prum, RO, 1999. Development and Evolutionary Origin of Feathers. Journal of 
Experimental Zoology 285:291–306 
<http://prumlab.yale.edu/sites/default/files/prum_1999_mde_development.pdf>.

Turner, AH, Makovicky, PJ & Norell, MA, 2007. Feather quill knobs in the 
dinosaurVelociraptor. Science. 317 (5845): 1721. 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/317/5845/1721>

Vinther, J, Briggs, DEG, Clarke, J, Mayr, G & Prum, RO, 2010. Structural 
coloration in a fossil feather.Biology Letters 6:128–131 
<http://rsbl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/early/2009/08/20/rsbl.2009.0524>

Xing, L, McKellar, R.C., Xu, X, Li, G, Bai, M, Persons IV, WS, Miyashita, T, 
Benton, MJ, Zhang, J, Wolfe, AP, Yi, Q, Tseng, K, Ran, H & Currie, PJ, 2016. A 
feathered dinosaur tail with primitive plumage trapped in Mid-Cretaceous amber.
Current Biology, in press 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982216311939>.
 