
Last year, Norway killed more protected whales than any other country – all 
for the sake of a marginal and dying industry characterised by cruelty and 
exploitation of an internationally protected species. Its 2014 catch of736 
minke whales 
<https://eia-international.org/wp-content/uploads/EIA-Convenience-Kills-FINAL.pdf>
 was more than the combined catch of Japan and Iceland – 447 and 261 whales 
respectively.

Commercial whaling was banned almost 30 years ago. Norway, however, has 
consistently flouted bans oncommercial whaling <https://iwc.int/commercial> and 
international trade 
<https://cites.org/sites/default/files/eng/app/2015/E-Reserv-2015-06-05.pdf> in 
whale products through reservations to the international agreements under the 
International Whaling Commission (IWC) and the Convention on International 
Trade in Endangered Species.

Japan accused of falsifying whaling data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/japan-accused-of-falsifying-whaling-data>
Reasons for the Norwegian government’s continued support for whale meat are 
complex, but include the fact that key stakeholders in the whaling industry 
have powerful allies in the government. There is also a misguided belief among 
senior officials and the fishing industry they serve that killing whales will 
improve commercial fish catches.

Today, a coalition of NGOs including the Environmental Investigation Agency, 
Animal Welfare Institute and CarbonFix Foundation is launching a campaign 
calling on Spar Norway, one of the country’s leading food retailers, to stop the
distribution and sale of whale meat. 
<https://eia-international.org/spar-norway-under-fire-for-its-role-in-propping-up-norwegian-whaling>
 The ultimate aim of the campaign is to reduce the market for whale meat and 
thus the incentive for continued whaling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fwhy-is-spar-intent-on-boosting-norways-cruel-and-dying-whaling-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436959599189%2F5ecdc946-1166-4a65-8e4a-3d9eb102e0ef-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Spar%20intent%20on%20boosting%20Norway's%20cruel%20and%20dying%20whaling%20industry%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fwhy-is-spar-intent-on-boosting-norways-cruel-and-dying-whaling-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Spar%20intent%20on%20boosting%20Norway%27s%20cruel%20and%20dying%20whaling%20industry%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fwhy-is-spar-intent-on-boosting-norways-cruel-and-dying-whaling-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436959599189%2F5ecdc946-1166-4a65-8e4a-3d9eb102e0ef-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Whale meat on display in Spar Norway. Photograph: paulthomson.info/EIA 
Spar is an international, multibillion euro enterprise with more than 12,000 
stores in 40 countries, the majority of which are overwhelmingly against 
commercial whaling. Opinion polls in the UK and Germany, for example, found more
than 80% of people 
<http://awionline.org/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/WhalingStudyUKGermanyPPT.pdf>
 would be unlikely to buy seafood products from companies linked to whaling.

Norway’s whaling and associated trade may be technically legal but it is 
clearly in defiance of international treaties. And the misappropriated 
methodology used by the country to set its high catch limits has been rejected 
by theIWC’s scientific committee 
<http://www.ifaw.org/sites/default/files/gaining-ground/ifaw-gaining-ground-chapter-07.pdf>
 as not being in accordance with the agreed scientific basis for ensuring 
sustainability.

Yet the country manages to mostly avoid international condemnation of its 
hunts, keeping a low profile at the IWC and allowing Japan and, to some extent, 
Iceland to take the flak.

Iceland whaling season under way despite protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/29/iceland-whaling-season-underway-despite-protest>
Norway has been quietly but steadily increasing its catch in recent years and 
has its sights set on Japan’s whale meat market. Japan’s catches have been
drastically reduced <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-30092516> after the 
International Court of Justiceruled 
<http://www.icj-cij.org/docket/files/148/18162.pdf> that Japan’s “scientific” 
whaling was not for the purposes of science, effectively outlawing its 
Antarctic whale hunt.

A small stumbling block to Norway’s plans is that Japan has rejected Norwegian 
minke whale products due tohigh levels of pesticides 
<http://eia-international.org/norwegian-whale-products-trigger-public-health-concerns>
, so expanding its limited domestic market is all the more important, although
most Norwegians are not that interested 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/norway-kills-729-whales-in-record-year-for-hunt-but-demand-failing-for-meat-9689466.html>
 in whales as food.

The Norwegian government and private entities have created several marketing 
campaigns in an effort to boost whale meat sales, promoting it to the hotel, 
restaurant and catering sectors. Amarketing association 
<http://www.hvalprodukter.no/?id=1&n=2&title=Norskhvalkjott-%20ndash-en-ravare-i-verdensklasse;%20http://www.kystogfjord.no/nyheter/forsiden/Flere-paa-hvalfangst>
 established in 2012 has focused on improving the packaging, advertising and 
diversity of whale products to tempt consumers.

Yet despite these efforts, and exports of more than 100 tonnes of whale 
products, Norway’s whaling industry remains a marginal business.

This is why Spar Norway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> and its 
parent company, NorgesGruppen ASA, play such an important role. As big name 
brands with hundreds of stores across the country, they are promoting and 
facilitating the trade of products that otherwise would not occur. Their 
involvement doesn’t stop there – NorgesGruppen is working with one whaling 
company to develop a marketing strategy for whale meat, presumably in the hope 
of significant future profits in the event that the export market opens up.

Whale species are increasingly recognised as essential components of healthy, 
productive marine ecosystems that contribute to increasing fish stocks and play 
an important role in our climate. Given that, plus the threat of consumer 
boycotts, the Norwegian fishing industry and government would do well to take a 
closer look at why the country continues whaling.

Despite its poor reputation, globalisation can be a force for good when major 
brands spanning multiple countries take a firm stand in favour of conservation 
and environmental protection. Walmart,Amazon 
<https://eia-international.org/amazon-com-confirms-new-policy-to-ban-whale-and-dolphin-products>
,Rakuten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/04/rakuten-ends-whale-meat-sales>
 andTesco 
<http://www.greenpeace.org.uk/media/press-releases/tescos-end-sale-of-whale-meat-in-japan>
 have ended their association with the sale of whale products in Japan when 
prompted by our organisations – we trust that Spar will do the same.



 