
This year winter arrived early in the UK, with temperatures plunging well 
below freezing before November was even out. So is an extra cold winter on the 
cards?

Forecasting months ahead is fraught with difficulty, but some scientists 
believe that the warm autumn in theArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> may portend a cold winter for North 
America and northern Europe.

As summer came to a close, Arctic sea-ice <http://neven1.typepad.com/> melted 
to its second lowest extent on record, allowing ocean waters to release more 
heat to the atmosphere. By November temperatures in the Arctic had rocketedto a 
staggering 20 degrees higher than average 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/extraordinarily-hot-arctic-temperatures-alarm-scientists>
.

Why the Arctic waters are reluctant to freeze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/why-sea-reluctant-freeze-arctic-climate-weatherwatch>
Much of that heat has raised temperatures in the stratosphere, and this is 
likely to weaken theArctic polar vortex 
<http://climatechange.cornell.edu/what-is-a-polar-vortex/> – the large low 
pressure region over the north pole.

Research by climate scientists Judah Cohen from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology <http://www.judahcohen.org/> (MIT) and Jennifer Francis from Rutgers 
University 
<http://news.rutgers.edu/news/climate-change-driving-brutal-winter/20150217#.WE7EWjaLRdA>
, indicate that a weakened polar vortex leads to a weakened jet stream – the 
fast, high-level westerly winds that bring storms to the UK. And when the jet 
stream weakens it becomes more wavy, and prone to getting stuck in position, 
bringing long periods of similar weather.

Already we’ve started off with unusually cold temperatures and heavy snowfall 
over Eurasia, and weirdly warm temperatures over north America. Previously 
Cohen has shown that heavy Siberian snowfall in October is often linked to 
colder than normal winters in Europe and the northeastern US.

This year there is the exceptional 2016 El Nino <https://www.climate.gov/enso> 
to add to the mix, butCohen is tentatively forecasting 
<http://www.aer.com/science-research/climate-weather/arctic-oscillation> 
something similar to the severe winter of 2009/10.
 