
On his office balcony Jeremy Corbyn has a small olive tree, and he once 
promised branches for his opponents. But the little tree need not fear being 
stripped bare: not one branch has yet been proffered. The man of peace shows no 
magnanimity in hisgreat victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/labour-moderates-learn-lessons-team-corbyn-andrew-rawnsley>
. Instead his gentler, kinder politics is bent on securing an absolute grip on 
the party, seizing all levers through control over the party’s rule-making body 
– thenational executive committee (NEC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/24/what-next-for-jeremy-corbyn?CMP=twt_gu>
. His calls for “unity” are only a call for capitulation and obedience.

If you can’t beat Jeremy Corbyn, you’d better try to learn from him | Andrew 
Rawnsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/labour-moderates-learn-lessons-team-corbyn-andrew-rawnsley>
He faces a host of adamant, despairing, irreconcilables on the backbenches. 
True, he has trounced them so thoroughly that any mutterings of future 
challenges are an empty blast of sour breath. Some behaved neither wisely nor 
well – though Owen Smith, who faced the contemptuousdaily catcalling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/30/corbyn-leadership-team-is-stopping-online-abuse-of-opponents>
 with bravery and good humour, deserves more praise than he gets.

Corbyn could apply a little balm to the great gash in his party. If he meant 
peace and unity, he could stop dead all talk of deselecting MPs, and protect 
MPs such as Walthamstow’s Stella Creasy and Brighton’s Peter Kyle,threatened by 
bullies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/18/vile-online-abuse-against-women-mps-needs-to-be-challenged-now>
 acting in his name. He could just say no, but he doesn’t. When he says“the 
vast majority” won’t be deselected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/25/jeremy-corbyn-vast-majority-mps-deselection-labour-video>
 that’s an unveiled threat. When he says it’s down to the democratic decision 
of local parties, he makes “democracy” sound like a nuclear weapon – an idea 
borrowed from his mentor Tony Benn’sCampaign for Labour Party Democracy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Campaign_for_Labour_Party_Democracy>.

If unity were his mission, he could return to the 2011 rule giving MPs a vote 
for shadow cabinet places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/labour-urged-to-put-the-band-back-together-in-case-snap-election-tom-watson>
. He can and does ignore the shadow cabinet’s views – but they would getthree 
crucial places on the NEC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/get-serious-labour-rebels-deal-with-brexit-catastrophe>
, and that’s why he refuses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-conference-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93566dc7648a40d0e8a0377111e78d746eee9dc6%2F0_122_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20I%20get%20behind%20Corbyn%2C%20when%20we%20want%20the%20same%20things%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20why%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-conference-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20I%20get%20behind%20Corbyn%2C%20when%20we%20want%20the%20same%20things%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20why%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-conference-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93566dc7648a40d0e8a0377111e78d746eee9dc6%2F0_122_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 ‘If Corbyn meant peace and unity, he could stop dead all talk of deselecting 
MPs, and protect MPs such as Walthamstow’s Stella Creasy’ (pictured above). 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
The key rule change he wants from the NEC is to reduce the votes of MPs and 
MEPs needed to put a candidate on the ballot in future leadership electionsfrom 
15% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/10/labours-leadership-contest-what-do-the-rules-look-like>
 to 5%: that ensures one of his own on the list, and the present party 
membership would then be able to select a successor in Corbyn’s image.

How shortsighted not to make minor concessions that would put opponents in his 
debt. All this Machiavellian back-room manoeuvring is out of keeping with his 
benign, almost devotional image. The few iron-fisted organisers bent on 
deselections are well hidden from the great wave of sincere followers.

I have been besieged at this Labour conference by thoroughly decent people who 
cannot understand why I and many Guardian colleagues can’t just get behind 
Corbyn. Doesn’t he stand for all the things we advocate? Some are young, but 
many are my age flocking back to Labour after leaving long ago over Iraq and a 
host of disappointments. Everyone – yes, everyone they know – has joined this 
mass movement, this great wave for a better society. If only we would see that 
they are ready to sweep the country off its feet, aPodemos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/06/podemos-surge-wakeup-call-european-left-spain-uk-radical>
, part of a great global shift – so please, please, join us!

Now Labour’s two sides can start to bridge the great divide | Gary Younge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/labour-two-sides-bridge-divide-jeremy-corbyn-left-right-principles>
They are polite and earnest, not brick throwers, but good people who have 
mainly spent lifetimes in the public or charity sectors. Look atJohn 
McDonnell’s strong speech on the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/sep/28/labour-conference-john-mcdonnells-economy-speech-politics-live>
, which does promise so much I would support, and little in principle I would 
disagree with – from a higher minimum wage, to taxing the avoiders and 
investing in industry. So why not?

My answers sound cynical, worldly and unworthy in the face of this surge of 
belief. Why not? Because Corbyn and McDonnell, burdened by their history, will 
never ever earn the trust of enough voters to make any plans happen. After 
GeorgeOsborne’s lethally successful branding of Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/17/budget-2015-osborne-austerity-labour-miliband-wavering-voters>
 as irresponsible, debt-ridden, magic-money-tree feckless borrowers, it will 
take heavy spadework of reassurance to win back trust. All McDonnell’s plans 
are popular, but he offers nothing to allay the voters’ fear that Labour 
doesn’t do “tough choices”.

At one conference meeting when a speaker said Labour must win some Tory votes, 
someone shouted out: “Why? We don’t want Tories!” So I find myself arguing dry 
psephology against passionate conviction. It’s depressing, but here’s theFabian 
Society’s analysis 
<http://www.fabians.org.uk/under-corbyns-electoral-plan-prospects-for-victory-look-bleak/>
: Labour needs 104 seats in England and Wales and 40% of the vote to win. In 
the marginals, four out every five of the extra votes must come from those who 
were Tory last time. Even if the young are energised and turnout soars to
Scottish referendum heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/21/scottish-referendum-massive-voter-turnout-means-politics-changed-for-ever>
, it gets nowhere close. Even if every single Liberal Democrat and Green vote 
went Labour, that only gives 29 seats. Even if Ukip were crushed, its vote 
divides equally Labour and Tory. As Labour wins radical votes, it risks losing 
moderate votes to the Tories: 2% went that way last time. Read the research 
yourself and groan. It hurts.

In one fraught conversation after another, I try all this on Corbyn believers 
but to no avail. No compromise, blocked ears, total denial of electoral facts, 
a post-truth conviction. You can hear this non-meeting of minds everywhere at 
this conference, a shutter of incomprehension dividing the two sides. “But we 
can convince them! People will listen!” They do think Corbyn will be the next 
prime minister, because conviction moves mountains. These are likable people, 
and I envy their certainty – the way you can envy the religious their delusions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-conference-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c29d60fe11d89c5a87fd7af4b0d2a4977b11549%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20I%20get%20behind%20Corbyn%2C%20when%20we%20want%20the%20same%20things%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20why%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-conference-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20can%E2%80%99t%20I%20get%20behind%20Corbyn%2C%20when%20we%20want%20the%20same%20things%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20why%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-conference-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c29d60fe11d89c5a87fd7af4b0d2a4977b11549%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 The comedian Eddie Izzard (centre) in the audience at the Labour conference. 
Photograph: Jon Super/EPA 
A solid old councillor from Sunderland spoke up emotionally at one meeting 
about his experience, week in and week out, on the doorstep. His local party 
has doubled in size – though none join the small bunch of doughty old 
canvassers. He finds half the old Labour voters on his patch turning away: not
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> any more, not while 
Corbyn’s the leader, they say.

The refusenik MPs, struggling to find their footing after this crushing 
defeat, seem all over the place, thrashing about for a handhold as the abyss 
opens under their feet. Some are snatching at “No free movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ah89FM-5R3Y>” as a red line in the Brexit 
negotiations, as if anti-immigration might save them between theScylla and 
Charibdis 
<http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20160620-the-monsters-hidden-beneath-the-sea> 
of Ukip and Momentum. But McDonnell struck the better note on cleaving to the 
single market.

What hope for a party that threatens to be irrelevant for years to come? The 
best of Labour is in power, in the cities as leaders and mayors, competent and 
imaginative in struggling with monstrous cuts – from London’s Sadiq Khan toNick 
Forbes in Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/nov/24/-sp-is-saving-newcastle-mission-impossible>
. Otherwise it’s a matter of waiting until enough party members come to terms 
with grim electoral reality and decide to compromise with the voters. Does that 
really need a devastating election defeat?
 