
When property tycoon Fan Jianchuan decided to step down from most of his 
companies and build museums, he wanted to do it on the same scale as he had 
with his business.

After a decade riding the wave of China’s fevered economic growth, he made it 
on to a list of the country’s 500 richest people. He then spent the next decade 
lavishing his energy and multimillion-dollar fortune on the small provincial 
town of Anren. Now 20 museums form the “Jianchuan cluster” in this otherwise 
unremarkable area of southernChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> – 
and he hopes they will keep both his name and some of China’s history alive.

“People die twice. Once physically, and a second time when they die from 
people’s memories,”Fan told the South China Morning Post 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/china/money-wealth/article/1843908/chinese-tycoons-museum-business-brings-him-joy-fame-and>
. “My museums will be here even after I die. When people talk about the 
Jianchuan museum cluster, they will mention me. In that sense, I gain 
immortality; I will never die.”

Fan was a market-leading property developer when he made his fortune, and then 
spent a dozen years investing on a grand scale for public benefit rather than 
private enjoyment.

But he never scaled the last peak of the super-elite and became a dollar 
billionaire. This is a group whose fortunes and ambitions are now making waves 
far beyond provincial China. Their spending power went on display in 
spectacular fashion last week, with the record-breaking$170m purchase of Amedeo 
Modigliani’sReclining Nude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/10/modiglianis-reclining-nude-fetches-second-highest-ever-art-auction-price>
 painting.

The buyer, taxi driver-turned-investment mogul Liu Yiqian, is one of the 
country’s most flamboyant entrepreneurs. He had previously grabbed headlines at 
home by splurging more than $36m on a porcelain cup once used by a Ming 
emperor, then posting an Instagram picture of himself drinking from it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fchina-super-rich-philanthropy-corruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cc2f3ad7b5e9b8d9918a83a8b70b0773b9fd227%2F0_0_3276_2108%2F3276.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20China%E2%80%99s%20super-rich%20are%20now%20eager%20to%20invest%20in%20philanthropy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fchina-super-rich-philanthropy-corruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20China%E2%80%99s%20super-rich%20are%20now%20eager%20to%20invest%20in%20philanthropy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fchina-super-rich-philanthropy-corruption%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cc2f3ad7b5e9b8d9918a83a8b70b0773b9fd227%2F0_0_3276_2108%2F3276.jpg>
 Reclining Nude by Amedeo Modigliani, sold for $170.4m to China’s Liu Yiquan. 
Photograph: AP 
In a mixture of showmanship and benevolence that is increasingly popular among 
the country’s super-rich, Liu will also put the Modigliani painting on display 
in one of his museums.

The life stories of almost all of the country’s elite involve rags-to-riches 
journeys and fortunes born after China emerged from decades of experimentation 
with radical communist ideas that left a country mired in extreme poverty.

“There are more self-made millionaires and billionaires in China than anywhere 
else,” said Rupert Hoogewerf, publisher of theHurun Report, a monthly magazine  
<http://www.hurun.net/en/hulist.aspx>which charts the fortunes of the country’s 
super-elite. “Pretty much everyone in mainland China is self made, and that 
includes 95% of theHurun rich list.”

After years of deprivation, China’s first cohort of businessmen and women 
relish both spending their wealth and putting it on display. One tycoon built 
himself a home modelled on the White House, with a view of “Mount Rushmore”; 
more recently a billionaire’s son posted online a picture of his dog wearing a 
gold Apple Watch on each of its front paws.

But as they settle into their fortunes, thoughts of posterity and a search for 
a deeper meaning in life are driving high-profile forms of philanthropy, from 
museum construction to education projects. “There are only so many cars and 
houses you can buy, and you can’t live in them all anyway,” said Carrie Waley, 
founder and CEO of Mandarin Consultant, a company that helps wealthy Chinese 
people navigate western education systems and build careers abroad.

“Human beings find money can only satisfy them for a while … After you have 
money, what do you want? You want status, and recognition from society.”

This chasing of status has made philanthropy in China a very public affair, 
Waley said, with very few people interested in the idea of anonymous donations 
or, like US billionaire Warren Buffett, giving billions of dollars to a 
foundation named after someone else.

However, in recent years China’s entrepreneurs have moved beyond the 
ostentation that marked some of the earliest ventures and are giving more 
thought to where their donations go. “Philanthropy is becoming more 
sophisticated now,” said Hoogewerf. “The main cause they give to is education.”

There may also be less charitable motives behind some public displays of 
benevolence, as tycoons spooked by a wide-ranging government crackdown on 
corruption look for less controversial ways to show off their wealth.

Since taking office in 2012, President Xi Jinping has targeted some of the 
most powerful people in the country and brought down men and women who were 
once thought untouchable. Those who have survived so far are often wary of 
attracting the attention of prosecutors looking for their next target. Xi and 
his allies have used the campaign in part to sideline political rivals, but it 
was also a response to genuine public anger about the apparent greed of many 
officials. Tens of millions of Chinese people still live on less than $1.25 a 
day, according to World Bank data, and in the cities up to 20% of the 
population are stuck in extreme poverty, with little chance of bettering 
themselves.

“The quality of life of many people I’ve talked to is not really different 
from how it was when reforms began,” said Professor Dorothy Solinger of the 
University of California, Irvine, who has spent years studying urban poverty. 
“When the government mentions poverty now, the cities are neglected: it’s all 
about the countryside.”

A recent report by the Peking University Institute of Social Science Survey 
found thatthe poorest quarter of Chinese citizens owned only 1% of the 
country’s wealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/28/china-more-unequal-richer>, and 
the country’s Gini coefficient – an economist’s measure of the gap between the 
richest and poorest in society – is well over a level that analysts see as the 
threshold for greater civil unrest.

The focus of ill feeling has until now been on officials profiteering from 
their positions, while the super-rich who made their own fortunes are more 
admired as role models than resented by most in Chinese society. “People don’t 
care much about the [ordinary] citizens who have become wealthy. It’s more an 
issue around the cadres,” Soligner said.

However, it is hard to get rich in China without having strong connections to 
local authorities, and those are rarely built on goodwill alone.

The line between the two groups is not as clear as either entrepreneurs or the 
government officials not caught up in the anti-corruption net might like to 
imply. Probing into the family fortunes of top officials is extremely risky in 
China, but theNew York Times this year exposed links between the very richest 
man in China – property and film tycoon Wang Jianlin – and the family of 
President Xi and other top current and retired officials.

For now though, men like Wang and Liu are heroes of the “Chinese dream” to 
hundreds of millions of people who see in the dramatic rags-to-riches stories 
of so many of the super-elite hope of rising equally far themselves.

“China is all about entrepreneurship at the moment,” said Hoogewerf. “Everyone 
seems to have an idea to explore, and in this way, the super-rich are the role 
models.”
 