
The Wigan prop Ben Flower will only play for his club again in 2016 if they 
reach theSuper League <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/superleague> Grand 
Final. The Wales international, who has been included in his country’s initial 
29-man squad for the 2017 World Cup qualifiers next month, was handed a 
two-match ban on Tuesday evening after admitting a reckless tackle.

Flower will serve the suspension when Wigan finish their regular season 
against Catalans Dragons at the DW Stadium on Friday and in the semi-finals a 
week later, but will be free to return for the title decider at Old Trafford on 
8 October if the Warriors get there.

Ben Flower’s brutal punch raises questions over state of rugby league
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/13/ben-flower-lance-hohaia-st-helens-rugby-football-league>
Flower was sent off – for the first time since his dismissal in the opening 
stages of the 2014 Grand Final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/14/ben-flower-wigan-st-helens-six-month-ban>
 – for a late and high tackle on the Wolves half-back Declan Pattonduring his 
side’s 35-28 win at Warrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/wigan-warrington-ben-flower-red-card>
 last Friday.

Although the Wigan coach, Shaun Wane, insisted the tackle was clumsy and his 
Warrington counterpart, Tony Smith, claimed the red card was harsh, the Rugby 
Football League’s match-review panel decided Flower’s actions were reckless 
because he used his forearm or elbow to strike Patton.

The RFL stated that at an independent disciplinary tribunal Flower “pleaded 
guilty to a reckless grade C strike with the elbow on Declan Patton in the 57th 
minute of the game against Warrington Wolves – he received a two-match ban plus 
£300 fine”.

It was Flower’s first appearance at the RFL headquarters at Red Hall, Leeds, 
since he was given a six-month ban for punching Lance Hohaia at Old Trafford 
nearly two years ago.

Wigan are still waiting to hear if the back-row forward Willie Isa will be 
punished for the two-fingered gesture he delivered to Warrington fans during 
the game last Friday. Isa subsequently issued an apology on his Twitter 
account, saying he acted in the “heat of the moment”, but a spokesman for the 
RFL confirmed it is looking into the incident.

Meanwhile, the Widnes captain Kevin Brown will sit out his club’s last match 
of the season at Castleford on Sunday after pleading guilty to punching. Brown, 
who was sent off for the offence during his side’s 21-8 home defeat by St 
Helens, was given a one-match ban and a £300 fine, the RFL announced.

The St Helens second-row Joe Greenwood submitted an early guilty plea to a 
similar grade A charge and was told he faces no further action, clearing him to 
play in the home game against Wakefield on Friday.
 