
Heavyweight champion Deontay Wilder’s title defense against Alexander Povetkin 
has been postponed by the WBC after the Russian challenger failed a drug test.

The WBC says the 21 May fight in Moscow is off, pending an investigation, with 
no back-up date.

“Keeping the priority of safety and also the principle of justice, the WBC 
will continue the investigation into the case,” the WBC said in a statement. 
“Consequently, the event scheduled for 21 May in Moscow is hereby officially 
postponed.”

What is meldonium and why did Maria Sharapova take it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/08/meldonium-maria-sharapova-failed-drugs-test>
It added that “the WBC will be releasing more information in the coming days 
regarding the final ruling on the matter.”

Povetkin’s promoter has said the substance found in an April test was meldonium
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/08/meldonium-maria-sharapova-failed-drugs-test>
, the stamina boosterfor which tennis star Maria Sharapova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/maria-sharapova-failed-drugs-test-australian-open-2016-tennis>
 anddozens of other athletes in ex-Soviet nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/30/russian-track-cyclists-test-positive-meldonium>
 have tested positive since it was banned at the start of this year.

Wilder, an unbeaten American (36-0), had been due to make his fourth defense 
of the belthe won against Bermane Stiverne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/deontay-wilder-proves-hes-no-against-bermane-stiverne>
 in January last year. For Povetkin (30-1), it is his first world title 
challenge since dropping a unanimous decision to Wladimir Klitschko in 2013.

Wilder had made allegations against Povetkin in an interview last year with 
USA Today. Wilder said he believed the Russian to be “on some kind of steroids” 
but said he was still willing to fight him.

Povetkin’s promoter Andrei Ryabinsky told Russia’s Tass news agency on Friday 
that his fighter had tested positive in April, but that only “leftover traces 
of meldonium at a very low concentration were found”. These traces, Ryabinsky 
said, were the result of Povetkin taking meldonium in September last year 
before it was banned.

Athletes in several sports have avoided suspensions for meldonium positive 
tests under new World Anti-Doping Agency guidance issued in April — if the 
concentration of the heart drug is low enough to indicate they did not take it 
after 1 January.

It is not clear whether such guidance will apply in the case of Povetkin. The 
WBC works with the Las Vegas-based Voluntary Anti-Doping Association, which 
often follows Wada’s example but is not under its supervision.
 