
Naked cricket. A Chicago house legend. The uplifting sound of a 30-piece 
orchestra. Wilderness certainly has a varied palate, yet caters to a rather 
one-note clientele. Now in its sixth year and hosted on the 5,000-acre Cornbury 
Park estate in the heart of Oxfordshire, the festival is the kind of place 
David Cameron might leave his kid behind at. Or, to put it another way: I spent 
Saturday at a Raymond Blanc lunch sat between an accountant and a former 
Whitehall staffer. One half of theBrexit divide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/27/liverpool-london-brexit-leave-eu-referendum>
 writ Magnum-size.

With a weaker lineup than in previous years, Wilderness still delivers some 
strong musical moments on what is a gloriously sunny weekend. Robert Plant, the
Corbyn-aged (67) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/corbyn-keeps-watson-arms-length>
 former Led Zeppelin frontman, electrifies the Friday night headline slot with 
Whole Lotta Love during his only UK 2016 gig. Lianne La Havas, returning after 
her memorable 2012 appearance here, exudes genuine joy on the main stage, 
switching deftly between numerous Gibson Les Pauls and telling us her mum just 
called to say her music’s being used on the BBC Olympics coverage. A cover of 
Aretha Franklin’s Say a Little Prayer is a treat, and the singer’s dress is so 
much admired that someone in the front row has the good sense to ask where it’s 
from (Temperley).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fwilderness-festival-music-momentum-robert-plant-james-rhodes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd9b5dd371f6c2fbb71c71f7c4b6d84ec211c89a%2F0_405_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wilderness%20%E2%80%93%20the%20festival%20that%20mixes%20music%20and%20Momentum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fwilderness-festival-music-momentum-robert-plant-james-rhodes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wilderness%20%E2%80%93%20the%20festival%20that%20mixes%20music%20and%20Momentum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fwilderness-festival-music-momentum-robert-plant-james-rhodes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd9b5dd371f6c2fbb71c71f7c4b6d84ec211c89a%2F0_405_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Dressed for success … Lianne La Havas. Photograph: Max Miechowski / Fanatic 
2016 
Elsewhere, stumbling upon Diana Yukawa’s haunting violin while scoffing an £8 
falafel scotch egg is a revelation as the sun sets on the Atrium stage. James 
Rhodes proves, via Rachmaninov, why he has 50,000 Twitter followers. And local 
boysGlass Animals <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/07/glass-animals> 
impress with their intelligent fusion of R&B, zig-zag bass-lines and Tetris 
beats. Shura’s set is assured and Touch gets the twentysomethings up from east 
London throwing angular shapes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fwilderness-festival-music-momentum-robert-plant-james-rhodes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a57bd86547950daea6d4886006944cd2f1a2865%2F0_0_3501_5251%2F3501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wilderness%20%E2%80%93%20the%20festival%20that%20mixes%20music%20and%20Momentum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fwilderness-festival-music-momentum-robert-plant-james-rhodes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wilderness%20%E2%80%93%20the%20festival%20that%20mixes%20music%20and%20Momentum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fwilderness-festival-music-momentum-robert-plant-james-rhodes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a57bd86547950daea6d4886006944cd2f1a2865%2F0_0_3501_5251%2F3501.jpg>
 Curtain of lights … the Flaming Lips’ Wayne Coyne. Photograph: Danny North 
Over in the Valley, a deep cleavage of greenery and ancient trees, Derrick 
Carter’s perfectly judged 2am house is elegantly lit by Tracey Emin-inspired 
neons. But Sunday headliners the Flaming Lips disappoint with a weak vocal and 
the bizarre choice to have frontman Wayne Coyne barely visible behind a curtain 
of lights

Away from the music, there is spoon carving, wild swimming and a cabaret show 
featuring a PVC-clad Kitty Bang Bang. Oh, and a man riding a bicycle along a 
tightrope through flames, because why the hell not? The star of one of numerous 
insightful debates is Larry Sanders, forever to be introduced as brother of 
Bernie, but delivering salient points as Green Party health spokesperson in his 
own right. In the same debate, George Galloway “will not apologise” for being a 
straight white man and rails against “rightwing Ed Miliband”. He’s dressed all 
in black despite the 26 degree heat and is wearing a fedora indoors.Momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/16/momentum-labour-party-jeremy-corbyn-politics-john-harris>
’s James Schneider speaks of a burgeoning Labour membership and there’s a 
ripple of applause like a second round Wimbledon win on court 2 from an 
audience who have just paid £20 for glitter accessories.


Wilderness’s general vibe appears to be a mashup of Latitude and Hay, with the 
dress-up chops of Secret Garden. And Sunday night’s Bowie tribute – featuring 
the Wilderness orchestra and choir; London Contemporary Voices; Kate Nash and 
Charlotte Church – is a properly stirring experience. Ending with Memory of a 
Free Festival might be somewhat awkward for obvious reasons, but it does allow 
for a rousing finale singalong. The audience filters away to a Bowie voiceover: 
“see you all once again, another day, in another place”. Wilderness might not 
be where the wild things are, but it’s jolly good fun nonetheless, old sport.
 