
This verdant isle is indeed a green gem, but for the visitor from eastern 
England the abundance of richly coloured flowers is the stand-out botanical 
feature of the west coast ofIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

Roadsides are a riot of primary yellow – bird’s foot trefoil 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=291&wildflower=Bird%27s-foot-trefoil,%20Common>
,St John’s wort 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=410&wildflower=St%20John%27s-wort,%20Perforate>
,ragwort 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=216&wildflower=Ragwort,%20Common>
 andcat’s ear 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=440&wildflower=Cat%92s-ear>
; pinks and purples – includingcommon 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=121&wildflower=Heather>
,bell 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=25&wildflower=Heather,%20Bell>
 andcross-leaved 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=117&wildflower=Heath,%20Cross-leaved>
 heather and whole hedges of fuchsia; whitish umbels ofangelica 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=12&wildflower=Angelica>
, and big white and pink striped, flared trumpets of theroseata subspecies 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=605&wildflower=Bindweed,%20Hedge%20subsp.%20roseata>
 of large bindweed.

Rossbeigh dunes <http://glenbeigh.ie/rossbeigh-beach/> project out from the 
north coast of the Iveragh peninsula into Dingle Bay. The low lying damp slacks 
are full of spiky little eyebright plants with their yellow-throated white 
flowers. Surrounding the slack, on the dune slopes, is a scattering ofpyramidal 
orchids 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=193&wildflower=Orchid,%20Pyramidal>
, each tight conical flower spike a sumptuous pinkish purple, as beautiful as a
rhodolite garnet 
<http://www.gemselect.com/gem-info/rhodolite-garnet/rhodolite-garnet-info.php>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fwildflower-heaven-west-ireland-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ea522b1b4f4c110bbab416e6bf3ab1904c6355%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildflower%20heaven%20in%20the%20west%20of%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fwildflower-heaven-west-ireland-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildflower%20heaven%20in%20the%20west%20of%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fwildflower-heaven-west-ireland-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ea522b1b4f4c110bbab416e6bf3ab1904c6355%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
 Flowers bloom on Leacanabuaile Cashel. Photograph: Matt Shardlow 
Further west, near Cahersiveen, are a couple of stone forts, or cashels. 
Cahergal 
<http://www.megalithicireland.com/Cahergal%20Stone%20Fort,%20Kerry.html> is the 
most impressive – probably 1,500 years old, circular, 25 metres in diameter and 
with walls three metres high and five metres thick. Apparently this was a 
defensive building, but the steeply terraced interior feels more like an 
amphitheatre than a fort. Time, including rebuilds and repurposing, leaves us 
guessing how these impressive structures may have been used.


The more modest walls of the nearby Leacanabuaile cashel 
<http://www.megalithicireland.com/Leacanabuile%20Stone%20Fort,%20Kerry.html> 
are topped with grass and flowers, including the very prettysheep’s-bit, or  
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=238&wildflower=Sheep%27s-bit>
duán na gcaorach 
<http://www.wildflowersofireland.net/plant_detail.php?id_flower=238&wildflower=Sheep%27s-bit>
in Irish. This is an under-appreciated little plant; thetanzanite 
<http://www.gemstone.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=103:sapphire&catid=1:gem-by-gem&Itemid=14>
 blue flowers look similar to the unrelated scabious but are smaller and the 
petals are sharply pointed. It even has its own species ofmite, thrip and moth 
<http://www.buglife.org.uk/>.

As a follow up to my diary of 24 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/24/country-diary-lower-benefield-northamptonshire-brook-nameless>
, the Nene tributary without a name is apparently called Laxton’s Brook. The 
village of Laxton is five miles north of the brook’s catchment, so it is more 
likely that the name comes from the Laxton family, who lived in Oundle, 
downstream and to the south of the brook. In 1544 aWilliam Laxton 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Laxton_(Lord_Mayor_of_London)> here 
became lord mayor of London and founded Oundle school.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>


 