
Not to worry, the world’s richest philanthropists are on the case. As the 
United Nations climate talks kicked off in Paris amid worries that governments 
aren’t committing to serious emissions reductions,Bill Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates> stole the spotlight with a 
bold promise to usher in a clean-tech future.

Gates is the new public face of Mission Innovation, an initiative of twenty 
governments, including the US and India, pledging to double their spending on 
future clean tech. And because government research is “not enough,” Gates also 
launched the Breakthrough Energy Coalition, a parallel plan with billionaires 
like Richard Branson and Mark Zuckerberg to spark big technological solutions, 
while making a buck on the side.

And what of the wave of decentralized green energy, based on existing 
technologies, already spreading through several countries? Gates has long made 
the argument that “today’s tools” are incapable of slashing emissions. He 
scoffs at technologies like rooftop solar; they’re “cute” and “uneconomic.” The 
costs of relying on them, he claims 
<http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/4f66ff5c-1a47-11e5-a130-2e7db721f996.html>, 
would be “beyond astronomical.”

Except that’s just not true. The latest research on how to rapidly transition 
to 100 percent green energyshows <https://web.stanford.edu/group/efmh/jacobson/>
 we don’t to wait for some kind of third-generation miracle tech. Already, 
renewable prices have dropped at an incredible rate (even though governments 
have provided scant support while continuing to shovel billions at fossil fuel 
corporations). The most impressive progress has happened in countries like 
Germany and Denmark, where locally-owned wind and solar co-ops have led the 
way, creating jobs and greater community control over energy.

Then, of course, there’s fighting poverty—Gates’ favourite recreational 
activity. For the poorest communities without electricity, the flexibility of 
small-scale wind and solar is critical. Continuing to rely on centralized grids 
and large scale power plants will mean energy is too costly and 
inaccessible—keeping “a billion people in the dark,” expertswarn 
<http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/sorry-bill-gates-you-are-wrong-on-clean-energy>
. And by shutting frontline communities out of the conversation, Gates’ message 
is perfectly in keeping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/20/paris-climate-talks-protesters-hollande-violence>
 with the spirit of the Paris climate talks so far—even as it’s profoundly at 
odds with the stated aims of his charitable ventures.

And whether it’s India or North America, the green energy transition will 
never happen fast enough without mobilizing broad-based coalitions of people 
who stand to benefit. Putting control over energy in the hands of local 
communities is not only just—it’s necessary.

So is it really a theory of technological change that makes Gates grumble 
about “cute” solar panels? Or is there something about politically empowered 
poor people supplanting profit-gouging corporations that rubs him the wrong way?

At the end of the day, Gates’ allegiances are clear. By his own admission, he 
wants 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/11/we-need-an-energy-miracle/407881/>
 governments to lay the groundwork for a new frontier of green profit-making, 
then get out of the way.

And he doesn’t seem to have considered the possibility that robust public 
investment could drive change in a different way—whether in health care, 
education, as with his past philanthropy, or energy and transportation. If 
governments are going to spend billions of dollars getting us off fossil 
fuels—and they should—then that money would be better spent investing in the 
public sphere based on existing technologies. That would not only mean rolling 
out wind and solar, but also drastically expanding publicly owned and 
affordable public transit and local sustainable agriculture.

And it’s no mystery how we might raise the money for these investments: 
through taxes on the billionaire class, the same men now presenting themselves 
as our planetary saviours.

If his past record is any indication, the kind of projects Gates will go to 
bat for have one defining feature: they hold out the hope that corporations can 
continue their business model undisturbed. Projects that are unproven, 
high-risk and require lucrative long-term subsidies from governments. Like 
carbon capture and storage (CCS), or a new variantknown 
<http://www.biofuelwatch.org.uk/2015/beccs-report-pr/> as Bio-energy with 
carbon capture and storage (BECCS)—climate quick-fixes that promise we can keep 
burning fossil fuels. Gates has also put millions into funding geoengineering 
techniques—like spraying the stratosphere with sulphate to block the 
sunlight—that would manipulate the global climate in order to counteract 
warming.

In contrast to the tried-and-true path of the redistribution of wealth and 
public investment, such gambits tend to be expensive boondoggles (and in the 
case of geoengineering, a massive risk to the food and water security of 
billions of people, who just happen to be in the poorest countries of the 
global South).

Gates, like most of the world’s wealthiest people and governments, want to 
believe we can find miracles. But we don’t need a miracle—we need to take our 
democracies back from the billionaire class.

So make no mistake about this initiative: it is an attempt to hijack the real 
solutions that movements outside the conference halls in Paris are attempting 
to make known. Indeed, by pitching in with Gates, twenty of the world’s richest 
governments couldn’t have been clearer about their desire to let corporations 
drive the climate agenda.

A civil-society backed transition to a more just and ecological economy is the 
best hope we have of averting catastrophic climate change. With or without 
Gates, that’s the kind of breakthrough we need.

On twitter: @Martin_Lukacs <http://www.twitter.com/Martin_Lukacs>
 