
It seems fitting that on the day that the Smithsonian’s National Museum of 
American History unveiled its Giving in America exhibit — with Bill Gates and 
Warren Buffett presiding —Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, the CEO of Facebook, 
and his wife Priscilla Chan, made a claim for the inauguration of a new chapter 
in the history of philanthropy, one dominated by the mushrooming fortunes of 
Silicon Valley.

In a post on Facebook to their newborn daughter Max, the couple announced that 
they would turn over 99% of theirFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> shares — with a current value 
of around $45bnn — “during our lives” to advance a mission of “advancing human 
potential and promoting equality for all children in the next generation”. This 
is a big deal, one of the largest philanthropic pledges ever made. But how much 
of a rupture it represents in the tradition of modern US philanthropy isn’t 
entirely clear. The Smithsonian might not need to add another display case just 
yet.

With today’s corps of newly minted billionaires, the lines between 
entrepreneur and philanthropist have been erased

It’s worth dwelling a bit on that phrase “during our lives,” for with it, 
Zuckerberg and Chan place themselves at the forefront of an important 
development in the philanthropic sector: theGiving While Living 
<http://www.atlanticphilanthropies.org/giving-while-living> movement. It’s not 
exactly new: more than a century ago, in his Gospel of Wealth, the steel 
magnate Andrew Carnegie sought to steer millionaires away from the charitable 
bequest toward warm-bloodedinter vivos giving. Only in this way could they 
assume active stewardship over the disbursement of their fortunes, applying the 
knowledge, expertise and temperament that gained them their piles toward the 
difficult task of giving them away. This idea has once again come into vogue, 
but with a significant new twist. The tech and finance booms have allowed 
individuals to accumulate enormous sums of money at a startlingly young age. So 
there is even more giving and even more living to do than ever before.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-45bn-pledge-change-philanthropy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3338c2fbd0a23362e1eeb9a272df7947a94ddc94%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Zuckerberg%20and%20Chan's%20%2445bn%20pledge%20change%20philanthropy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-45bn-pledge-change-philanthropy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Zuckerberg%20and%20Chan%27s%20%2445bn%20pledge%20change%20philanthropy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-45bn-pledge-change-philanthropy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3338c2fbd0a23362e1eeb9a272df7947a94ddc94%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan with new daughter Max. Photograph: 
Uncredited/AP 
Zuckerberg, 31, and Chan, 30, are not just young; they have also begun their 
philanthropic careers at an early age (they have already given away more than 
$1.5 bn).Philanthropy <https://www.theguardian.com/society/philanthropy> used 
to be a sort of valedictory endeavor, a vocation taken upafter the money had 
been made, like golf or an ambassadorship. Gates and Buffett for the most part 
have followed that traditional pattern. Gates, for instance, didn’t turn to 
philanthropy till he was in his mid 40s and then left Microsoft to devote 
himself entirely to his foundation’s good works.

 But increasingly, with today’s corps of newly minted billionaires, the lines 
between entrepreneur and philanthropist have been erased. It’s all one single, 
synchronous identity. In a statement, Facebook made a virtue of those blurred 
boundaries, announcing that Zuckerberg and Chan “believe in pursuing 
philanthropy concurrently with pursuing their professional careers”. Zuckerberg 
himself made clear that he wasn’t going to loosen his reigns on Facebook, 
reassuring skittish shareholders that he would continue to serve as the 
company’s CEO “for many, many years to come”. In a statement, the company 
disclosed that Zuckerberg would not dispose of more than $1bn of Facebook stock 
in a year for at least the next three years. And although the full details are 
not yet known, initial press reports suggest that channeling their giving 
through a newly created limited liability company called the Chan Zuckerberg 
Initiative, rather than through a charitable trust, would assist Zuckerberg in 
maintaining control of the shares he has pledged.

 On the one hand, with the announcement, Zuckerberg secures his status as the 
nation’s pre-eminent tech philanthropist, a breed that is increasingly 
dominating the ranks of the nation’s largest benefactors (three of the top five 
givers last year in the US came from the tech world, according to theChronicle 
of Philanthropy 
<http://money.cnn.com/2015/01/01/news/biggest-charity-billionaire-donations/>). 
Zuckerberg and Chan’s announcement hit on many of the touchstones of tech 
giving: the gigantic sums involved and the oversized ambitions conjured; the 
push toward technological and technocratic solutions; the comfort with using 
the market for philanthropic ends, and; the attraction toward for-profit 
mechanisms (perhaps another reason for their employment of a limited liability 
company is that the couple signaled their intentions to direct some funds 
toward for-profit investments). Another hallmark of tech giving can be detected 
in the fact there was no indication that the pledge would prompt the 
construction of a massive bureaucracy of giving, such as the Gates Foundation: 
this generation of tech givers prefers lean institutions. As far as the letter 
to Max was concerned, their giving would be a strictly family affair.

 There’s a certain poignancy to the sight of Zuckerberg redeeming the figure 
of the Silicon Valley philanthropist with a heartfelt missive to his young 
daughter, because over the last decade, no one has done more to tarnish that 
figure’s reputation. His best-known philanthropic intervention to date remains 
his gift of $100 million to the Newark public school system in 2010 — announced 
with great fanfare on Oprah. Though there is some debate over the extent to 
which the gift improved educational outcomes in the city, what is indisputable 
is how quickly public opinion soured on the gesture. Zuckerberg hoped to make 
Newark a model for education reform, but it became a cautionary tale of another 
sort. His gift came to represent for manythe worst of philanthropic hubris 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/27/business/dealbook/the-melting-of-mark-zuckerbergs-donation-to-newark-schools.html?_r=0>
 — an impatient, big-footed effort to parachute into a city he knew little 
about, with a team of high-priced consultants and scheming politicians, and 
with little consultation with the families and teachers he purported to be 
saving from rotten schools.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoBvEdw3rkc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoBvEdw3rkc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoBvEdw3rkc&media=>
 Facebook Founder Giving $100M to Newark Schools – Associated Press 
 The blowback was fairly intense — captured in Dale Rissakoff’s New Yorker 
piece <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/05/19/schooled> fine book, The 
Prize— and there was even some concern that it would lead other tech givers to 
shrink from similarly ambitious philanthropic gambits. But this doesn’t seem to 
have happened, at least not for Zuckerberg. He has clearly taken the public 
flogging to heart. He and Chan have directed much of their subsequent 
educational philanthropy to San Francisco, a city in which they have deeper 
roots, and they have repeatedly emphasized the importance of soliciting 
community feedback, a theme they play up in their Facebook letter. “We must 
engage directly with the people we serve,” they write to Max.

This doesn’t sound like the caricature of the Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> benefactor. In fact, 
somewhat paradoxically, there are notes of humility creeping into their giving 
at precisely the moment when it is glorying in its massive scale. In this and 
in other ways, Zuckerberg and Chan play somewhat against type. Tech giving, for 
instance, is often lambasted for demanding immediate results, but the couple 
make clear that they are in this for the long-haul. “The greatest challenges 
require very long time horizons and cannot be solved by short term thinking,” 
they insist, stating that they plan on making investments that might take a 
century to come to fruition. And they are quick to point out how much they have 
to learn about the realm of philanthropy from existing “experts” in the field, 
without assuming that their own expertise in the tech sector automatically 
transfers over (and without the blithe celebration of philanthropic risk-taking 
and mistake-making that defined Sean Parker’s recent ode to “hacker 
philanthropy”). One of the reasons why Zuckerberg wanted to begin giving now, 
he explained in a comment on his Facebook page, is so that he can start 
learning. “If we want to be good at [philanthropy] in 10-15 years, we should 
start now,” he wrote.

 It’s way too early to predict whether Zuckerberg and Chan will in fact ever 
be “good” at philanthropy or whether their style and strategies will spread to 
the sector at large. And there are plenty of additional dangers that lurk in 
the announcement – in the letter, for instance, the couple commit themselves to 
advocacy towards policy change at a moment when the power of wealth over the 
polity is a particular sensitive topic. But what is clear is how complex, 
consequential and difficult to characterize the new generation of large-scale 
philanthropy has become. The Smithsonian’s curators have their work cut out for 
them.

 * Benjamin Soskis is a Fellow at the Center for Nonprofit Management, 
Philanthropy and Policy at George Mason University and a frequent contributor 
to the Chronicle of Philanthropy.
 