
Donald Trump claimed this week he would remove himself from his business 
operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-leaving-business-interests>
 in a bid to address the unprecedented conflicts of interest that would follow 
him to the presidency.


Little is known about how exactly Trump plans to distance himself from his 
sprawling empire, which owns hotels and golf resorts and businesses including a 
winery and modeling agency, and whether his plans would truly be enough to 
avoid placing his private and public interests on a collision course.

What exactly is Donald Trump proposing?

It’s not entirely clear. The president-elect tweeted on Wednesday that he 
would be leaving his business “in total”, and he said he would hold a press 
conference to discuss the matter on 15 December.

Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
Trump said legal documents were being prepared to take him “completely out of 
business operations”, because it was “visually important” there be no conflicts 
of interest when he takes office.

Notable in Trump’s announcement was his plan to have his adult children attend 
the press conference with him. Trump’s transition team has stated in the past 
that Trump will relinquish the day-to-day operations of the Trump Organization 
to three of his children: Ivanka, Eric and Donald Jr.

Would that be a blind trust?

Trump has sometimes described placing his children in charge of the family 
business as a blind trust. But legal and ethics expertshave said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-conflict-of-interest-blind-trust>
 that this would fall short of a true blind trust.

While the law does not require it, elected officials traditionally divest 
themselves from holdings or assets that would be subject to potential conflicts 
of interest while serving in public office.

Trump has declined to do so, leaving him with the option of setting up a true 
blind trust operated by a lawyer or trustee to mitigate concerns. But in order 
for a blind trust to properly function, Trump should have no contact during his 
presidency with the individual overseeing the management of his assets.

Trump’s children are not only in regular contact with him, but were also named 
in top roles on his transition team.

Just last month, Trump’s daughter Ivanka set off alarm bells by sitting in on 
a meeting 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/us/politics/ivanka-trump-shinzo-abe.html> 
between her father and the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe. Jared Kushner, 
who is Ivanka’s husband and is rumored to be taking on a prominent job in the 
Trump administration, also attended the meeting.

Ivanka and brother Eric subsequently joined their father at a meeting with 
business associates from India 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/us/politics/donald-trump-pauses-transition-work-to-meet-with-indian-business-partners.html?_r=0>
. There are at least 20 countries where the Trumps do business.

What is the legal position here?

Since his unexpected victory, Trump has sounded a note of defiance regarding 
the legality of continuing with his business operations in tandem with the 
presidency. “The law’s totally on my side, the president can’t have a conflict 
of interest,”he told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/22/us/politics/donald-trump-visit.html>.

While it is true that some rules on conflict of interest for executive branch 
employees do not apply to the president, Trump will be bound by bribery laws, 
disclosure requirements and a section of the US constitution known as the 
“emoluments clause” that bans elected officials from taking gifts from foreign 
governments.

Trump has framed his stated intention to step back from the Trump Organization 
as something he is doing for the good of the country, rather than out of 
necessity.

But the US Office of Government Ethics, the federal agency tasked with 
oversight of conflicts of interest laws among elected officials, maintains that 
divestiture is the “only way 
<https://twitter.com/OfficeGovEthics/status/804020923800158209>” for Trump to 
truly put the issue to rest.


Former White House ethics counsels agree. Richard Painter, a chief ethics 
counsel to President George W Bush, said Trump must sell his businesses or risk 
violating the “emoluments clause”.

“Foreign diplomats staying in hotels, parties thrown by foreign governments in 
hotels, loans from the Bank of China, rent paid by foreign governments and 
companies controlled by foreign governments in office buildings, etc” would all 
pose a risk for him,Painter told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest-business-ethics-president>
.

If Trump does say he will remove himself from all his holdings, will we be 
able to tell?

The lack of public information about Trump’s finances renders it difficult to 
truly examine any action he might take on this front, short of clear 
divestiture.

During the presidential race, Trump broke with a 40-year tradition among 
major-party candidates by refusing to release his tax returns. This left the 
public, and the media, without a clear portrait of his finances, business 
partners, payments and loans. Because Trump’s eponymous conglomerate is 
privately held, there is also no requirement that it disclose its assets.

Absent financial transparency, the possibility of Trump using the office of 
the presidency to bolster his businesses could continue to exist, even with his 
children in charge.

Have there been any signs of him doing that so far?

There have already been several examples since the election that have 
triggered concerns over whether Trump has any intention of separating his 
privately run business from his soon-to-be official business.

In a meeting last month, Trump asked the Ukip leader Nigel Farage to oppose 
the building of wind farms near his golf course in Scotland – reportedly 
because Trump was concerned such activity would spoil the property’s view. 
There was also the meeting with the Indian real estate executives, shortly 
after the election, who are developing a Trump-branded property in Mumbai.

Congressional Democrats sought answers this week pertaining to another 
possible conflict of interest: a contract Trump signed three years ago to lease 
the government-owned Old Post Office for his new hotel in Washington.

Both House and Senate Democrats pointed out that a clause in the lease 
specifically stated that no elected official of the US government should 
benefit from the agreement. Now that Trump is president-elect, they argued, he 
would in effect become “landlord and tenant at the same time” and thus violate 
federal government regulations.

The Democrats also pointed to a reception at the Trump International Hotel in 
DC, booked for next month by the Kingdom of Bahrain, as further evidence of 
conflicts of interest that are expected to grow with the property openly 
encouraging foreign diplomats to stay there while traveling to Washington on 
official business.
 