
Ronda Rousey <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ronda-rousey> was rare enough, 
and the memory of women’s MMA was shallow enough, that some people believed as 
she went so would the trajectory of female cage fighting. From the moment 
Rousey proved she could be a driver of mass attention and revenue for the 
Ultimate Fighting Championship, questions arose about what would happen when 
she wasn’t around anymore.

Would the UFC, which opened its divisions to women in 2013 because of Rousey 
<http://www.mmafighting.com/2012/11/16/3654894/dana-white-confirms-ronda-rousey-signed-ufc-mma-news>
, continue to invest in building weight classes without a superstar on which to 
pin its interest? Could fighters emerge from Rousey’s long shadow to curry 
similar media attention and sell pay-per-views? Over the long run would fight 
fans pay the same attention to women fighters the way they do for men?

Following Friday’s stunning result in Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc>
, when the once untouchable Rousey lost her second consecutive bout, this time 
in 48 seconds, the concept of the UFC operating without her, or with a shell of 
her former self, became more real than ever.

Ronda Rousey's defeat to Amanda Nunes is a cautionary tale for UFC fighters | 
Josh Gross
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc>
Does this mean a downturn for women in MMA is on its way? The landscape has 
changed in monumental ways since Rousey’s emergence, making concerns about what 
might happen once she disappeared less dire. In fact, to the surprise of evenUFC
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> executives, a slew of women resonated 
with audiences as the female side of the sport became an entrenched part of the 
business.

Two weeks before Rousey lost to UFC bantamweight champion Amanda Nunes, Paige 
VanZant and Michelle Waterson 
<http://www.mmafighting.com/2016/12/17/13995680/paige-vanzant-vs-michelle-waterson-full-fight-video-highlights-ufc-on-fox-22>
 drew 4.8 million viewers to Fox. UFC’s next pay-per-view on 11 February at the 
Barclays Center in Brooklyn, appears likely to feature a main event pitting 
Holly Holm and Germaine De Randamie in a championship contest that will open up 
business for the UFC’s female featherweight division. That will make three 
active weight classes for women in the UFC, including the 115lbs flyweights led 
by Poland’sJoanna Jedrzejczyk 
<http://www.ufc.com/fighter/Joanna-Jedrzejczyk?id=>. Prior to that, 28 January 
on Fox, bantamweights Valentina Shevchenko and Julianna Peña have been slated 
to headline over several well-known male counterparts.

“The young ones coming through now will define the future for us,” says 
Shannon Knapp, founder of the all-female promotion Invicta Fighting 
Championships.

Knapp worked with the Strikeforce promotion that helped build Rousey on 
Showtime before the UFC absorbed its upstart rival and folded women into the 
fray. Women inMMA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma> had long fought 
alongside the men, and for fans who knew what they were watching, the female 
fights were often the most exciting to watch, but there was always a hesitation 
to sign them to promoters’ rosters in large numbers. Behind the scenes, 
matchmaking discussions about women on cards rarely centered on how great an 
athlete they were, Knapp says: “It was about hot girls.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-comeback-halted-48-seconds-brazilian-amanda-nunes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ronda%20Rousey%E2%80%99s%20UFC%20comeback%20halted%20after%2048%20seconds%20by%20Brazilian%20Amanda%20Nunes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-comeback-halted-48-seconds-brazilian-amanda-nunes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ronda%20Rousey%E2%80%99s%20UFC%20comeback%20halted%20after%2048%20seconds%20by%20Brazilian%20Amanda%20Nunes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fronda-rousey-ufc-comeback-halted-48-seconds-brazilian-amanda-nunes-video&media=>
Ronda Rousey’s UFC comeback halted after 48 seconds by Brazilian Amanda Nunes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-ufc-comeback-halted-48-seconds-brazilian-amanda-nunes-video>
. 
One of the major legacies of Rousey’s run will be the doors it opened, not 
just in the UFC but across the globe. As macho as MMA seems to be, it has 
welcomed women competitors – and done so without any snide asides.

Knapp made it a point to separate the sexes in her Invicta FC operation, which 
features close to 70 fighters on its roster, but one of the most impressive 
aspects about how female MMA is that it generally lives on the same terms as 
men. Women fight on the same card as men for the same amount of pay under 
identical rule sets and, as Rousey proved, can receive tremendous media 
coverage under the right circumstances.

Dr Mary Jo Kane, a director of the Tucker Center at the University of 
Minnesota which studies the role of media and women in sport, says female MMA 
fighters benefit from something “incredibly rare”, compared to their 
counterparts in other sports.

Kane argues that women’s sports continue to expand in spite of what is 
“essentially a media blackout,” earning only 2-4% of sports media coverage 
despite huge participation numbers.


“On some level the coverage of MMA and the respect and amount of attention 
that’s given to women athletes kind of proves my point,” Kane says, “which is 
that if the media were to provide a platform in which female athletes are given 
respect as athletes — combatants in this particular case — and then build up 
superstars.”

Judo gold medallist Kayla Harrison to follow 'frenemy' Ronda Rousey into MMA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/kayla-harrison-judo-mma-switch-ronda-rousey>
This is the world Kayla Harrison sees as she makes her foray into MMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/kayla-harrison-judo-mma-switch-ronda-rousey>
 with the NBC-aired World Series of Fighting promotion. The move comes after 
Harrisonwon her second straight Olympic gold in judo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/usa-kayla-harrison-judo-second-gold-olympics-rio-2016>
, making her the only American to accomplish such a feat.

“I look at one of the reasons MMA has become so successful and so popular is 
my team-mate Ronda,” says Harrison, who competed one weight class above Rousey 
during the Beijing Olympics. “I look at her and she just sort of has this, ‘I 
deserved to be treated equally’ attitude. That’s something that I think she got 
from judo. From the very beginning we’ve been treated as equals.

“I think about the reach MMA fighters have and the impact. It’s a crazy fast 
growing sport in the United States and the world, especially for women. I’m all 
about women’s empowerment, and I’m all about doing it the right way and being a 
true role model for young girls and boys. It’s such an opportunity I’d be a 
fool not to give it a shot.”

Whether Harrison is the women to replace Rousey is another question. “I think 
she’s incredibly talented. We’ll see. Some people transition well into our 
sport. Some people don’t,” says Knapp. “Is she the next Ronda Rousey? I don’t 
know. I think Ronda is in a class of her own at the moment. I’m not saying 
Kayla won’t. It’s going to be hard to walk in those footsteps.”

Prior to the introduction of women to the UFC, women had their chances to 
fight in big spots, including network television when CBS aired MMA. Gina 
Carano and Cris “Cyborg” became known to mass audiences — an aspect of women’s 
MMA that seemed to click faster than the men — once they headlined on Showtime. 
The ratings didn’t slip, and in some cases they grew. MMA watchers have always 
been drawn to female fights, it just took a competitor like Rousey to elevate 
the money potential and the number of competitors who wanted to give it a try.

“What you now have for the first time ever in our history is that young girls 
today grow up with a sense of entitlement to sport that they never had,” says 
Kane, crediting Title IX which “fundamentally altered the landscape of what it 
meant for females to be engaged in sports and physical activity.”

Because of the rigors of MMA and the exciting action it creates, old cliches 
about why it is that women’s sports lag behind the men — a lack of athleticism 
and power, or that men just aren’t interested in watching women compete — have 
fallen by the wayside.

“I see that grit, that moxie, that toughness,” Knapp said of women’s MMA 
fighters. “Sometimes you’re just looking at them and they’re so little and 
you’re like, ‘oh my gosh.’ The young ones coming through now will define the 
future for us.”

Harrison also believes female MMA is more of a draw than other women’s sports. 
“I think in combat sports it happens a little bit less just because it is 
literally you versus another person and at the end of the day it’s a fight,” 
she says. “Who wants it more? People, men or women, can push sex aside and see 
that is a basic thing. It’s caveman stuff. For me I always was the only girl on 
the mat growing up, but I was treated like one of the guys. It was never 
treated any differently. The bigger combat sports gets and the bigger 
viewership it gets the more likely we are to have equal rights and have 
viewership be equal.”

If Rousey is done as an active competitor, she’ll have left the UFC and MMA in 
a place where women are respected as peers alongside the men, treated as equals 
in what can be an unforgiving space.
 