
Football, it is often said, is about being in the right place at the right 
time. It usually refers to the knack of scoring. On Saturday, asBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> were relegated from League Two, 
the Guardian had no one within 60 miles of Northampton, where they lost 2-0. 
Last-day survival, after three in a row, had seemed old hat.

In fact the drama covered six venues and seven teams and all but Aldershot had 
it in their own hands to survive. In the eventPlymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle> and Torquay United, 
sitting prettiest, escaped the afternoon's worst agonies, despite a defeat and 
draw respectively; Aldershot went down quietly at Rotherham; but York City's 
1-0 win at Dagenham & Redbridge would have sent their hosts down if Barnet had 
drawn and if AFC Wimbledon had not beaten Fleetwood Town 2-1 at Kingsmeadow.

Wimbledon's position was clear-cut. Starting below the dotted line, they had 
to win but knew too that a win was enough. It could not have been simpler; and 
it could not have been tenser as they never led by more than a goal. Except at 
Plainmoor there were no goals in any of the six matches until beyond the hour. 
Then Gary Alexander, on loan from Crawley, headed in Sammy Moore's free-kick 
and the Wombles danced in the sun. Within three minutes it was 1-1 as a rain 
squall swept the ground and Andy Mangan flicked home a corner at the Tempest 
End.

Neal Ardley, manager since October and one of Wimbledon's old Crazy Gang, had 
urged his side to "embrace the pressure". Vinnie Jones would have grabbed the 
situation by the scruff of the neck – or perhaps lower – and AFC have not 
forgotten their heritage. The captain is Alan Bennett, his team the new history 
boys. With 18-plus minutes to go Curtis Osano, steaming forward from 
right-back, was tripped and Jack Midson, who had twice hit the bar, converted 
the penalty. This time two years ago he was on loan to Barnet, helping to save 
them in their final game.

In the 89th minute Gareth Evans shot inches past Wimbledon's far post. By such 
margins are fates decided after 46 games. One fan said it was "better than 
promotion". After five of those in nine years familiarity may have bred 
contempt.

There was no complacency from the chief executive, Erik Samuelson. He said in 
advance that, whatever happened, they would still be a fans-owned club 
afterwards. "It would have been bloody if we had gone down but not a disaster," 
he said later. "I'm delighted to be going on holiday, off to the Western Isles."

He sensed a "wave of goodwill towards us. The last two managers rang and 
emails came from everywhere." Dave Bassett and Lawrie Sanchez were among the 
pre-AFC favourites at the match. But he added: "We need to behave in a way that 
we continue to deserve that." The running fans' skirmish at Norbiton Station 90 
minutes after the finish – Fleetwood had 157 in a crowd of 4,738 – showed that 
even the most decent clubs can be disgraced by their own so-called support.

In general there is the sense of a club comfortable with itself, unafraid to 
be different, perhaps proud to set an example. They have been commended for 
work in the community, running teams for boys and girls at every age group. At 
half-time seven minis received "contracts" to supplement dreams while a lady 
pitch-forker struggled more with her hair than divots.

Samuelson feels he has a winner in Ardley. "Next season Neal will be able to 
do it his way rather than picking up someone else's picture," he said. "I think 
we'll see the sort of football that got us promotion under Terry Brown. I'll 
enjoy that. He is going to be a very fine manager and I look forward to someone 
poaching him in about three years." First, he said, "I could do with a season 
of mid-table boredom."

Ardley, armed with daughter and beer, admitted as a true Don: "Nothing will 
get close to this in my managerial career. We had to play the way we were going 
to be most effective." He referred beforehand to "walking along a cliff. We can 
look down and worry how far we might fall or we can admire the view" – which is 
probably better at Kingsmeadow than Wimbledon Stadium, with its greyhound 
ghosts, where they hope to move in due course. Meanwhile the Bees, on 51 
points, having survived four seasons with 48 or fewer, head for The Hive and 
the Blue Square Premier £750,000 worse off.
 