
The Guardian has teamed up with the PDC and Universal Pictures to offer 
readers the chance to win one of two pairs of tickets to an evening session of 
the world’s biggest darts tournament. Seventy-two players from across the globe 
compete at Alexandra Palace in north London across 15 days live on Sky Sports, 
from 15 December to 2 January.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fwin-tickets-to-the-pdc-world-championships%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5684a25f9444268ef3bf67900993f639bff50435%2F278_229_1398_2029%2F1398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Win%20tickets%20to%20the%20PDC%20World%20Championships&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fwin-tickets-to-the-pdc-world-championships%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Win%20tickets%20to%20the%20PDC%20World%20Championships&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fwin-tickets-to-the-pdc-world-championships%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5684a25f9444268ef3bf67900993f639bff50435%2F278_229_1398_2029%2F1398.jpg>
Winners will also receive a DVD copy of House of Flying Arrows, a brand new 
documentary from Fulwell 73 and Universal Pictures that investigates what it 
takes to be a world-class darts player and why millions of spectators from 
around the world cram into arenas to watch a sport visible only to the naked 
eye from 10 feet away. Featuring interviews with key figures from the sport 
past and present while following Gary Anderson and Michael van Gerwen’s 
respective bids to win the PDC World Championship 2016.House of Flying Arrows 
is now out on digital, DVD and Blu-ray 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/House-Flying-Arrows-Daniel-Mendelle/dp/B01KO7G9CQ>. 
To enter, answer this question:

Terms and conditions

1. The competition is closed to employees of any company in the Guardian Media 
Group and any person whom, in the promoter’s reasonable opinion, should be 
excluded due to their involvement or connection with this promotion. Entrants 
must be 18 or over.


2. Answer the question correctly and complete your personal details on the 
online form and your details will be entered into a free prize draw. Only one 
entry per person.

3. Entries must be made personally. Entries made through agents/third parties 
are invalid. Entry indicates acceptance of terms and conditions.

4. One prize is a pair of tickets for entry to the 7pm evening session for 4 x 
first rounds on Wednesday 21 December. The other prize is for a pair of tickets 
for entry to the 7pm evening session for 4 x first rounds on Thursday 22 
December. Date and session are non-negotiable. Standard PDC Terms & Conditions 
apply, which can be seen atwww.pdc.tv/tickets <http://www.pdc.tv/tickets>. 
Travel to and from the venue is not included, nor is accommodation.

5. No purchase necessary to enter. Fill in the online application form with 
the necessary details, name and mobile number.

6. All entries must be received by noon on Wednesday 15 December 2016.

7. The winner will be notified before 1pm on Thursday 16 December 2016 by 
telephone or email. Prize winners’ details can be obtained by writing to 
Guardian Sport at Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, 
London N1 9GU, UK.

8. Stamped addressed envelope required.

9. Winners will be the first entry drawn at random from all qualifying entries 
by an independent judge on 15 December 2016. The judge’s decision is final.

10. There is no cash or other alternative to these prizes in whole or in part. 
Prize is not transferable in whole or in part. Prize is not for resale.

11. The winners will be required to participate in all required publicity, 
including any presentation ceremony.


12. The decision of the promoter in all matters is final and binding and no 
correspondence will be entered into.


13. The promoter is not responsible for any third party acts or omissions.

14. We cannot guarantee that the event will be free from disruptions, failings 
or cancellations. We are not liable for such disruptions, failings or 
cancellations unless they are caused by our negligence. Any requests for 
refunds or compensation arising from them should be sent to the operator of the 
event. We can provide you with their details on request.

15. The promoter reserves the right to cancel or amend this promotion due to 
events or circumstances arising beyond its control.

16. The prize is subject to the terms and conditions listed above.

17. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any 
injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or 
resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with 
the Competition. Nothing shall exclude the liability of GNM for death or 
personal injury as a result of either party’s negligence.

18. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its control.

19. The Competition will be governed by English law. Promoter: Guardian News & 
Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, UK.
 