
As one already in awe of Dame Sally Davies, England’s charismatic chief 
medical officer, I did not hesitate to trial her latest advice. Think first – 
wine or breast cancer? Result: a glass of increased-breast-cancer-risk (house 
white) concluded the first experiment, which was conducted, by way of 
mitigation, in a melee of similar risk-takers.

An objective cancer versus wine risk-assessment – factoring in age, family 
history, quite a depressing play, no interval and so forth – is hard, I 
conclude, to conduct in haste, in a bar where social norms are putting up a 
death-defying fight against medical advice.

But all credit to Davies for following through with practical advice, however 
idiosyncratic, on her radicalnew drink guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/08/tough-drinking-guidelines-not-scaremongering-says-chief-medical-officer>
, of 14 units a week, for both sexes, with no safe level. Outside the public 
health and temperance communities, her advice seems to have met, possibly 
unhelpfully for public health, with enormous indignation.

On what was it based, some patriots asked, when a Spaniard’s intake is double 
a Briton’s? How come the limits are now the same for men and women?

What, anyway, is their likely impact in a country where, as testified by the 
occasional brawl, parliament itself is daily sluiced down with buckets of 
subsidised gin, and, indeed, where the state’s alcohol policy is run by the 
alcohol industry?

How to treat one’s body as a temple, when, the prime minister treats Matthew 
Freud, PR to Diageo, as a mate? Cameron has been a regular at the parties 
where, with his health educator’shat on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/20/matthew-freud-change4life-healthy-eating>
, Freud presumably never opens a bottle without reminding his guests of the 
liver disease and drunkenness that unaccountably accompany the availability of 
incredibly cheap drink, 24 hours a day.

But as Davies reminds us, on this as on obesity and exercise, there is such a 
thing as personal responsibility. “I would like people to take their choice 
knowing the issues and do as I do when I reach for my glass of wine,” she told 
a Commons committee last week. “Think – ‘do I want a glass of wine or do I want 
to raise my risk of breast cancer’ – and I take a decision each time I have a 
glass.” Although Davies has been ridiculed for her hint, it’s perhaps no more 
absurd, if a little more statistical, than an old-fashioned memento mori. A 
beaker of the warm south, with carcinogenics winking at the brim – while you 
calculate your life expectancy?

And who knows, since it works so well for Davies, that her signature, personal 
evidence-based technique will not turn out to be the missing link in the 
light-touch paradise adumbrated in early coalition documents. “Strong-armed 
regulation,” said the new nudge unit, in applying behavioural insights to 
health, “is not the answer to rebalancing our diets, changing our desire to 
drink too much alcohol on a Friday night or making our lives more active.”

And there is no reason why the individual, Davies approach to everyday hazard 
assessment should be limited to alcohol. Think: do I want that cake or do I 
want to raise my risk of diabetes? Think: do I want to go by bike or do I want 
to increase the probability of being killed by a lorry? Think: do I want to go 
for a country walk or do I accept the near certainty of being killed by a 
stampeding horse?

Then again, in a science-based health service, there must be doubts about the 
impact of the chief medical officer’s “do as I do” mantra. Could it be 
counterproductive? Since it helps, research has established, to have some of 
the media on side in a health campaign, as opposed to many of them labelling 
you – however unfairly – a nanny or, more politely, a sanctimonious alien from 
planet Islington. Even without such media trolling, which must hugely delight 
the drinks industry, the chief medical officer’s exhortations conflict with 
earlier Tory precepts on reforming unhealthy lifestyles.

In its 2010 paper, which featured, somewhere in its reams of wishful cobblers, 
a section on social norms and alcohol, thebehavioural insight team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/jun/01/nudge-unit-behavioural-insights-team-conference>
 made much of the psychologist Robert Cialdini on the “big mistake”: to make 
people think problem behaviour is the norm. For instance, if I have got this 
right, it could be a big mistake to suggest, as Davies is apt to do, that all, 
rather than some drinkers, should do as she does.

Millions of light to moderate drinkers don’t need to think about cancer with 
every glass or, at least, they might just as well spend the time thinking about 
appendicitis, malaria or german measles, the illness of their choice.

In contrast, the nudge unit was excited about the beneficial impact of hearing 
about low drinking social norms on binge-drinking students.

The reason, it turns out, that we have heard little since then on this 
wondrously cheap, small-state health solution is that what works on, say, slow 
taxpayers does not work on drinkers. In a Cochranereview, 
<http://www.cochrane.org/CD006748/ADDICTN_social-norms-interventions-are-not-effective-enough-their-own-reduce-alcohol-use-or-misuse-among>
 published last year, the authors concluded that “social norms interventions 
are not effective enough on their own to reduce alcohol use or misuse among 
university or college students”.

To make things worse, another plank in the Tories’ super-voluntary, 
legislation-free approach to problematic drinking, its“responsibility deal”, 
run by associates of Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/12/food-industry-responsibility-deal-little-effect-health-study>
, has been condemned by the BMA, among many others, as weak and ineffective. 
Shortly before Davies produced her evidence-based drinking guidelines, areport 
<http://www.ias.org.uk/uploads/pdf/IAS%20reports/Dead%20on%20Arrival_x3F_%20Evaluating%20the%20Public%20Health%20Responsibility%20Deal%20for%20Alcohol.pdf>
 from the Institute of Alcohol Studies condemned the deal, for, among other 
failings, “obstructing more effective policies addressing alcohol harm”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fsally-davies-wine-cancer-drinks-industry-helen-mirren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8616eca2d35da39cee6c9997400f845f52aab0d%2F0_0_2000_1199%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wine%20or%20cancer%3F%20If%20it%E2%80%99s%20that%20bad%2C%20curb%20the%20drinks%20makers%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fsally-davies-wine-cancer-drinks-industry-helen-mirren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wine%20or%20cancer%3F%20If%20it%E2%80%99s%20that%20bad%2C%20curb%20the%20drinks%20makers%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fsally-davies-wine-cancer-drinks-industry-helen-mirren%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8616eca2d35da39cee6c9997400f845f52aab0d%2F0_0_2000_1199%2F2000.jpg>
 Don’t be a pillock’: Helen Mirren delivers a lecture about drink driving from 
a Budweiser spot for Super Bowl 50. Photograph: AP 
To the surprise of nobody except Conservative politicians, it turns out that 
the alcohol industry is in no hurry to make people drink less. It can’t even be 
arsed to prominently change the labels. The importance of the IAS study was 
confirmed for anyone who makes it a rule never to do or believe anything 
endorsed by Andrew, now “Lord” Lansley, when he rubbished it as “polemical in 
character and not a research report at all”. Admittedly, this is consistent 
with his department’sassertion 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/224075/alcohol-strategy.pdf>
 in 2012 of alcohol’s “positive impact on adults’ wellbeing”.

The use of dames, in public health, is not unknown. In the US, Budweiser just 
hired Dame Helen Mirren to call drink drivers “pillocks” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/othersports/americanfootball/12137406/Dont-be-a-pillock-Helen-Mirrens-drink-drive-message-for-Super-Bowl.html>
. The company thought it would “spark conversation”. And the exhortations of 
Davies have definitely done that. But in the absence of Cochrane reviews on the 
impact of her personal example, there is surely a case for her promoting, 
instead, evidence-basedinterventions 
<https://www.stir.ac.uk/media/schools/management/documents/Alcoholstrategy-updated.pdf>
 such as drink pricing, however unpopular with the government’s responsibility 
deal partners.

Shouldn’t the cancer warning be writ large on the bottle, as well as in the 
consumer’s mind? Only a few of our very top dames could get away with telling 
British women “do as I do” when it comes to drinking, and those who could would 
probably be too sensible to try.

• This article was amended on 8 February 2016. An earlier version referred to 
the psychologist Robert Cialdini as an economist. A further amendment on 10 
February 2016 corrected Dame Sally Davies’s title.

 