
A buzzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/01/buzzard-uturn-welcome-fight-there>
 perches on the high branch of a leafless tree. With its back to me, it looks 
out on the same scene, but do we see the same thing? I see through the trees to 
fields chemically enhanced with the vivid greens of new crops. The old 
landscape under this December sky is a brown study: a mood induced by hedges,
ash keys <http://paulkirtley.co.uk/2013/how-to-identify-an-ash-tree/>, muddy 
paths, the woods bare and misty-headed with reddish and purple-brown buds. The 
subtlety of these colours has a deepening beauty as winter thickens across the 
land.

This buzzard is a harlequin of browns, greys and whites, and it has been 
suggested that because of this plumage, colour is relatively unimportant to 
these predators. I’m always impressed when I see buzzards soaring and they 
catch the light in the silvery feathers under their wings and their markings 
glow like bronze and polished wood. But this display is for the benefit of 
other buzzards, not for me.


No hiding place for a stranded squab
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/26/no-hiding-place-stranded-woodpigeon-chick-country-diary>
Perhaps because I like these colours in the landscape, I think they’re more 
important to the buzzard; it sees them differently, far more intensely than I 
do.Its retinas <http://www.earthlife.net/birds/vision.html> have cones with 
five pigments (we have three), and this allows it to see far more variation in 
colour than I can. Without my specs all this would look like muddy 
Impressionism, so that may be the difference between our colour visions.

The buzzard scans the landscape for traces of movement that betray the 
presence of rabbits, voles or mice. Its eyes are more forward facing than most 
birds’ and, like humans, it hasbinocular vision 
<http://webeye.ophth.uiowa.edu/eyeforum/tutorials/BINOCULAR-VISION.pdf>. But it 
can also create a telephoto optical system that detects and follows movement 
that would seem a blur to us.

Although this bird is searching for small mammals and birds, if hungry it may 
go over to the open fields to walk about picking worms and other invertebrates 
from the bare earth. For now, the buzzard sits, wings folded on its perch, a 
beautiful grotesque, watching a world with an intensity of gaze that I can only 
guess at.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 