
Wladimir Klitschko <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wladimir-klitschko> has 
compared Tyson Fury’s views to those of Adolf Hitler, and says the comments he 
made last month should lead to a suspension.

In a video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/13/tyson-fury-banned-antisemitic-comments-video>
 published on YouTube, the defending WBA and WBO heavyweight champion Fury 
caused outrage with his views on rape, bestiality and the Jewish faith. He has 
previously been accused of sexism and homophobia.

The Campaign Against Antisemitism called for him to be banned for his 
“offensive and racist remarks” and made a complaint to the BritishBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of Control.

Klitschko, who faces Fury in a rematch at the Manchester Arena on 9 July, has 
now echoed the calls for a ban, regardless ofthe apology his opponent issued 
via a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/16/tyson-fury-aplogises-offensive-comments>
.

The Ukrainian lost his first fight in 11 years when Fury earned a surprise 
unanimous decision victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
 against him in Dusseldorf in November, and speaking from his training camp in 
the Tyrolean Alps in Austria, Klitschko said: “I’m fighting a guy who can’t 
hold his mouth on certain things.

“I was in shock at his statements about women, the gay community, and when he 
got to the Jewish people he sounded like Hitler. The man is an imbecile. 
Seriously. You cannot put it all together as a representation of the sport of 
boxing. He’s an imbecile champion.”

Tyson Fury tries to apologise his way out of a jungle of prejudice | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/16/tyson-fury-apology-prejudice-antisemitism>
In the outburst that came to light on 13 May, Fury claimed: “Zionist, Jewish 
people … own all the banks, all the papers, all the TV stations.”

Klitschko said: “It puts the world of boxing in the wrong spot. He represents 
not just himself, but the sanctioning bodies, a lot of boxing fans in general, 
it’s not just about him and he needs to understand but he obviously doesn’t. 
All the stupidity that comes out of his mouth …

“Especially in this crazy world when we can see all that’s going on, we don’t 
need someone having this stage and bringing hate to Jewish people, I can’t 
accept. As I said, he sounds like Hitler, I cannot accept it and I don’t accept.

“We cannot have a champion like that. Either he needs to be shut up or shut 
down in the ring, or just suspended, because you cannot create more hate. 
Friction creates friction, the more hate you bring out there – with women, the 
gay community and Jewish people – what next is he going to say?”

There was little from the first fight that suggested Klitschko is capable of 
succeeding in next month’s rematch, but the 40-year-old remains adamant he is 
certain of victory.

He also dismissed suggestions that, as Fury said, the IBF title holder Anthony 
Joshua is a “paper champion”, that November’s defeat meant he needed to change 
his preparation, and that that fight led to him considering retirement.

“It’s not just British fans I’ll be doing a favour when I beat him, it’ll be 
for Klitschko fans and boxing fans in general,” said Klitschko. “It’s just 
something we don’t need in this world, it’s beyond boxing. I’m totally not on 
the same page as him.

“There’s a lot of ‘BS’ coming out of his mouth and I’m not buying it. I think 
it’s good for boxing that Joshua is world champion and I’m happy for him.

“It’s an exciting time and there’s nothing wrong with Joshua having the IBF 
belt. I have no doubt that eventually [a Joshua fight] can happen, but there’s 
nothing I’m looking at beyondTyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tyson-fury>. My routine will remain the same 
as it has been in the past years.

“There was a lack of punches thrown and whatever it was I’m going to fix it on 
9 July. I never thought about retirement, because there was nothing leading me 
to that. I don’t actually believe what happened.

“Fury won the fight but I don’t feel defeated. I know how to fix it and we are 
capable of doing that. I’ve had three defeats before and after each defeat I 
came back stronger.

“My preparation was not bad. We accomplished what we needed to accomplish. If 
you control your mind that’s it. I just need to tighten a couple of screws.”
 