
Wladimir Klitschko intends to go to court over the negotiations for his 
rematch against Tyson Fury.Having lost the WBA, WBO and IBF titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
 to Fury in November, the 40-year-old has the right to a rematch, with the 
initial fight scheduled for Julypostponed after Fury suffered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/tyson-fury-pulls-out-wladimir-klitschko-injury>
 an ankle injury.

Tyson Fury shocks Wladimir Klitschko to take world heavyweight title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/tyson-fury-shocks-wladimir-klitschko-world-heavyweight-title-champion>
A new date, 29 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/07/tyson-fury-rematch-wladimir-klitschko-29-october>
, has been set for Manchester Arena but Klitschkoposted a video on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Klitschko/status/765813044031135744> on Wednesday morning 
claiming Fury’s camp has attempted to shift the terms of their agreement and he 
is therefore seeking legal action.

“Dear fans, I just want to keep you updated on the status quo of my rematch 
against Fury,” the Ukrainian said. “Unfortunately, Team Fury is trying to 
change the terms of an already-signed contract multiple times and it is going 
on endless[ly]. To protect my own rights and eventually see the rematch, I am 
forced to go to court.”

Shortly after the video was posted, Klitschko’s manager, Bernd Boente, 
explained why it was deemed necessary to take legal action.

“They want to change details in the contract,” he told Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> News. “We cannot discuss that 
publicly – but, as you know, we’ve already done press conferences in 
Manchester, in Cologne.

“Now Team Fury wants to change many parts of the contract, important parts, 
financial conditions etc, etc, and now I think we have to make sure we 
implement our rights and so we have to go to court in Germany because the 
contract is under German jurisdiction. We have enforced our rights and that is 
what we will do now.”

Team Fury were unavailable for comment when contacted by the Press Association.

Fury, who earlier this week mapped out his plans for his next three fights 
which included beating Klitschko and then facing unification bouts against 
Anthony Joshua and Deontay Wilder, suffered a badly sprained ankle in June.

He is also contending with doping allegations after UK Anti-Doping charged the 
28-year-oldover the alleged presence of a banned substance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/03/tyson-fury-ban-prohibited-substance-uk-anti-doping>
.

Both Fury and his cousin Hughie have a hearing on 4 November, having 
strenuously denied the charge.A provisional suspension imposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/26/tyson-fury-heavyweight-champion-baffled-drugs-test-nandrolone>
 on 24 June was lifted after an appeal.
 