
Wladimir Klitschko has refused to rule out the possibility of competing in the 
Olympic Games again. The 39-year-old, who won super-heavyweight gold in Atlanta 
in 1996, could take advantage of anew move by the International Boxing 
Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/professional-boxers-eligible-rio-olympics>
 (AIBA) to open up its eligibility criteria to all existing professionals.

Floyd Mayweather at the Olympics might not make sense but the horse has bolted 
already | Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/25/floyd-mayweather-olympics-boxing>
Klitschko has long stated his desire to return to the amateur code before 
retirement and will press his case following hisworld heavyweight title rematch 
with Tyson Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/09/ibf-tyson-fury-world-heavyweight-title>
. “I have always said that I would love to participate again in the Olympic 
Games but right now I’m only focusing on my rematch with Tyson Fury,” he said.

Klitschko previously expressed his desire to try to qualify for London 2012 
but was ruled out by a combination of the current AIBA rules and the reluctance 
of the UkrainianBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Federation. 
He would need to persuade the powers that be at AIBA to lift the age limit for 
fighters under its jurisdiction. He will be 43 by the time of the Tokyo 
Olympics in 2020, and AIBA’s upper limit currently stands at 40.

Klitschko is the highest-profile fighter to express an interest in taking 
advantage of the new ruling, which will be officially ratified by AIBA in May, 
enabling professionals to enter the finalRio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> qualifying tournament in Baku in 
June. But others believe top professionals will be reluctant to commit to the 
Games because of a mixture of reputational, licensing and financial issues.

The promoter Eddie Hearn said: “I think you might get some mid-level 
professionals having a crack at it but I don’t think you are going to get the 
elite guys. Sometimes that’s also the case with other sports – we’ve seen that 
tennis and football hasn’t always had the strongest representation in the 
Olympics but I think it is a strange situation in boxing.

“There are questions over funding and sponsorship and although the sport is in 
a kind of transition at the moment, I think the two should stay as they are – 
boxing should be one of the few sports where you have amateur and pro 
separation.”

Scott Quigg, preparing for his world super-bantamweight title unification bout 
against Carl Frampton in Manchester on Saturday, is against the idea. “When you 
are an amateur you are learning and if you start mixing up with the 
professionals I think it is a bad idea and it could be dangerous,” he said.

“The Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> is the 
pinnacle of an amateur’s career so you have got to keep it separate. I was 
shocked when they said it could actually go ahead, and I hope they have another 
good think about it and make the right decision.”
 