
A woman who is suing police after discovering that she had a sexual 
relationship with an undercover officer has accused police of using a variety 
of delaying tactics to obstruct her legal action.

The woman, known as Deborah, started legal action against police in 2012, 
alleging that she suffered psychiatric harm from being deceived into forming an 
intimate relationship with the undercover officer, who used the fake name of 
Marco Jacobs.

Four years after the legal action began, police now say that a search through 
classified files for relevant information will be so complex that it will take 
until April and cost at least £80,000. The woman says that the delay is 
exacerbating the abuse she experienced from her relationship with the spy.

Commenting on the police’s conduct, Deborah said: “Dragging it out is causing 
me more distress. I feel it’s abusive what they are doing. They know how 
distressed we are. It feels really cruel how they have treated us.” 

Jacobs spent five years infiltrating a group of anarchists in Cardiff which 
had about 10 regular members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jan/19/undercover-police-officer-mark-jacobs>
. The woman took legal action after investigations by the Guardian andthe 
anarchists unmasked Jacobs in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jan/14/third-undercover-police-spy-cardiff>
. Another woman who had a sexual relationship with Jacobs, who recently settled 
her case, had also complained that the lawsuit had been dragged out unduly. 
Both women had been unaware of his real identity.

During his undercover deployment, Jacobs started a relationship with Deborah 
while she was the girlfriend of another member of the group, Tom Fowler. She 
broke up with Fowler soon afterwards. Jacobs’s involvement in Deborah’s life 
was such that he often met her parents and attended her father’s funeral.

Until recently, police refused to confirm or deny that Jacobs, who was also 
known as Mark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jan/19/undercover-police-officer-mark-jacobs>
, was an undercover officer and declined to answer questions about his 
deployment, such as what he was authorised to do and who supervised him.

The police say that the search through classified files is necessary to 
determine which ones can be disclosed to Deborah or to Fowler, who is also 
taking legal action. They and the other woman who recently settled her case 
were told that there could be as many as 30,000 references to them in 
classified electronic police files.

Deborah said police were claiming that they would have to pay lawyers at least 
£80,000 to review these electronic files and another 737 paper files - 
containing 25,000 pages - that were generated during Jacobs’s covert mission.

Deborah, who does not have a criminal record, said she was shocked when police 
told her about the need to search the files.

“It indicated that he was spying on every aspect of my life”, she said. “I 
find it shocking that my life at that point warranted that amount of 
surveillance. It makes me very uncomfortable that there is potentially 
information about very personal aspects of my life. It makes me think, what 
information was he gathering? How far did it go and on whom?”

She questioned why the process had not begun already, adding: “It’s 
disgusting. They are trying to delay justice ... What happened was wrong. It 
should not have happened and it was abusive.”

She pointed out that her legal action had yet to be concluded even though 
police had last year settled a lawsuitbrought by seven women who had been 
similarly deceived into 
<http://news.met.police.uk/news/claimants-in-civil-cases-receive-mps-apology-138574?utm_campaign=send_list&utm_medium=email&utm_source=sendgrid>
 forming intimate relationships with undercover officers. In November last 
year, policeapologised for the “abusive and manipulative” relationships and 
paid the seven women substantial compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/20/met-police-apologise-women-had-relationships-with-undercover-officers>
.

Deborah said she was pursuing the legal action to find out why Jacobs intruded 
into her private life where there was no criminality and how the police 
believed that such intrusion was justified.

She became close friends with Jacobs in 2005 after he joined the Cardiff 
Anarchist Network, claiming to be a truck driver 
<https://southwalesanarchists.wordpress.com/tag/cardiff-anarchist-network/>.

She did not know that, in reality, he was a police officer working for a 
secretivesquad, the National Public Order Intelligence Unit, 
<http://specialbranchfiles.uk/npoiu-formation/> which monitored political 
groups.

For three years, Deborah and Jacobs were friends and frequently met outside of 
the anarchists’ gatherings, leading her to believe that they were “kindred 
spirits”.

In 2008, they had sex on a number of occasions and he told her he loved her. 
She ended her relationship with Fowler, believing that she was going to become 
Jacobs’s girlfriend. However Jacobs told her within weeks that he just wanted 
to be friends. She said: “I was devastated. I felt confused, stupid, used and 
lost. My self-esteem was shattered.”

Jacobs disappeared in 2009, claiming 
<http://powerbase.info/index.php/Marco_Jacobs_(alias)> to have got a job 
maintaining holiday villas in Corfu.

Deborah said that since discovering that Jacobs “was not a real person”, she 
had experienced serious depression and had difficulties in her job in social 
care. “I feel a constant state of hopelessness and that there is a lack of 
purpose in my life. I feel despair and ask myself what’s the point of anything 
when it might not be real.”

During their lawsuit, police went to court in an attempt to have the whole of 
the legal action struck out.

More than 100 undercover officers have been deployed to spy on at least 460 
political groups since 1968.

Revelations about their conduct compelled Theresa May, when she was home 
secretary,to set up a public inquiry, led by a senior judge, Lord Justice 
Pitchford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2016/mar/24/judge-to-decide-how-much-of-the-public-inquiry-into-undercover-policing-can-be-public>
, into their activities.

Police have also paid more than £400,000 to a woman who was profoundly 
traumatised after finding out by chance that an undercover officer, Bob Lambert,
was the father of her son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/23/police-compensation-payout-woman-undercover-officer>
.

The Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
said they remained “hopeful” that they could settle Deborah’s legal case. “An 
apology from all the relevant police forces is of course part of that 
settlement. Given the current stage no such disclosure process will be 
required,” they said.

• If you would like to pass on information in confidence, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>).
 