
A woman has died after a light tourist plane crashed on a beach near the 
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> town of 
1770, south of Gladstone.

A Queensland police spokesman confirmed the death, saying officers were trying 
to identify the woman to contact next of kin.

Paramedics had rushed by helicopter to the remote scene of the accident at 
Middle Island, just north of 1770, where four passengers were injured on 
Tuesday.

Nine News <https://twitter.com/9NewsBrisbane/status/818665988069687297> 
reported that a woman in her 20s had died.


The rescue mission involving the injured passengers, who reportedly flew in a 
plane operated for a tourism business called1770 castaway Fly-in Island 
Adventures <http://www.1770castaway.com.au/>, was expected to take several 
hours.


The plane crashed in view of another tourist plane flying behind it, which 
then safely landed and called emergency services.

A 29-year-old woman with suspected head injuries and a possible broken leg was 
airlifted in a serious condition from the scene, a spokeswoman for RACQ CQ 
rescue helicopter service said.

A 13-year-old boy also in a stable with a possible leg fracture was also flown 
from the scene in a stable condition, with both patients taken to Rockhampton 
base hospital, the spokeswoman said.

Mindy Thomas, the manager of the Rockhampton emergency services communications 
centre, said both planes were believed to be involved in “tourist activities”. 
News reports said the plane was a four-seat, single engine Cessna 172.

“There were two planes, one was following another and has seen the first plane 
go down,” she said.


Thomas said it would be “a number of hours before all patients are safely 
extricated, as well as all staff from [Queensland ambulance service]”. She said 
it was “unknown at this stage what caused the plane to come down.”

Damian Freiberg, who runs the CQ plane spotting blog, told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-10/plane-crashed-central-queensland-gladstone-eurimbula/8172434>
 an emergency call to air traffic control on their radio scanner stated that “a 
wing had been broken off and the plane [was] upside down”.


“It doesn’t sound good,” he said.

1770 Castaways’ website says it offers adventure camping holidays that 
involved flying to isolated island beaches.

“Buckle up and leave the crowds behind as we fly you onto your own tropical 
island paradise, landing on the beach, where you will live like a CASTAWAY or a 
SURVIVOR for 3days/2nts,” it says.

“WARNING!!!! These trips aren’t for “Princesses” (or “Princes” for that 
matter). They’re a fair dinkum Aussie camping experience in the bush on a 
remote, virtually untouched, island!”

Thomas said the QAS helicopters would have to assist with transporting 
ambulance officers and “a number of bystanders from the second tourist plane” 
off the island.

“Middle Island is not easily accessible by road, there is one access point 
that is dependent on low tide, so most of our resources have been sent via 
helicopter,” she said.
 