
On Christmas Eve, two letters landed on my doormat. Before I’d even bent to 
pick them up, I could tell they were going to be bad news. Like most people who 
have become accustomed to living on the breadline, I’ve practically developed a 
sixth sense about such things and can instinctively tell when an unwanted bill 
or a letter from the benefits department has arrived before I’ve even set eyes 
on the return address. Such letters make their arrival known with a sinking 
feeling in the pit of your stomach and a fleeting thought in the back of your 
mind reminding you that there’s always someone sitting at a desk somewhere just 
itching to kick you while you’re down.

BHS workers swamp Charles Dickens charity with help requests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/bhs-workers-swamp-charles-dickens-charity-with-help-requests>
The first letter was from my local authority’s housing benefit department 
telling me that, while I was now entitled to full benefits, they would be 
unable to pay them for any period prior to my informing them that I was unable 
to meet the cost of November’s rent payment. This was despite the fact that I 
had provided them, as per their request, with myP45 
<https://www.freeagent.com/glossary/p45/> and bank statements detailing every 
single transaction since receiving myredundancy payment from BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/frank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs>
. I was somewhat taken aback by their inability to backdate the claim by a 
couple of weeks, as they seem to have little trouble doing so when dealing with 
overpayments.

The second letter was from the local housing group letting me know that my 
rent was in arrears to the tune of almost £350 – and that this needed to be 
paid within seven days of the date of the letter (despite their offices being 
closed from now until 3 January), or steps would be taken to repossess my home. 
Two days previously I had begrudgingly begun my claim foruniversal credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/millions-affected-by-universal-credit-cuts-to-be-partly-compensated-by-chancellor>
 (having discovered that most local retailers are less than keen to offer you 
work once you’ve written a couple ofscathing newspaper articles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/30/boredom-scavenging-stifling-heat-final-days-of-bhs-philip-green>
 about your previous employer) and had been informed that I would not receive 
payment until February. So, penniless and with no other option, I have been 
forced to turn to others for help.

The knowledge that I will likely owe a sum larger than my first universal 
credit payment fills me with dread

Unlike the hundreds of families of ex-BHS workers who recently flooded the 
Fashion and Textile Children’s Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/bhs-workers-swamp-charles-dickens-charity-with-help-requests>
 (a charity set up in 1853 to support the families of hard-up workers, the 
appeal board of which was once chaired by Charles Dickens. Insert comical 
Ebenezer Scrooge/Philip Green comparison here) with requests for grants, I was 
able to find help close to home. My mother, not at all keen on the idea of me 
becoming homeless, has agreed to loan me the money I need to make it through 
January with food and shelter out of her savings. Grateful as I am that I’ll 
find myself in debt to a family member rather than a loan company, the 
knowledge that I will likely already owe a sum larger than my first universal 
credit payment fills me with dread. The fact that throughout the country 
countless other ex-BHS employees are facing similar situations and worse fills 
me with anger and sadness.

Naturally, in the midst of all this hardship, it’s business as usual for the 
man who caused it all. When he’s not busy expanding his empire into China, the 
inimitableSir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/philip-green-demands-dominic-chappell-pays-into-bhs-pension-deal>
 is still angrily protesting his innocence. His unwillingness to plug the hole 
in the pension fund, once supposedly the fault of a meddlingFrank Field 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37709803>, is now the fault of the press, 
he tells us. Besides, he’s not paying a penny until his poor, bewildered patsy,
Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/pensions-regulator-seeks-millions-dominic-chappell-retail-acquisitions-bhs-pension-deficit>
, puts up some money.

It occurs to me, in hindsight, that given the extent to which the odds seemed 
stacked against it this summer, I could have spared myself my current financial 
woes by gambling a small portion of my redundancy payment on the fact that the 
“king of retail” would still beclutching his knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/removal-of-sir-philip-greens-knighthood-is-far-from-certain-say-experts>
 by the start of 2017. Not only would my winnings have seen me comfortably 
through January, but they would also have provided me with a single reason to 
not feel aggrieved and betrayed by the fact that, despite the committee 
hearings and parliamentary debate, this man remains unpunished.
 