
Things are not going well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/sep/11/nhs-providers-chief-executive-under-greatest-pressure-generations-health-hospitals-video>
 in the NHS right now. It is under sustained attack day after day; the media 
bad-mouths it, while the people who work for it are being asked todo more and 
more with fewer and fewer resources 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/25/nhs-at-breaking-point-despite-deficit-reduction-say-trusts>
.

In my 15 years of study and training, I have watched cuts immiserate the 
services we can offer children and their parents all over the country. Fewer 
fundedpaediatric nurse  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/dec/07/will-scrapping-nurse-bursaries-help-or-worsen-nhs-staffing-crisis>
training spots;local closures 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36516387> leading to clogged 
emergency departments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/14/emergency-departments-fighting-for-life-nhs-marketisation>
; and £80bn slashed frommental health services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/uk-child-mental-health-services-destroying-lives-families>
 resulting in ever more troubled young people occupying acute hospital beds, 
because there’s simply nowhere else for them to go.

Working in a health service under pressure – one that is low in finances, low 
in staff and low in morale – is hard. And things are only going to get worse. 
The current political climate activelypits health workers and patients against 
each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/24/junior-doctors-suspend-plan-to-strike-due-to-patient-safety-concerns>
, the opposite of what caring relationships are supposed to look like. Under 
this kind of pressure, it’s not only the patients who need healing,it’s also 
the staff 
<https://www.nursingtimes.net/roles/mental-health-nurses/greater-focus-needed-on-mental-health-of-nhs-staff/5067529.fullarticle>
.

I felt this myself. I would see my colleagues, hungry and thirsty from lack of 
breaks with circles under their eyes, struggle to do their jobs. Being in 
hospital can be scary and alienating for sick children at the best of times – 
how much worse when the staff looking after them are too tired and busy even to 
smile?

I've never felt prouder of the NHS than when my grandmother died
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/05/never-felt-prouder-nhs-grandmother-died-junior-doctor-a-and-e>
I decided to do something about it. Barnet Bopping is a pilot project I 
developed with colleagues that brings dance to the paediatric ward of Barnet 
hospital, in north London. The aim is to help patients, parents and staff feel 
happier, healthier, less stressed and more connected by doing physical activity 
together that’s mood lifting and fun.

One morning, we gathered some of the kids and staff in the playroom and I 
asked a friend – who happens to be a nurse on the ward – to lead a hip-hop 
dance class. At first it felt a bit awkward; here we were, in the middle of the 
working day, my colleagues and I, swaying our hips with the consultant. And in 
front of the parents. But with every new move, and with every song, we all got 
more and more into it. Before long we forgot who we were, and even where we 
were. It didn’t matter whether we were a doctor, nurse, patient, parent or 
cleaner – all that mattered was the music. By the end, the atmosphere on the 
ward was really, well, happy.

I noticed how things changed after that. The boundaries between the nurses and 
doctors were gone. People smiled more. The team communicated better. It made us 
all wonder why we didn’t do things like that more often.

On its own this will not fix the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>
. But it is a way for us, in our local general hospital, to take matters back 
into our own hands, to resist the destruction of our health service and try to 
offer the best care we can to our patients.

Wellbeing should be for all of us. Health workers operate under huge stress 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-32029802>, all while feeling as if we aren’t 
really doing justice to our patients. We need take care of each other – health 
workers and patients alike. Whether it’sstanding up for patient safety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/19/patients-junior-doctors-striking-contract-jeremy-hunt>
 or being creative at work, we stand with our patients. Cuts or no cuts, this 
is the kind of spirit that hasn’t yet been crushed in the NHS.

If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
which is about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read our
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 