
Spare a thought for the billionaires of the world: the combined wealth of the 
20 richest people on the planet has fallen by more than $70bn (£50bn) following 
a slump on global financial markets.

The latest annual ranking of billionaires by Forbes shows that falling share 
prices, a dramatic drop in the price of oil and volatile currency markets have 
shaken the global elite.

The combined wealth of the top 20 has fallen from $899bn last year to $827bn 
and the number of billionaires in the world has shrunk from a record 1,826 in 
2015 to 1,810. It is the first time in seven years that the number of 
billionaires has decreased, and is the first drop in the wealth of the top 20 
since 2012.
Forbes' top 10 rich people 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/forbestop10-zip/giv-27167RTZcT50Yf975/>
But more than a third of the $70bn decline was down to just one man: Carlos 
Slim <https://www.theguardian.com/business/carlos-slim>. The Mexican telecoms 
tycoon has seen his fortune decrease from $77.1bn to $50bn in just 12 months. 
Shares in his bank, Grupo Financiero Inbursa, telecoms company América Móvil 
and mining group Minera Frisco have all tumbled.

As a result Slim is no longer the second-richest man in the world – and is 
merely fourth.

Bill Gates <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates> is once again 
the wealthiest person in the world, although even the Microsoft founder’s 
fortune has dipped, from $79.2bn to $75bn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fworlds-20-richest-people-70bn-poorer-forbes-annual-ranking-billionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bd2adf736942fbf4343e2aa9f5430cd392cfa79%2F247_0_2272_1364%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%2020%20richest%20people%20are%20%2470bn%20poorer%2C%20says%20Forbes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fworlds-20-richest-people-70bn-poorer-forbes-annual-ranking-billionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%2020%20richest%20people%20are%20%2470bn%20poorer%2C%20says%20Forbes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fworlds-20-richest-people-70bn-poorer-forbes-annual-ranking-billionaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bd2adf736942fbf4343e2aa9f5430cd392cfa79%2F247_0_2272_1364%2F2272.jpg>
 Forbes has ranked Bill Gates the wealthiest person in the world for the third 
year in a row. Photograph: Ida Mae Astute/Getty Images 
The list continues to be dominated by men. Out of 1,810 billionaires, just 190 
are women, down from 197 in 2015.

Both the female billionaires in the overall top 20 inherited their wealth: 
Liliane Bettencourt, the heir to the L’Oréal empire, and Alice Walton, daughter 
of the Walmart founder, Sam Walton.

The richest self-made woman in the world is Zhou Qunfei, who is ranked 205th 
and valued at $5.9bn. She made her fortune by founding the touchscreen maker 
Lens Technology, whose biggest customers are Apple and Samsung.

Carlos Slim: biography of Mexico's richest man penetrates 'cloak of silence'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/06/carlos-slim-biography-diego-enrique-osorno-interviews>
Zhou, who is rarely seen in public, grew up in a small village in Hunan, 
central China. Her mother died when she was five and her father was badly 
injured in an industrial accident. She helped her family raise pigs and ducks 
for their food before moving to Shenzhen to work in a factory, making watch 
lenses in harsh conditions.

After winning promotion she saved up $3,000 and decided to set up her own 
business producing high-quality lenses. This grew into Lens, which today 
employs more than 75,000 people.

Across all billionaires, 1,186 are self-made, 228 inherited their wealth and 
396 inherited a portion, but are growing it. Just 33 of the 190 female 
billionaires are self-made.

The biggest gainer on the list was Mark Zuckerberg, the boss of Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, whose wealth grew by $11.2bn 
to give him a total net worth of $44.6bn. Zuckerberg is the sixth-richest 
person in the world, behind Jeff Bezos, the Amazon founder, Slim, the investor 
Warren Buffett, Amancio Ortega, the Spanish businessman behind the Zara fashion 
empire, and Gates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fworlds-20-richest-people-70bn-poorer-forbes-annual-ranking-billionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65126f44cc8cfb74d79029afae1c26341959987f%2F0_1158_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%2020%20richest%20people%20are%20%2470bn%20poorer%2C%20says%20Forbes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fworlds-20-richest-people-70bn-poorer-forbes-annual-ranking-billionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%2020%20richest%20people%20are%20%2470bn%20poorer%2C%20says%20Forbes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fworlds-20-richest-people-70bn-poorer-forbes-annual-ranking-billionaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65126f44cc8cfb74d79029afae1c26341959987f%2F0_1158_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 L’Oréal heir Liliane Bettencourt. Photograph: Francois Guillot/AFP/Getty Images
The only people in the top 10 to see their value increase over the last year 
were Zuckerberg, Bezos, thepotential presidential candidate Michael Bloomberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/08/michael-bloomberg-for-president-2016-white-house-bid>
, and Ortega.

Ortega, 79, is Europe’s richest man after building Inditex, which owns Zara, 
the biggest fashion retailer in the world. He keeps a low public profile but is 
regularly seen in the staff cafeteria at Inditex’s base in Arteixo, a small 
town in northern Spain close to the city of A Coruña.

Ortega and his business partner, Rosalia Mera, opened their first store in A 
Coruña in 1975. They wanted to call the shop Zorba, after their favourite film,
Zorba the Greek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/aug/14/zorba-greek-nikos-kazantzakis-summer-readings>
, but were forced to change because a nearby bar had the same name – calling it 
Zara instead.
Top 10 richest women 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/forbeswomen-zip/giv-27167XEaMlk21AjC3/>
Zara and Inditex, which do not advertise, have become renowned for “fast 
fashion”. At a time when other companies were sending manufacturing to the east 
Asia, Inditex focused on making as many clothes as possible in Europe, allowing 
it to stock its shops with the latest fashion quicker than its rivals. Every 
item of clothing that Zara sells still goes through Spain.

There are 489 billionaires in Europe, with their wealth growing from $1.19tn 
to $1.83tn in the last year. The US remains home to the most billionaires. 
There are 540 American citizens on the Forbes list compared with 536 last year.

However, not every billionaire was happy with their fortune. Forbes has 
admitted it had an “intense interaction” with Donald Trump about the value of
his wealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-reveals-net-worth-presidential-campaign-launch>
. The US presidential candidate has repeatedly claimed he is worth more than 
$10bn, and sent documents to Forbes to try to prove it, but the report has put 
his fortune at $4.5bn, up from $4.1bn last year. The discrepancy is thought to 
be at least partly down to the valuation Trump puts on his own brand.

The number and value of billionaires in the Asia-Pacific region also grew, but 
the Middle East, Africa and the rest of the Americas took a hit as the value of 
oil and other commodities fell sharply. The number of billionaires in the 
Middle East and Africa fell from 106 to 90, while in the Americas, not 
including the US, it dropped from 140 to 101.
Top 10 richies under 30 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/forbesunder30-zip/giv-27167QsG7IcXR7QLg/>
China has the most billionaires after the US, with 251, up on 213 last year. 
Germany is third with 120 and India is fourth with 84.

The UK has 50 billionaires, down from 53 in 2015. It includes seven newcomers, 
including the theatre producerCameron Mackintosh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/cameron-mackintosh> and John Bloor, the 
owner of Triumph Motorcycles. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/dec/26/triumph-power-british-manufacturing>

Nick Bryer, head of inequality at Oxfam, said the scale of the wealth enjoyed 
by the richest people highlighted the growing inequality in the world.

He said: “Market fluctuations have caused the combined wealth of the world’s 
richest 20 people to drop but their collective $827bn is still greater than the 
GDP of Turkey. The long-term trend remains one of runaway inequality that is 
slowing economic growth and undermining the fight against poverty.

“Governments need to act now – starting with a crackdown on tax havens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/richest-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-combined>
 that allow the super-rich individuals and big companies to avoid paying their 
fair share of tax and rob poor countries of billions each year that could help 
to fund schools and hospitals.”
 