
Chess has dropped almost completely from the public eye in the four decades 
since Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky waged their Cold War proxy battle in 
Reykjavik. This month’s world chess championship match inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City will do little to reverse 
that course despite the organizers’ best intentions, but early returns suggest 
the taut showdown between champion Magnus Carlsen and challenger Sergey 
Karjakin may not be as straightforward as initially suspected.

It marks the first time New York has played host to a world title match since 
1995, whenGarry Kasparov retained his title against Viswanathan Anand 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/09/12/nyregion/great-view-unsurprising-game-everyone-s-an-analyst.html>
 on the 107th-floor observatory deck in the south tower of the World Trade 
Center. For the past week Carlsen and Karjakin have faced off in a sound-proof 
studio within a sleek purpose-built arena on the third floor of the Fulton 
Market Building, only four blocks east from where the towers once stood. A 
one-way mirror allows spectators to watch the players in action, by themselves 
save for two silent arbiters, lending a terrarium-like feel to the spectacle. 
Prices range from $75 for general admission to $1,200 for VIP lounge access, 
where ticket-holders can suck down vodka cocktails and rub elbows with 
grandmasters, financiers and the odd celebrity. Woody Harrelson, an avid player 
himself,spent most of the first two days taking challenges from passers-by 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/nyregion/world-chess-championship-kicks-off-with-vip-treatment.html>
 on the outdoor balcony overlooking the East River while Carlsen and Karjakin 
faced off inside.

The best-of-12-games match began on Friday, with each contestant awarded one 
point for a win and a half-point for a draw. So far Carlsen and Karjakin have 
drawn all four games they’ve played and enter Thursday’s fifth meeting 
deadlocked at 2-all. Whoever reaches six and a half points first will be 
declared the champion, earning the winner’s share of a roughly $1.1m prize fund.

Inside the brain of the man who would be 'Blindfold King' of chess
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/03/inside-the-brain-of-the-man-who-would-be-blindfold-king-of-chess-timur-gareyev>
Carlsen, who is 25, was already regarded as the world’s best player even 
before he saw off Anand for the championship in Chennai three years ago and is 
the closest thing to a star in the sport today. He’s done ads for Porsche,
modeled for G-Star Raw 
<https://www.g-star.com/en_us/featured/collaborations/magnus-carlsen.htm> 
alongside Liv Tyler and Lily Cole and enjoys a massive presence in his native 
Norway, where NRK is broadcasting the games in prime time. He is handsome and 
media trained, perhaps overly so, giving off the air of an unthreatening 
playboy. His peak rating of 2882 is the highest in history, a point frequently 
cited by those who have called him the greatest player ever.

Karjakin, 26, earned the right to challenge for the title in March by making 
it through the Candidates Tournament in Moscow, where he defeated a series of 
higher-ranked opponents, among them Brooklyn’s Fabiano Caruana. He was born in 
Ukraine, where he became an international grandmaster at 12 years old (a record 
that still stands), but adopted Russian citizenship in 2009. He is married with 
a son, an avowed supporter of Vladimir Putin and the invasion of Crimea, and 
speaks with a stutter that surfaces more in English than his native tongue. He 
is ranked ninth in the world.

Karjakin is a player in the classical mold known for his resilience. Carlsen 
is known for his adaptability, which enables a flair for the unpredictable not 
commonly seen among top players. “[Carlsen] has practically no weaknesses,” the 
Russian said at last week’s pre-match press conference before more than one 
hundred credentialed media. 

Any expectations of the political intrigue and paranoia associated with the 
sport’s golden age were not disappointed. Israel Gelfer, the vice president of 
the world chess federation, spoke on behalf of the governing body only because 
Fide president Kirsan Ilyumzhinov was barred from entering the countrydue to 
his ties to the Syrian government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/07/leader-of-world-chess-body-kirsan-ilyumzhinov-steps-down-over-alleged-syria-links>
 and the Central Bank of Syria. At one point Carlsen fielded a question over 
the rumors that he’d enlisted Microsoft for cybersecurity consultation over 
concerns Karjakin’s team were trying to hack his preparations. No fewer than 
two questions were posed about Fischer-Spassky, never mind that Carlsen and 
Karjakin were years away from being born when the Match of the Century 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Chess_Championship_1972> took place.

This time around in New York, the chess eventually went off, no doubt to the 
organizers’ relief, and it didn’t take long for the first surprise. Carlsen, 
handling the white pieces, played the seldom-usedTrompowsky Attack 
<https://www.chess.com/openings/A45_Trompowsky_Attack> in Friday’s first game, 
a seldom-used opening he’d later confess was at least partially inspired by the 
name of America’s newly minted president-elect. The Norwegian played fast and 
it seemed like he’d outprepared his rival, but Karjakin managed to scratch back 
to force a mostly forgettable draw after 42 moves. Karjakin played the far more 
familiar Ruy Lopez in Saturday’s second game, prompting a Morphy Defense from 
Carlsen. That also ended in a draw, this time on the 33rd move.

After Sunday’s rest day the players reconvened for Game 3, a white-knuckler of 
a contest that saw Karjakin recover from a misstep on his 30th move before 
defending brilliantly as Carlsen tried to press his advantage and draw first 
blood. But after seven tense, excruciating hours, Karjakin managed to salvage a 
draw when the champion missed a move in the endgame that would have assured 
checkmate. 

Moments later, they agreed to a draw after 78 moves. That left a short 
turnaround for the following day’s game, where Karjakin recovered yet again to 
force a 94-move marathon that ended in another draw and kept the match level.

The resilience that Carlsen had praised on the eve of the match has proven the 
critical talking point as the match enters the middle act: “Sergey has studied 
the game very well, is very knowledgeable and, most of all, he’s extremely 
resilient in defense. He’s very, very good in finding resources even in 
difficult positions, finding positions he can defend. 

“For me, it’s a matter of when I get the chance, I’ll try to punch him until 
he finally knocks over.”

It seems inevitable that Carlsen’s blows will find their target, but for now 
the Russian underdog is very much in the fight.

 