
The world’s eight richest billionaires control the same wealth between them as 
the poorest half of the globe’s population, according to a charity warning of 
an ever-increasing and dangerous concentration of wealth.

In a report 
<http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/an-economy-for-the-99-its-time-to-build-a-human-economy-that-benefits-everyone-620170>
 published to coincide with the start of the week-longWorld Economic Forum in 
Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>, Switzerland, Oxfam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam> said it was “beyond grotesque” that a 
handful of rich men headed by the Microsoft founder Bill Gates are worth $426bn 
(£350bn), equivalent to the wealth of 3.6 billion people.

The development charity called for a new economic model to reverse an 
inequality trend that it said helped to explain Brexit and Donald Trump’s 
victory in the US presidential election.

Related: Robotics, Trump and Brexit turn up the heat amid the snow of Davos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/14/davos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit>

Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam> blamed rising inequality on 
aggressive wage restraint, tax dodging and the squeezing of producers by 
companies, adding that businesses were too focused on delivering ever-higher 
returns to wealthy owners and top executives.


The World Economic Forum (WEF) said last week that rising inequality and 
social polarisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/inequality-world-economy-wef-brexit-donald-trump-world-economic-forum-risk-report>
 posed two of the biggest risks to the global economy in 2017 and could result 
in the rolling back of globalisation.

Oxfam said the world’s poorest 50% owned the same in assets as the $426bn 
owned by a group headed by Gates, Amancio Ortega, the founder of the Spanish 
fashion chain Zara, andWarren Buffett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/warrenbuffett>, the renowned investor and 
chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway.

The others are Carlos Slim Helú: the Mexican telecoms tycoon and owner of 
conglomerate Grupo Carso; Jeff Bezos: the founder of Amazon; Mark Zuckerberg: 
the founder of Facebook; Larry Ellison, chief executive of US tech firm Oracle; 
and Michael Bloomberg; a former mayor of New York and founder and owner of the 
Bloomberg news and financial information service.

Last year, Oxfam said the world’s 62 richest billionaires were as wealthy as 
half the world’s population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/richest-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-combined>
. However, the number has dropped to eight in 2017 because new information 
shows that poverty in China and India is worse than previously thought, making 
the bottom 50% even worse off and widening the gap between rich and poor.

With members of the forum due to arrive on Monday in Switzerland, where guests 
will range from theChinese president Xi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/china-xi-jinping-world-economic-forum-davos-donald-trump>
, to pop star Shakira, the WEF released its own inclusive growth and 
development report in which it said median income had fallen by an average of 
2.4% between 2008 and 2013 across 26 advanced nations.

Norway, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Iceland and Denmark filled the top five 
places in the WEF’s inclusive development index, with Britain 21st and the US 
23rd. The body that organises theDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> event said rising inequality was 
not an “iron law of capitalism”, but a matter of making the right policy 
choices.

The WEF report found that 51% of the 103 countries for which data was 
available saw their inclusive development index scores decline over the past 
five years, “attesting to the legitimacy of public concern and the challenge 
facing policymakers regarding the difficulty of translating economic growth 
into broad social progress”.

Basing its research on the Forbes rich list and data provided by investment 
bank Credit Suisse, Oxfam said

the vast majority of people in the bottom half of the world’s population were 
facing a daily struggle to survive, with 70% of them living in low-income 
countries.


It was four years since the WEF had first identified inequality as a threat to 
social stability, but that the gap between rich and poor has continued to 
widen, Oxfam added.


“From Brexit to the success of Donald Trump’s presidential campaign, a 
worrying rise in racism and the widespread disillusionment with mainstream 
politics, there are increasing signs that more and more people in rich 
countries are no longer willing to tolerate the status quo,” the report said.

The charity said new information had shown that poor people in China and India 
owned even fewer assets than previously thought, making the wealth gap more 
pronounced than it thought a year ago, when it announced that62 billionaires  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/richest-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-combined>
owned the same wealth as the poorest half of the global population.

Mark Goldring, chief executive of Oxfam GB, said: “This year’s snapshot of 
inequality is clearer, more accurate and more shocking than ever before. It is 
beyond grotesque that a group of men who could easily fit in a single golf 
buggy own more than the poorest half of humanity.

Related: Eight people earn more than 3.6 billion: our economics is broken | 
Mark Goldring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/eight-people-earn-more-billion-economics-broken>

“While one in nine people on the planet will go to bed hungry tonight, a small 
handful of billionaires have so much wealth they would need several lifetimes 
to spend it. The fact that a super-rich elite are able to prosper at the 
expense of the rest of us at home and overseas shows how warped our economy has 
become.”

Mark Littlewood, director general at the Institute of Economic Affairs 
thinktank, said: “Once again Oxfam have come out with a report that demonises 
capitalism, conveniently skimming over the fact that free markets have helped 
over 100 million people rise out of poverty in the last year alone.”


The Oxfam report added that since 2015 the richest 1% has owned more wealth 
than the rest of the planet. It said that over the next 20 years, 500 people 
will hand over $2.1tn to their heirs – a sum larger than the annual GDP of 
India, a country with 1.3 billion people. Between 1988 and 2011 the incomes of 
the poorest 10% increased by just $65, while the incomes of the richest 1% grew 
by $11,800 – 182 times as much.

Oxfam called for fundamental change to ensure that economies worked for 
everyone, not just “a privileged few”.

 