
Rising numbers of millionaires in the fast-growing economies of China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> helped to push global private wealth 
to $168tn (£115tn) in 2015.

The 5.2% increase in wealth among the world’s richest individuals was driven 
largely by the Asia-Pacific area, which is expected to overtake western Europe 
as the second wealthiest region behind North America next year.

The annual snapshot measures private wealth by cash, deposits and assets such 
as shares and bonds, but excludes property.
Global private financial wealth 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-07T15:41:34/embed.html>
China recorded one of the the biggest jumps in millionaire households of all 
countries in the BCG annual wealth report, up 27% to 2.07m. Sustained economic 
growth has created a new class of wealthy individuals in the world’s second 
largest economy, includingJack Ma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/19/jack-ma-profile-alibaba-powerful-humble-billionaire>
, founder of e-commerce businessAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba>, and the country’s richest man, 
theproperty tycoon Wang Jianlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/29/chinas-richest-man-opens-wanda-world-to-rival-shanghai-disney>
. The number of millionaire households in India jumped by a quarter last year, 
to 71,876.

In a reflection of the global shift in economic power, the Asia-Pacific 
region, excludingJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, experienced 
the strongest rate of growth in private wealth, although it remained behind 
North America and western Europe in total wealth.

Asia-Pacific was the only region to post double-digit growth, up 13% at $37tn, 
withChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> “the principal growth 
motor”, BCG said, despite slowing economic growth in the region and increasing 
market volatility.

“China and India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> have strong GDP 
growth and that has fuelled a lot of wealth creation,” said Anna Zakrzewski, 
one of the report’s authors.

Despite the rise in global wealth in 2015, the growth rate slowed in all 
regions apart from Japan, where a government stimulus drive boosted asset 
values.

BCG said the growth in global private wealth hit a “speed bump” in 2015, 
slowing to 5.2% from 7.5% in 2014 as weaker financial markets and slowing 
growth weighed on most regions. However, global financial wealth is expected to 
continue to rise over the next few years, hitting $224tn in 2020.

The TUC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc>, the umbrella body for 
British trade unions, said there was still a huge gap between the wealthy and 
the poorer sections of society.

Paul Nowak, the TUC’s deputy general secretary, said: “For all the moral angst 
being expressed by business leaders and politicians about growing wealth 
inequality, very little is being done to change the status quo.

“Unless companies here and across the globe reign in executive salaries, pay 
their fair share of taxes and invest in decent jobs the yawning gap between the 
haves and have-nots will continue to grow.”
Millionaire households 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-07T15:43:28/embed.html>
The number of millionaire households around the world grew by 6% last year to 
18.5m. By 2020, millionaire households are expected to account for a 52% share 
of global wealth, up from 47% in 2015. The UK had 961,000 millionaire 
households in 2015, up 12.4%, putting it in fourth place behind the US, China 
and Japan.

Nowak said: “It says much about current Britain, that at a time when millions 
are struggling to pay their rent or get a mortgage, others are paying for 
swimming pools and cinemas to be constructed in the basements of their homes in 
Chelsea.”


At 2%, wealth growth in North America was slowest of any region in 2015, 
totalling $60tn. BCG said the slowing growth rate was largely explained by 
falling equity prices, with the Dow Jones and the S&P 500 indices closing the 
year with negative returns for the first time since 2008.

The Asia-Pacific region is expected to overtake North America in the global 
wealth rankings soon after 2020 according to BCG, although the US will remain 
the world’s richest country.

In western Europe, private wealth grew by 4.3% in 2015 to $40.8tn. It was a 
slower rate of growth than 2014, when riches increased by 6.1%. BCG said 
uncertainty about the future of the European Union and lower commodity prices 
weighed on equity and bond markets.

The consultancy group said that private wealth growth could be further 
weakened should the UK vote to leave the EU on 23 June.

“Regional wealth [in western Europe] growth is expected to continue at rates 
similar to those in recent years, although this expansion could be held back by 
the low interest-rate environment and the potential exit of Great Britain from 
the European Union,” BCG said in the report.

“Further pressure could come from economic slowdowns in countries outside the 
region, such as China, in which western European nations have high investment 
stakes.”

Share of millionaires 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-07T15:42:39/embed.html> 