
World leaders will closely watch Shinzo Abe’s meeting with Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> in New York on Thursday for 
tips on how to handle the unpredictable US president-elect.

How Trump responds to Abe – the first head of government to gain an audience 
with him – will be of equal interest, given the importanceJapan attaches to 
respectful behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/japan-pm-shinzo-abe-first-foreign-leader-meet-donald-trump>
 and correct protocol.

Japan’s prime minister pulled off this coup when he rang up to congratulate 
Trump after last week’s election, suggesting he drop by on his way to a 
regional summit in Peru.

By getting in first, Abe has trumped other traditional allies, such as 
Britain’s Theresa May. Already stereotyped as a second Margaret Thatcher to 
Trump’s Ronald Reagan, May is still waiting for a chance to meet the 
president-elect.

Manliness matters a lot, apparently, to a politician frequently labelled a 
misogynist. So Abe’s hard-headed, conservative style may appeal to Trump. The 
Japanese PM has a record of hitting it off with “strongman” leaders of the type 
Trump seems to admire. To the annoyance of the Obama administration, he has 
pursued closer ties with Vladimir Putin, increasing Japanese investment in 
Russian energy projects while pushing to resolveold territorial disputes 
<http://thediplomat.com/2016/09/kuril-islands-dispute-putin-and-abe-once-again-get-serious-about-finding-a-solution/>
.

Hillary Clinton: 'There have been times when I wanted never to leave the house 
again'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/hillary-clinton-first-public-appearance-bernie-sanders>
Abe also reportedly gets on well with Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s 
authoritarian president, and Iran’s leaders. He recently told the vociferously 
anti-American Philippines leader, Rodrigo Duterte, that he was a “famous 
figure”.

“Abe has the mysterious skill of getting along with people,” Makoto Iokibe, 
the former president of the National Defense Academy of Japan,told Mainichi 
Shimbun newspaper. 
<http://qz.com/838774/japanese-prime-minister-shinzo-abe-is-one-world-leader-who-could-tame-us-president-elect-donald-trump/>
 “If Abe can get along with Putin, perhaps he won’t find it difficult to strike 
up a cordial relationship with Trump.”

Outright flattery is a tactic likely to work with Trump who, despite his 
bluster, has zero experience at this elevated level and will be feeling his 
way. If the two men get on well, Abe may draw on his superior knowledge to 
shape or temper Trump’s views, for example on future dealings with China, 
Tokyo’s more powerful regional rival.

Abe is likely to appeal directly to common interests as a way of defusing or 
circumventing Trump’s more alarming statements. During the campaign he demanded 
Japan pay more for the upkeep of US bases. Trump also suggested, although this 
is now disputed, that Japan and South Korea consider acquiring nuclear weapons 
to deter Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s dictator,whom he termed a “maniac” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/world/asia/shinzo-abe-donald-trump.html>. 

Japanese analysts calculate Tokyo is already paying up to 75% of the total 
cost of American military deployments inJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, which include 50,000 troops and the 
US Seventh Fleet, and that these commitments uphold a shared interest in 
maintaining security across the east- and south-east Asian regions.

Japanese PM Abe to meet Trump against backdrop of security fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/japan-pm-shinzo-abe-first-foreign-leader-meet-donald-trump>
Likewise, Abe may argue, North Korea’s rogue nuclear weapons programme 
represents a threat to the entire free world, of which Trump will soon be the 
nominal leader, and is undermining global counter-proliferation efforts. Such 
an approach would appeal to Trump’s idea of himself as a budding international 
statesman.

A key test will be whether Abe can change Trump’s mind about the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership, an ambitious international trade pact. Abe is a strong supporter 
and will hope to convince Trump of its virtues despite the latter’soft-stated 
criticism of free trade treaties <https://ustr.gov/tpp/> in general. 

It will be a meeting of contrasts. Physically, the two men are strikingly 
different. At 6ft 2in (1.87 metres), Trump is five inches taller and a lot 
heavier. This will presumably gratify any assumptions Trump may hold about 
senior and junior partners in the US-Japan alliance. Yet, in psychological 
terms, the disparity could work to Abe’s advantage.

But Abe may have to bite his tongue. For such a distinguished visitor, he may 
experience an unusual degree of back-slapping informality and undiplomatic 
banter. Trump’s guest will also have to refrain from interpreting his 
transition team’s organisational confusion as deliberate rudeness.

As Abe flew to New York, aides could still not say exactly where and when the 
meeting would take place. For all anybody knows, it could bein Trump’s 
favourite steak diner. 
<http://ny.eater.com/2016/11/16/13649792/donald-trump-21-club>
 