
Scientists have discovered the world’s largest tropical peatland in the remote 
Congo swamps, estimated to store the equivalent of three year’s worth of the 
world’s total fossil fuel emissions.

Researchers mapped the Cuvette Centrale peatlands in the central Congo basin 
and found they cover 145,500 sq km – an area larger than England. The swamps 
could lock in 30bn tonnes of carbon that was previously not known to exist, 
making the region one of the most carbon-rich ecosystems on Earth.

The UK-Congolese research team, co-led by Prof Simon Lewis and Dr Greta 
Dargie, from the University of Leeds and University College London, first 
discovered the swamps five years ago. Their research, published inNature 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature21048> on Wednesday, combined three year’s 
worth of peat analysis with satellite data to estimate that the Congo basin 
peatlands store the equivalent of nearly 30% of the world’s tropical peatland 
carbon.

Lewis said: “Our research shows that the peat in the central Congo basin 
covers a colossal amount of land. It is 16 times larger than the previous 
estimate and is the single largest peatland complex found anywhere in the 
tropics.

Related: US and EU conservation funds failing to protect trees or people, 
claims report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/22/us-eu-conservation-funds-failing-to-protect-trees-people-rainforest-foundation-report>

“We have also found 30bn tonnes of carbon that nobody knew existed. The peat 
covers only 4% of the whole Congo basin, but stores the same amount of carbon 
below ground as that stored above ground in thetrees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/15/tropical-rainforests-not-absorbing-as-much-carbon-as-expected-scientists-say>
 covering the other 96%.


“These peatlands hold nearly 30% of the world’s tropical peatland carbon, 
that’s about 20 years’ of the fossil fuel emissions of the United States of 
America.”

Peat is an organic wetland soil made from part-decomposed plant debris, more 
commonly found in cool environments, such as northern Russia,Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/05/peat-bogs-burning-grouse-shooting>
 and Canada. Healthy peatlands act as carbon sinks, removing carbon from the 
atmosphere through plant growth. Further decomposition of the peat is prevented 
by its waterlogged environment, locking up carbon. Year-round waterlogging is 
needed for peat to form in the tropics.


If peatlands dry out, either through changes in land use such as drainage for 
agriculture or reduced rainfall, further decomposition resumes, releasing 
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.

Lewis said: “Peatlands are only a resource in the fight against climate change 
when are left intact, and so maintaining large stores of carbon in undisturbed 
peatlands should be a priority. Our new results show that carbon has been 
building up in the Congo basin’s peat for nearly 11,000 years.


“If the Congo basin peatland complex was to be destroyed, this would release 
billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide into our atmosphere.”

Because of their remote location, the peatlands in the Congo basin are 
relatively undisturbed, but because they are so newly discovered, they are not 
protected by conservation plans. They could face threats from drainage for 
agricultural plantations,particularly for palm oil, as is happening in Indonesia
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/16/wwf-greenpeace-april-indonesia-peat-forest-canal-pulp-paper-industry>
.

The study places the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and the Republic of 
Congo (RoC) as the second and third most important countries in the world for 
tropical peat carbon stocks. In first place is Indonesia, that contains 
tropical peatlands across the islands of Borneo, Sumatra and New Guinea. 
However, the islands have suffered damage or loss to about 94,000 km2 of 
peatland over recent decades, primarily due toforest fires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/dec/01/indonesia-forest-fires-how-the-years-worst-environmental-disaster-unfolded-interactive>
 or drainage for agricultural use.

The peat may also be vulnerable to the effects of climate change – increased 
evaporation due to rising temperatures or reduced rainfall could cause it to 
dry out and begin to release its carbon to the atmosphere.

The study’s co-author Dr Ifo Suspense, from the Université Marien Ngouabi in 
the RoC capital Brazzaville, said: “The discovery of the Cuvette Centrale 
peatlands could have a large impact on the climate and conservation policies of 
the Congo. The maintenance and protection of this peatland complex, alongside 
protecting our forests, could be central Africa’s great contribution to the 
global climate change problem.
 The new study found that the central Congo peatlands cover 145,500 square 
kilometres – an area larger than England. Photograph: Simon Lewis/University of 
Leeds 
“It is of the utmost importance that governments, conservation and scientific 
communities work with the people of the Cuvette Centrale to improve local 
livelihoods without compromising the integrity of this globally significant 
region of Earth.”

In addition to their status as a globally important region for carbon storage, 
the Congo basin swamps are refuges for endangered species including lowland 
gorillas and forest elephants.

Dr Emma Stokes, director of the central Africa program of the Wildlife 
Conservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society 
said: “This research highlights the immense significance of these swamp forests 
for the stability of our climate. However, these forests, in the geographical 
heart of Africa, are also a vital refuge for many thousands of great apes, 
elephants and other large forest mammals that are threatened by developments in 
the surrounding landscape.

“The RoC government is considering the expansion of Lac Télé community 
reserve, a move that could safeguard an additional 50,000 sq km of swamp forest 
– much of it overlying peat – from future disturbance. We strongly support this 
move and commend the RoC government for this initiative. We urge both countries 
to continue efforts to protect these habitats from industrial transformation.”

Dargie said: “With so many of the world’s tropical peatlands under threat from 
land development and the need to reduce carbon emissions to zero over the 
coming decades, it is essential that the Congo basin peatlands remain intact.”

She added: “The sheer expanse of these peatlands makes central Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> home to the world’s most extensive 
peatland complex. It is astonishing that in 2016 discoveries like this can 
still be made.”

• This article was amended on 12 January 2017. The headline on an earlier 
version referred to the peatland discovered in Congo as the world’s largest.
 