
Have you got an idea for a blog about the trials, tribulations and 
frustrations of life on the frontline of the health service? Or, would you like 
to tell us about the positives of your job? If the answer is yes, we want to 
hear from you.

We've started a new blog on the Guardian Healthcare Professionals Network, 
Views from the NHS frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
featuring first person accounts that raise awareness of an issue you face at 
work. You could bea financial manager lamenting the apathy of those in your 
profession towards cuts to the health service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/jul/30/finance-managers-speak-out-cuts-nhs>
, ora doctor who has experienced compassion-less care where staff won't even 
call you by your name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/may/21/friendly-introduction-transform-patient-experience>
.

How can you get involved? Read the pieces above and some of these published on 
the Guardian Teacher Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/the-secret-teacher> and try to work out 
what makes the best of them so successful.

These blogs are not like people's personal blogs. They are focused on a 
specific area of working life. Each has a case to make and a clear focus for 
discussion.

Once you've decided what you'd like to write about, send a pitch to 
healthcare@theguardian.com <mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>. Tell us what 
your argument will be, who will be quoted in your piece, and what links to news 
reports, surveys or blogs you might include. If we think there's a good chance 
of it being published, we will discuss your pitch with you, make further 
suggestions, and then you can go ahead and write. Remember, the piece can be 
anonymous.

Some tips for a successful blog post:

• It should be around 600 words long

• It should adopt an informal but not overly colloquial style

• Put some work into your intro – is it intriguing/engaging/different?

• Always use specific examples, perhaps based on personal experience

• Link to recent research or media coverage of the topic if appropriate

• Try to find a subject that has not been written about over and over again – 
or have something new and different to say about an old theme

• The best topics are small and specific rather than huge and wide-ranging

• Avoid standing on a soapbox and banging on about something

• Avoid jargon and acronyms

• The reader should emerge clear about what you're saying, what other people 
have said on the subject, and what they are being asked to comment on

Are you a member of our online community? Join the Healthcare Professionals 
Network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> to receive 
regular emails and exclusive offers.
 