
Darren Way was a passenger in a white van, in the process of moving house, 
when a 4x4 veered over from the other side of the A3088 just outside of Yeovil 
in December 2008. The impact of the serious car accident that followed ended 
Way’s playing career and almost his life.

Football League Weekly: Mick McCarthy swears Ipswich have reason to cheer | 
Nick Ames
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/21/ipswich-norwich-east-anglian-derby-match-report>
“I feel very fortunate to be alive,” Way says. “At one stage I did ask the 
passerby that came up to the window to help me just to tell the kids that I 
love them and that one day I would see them again. If it was not for her asking 
me my childrens’ names, then I do not think I would be here to tell the story 
today. It was a critical moment in me staying alive because it gave me 
something to fight for.”

He broke three limbs but what was left undamaged, though, was an incredible 
relationship between Way and Yeovil Town. Following the crash, he joined the 
club’s backroom staff, working as a scout and honing his skills in sports 
science, later assuming duties as the first-team coach and assistant manager 
before taking interim charge followingPaul Sturrock’s exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/01/paul-sturrock-sacked-manager-yeovil-town>
 in December.

Yeovil went on to lose seven league matches during the rest of the season as 
Way steered the club away from a League Two relegation that was virtually 
inevitable when hetook over on a permanent basis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/31/yeovil-town-appoint-darren-way-manager>
 last New Year’s Eve. “When it came to me having the opportunity to becoming 
manager, I didn’t want to let the club down knowing what they had done for me,” 
says Way, who takes his team to Everton in the EFL Cup on Tuesday. “I was proud 
keeping the club up knowing that on both parties we’ve kept this unbelievable 
relationship and that was my way of saying thank you.” The club’s motto 
“achieve by unity” feels extremely apt.

After being cut free from the van by emergency services, Way was airlifted to 
Dorchester hospital, where he was in intensive care with a list of injuries 
that included a dislocated hip and a broken kneecap. The road to recovery was 
challenging, undergoing numerous operations and learning how to walk again 
along the way. Way was bed-bound for almost eight months before eventually 
returning home with the use of an electric wheelchair that he funded with the 
help of the Professional Footballers’ Association.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fyeovil-town-manager-darren-way-fortunate-to-be-alive-everton-efl-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47f69addeaaf6abeaf33fd6b8bae80121d7ca541%2F0_226_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yeovil%20Town%20manager%20Darren%20Way%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20feel%20very%20fortunate%20to%20be%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fyeovil-town-manager-darren-way-fortunate-to-be-alive-everton-efl-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yeovil%20Town%20manager%20Darren%20Way%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20feel%20very%20fortunate%20to%20be%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fyeovil-town-manager-darren-way-fortunate-to-be-alive-everton-efl-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47f69addeaaf6abeaf33fd6b8bae80121d7ca541%2F0_226_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Darren Way broke three limbs in the 2008 collision, injuries which required 
numerous operations and ended his playing career. Photograph: Darren Way 
“When I got home I had to be careful, I had a child at the time at six months 
and one at one and a half, so you can imagine how difficult that was at the 
same time as trying to fight for my Yeovil career,” he says. “They didn’t know 
at that time how my body would react and I didn’t know. All I did know was I 
was going to give it everything I possibly could. Behind the scenes they knew 
that I was never going to play again but I just seem to have this never, never 
give up attitude and I wanted to give it everything I possibly could to get 
back playing again. In the meantime, I was trying to organise an event to get 
Manchester United down for my testimonial.”

Sir Alex Ferguson sent down a young team including Ravel Morrison, Jesse 
Lingard and Joshua King to play at Huish Park. Way entered the field as a 
last-minute substitute to rapturous applause. “It was a big thing for me,” says 
Way, who retired in 2010. “In my heart of hearts I knew I would do well to get 
back and I knew deep down inside my body was never going to allow me to get 
back.”

Ferguson’s kindness was echoed by those at Yeovil, his former club Swansea 
City and friends within the game, notably Craig Bellamy, who he played with at 
Norwich City as a schoolboy. Bellamy sent Way, a boyhood Chelsea fan, a signed 
Gianfranco Zola shirt while in hospital. “To take a gift from him at that 
important time, it was a nice moment,” Way says. “It was great to have that 
support. I’ll never forget Martin Allen called me, Gary Johnson came to my 
bedside. The Yeovil team wore shirts that year with my name on it. Garry Monk 
came to visit. It was only recently I had come back to Yeovil from Swansea and 
the Swansea supporters were fantastic, too. I think they could see the pictures 
of the accident and how serious it was.”

Swansea’s manager at the time of the accident was Roberto Martínez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roberto-martinez>, who Way considers a 
mentor and a good friend. It has proved a useful relationship, too, with 
Martínez instrumental in allowing Shane Duffy and John Lundstram to join Yeovil 
on loan from Everton three years ago as well as Liam Walsh last season. 
Yeovil’s reputation as a trusted stable for young players to develop has also 
ensured Ryan Mason, Steven Caulker and Andros Townsend have shone in Somerset 
over previous seasons.

Martínez was sacked by Everton in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/roberto-martinez-sacked-everton>
 and there is a sense of frustration the two did not reunite last season after
losing to Carlisle United on penalties in an FA Cup third-round replay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/yeovil-carlisle-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report>
 denied Yeovil a trip to Goodison Park in the next round. “I wanted it 
desperately last year but it wasn’t to be,” Way says. “I believe he’s a 
fantastic manager and he gave me an insight into the change in English 
football, how he manages and how he coaches. I’ll never forget when he took us 
to Barcelona and the next minute we’re having conversations with Johan Cruyff. 
I was 28 at the time and you do not really understand when you’re a young 
player: was it a trip? There were reasons why he did it.

“You only have to look at how Swansea kicked on under him and now he’s with 
Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/roberto-martinez-appointed-belgium-manager-everton>
. He’s somebody I’ve always looked up to and a very good manager in the way he 
deals with situations. I have no doubt in my mind he’ll be a successful 
manager. Every manager is going to go through bad times and, unfortunately, it 
did not work out at Everton.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fyeovil-town-manager-darren-way-fortunate-to-be-alive-everton-efl-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b84d74f8a50a35892a55a152e81d4b921ba7e6d%2F0_214_3940_2365%2F3940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yeovil%20Town%20manager%20Darren%20Way%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20feel%20very%20fortunate%20to%20be%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fyeovil-town-manager-darren-way-fortunate-to-be-alive-everton-efl-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yeovil%20Town%20manager%20Darren%20Way%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20feel%20very%20fortunate%20to%20be%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fyeovil-town-manager-darren-way-fortunate-to-be-alive-everton-efl-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b84d74f8a50a35892a55a152e81d4b921ba7e6d%2F0_214_3940_2365%2F3940.jpg>
 Darren Way, left, then part of Yeovil’s coaching team, celebrates making the 
2013 League One play-off final. Photograph: David Davies/PA Wire/Press 
Association Images 
Yeovil are your archetypal minnows. Financially, the club is run on fumes. On 
the day of this interview, Tuesday’s opponents, Everton,completed the signing 
of Yannick Bolasie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/15/yannick-bolasie-signs-everton-crystal-palace>
 for about £28m andsold John Stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-city-complete-signing-of-john-stones-from-everton>
 for almost £20m more. Most players arrive at Yeovil with a point to prove: the 
defender Bevis Mugabi signed this summer from Southampton, Otis Khan from 
Barnsley and Tom Eaves from Bolton Wanderers. For Yeovil, it was not unusual 
for the match-day squad to comprise only six substitutes from a possible seven 
last season.

“We had one player the other day who’s never even played extra time and that 
shows you perhaps the experience is not there,” Way says. “I’ve said to the 
players: if you’re unknown, you need to make sure you are known and by the end 
of the season you need to have a good CV.

“You can outwork a team and that’s one thing that money can’t buy. I’ve got to 
make sure the players relish the environment they’re going to. They have to 
show no fear, enjoy the moment because they’ve worked hard for this.”
 