
Late goals from Kazenga LuaLua and Jesse Lingard confirmed Yeovil's relegation 
from theChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> and 
fired Brighton back into the play-off places.

LuaLua struck with 12 minutes left moments after coming on as a substitute 
before Lingard confirmed the victory in stoppage time to send Yeovil back to 
League One after one season.

The Glovers had arrived on the south coast already resigned to their fate, 
needing to win their remaining two games, hope everyone else around them lost 
theirs, and engineer a 13-goal swing. But the Somerset side, who continue to 
punch above their weight while revelling in the tag Little Old Yeovil, were 
determined not to go away quietly and a battling display nearly ruined 
Brighton's chances of exiting the Championship in the opposite direction. They 
almost stunned the hosts after a quarter of an hour when Rub√©n Palazuelos 
crashed a superb effort from 25 yards against the crossbar.

The Seagulls were able to welcome Andrea Orlandi back into their side after 
two months on the sidelines, but the former Swansea winger looked a little 
rusty as he missed two gilt-edged chances in the space of two minutes. First 
Lingard outstripped the Yeovil defence and crossed towards Leonardo Ulloa, but 
when the ball came back to Orlandi 12 yards out he blazed wide. Moments later 
Will Buckley chipped the ball into the area where Orlandi dived to meet it in 
front of goal, but again the Spaniard was off target.

Brighton survived a scare in the 35th minute when keeper Tomasz Kuszczak came 
out to punch Jamie McAllister's free-kick from the halfway line, and completely 
missed it, but Lewis Dunk had got back on the line to prevent a bizarre goal.

Albion piled forward throughout the second half but still their finishing was 
wayward. Ulloa missed two headers in quick succession and Orlandi's attempted 
backheel in front of goal ended with the ball flying through his legs.

Brighton desperately needed a lucky break and they got it in the 79th minute 
when LuaLua aimed for Ulloa in the penalty area. Once again the ball missed its 
intended target, but this time with the perfect outcome for Brighton as Marek 
Stech was fooled by Ulloa's out-stretched leg and the ball nestled in the 
corner.

Lingard doubled the lead, perhaps harshly on Yeovil, when he tucked away Solly 
March's pull-back moments before the end.

Brighton are now in the final play-off spot, two points above Reading, who 
play Doncaster on Saturday, but having played a game more.
 