
What a great year 2016 was. It was a tremendous year, full of hope. Honestly, 
this year made me glad to be alive. Landmark. Vintage. I for one will look back 
on 2016 with fondness. It was a Good Year. That would be my “hot take” if I 
could ever use that phrase with any conviction, but I can’t because I always 
visualise someone lobbing me a baked potato.

I know, the liberal consensus is that 2016 was a total shitastrophe. A year 
somehow jinxed by karmic voodoo, despite the contradictory liberal consensus 
that no supernatural agency must ever be acknowledged, as in Black Mirror. And 
now there’s a rush to get it over with, to bosh the Christmas tree up and then 
down again, quick Auld Lang Syne, new calendar, fresh start.

Yes, I agree. 2016 was a chronicle of fear and misery, a saga of hate and 
tragedy. Full and empty at the same time. Our world felt fragile, doomed, a 
paper lantern sent aloft in flames to perish in the wind.Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> & Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, which should have been a 
Soho bruncherie for wankers, turned out to be a political victory for wankers 
instead. Comrades, I too cried listening toBowie songs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y-JqH1M4Ya8> and Prince mixes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=icontEECkVk>. I too speed-mourned everyone (
bye Diski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/28/author-jenny-diski-cancer-dies>, 
byeShandling 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/garry-shandling-dead-larry-sanders-show-show-1201738601/>
,bye Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-dies-aged-62-comedian>
,bye Zaha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/star-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65>
,bye Cohen 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/leonard-cohen-dead-at-82-w449792>, bye 
bye everybody) just managing, along with the rest of the world, to reconfigure 
my disbelief in time for the next mortal blow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2526c7375b90f77b2b4ac9124a010eef735201b%2F749_0_2139_2511%2F2139.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I'd%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2526c7375b90f77b2b4ac9124a010eef735201b%2F749_0_2139_2511%2F2139.jpg>
 ‘Yes, I agree, 2016 was a chronicle of fear and misery’ ... death of Bowie. 
Photograph: Niklas Halle’n/Getty Images 
Yeah, death’s been relentless this year. With one quite important exception. 
For me, anyway. Because 10 years ago, in answer to the obvious question, the 
oncologist told me flatly and honestly: “Between three months and 10 years”. 
And in a flash, in that negative Kodak moment, my life was instantly 
recalibrated. Worst case scenario: dead by Christmas 2006. Best case scenario: 
still alive in 2016.

I was 53. My cancer had been sudden and aggressive. To complicate matters, it 
then triggered mass hysteria among my antibodies. Rather than address the 
tumour, the useless panicking minion antibody dickheads went nuts and started 
eating my nervous system, creating genuinely impressive levels of pain and 
putting me in a wheelchair. 2006 was rubbish. Although to take a balanced view, 
I’m sure in the world outside Lancaster Royal Infirmary people were clinking 
glasses, laughing like donkeys and agreeing that 2006 was a really bloody 
tremendous year.

At that point though, blitzed on morphine, a whole decade of borrowed time 
seemed a preposterous stretch of life. I could barely see past breakfast. To 
misquote millionaire art provider Damien Hirst, I experienced the physical 
impossibility of life in the mind of someone dying. How impossibly glamorous 
and futuristic “2016” sounded. Not that I was going to be around, probably, but 
imagine what humanity would achieve in a decade. A cure for cancer, obviously, 
that’s basic. How difficult could it be?Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> is essentially a script error. 
Surely by 2016 there would be some sort of genomic cellular reboot serum that 
just, you know, restored your factory settings or whatever? Alas, no. A 
code-correcting cancer jab remains on the world’s to-do list, along with sky 
trams and a Smiths reunion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4304f2b73ebe550170b124bcc17d8d077054e5cd%2F411_155_2672_1603%2F2672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I'd%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4304f2b73ebe550170b124bcc17d8d077054e5cd%2F411_155_2672_1603%2F2672.jpg>
 Splashing time ... Ian Martin plays with his grandson Monty 
But here I am, against the odds, with no indication that I’m going anywhere 
soon and I’ll tell you what, it’s just the strangest thing to contemplate an 
entire bonus decade. To look back through a weird four-dimensional kaleidoscope 
and try to imagine all that time unlived. To imagine not having been here. The 
grandchildren unknown. The gigs untaken, the people unmet, the crap telly 
unwatched with my missus. I suppose in a parallel universe I’mnot here with 
this sunset, or this armagnac. I mean, I know we all wonder at the world 
continuing without us when we die, but I’m pretty much permanently amazed at it 
continuing while I live. Oh, I’ve collected a few more biological failures on 
the way. My lungs are now reduced to those birthday balloons you find under the 
sofa months later. My pillboxes sound like maracas. Yet here I am still, 
dazzled and grateful, with occasional existential flashes of being a 
supernatural presence in my own life. Ghost Grandpa, ghostwriting this. I no 
longer try to guess how long I’ve got. And I like living with this vagueness. 
“Vague” and “hopeful” sort of go together, somehow.

As strange as it was in 2006 to imagine what this “best scenario – 2016” might 
look like, I’ve tried looking the other way. Bloody hell, the world as it was 
10 years ago is very much a foreign country. Tony Blair was still prime 
minister. Remember him? Trim guy, tanned, guilty face stretched over his skull, 
as if by trampoline springs? Tory leader: David Cameron. Remember him? Flushed, 
succulent, permanent look of bafflement as if someone had just asked him for 
some “spare change”.Menzies Campbell 
<http://www.libdems.org.uk/menzies_campbell> was the new leader of the Lib 
Dems. Remember him? Only joking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f2dd8840c4b4178f8215b6a8fe315813926da16%2F1470_0_1742_2452%2F1742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I'd%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f2dd8840c4b4178f8215b6a8fe315813926da16%2F1470_0_1742_2452%2F1742.jpg>
 Jinxed year ... Trump wins. Photograph: George Frey/Getty Images 
The UK economy then was purring like a milkman’s cat. We were all like, come 
on, that whole boom and bust thing’s as dead as new jack swing, mate. Come on, 
it’s the 80s all over again but this time it’ll never stop, sustainable growth 
mate, don’t worry, the poor will catch up eventually. Come on, take a chill 
pill, Labour are in charge, how bad can it be, look at us all, we’re adorable 
andhilarious, having it large with our sex and drugs and Sugababes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oJDGcxAf9D8>, out of the way, we’re gonna do a 
massive conga in the Titanic ballroom! And then the light started to fade as we 
headed at full speed into the silent foggy ice banks of Newfoundland.

It really was a golden summer in 2006 though, one of those mythical summers 
people like to remember happening before catastrophes. July had a 
recordbreaking heatwave. Memorable month for me too, as it turned out. My 
antigen numbers had come in, spectacularly high. But an inflexible NHS system 
had already decided there was no way they could bring forward the biopsy, set 
for three months’ time. A neat solution as by then I’d be, if not dead, 
unsaveable. So in July 2006, for the first and only time in my life, and 
following the clever advice of Barbara on reception at my GP’s surgery, I paid 
for a private consultation with my NHS oncologist, at the local private 
hospital where he worked part-time. He was then able to pick up the phone from 
his private consultant’s office and book me an NHS biopsy, with the public 
sector version ofhim, in two days’ time. Then at that biopsy his NHS persona 
acknowledged the seriousness of the situation flagged up by his private sector 
self and thankfully “they” immediately started me on the treatment that’s kept 
me alive ever since.

This blurring of who does what in the NHS – this is how the lung-shadow of 
privatisation has spread in the last 10 years. Lobbyists and politicians push 
for lucrative contracting-out for companies and their shareholders but call it 
improved customer service, and savings. Those of us in the #WeLoveTheNHS club 
are forced to circle the wagons, when it clearly needs not brittle defence but 
proper reform. And those of us born in the infancy of the NHS, who have paid in 
their whole lives for the treatment they receive, now discover they’re part of 
an “overspend”. Before the Tory cuts – £20bn so far and another £22bn by 2020 – 
the NHS was “in surplus”. Why in the name of Beveridge’s bollocks are we even 
talking about overspending and not underfunding? Because we’re idiots, that’s 
why.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff39d743b0a561012d10ae3fc945e7ed6ca6ecf90%2F0_58_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I'd%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff39d743b0a561012d10ae3fc945e7ed6ca6ecf90%2F0_58_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
 Martin enjoys the Emmys in 2014. Photograph: Sean Gray 
And in the near future we will bugger an ankle or a hip and we will have been 
waiting for an X-ray result for 10 days, and we will concede that in the scheme 
of things it’s not a priority, the NHS is stretched, even though the hospitalis 
tantalisingly only 300 yards from the doctor’s. And we will ring up again and a 
customer service representative will ask us if we’ve considered a free trial of 
NHS Prime, which would definitely get us the result by teatime. And we will say 
yes, and it’ll be game, set and match to Richard Branson, who’s larking about 
for the photographers in his white coat and stethoscope, chucking a hapless 
intern dressed as a Carry On nurse into his fucking swimming pool.

Talking of viral narcissists, I’ll tell you what else happened in 2006: 
Twitter was launched <https://about.twitter.com/company/press/milestones>. 
Admittedly it would be a while before it metastasised into the shrieking game 
of off-ground touch we know today. Who then could have foreseen the baleful 
effect of social media on the very notion of “truth”? A decade ago it was 
possible, just, to remember a world without the internet. Now it is difficult 
even to remember a time before Facebook. Nobody could have predicted that 
social media would occupy the cockpit of online journalism and then force it 
into aGermanwings descent <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-32604552>. 
Now we scroll on our “devices” through the news wreckage, an aggregated jumble 
of Yesterday On Twitter, desperately searching for signs of surviving listicled 
paptent, discovering whose turn it is today to be shamed into an apology and 
resignation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12741d59b56c207a87eb06fd004d5e5be22168e3%2F0_56_4247_2549%2F4247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I'd%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12741d59b56c207a87eb06fd004d5e5be22168e3%2F0_56_4247_2549%2F4247.jpg>
 ‘I too watched speechless as Brexit unfolded, a Whitehall farce’ ... vote 
leave leaders Michael Gove and Boris Johnson drumming up support in 
Stratford-upon-Avon. Photograph: Andrew Parsons/Getty Images 
Even the “real news” this year hasn’t made much sense. I too watched 
speechless as Brexit unfolded.A Whitehall farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2016/oct/24/brexit-text-messages-boris-gove-leadsom-war-by-phone>
, with Cameron and Johnson and Gove in and out of the wardrobe, their trousers 
round their ankles, union jack underwear barely containing their political 
ambitions. I gasped too as the tumbling tragi-comedy turned to cartoon horror 
and suddenly the prime minister was a Matt Groening sketch of Mr Burns’ evil 
niece. We all wondered where furtive leader of the oppositionJack Hargreaves 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZZ-ByPS71M> had disappeared to. We held our 
breath as, tiptoe-quiet, BBC’sAutumnwatch 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0079t1p> tracked him to a bramblecovered 
allotment shed in north London where, God bless him, he was quietly sharing 
gardening tips on Mumsnet.

But however much I railed against this weird world, where post-truth politics 
was primped and fluffed by post-truth tabloids, at least I was still here to 
complain. I was glad to be alive to watch England turn into some grim am-dram 
production of The Crucible. And look, I know everyone under 30 assumes all old 
people are paranoid racists (sorry “nillennials”, generational stereotyping is 
a twoway street) but for a lot of boomers Brexit Britain wasn’t just scary, it 
was baffling. I can’t have been the only old git to have been completely thrown 
by the anti-Polish stuff, for instance. As schoolchildren in the 50s we were 
taught about the bravery of the Polish people. Murdered by Nazis. Fighting 
alongside us in the Battle of Britain. Our staunchest, bravest allies. Now
Polish people were being beaten up by English kids? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/death-arkadiusz-jozwik-post-referendum-racism-xenophobes-brexit-vote>
 Were English kids now the Nazis? None of it made any sense, which was good 
news for the internet because internet “news” is whatever its brainless oxen 
algorithms say it is. As I write this, there is a “news feed” on my laptop and 
into the feeding trough has been tipped a story on the repeat bombing of two 
hospitals in Aleppo followed by another on the eyebrow-grooming industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33178ee814152a60de4ab48be4de7884eea6de5f%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I'd%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33178ee814152a60de4ab48be4de7884eea6de5f%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 The fight goes on ... Martin at Labour conference 
2016 seemed to be half the time about small stuff – little celebrity spirals 
of “virtue signalling” and “self-care” and “identity politics”– and half the 
time about massive stuff, like entire continents sloughing off the skin of 
liberal democracy. And is something happening at a supra-biological level? 
Every referendum and election since the Scottish IndyRef seems to result in a 
more or less even 50-50 split. Perhaps there’s some continuous next-level 
humanity cell division under way. It’s easy to see how a devolved England could 
split into Greater London and The Rest. Then, the chaff disarded as usual, 
London would split into north and south, then east and west, then into smaller 
and smaller bubbles until London’s just a vast, unfathomable sociological 
froth. Oh God, has it happened already?

I know things went dark and darker for a lot of people this year and I 
hesitate to strike a note of optimism because being alive is a privilege and 
believe me I have checked and double-checked it. But come on. Still here after 
living a bonus decade. Surely that confers some sort of temporary suspension of 
the trembling, fist-clenching “you need to” and “you don’t get to” bullshit we 
are obliged to observe these days. So let’s have a knees-up, see 2016 out with 
love in our hearts. And if we’re here the same time next year, well. What a 
tremendous privilege that will be. Here’s to 2017.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97ab911caff44ba7ef574d3707ed47054e3d5cdd%2F0_182_3840_4959%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I'd%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20jinxed%20by%20karmic%20voodoo%20but%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20live%20to%20see%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdiagnosed-cancer-dead-by-christmas-karmic-voodoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97ab911caff44ba7ef574d3707ed47054e3d5cdd%2F0_182_3840_4959%2F3840.jpg>
 ‘Let’s have a knees-up, see 2016 out with love in our hearts’ ... Ian Martin. 
Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Epilogue: friendly distant cousins

There’s a story from 10 years ago I’d like to share. Because it shows – I 
think – that as long as we hold on to our humanity, miracles can happen. After 
the clumsy melodrama of cancer, my frankly improbable Act Two was unfolding in 
a neurology ward, where I’d been diagnosed withGuillain-Barré Syndrome 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Guillain-Barre-syndrome/Pages/Introduction.aspx>. 
My twattish immune system was destroying my gormless nervous system. Legs gone, 
shuffling around on a Zimmer frame. Astonished to hear the consultant on his 
ward round tell a posse of student doctors that I would never walk again. Still 
in shock when a junior doctor called Chris Murphy came back a little later and 
told me they would offer me something called IVIG – intravenous immunoglobulin.

It was a last throw and they wouldn’t be that enthusiastic. It probably 
wouldn’t work. Also, it cost six grand a bag and I’d need one a day for at 
least a week. Anyway, he urged me to take it. So I did. And 10 days after 
starting the treatment – exactly like Uma Thurman in Kill Bill – I could wiggle 
a toe, then lift a foot an inch off the bed, then walk with sticks, then walk 
out of hospital. But here’s the thing. Nobody seems to know howIVIG 
<http://www.webmd.com/a-to-z-guides/immunoglobulin-therapy#1> works. It’s just 
a gloop of humanity, each bag containing the plasma of thousands of donors from 
all over the world. What doctors think might happen is that somewhere in this 
human plasmic squidge there may be one or two sets of antibodiesjust like yours.

Friendly distant cousins. And they put their arms around your wayward, 
thick-as-shit antibodies and love them. Counsel them. These total strangers’ 
antibodies, from who knows where, say to your dickhead antibodies: “Mate, 
seriously. Stop chewing those nerves. I know you’re angry but honestly, it’s 
not helping. There’s actual cancer due south of here, let’s have a go at that 
instead. Come on, take my hand …” And so your stupid antibodies finally leave 
your nerves alone, thanks to the incredible generosity of an anonymous donor in 
Sri Lanka or Russia or Italy or Nigeria. Miracles are marvellous things that 
can’t be explained. And if that’s not a miracle I don’t know what is. We are 
all marvellous, really.
 