
The Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/yorkshire> chief executive, 
Mark Arthur, has warned the delayed redevelopment of Headingley could mean the 
county loses international cricket for four years and will be excluded from the 
2019 World Cup in England.

Temba Bavuma’s clock-stopping brilliance underlines art of fielding | The Spin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/temba-bavumas-clock-stopping-brilliance-underlines-art-of-fielding>
Leeds Rhinos <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leedsrhinos> share use of the 
main stand with Yorkshire and the rugby league club announced on Wednesday the 
planned £38m upgrade, expected to begin in January, was being put back owing to 
problems with planning permission.

For the Rhinos that means the stand will be back in operation for the coming 
season but Yorkshire fear a more profound impact on their future.

New and improved facilities were key to the county’s hopes of winning a 
favourable allocation when the 2020-2024 England fixtures are awarded next year 
and without them Arthur believes the ground could be edged out entirely.

“The 2020-2024 major matches will be allocated in the summer of 2017, 
therefore this delay could mean Headingley will no longer be considered fit for 
Test match cricket – or to host any World Cup matches in 2019,” he said.

“Not only does this delay impact the club’s ability to stage internationals, 
it would also have profound consequences to both Yorkshire’s and Leeds Rhinos’ 
valuable and long-standing work within the wider community. To continue the 
vast amount of work within the Leeds area, the club is dependent on retaining 
international cricket.”

The county has an existing staging agreement with the England and Wales Cricket
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board guaranteeing one Test a year 
up to 2019, when they will host an Ashes match for the first time since 2009.

Arthur has previously warned that without top-class facilities and strong 
ticket sales - two areas that Headingley has struggled with in recent times - 
Yorkshire could “fall off the cliff face” of international cricket.

The Rhinos chief executive, Gary Hetherington, expressed regret at the news. 
“We are deeply disappointed we have been unable to deliver the project on 
time,” he said. “The funding package for the whole stadium development involves 
investment from ourselves and Yorkshire CCC, and support from Leeds City 
Council and other public bodies.

“Naturally a project of this magnitude has unique challenges and unfortunately 
we have not been able to conclude some of those to allow us to begin work on 
the South Stand. We appreciate the support from the council to date but we 
recognise the distinction and integrity of the planning process.

“We are desperately disappointed to be making this announcement but remain 
hopeful the scheme will go ahead as planned in the near future.”

Capacity at the rugby stadium was due to drop from 20,000 to 13,500 for the 
coming season but the South Stand will now be open when rugby league begins in 
February, with supporters being given the chance to relocate their season 
passes.

“We apologise for the inconvenience and our customer experience team will be 
in touch with each member to review their options for next season,” 
Hetherington said.
 