 When it comes to the important issues, I’m pretty sure my opinions are just 
right. Of course I am: if I thought they were wrong, I’d trade them in for some 
different ones. But in reality, there’s plenty of evidence to suggest that 
we’re all at least somewhat subject to bias – that my support for stricter gun 
control laws here in the US, for example, is partly based on wanting to support 
my team. Tell Republicans that some imaginary policy is a Republican one, as 
the psychologist Geoffrey Cohendid in 2003 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14599246>, and they’re much more likely to 
support it, even if it runs counter to Republican values. But ask them why they 
support it, and they’ll deny that party affiliation played a role. (Cohen found 
something similar for Democrats. Maybe I mentioned Republicans more prominently 
because I’m biased?)

Surely, though, if you tell people you’re giving them biased information – if 
you specifically draw their attention to the risk of being led astray by bias – 
they’ll begin to question their own objectivity? Nope: even then, they’ll 
insist they’re reaching an unbiased conclusion, if anew paper 
<http://psp.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/02/20/0146167214523476.abstract> by 
five Princeton researchers (which I foundvia Tom Jacobs at Pacific Standard 
<http://www.psmag.com/navigation/health-and-behavior/biased-blindness-prejudice-judgment-75479/>
) is anything to go by.

Emily Pronin and her colleagues asked Princeton students, and other people 
recruited online, to look at 80 paintings, and to give each a score from 1 to 
10 based on their artistic merit. Half of the subjects weren’t told the 
artists’ identities. The other half were allowed to see a name, purportedly 
that of the painter of each picture. In fact, those names were a mixture of 
famous artists and names pulled from the phone book. As you’d predict, those 
who saw the names were biased in favour of famous artists. But even though they 
acknowledged the risk of bias, when asked to assess their own objectivity, they 
didn’t view their judgments as any more biased as a result.

Even when the risk of bias was explicitly pointed out to them, people remained 
confident that they weren’t susceptible to it; indeed, they actually rated 
their performance as more objective than they’d predicted it would be at the 
start of the test. “Even when people acknowledge that what they are about to do 
is biased,” the researchers write, “they still are inclined to see their 
resulting decisions as objective.”

This is more evidence for the “bias blind spot”, a term coined by Pronin which 
refers to the head-spinning fact that we have a cognitive bias to the effect 
that we’re uniquely immune to cognitive biases. Take the famous
better-than-average effect <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illusory_superiority>, 
or Lake Wobegon effect, whereby the majority of people think they’re above 
average on any number of measures – their driving skills, their popularity, the 
quality of their relationship – when clearly they can’t all be right. It turns 
out the biasalso applies to bias 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022103106000916>. In other 
words, we’re convinced that we’re better than most at not falling victim to 
bias. We seem to imagine we’re transparent to ourselves: that when we turn our 
attention within, we can clearly see all the factors influencing our decisions. 
The study participants “used a strategy that they thought was biased,” the 
researchers note, “and thus they probably expected to feel some bias when using 
it. The absence of that feeling may have made them more confident in their 
objectivity.”

This helps explain, for example, why it’s often better for companies to hire 
people, or colleges to admit students, using objective checklists, rather than
interviews that rely on gut feelings. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jan/18/can-you-trust-gut-instinct-oliver-burkeman>
 As Jacobs notes, it’s also why some orchestras ask musicians to audition from 
behind screens, so that only their music can be judged. It’s no good relying on 
the judges’ sincere confidence that they’d never let sexism or other biases get 
in the way. They may really believe it – but they’re probably wrong. Bias 
spares nobody. Except me, of course. 