
Click to enlarge 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/10/8/1444325309133/Jimmy-Floyd-Hasselbaink-Y-001.jpg?w=1065&q=85&auto=format&sharp=10&s=d0d110b5c70b8214195e554cd7d3380d>
, and debate the strip below the line.

Keith Hackett's verdict

1) You have to intervene here, you can't allow this to happen. The guidance is 
clear on this: equipment of this type – cameras, TV monitors etc – cannot be 
used in the technical area. Authorities can now impose retrospective 
punishments based on video evidence, as happened to Diego Costa recently, but 
that does not mean teams can start filming each other from the dugout just in 
case. After the match, report what happened to the FA. Thanks to Christian 
Jackson.
2) In my long career I was hit by the ball only once. Sadly, in my case, the 
ball deflected off me into the path of the No9, who blasted it into the net – 
and I had to award the goal. In this scenario, too, the goal stands. Thank your 
assistant for taking responsibility and not immediately stopping the game, and 
confirm with him that the goal was valid. After that, though, you really need 
to relinquish your duties – it's not safe to continue after being knocked out. 
Arrange for a colleague to step in. Professor Robert W. Zoellner wins the shirt.
3) You have no idea what the substance is, and you have no way of finding out. 
This player may be diabetic, so the injection may be perfectly legitimate. All 
you can do is have a word, make sure the syringe is safely disposed of, then 
allow him to enter the game as normal. Mention it in your post-match report. 
Thanks to Sheikh Sal.
 You are the Ref book Photograph: Observer 
Special offer

Get two books from the You are the Ref series for the special price of £10. 
Visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=%22you+are+the+ref%22&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 or call 0330 333 6846.Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 Modern football shirt Photograph: Observer 
Competition: win a T-shirt of your choice

For a chance to win a Philosophy Football T-shirt of your choice from the 
Guardian sport range 
<http://entertainment.guardianoffers.co.uk/search/results/?search=philosophy+football+shirt&utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=link&utm_campaign=YATR>
 send us your questions for You are the Ref toyou.are.the.ref@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:you.are.the.ref@observer.co.uk>. The best scenario used in each new 
strip wins a T-shirt; Terms apply. For more on You are the Ref's history,click 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/aug/07/football.ref?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 