
Brexit may mean Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/the-guardian-view-on-theresa-may-shifting-view-of-what-brexit-means>
 to Theresa May, but the Oxford English Dictionary has come to the aid of those 
who wish for a less opaque definition. The word is among 1,500 new words added 
to the dictionary this week.

OED editors steered clear of political controversy by defining the process of 
Brexit rather than its consequences or implementation. The definition reads: 
“The (proposed)withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, and the political process 
associated with it. Sometimes used specifically with reference to the 
referendum held in the UK on 23 June 2016, in which a majority of voters 
favoured withdrawal from the EU.”

Fiona McPherson, senior editor on the OED, told the Guardian the word had been 
one of the fastest to move from coinage to definition and listing. “It is very 
unusual for a word to take hold of the language so quickly,” she said. The 
word, she added, had filled “an empty space in our language, and the growing 
importance of the phenomenon it described”.

She added: “It has gone from a new word a couple of years ago to being on the 
front pages of foreign language newspapers used, which shows it is now a global 
word, not just one used here.”

As Grexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/greece-austerity-grexit-drachma> 
– Greece’s hypothetical exit from the EU – has also been added to the OED this 
month, it is expected that should momentum grow for EU membership referendums 
elsewhere Nexit (Netherlands), Frexit (France) and Oexit (Austria) will follow 
Brexit into the dictionary.

The influence of social media is visible in many of the new coinages. 
YouTubers, defined as “frequent user of the video-sharing website YouTube, 
especiallysomeone who produces and appears in videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/04/marina-joyce-internet-hysteria-witch-hunts-cyberspace>
 on the site” is included in the dictionary for the first time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbrexit-youtuber-bama-new-words-oxford-english-dictionary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9d6821ca2765319d27610a1475ffe94028fbc96%2F0_0_854_481%2F854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=YouTuber%2C%20Bama%20and%20Brexit%20among%20new%20words%20in%20Oxford%20English%20Dictionary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbrexit-youtuber-bama-new-words-oxford-english-dictionary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=YouTuber%2C%20Bama%20and%20Brexit%20among%20new%20words%20in%20Oxford%20English%20Dictionary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbrexit-youtuber-bama-new-words-oxford-english-dictionary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9d6821ca2765319d27610a1475ffe94028fbc96%2F0_0_854_481%2F854.jpg>
 YouTuber Marina Joyce. Photograph: YouTube/Marina Joyce 
Anyone who stands up to internet trolls can now legitimately call themselves 
an upstander – “a person who speaks or acts in support of a cause, especially 
one who intervenes on behalf a person being attacked or bullied”.

A number of newly listed words and phrases have migrated from pop music, 
notably “get your freak on”: defined as “US slang (chiefly in African-American 
usage) 1) to engage in sexual activity, especially of an unconventional or 
uninhibited nature. 2) To dance, esp. in an uninhibited, wild, or exuberant 
fashion”. The phrase gained prominence in 2001 as the title of aMissy Elliott 
song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FPoKiGQzbSQ>.

Singer Beyoncé had a hand in the listing of Bama, originally a 1920s 
abbreviation of the US state of Alabama. It evolved to become slang for a 
person from the rural American south, but was reclaimed this year by the singer 
inFormation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/07/hear-beyonces-surprise-new-single-formation>
, a track from her latest album Lemonade. The lyric says: “My daddy Alabama / 
Momma Louisiana / You mix that negro with that Creole / make a Texas Bama.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbrexit-youtuber-bama-new-words-oxford-english-dictionary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ea334ff2a8500ca60ecdaefbbcad36a94db77aa%2F188_72_2488_1494%2F2488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=YouTuber%2C%20Bama%20and%20Brexit%20among%20new%20words%20in%20Oxford%20English%20Dictionary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbrexit-youtuber-bama-new-words-oxford-english-dictionary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=YouTuber%2C%20Bama%20and%20Brexit%20among%20new%20words%20in%20Oxford%20English%20Dictionary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbrexit-youtuber-bama-new-words-oxford-english-dictionary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ea334ff2a8500ca60ecdaefbbcad36a94db77aa%2F188_72_2488_1494%2F2488.jpg>
 She’s a Texas Bama … Beyoncé. Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP 
Words are admitted to the OED, McPherson said, according to their usage. “Once 
a word goes in, it doesn’t come out. We have to have examples of it having 
passed into common usage or within a specialist area.” Among the latest 
technical terms to have been added are examples of surfer lingo for wave types 
and surfing techniques.

As usual, a raft of management speak makes it into the dictionary, led by 
out-strategise: “a verb by to outmanoeuvre (an opponent, rival, etc.); to outdo 
in strategising”.

Though many additions to the 829,000 words in the dictionary arise from young 
people and social media, others reflect the ageing population. Leading the way 
for Baby Boomers is glam-ma: a glamorous grandmother, especially one who is 
comparatively young or fashion-conscious.
 