
As the final whistle blew at The Hawthorns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/17/west-brom-v-manchester-united-premier-league-live>
, Zlatan Ibrahimovic found himself standing in the centre circle with the ball 
in his hands. Ultimately, he was one goal shy of being allowed to keep it but 
given how central the player had been to the outcome of proceedings, it was an 
apt sight on a dark December evening.

Manchester United ease past West Brom thanks to Zlatan Ibrahimovic double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/west-bromwich-albion-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
The Swede’s double secured a deserved fourth successive victory for Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. It also 
extended his tally to 16 goals in 25 appearances and 10 in his past nine. An 
excellent return made more notable by that fact that by still being on the 
pitch when the referee, Anthony Taylor, called time, Ibrahimovic had maintained 
his run of completing every Premier League match for which he has been 
available since joining United. Sixteen starts, 16 finishes, 1,440-plus minutes 
played.

That is not what many predicted when Ibrahimovic arrived on these shores in 
July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/manchester-united-confirm-signing-of-zlatan-ibrahimovic-one-year-contract>
 amid a blaze of hype. United’s social media team did not hold back with the 
#ZlatanTime hashtag and turned the whole thing up to 11 by including one in a 
tweet extolling how the striker had “broken #mufc power records in tests during 
his medical <https://twitter.com/ManUtd/status/749203663814557696>”. Yet the 
sense from outside was that Ibrahimovic, while undeniably talented, was too old 
for the challenge ahead. A free transfer but the wrong signing for United.

Close to the halfway stage of the season, however, and the 35-year-old is 
going strong. José Mourinho has described him as “phenomenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/manchester-united-zlatan-ibrahimovic-undroppable>
 ” and from the player himself has come, in his own inimitable style, the 
insistence that he has even more to offer. “The older I get, the better I get, 
like red wine,” he said. “You like red wine? I am a perfect example of that. 
I’m settling in and I feel happy, I feel good. Even if I’m 35, in my mind I’m 
20. I think I could play at 50.”

It is safe to say that if Ibrahimovic is still kicking a ball around in 2031 
it will not be for United, but for the time being there is no doubting his 
value to the side. The former Paris Saint‑Germain striker has brought 
experience, muscle, craft and ruthlessness to the point of their attack, which 
was there to see in the goals he securedin the 2-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/west-bromwich-albion-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 at West Bromwich Albion. Ibrahimovic’s first came via a precise header after 
he beat Gareth McAuley to Jesse Lingard’s excellent cross, having craftily 
pulled back the Albion defender. His second took a deflection off Craig Dawson 
but only after United’s No9 had manoeuvred between McAuley and Matt Phillips 
with verve.

“He’s good in the air, he’s got great feet, he’s powerful. Look at his second 
goal – most players are looking to pass but he chips it over the defender and 
just wellies it,” said Ben Foster, the West Bromwich goalkeeper. “How old is 
he? 35? Jesus – he’s brilliant. You don’t do what he’s done by just being a big 
lump.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fzlatan-ibrahimovic-older-i-get-better-i-get-like-red-wine-manchester-united-west-brom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedc798372501440c399e4fdf000c3c52c308e0c2%2F0_297_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%3A%20the%20older%20I%20get%2C%20the%20better%20I%20get%2C%20like%20red%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fzlatan-ibrahimovic-older-i-get-better-i-get-like-red-wine-manchester-united-west-brom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%3A%20the%20older%20I%20get%2C%20the%20better%20I%20get%2C%20like%20red%20wine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fzlatan-ibrahimovic-older-i-get-better-i-get-like-red-wine-manchester-united-west-brom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedc798372501440c399e4fdf000c3c52c308e0c2%2F0_297_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Zlatan Ibrahimovic, centre, fires his second goal at The Hawthorns, which came 
about after he had burst past Gareth McAuley and Matt Phillips. Photograph: 
Michael Steele/Getty Images 
Of that there is no doubt and a trait that is somewhat overshadowed by 
Ibrahimovic’s occasionally comical self-regard is his dedication to optimum 
fitness. This is a man who puts in the hours behind the scenes - including 
practicing Taekwondo, in which he holds a blackbelt – and what persuaded 
Mourinho, having worked with him at Internazionale, that the veteran could cut 
it in England. “The only thing that surprises me [about the Premier League] is 
that the game is not controlled,” Ibrahimovicsaid. “Back and front, back and 
front, the rhythm is high but this is how the game is and you have to adapt 
your body to it. I have played in different championships in different 
countries and always adapted.”

As well as being a source of goals, Ibrahimovic is also an outlet for others. 
On Saturday he assisted two scoring attempts, the joint highest in the 
visitors’ ranks alongside Lingard, and generally allowed United to build 
momentum with his hold-up play.

Premier League fans’ half-time verdict part 2: Manchester United to West Ham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/premier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham>
This was also a contest, however, in which the player showed his devilish side 
with a collision with Dawson for which he could have been sent off – he was 
shown only a yellow card by Taylor – and therein lies a concern for United: 
what if Ibrahimovic is missing, either through suspension or injury? That was 
the case for one league game this season, the1-1 draw with Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 when United created the bulk of chances but were undone late on. What might 
have been if their suspended striker had been out there?

As things stand, the Swede has contributed more than three times as many 
league goals as United’s second‑highest scorers – Paul Pogba, Juan Mata and 
Marcus Rashford. They and others need to wade in with more, especially as 
Ibrahimovic is likely to go through a slump and/or require a rest. As Mourinho 
said: “He cannot play 60 matches”.

For the time being, however, he is fit and firing and it caught the attention 
on Saturday when the travelling supporters began to sing Eric Cantona’s name 
shortly after it became 2-0. A little under 20 years on from the Frenchman’s 
retirement, United have another forward imbued with a potent mix of charisma 
and talent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fjose-mourinho-hails-zlatan-ibrahimovic-after-manchester-united-win-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20hails%20Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20after%20Manchester%20United%20win%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fjose-mourinho-hails-zlatan-ibrahimovic-after-manchester-united-win-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20hails%20Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20after%20Manchester%20United%20win%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fjose-mourinho-hails-zlatan-ibrahimovic-after-manchester-united-win-video&media=>
José Mourinho hails Zlatan Ibrahimovic after Manchester United win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/17/jose-mourinho-hails-zlatan-ibrahimovic-after-manchester-united-win-video> 