
The actor and celebrity Zsa Zsa Gabor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zsa-zsa-gabor> has died aged 99.

The Hollywood star, arguably more famous for her larger than life personality 
and string of marriages than for her films, passed away at her home in Los 
Angeles on Sunday.

Her husband, Frederic von Anhalt, said she died of a heart attack.

“We tried everything, but her heart just stopped and that was it,” he said. 
“Even the ambulance tried very hard to get her back, but there was no way.”

Gabor suffered a series of illnesses in recent years and had to have her leg 
partially amputated in January due to poor circulation. She suffered a stroke 
in 2005, three years aftera car accident had left her partially paralysed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/nov/29/film.arts>. 

In 2010 she reportedly asked a priest to administer the last rites  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/aug/16/zsa-zsa-gabor-last-rites>after 
surgery to remove two blood clots; the following year she had a leg amputated. 
The last stage of her life was reported to have been spent suffering from 
dementia.

Zsa Zsa Gabor knew femininity was a performance. She played it perfectly | 
Suzanne Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/zsa-zsa-gabor-death> 
This spell of ill-health was said to have begun after she was sent to hospital 
suffering from grief and anxiety over the death of Elizabeth Taylor in March 
2011. Her then publicist John Blanchette (who died in 2014) revealed that Gabor 
suffered dangerously high blood pressure watching TV coverage of the news of 
Taylor’s death, saying: “Oh, Jane Russell and Liz Taylor – I’m next.”

Although many of the details of her early life are disputed, Gabor is believed 
to have been born on 6 February 1917 as Sari Gabor in Budapest, Hungary, where 
she was brought up with her older and younger sisters, Magda and Eva. She acted 
on stage in Vienna in her youth before emigrating to the United States in 1941. 
Her first starring role was in Moulin Rouge (1952), directed by John Huston.

She attained cult figure status starring in 1950s B-movies, including Queen of 
Outer Space, in which she played a rebel Venusian who falls in love with four 
Earthmen whom her man-hating queen wants to destroy.

Later, she maintained her profile with film and TV cameos. She made one such 
appearance in The Naked Gun 2½: The Smell of Fear (1991), featuring in a scene 
that appeared to make fun of her real-life conviction for slapping a police 
officer in a traffic incident.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fzsa-zsa-gabor-actor-and-socialite-dies-aged-99%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435930579554%2F2bcbbd38-bec7-429f-bf17-bda73f7ab0d8-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zsa%20Zsa%20Gabor%20dies%20aged%2099&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fzsa-zsa-gabor-actor-and-socialite-dies-aged-99%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zsa%20Zsa%20Gabor%20dies%20aged%2099&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fzsa-zsa-gabor-actor-and-socialite-dies-aged-99%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435930579554%2F2bcbbd38-bec7-429f-bf17-bda73f7ab0d8-1020x612.jpeg>
 Zsa Zsa Gabor at home in 1992. Photograph: Paul Harris/Getty Images 
She appeared in dozens of films, but these achievements were arguably 
overshadowed later on by public interest in her extravagant style and fondness 
for wealthy husbands. She married nine times and her spouses included Conrad 
Hilton, the founder of the Hilton hotel chain, and Barbie doll creator Jack 
Ryan. Her last marriage was also her longest lasting: she tied the knot with 
Frédéric Prinz von Anhalt in 1986.

He has also battled ill-health in recent years, hospitalised twice in 2010, 
once after swallowing a bee and another time following his gluing his eye shut. 
He was also involved in a motor accident in 2011 .

Gabor’s only child, Francesca Hilton, died aged 67 in February 2015.

As news of Gabor’s death spread, friends and fans paid tribute to her on 
Twitter.
Barbara Eden (@Barbara_Eden) 
Rest in peace Zsa Zsa Gabor. She and her sisters were lovely ladies who were 
always fun and delightful to be around. -B
 <https://twitter.com/Barbara_Eden/status/810629646710620165> December 18, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/Barbara_Eden/status/810629646710620165> Piers Morgan 
(@piersmorgan) 
RIP Zsa Zsa Gabor. 
99 years old, 9 husbands, Miss Hungary & Hollywood star. What a life! 
pic.twitter.com/wt759OWCvu <https://t.co/wt759OWCvu>
 <https://twitter.com/piersmorgan/status/810616634364796928> December 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/piersmorgan/status/810616634364796928> Larry King 
(@kingsthings) 
There will only be one Zsa Zsa Gabor. And, I liked her a lot. Rest In Peace, 
my dear.
 <https://twitter.com/kingsthings/status/810622456478187520> December 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kingsthings/status/810622456478187520>  