
1 | Think of environment and development as one sector

Sectoral thinking is partly what will hinder us from meeting the sustainable 
development goals. The question is not how these sectors can collaborate, but 
how they can become increasingly intertwined to reflect the joined-up nature of 
the goals. A good example is the transformation from marine governance to 
ecosystem governance that took place in some countries when fisheries and 
environment ministries were reformed.Tim Daw, researcher – ecosystem services 
and poverty,Stockholm Resilience Centre <http://www.stockholmresilience.org/>, 
@sthlmresilience <https://twitter.com/sthlmresilience>

2 | Develop trust

Traditionally, we have often seen these two sectors as competing – with the 
notion that you had to sacrifice environmental quality for development. There 
has also been some scepticism from those within these two communities about the 
intentions or approaches of others. Economists have not always been welcomed in 
environmental circles and there is mistrust when it comes to issues that are 
important to so many. But we are seeing a more enlightened view. Both sides are 
working together and appreciating that by doing this we can achieve more than 
we could by working against each other.Oren Ahoobim, associate partner, Dalberg 
<http://www.dalberg.com/>, @orenahoobim <https://twitter.com/orenahoobim>, 
@DalbergTweet <https://twitter.com/DalbergTweet>

The planet's health is essential to prevent infectious disease
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/15/the-planets-health-is-essential-to-prevent-infectious-disease>
3 | Use the SDGs as a checklist

We all recognise that we need a holistic approach, so perhaps industrial 
projects (eg dams and mining) could use the SDGs as a design checklist to 
ensure they do not cause negative impacts elsewhere and are a positive force 
for good. We use ourOne Planet Living 
<http://www.bioregional.com/oneplanetliving/> framework in this way, which 
could really work for the SDGs.Sue Riddlestone, CEO and co-founder, Bioregional 
<http://www.bioregional.com/>, @sueriddlestone 
<https://twitter.com/SueRiddlestone>, @bioregional 
<https://twitter.com/Bioregional>

4 | Create financial incentives

There are now 20 million artisanal and small-scale miners worldwide. They are 
responsible for about a tenth of all gold production, but they also do great 
environmental damage, accounting for the biggest single use of mercury that 
poisons land and drinking water supplies. The activity is hard to control as 
miners are widely dispersed, often operating illegally and in remote places. 
Last week, the GEF council approved a programme that will design and deploy 
ways in which miners in eight countries can get loans to switch from mercury.
Robert Bisset, head of communications,Global Environment Facility 
<http://thegef.org/>, @robbiebisset <https://twitter.com/RobbieBisset>, @theGEF 
<https://twitter.com/theGEF>

5 | Support social entrepreneurs

We need business models where development aid and environmental grants are 
used to get things started, and then they need to stand on their own two feet 
as some sort of service or business. Social entrepreneurs are entering the 
development space with initiatives like this, for example, projects bringing 
solar power to villages in remote areas help development and address 
environmental issues.Sue Riddlestone

6 | Educate children about sustainability

We need all children and students to know not to support unsustainable 
solutions, so that when they grow up – perhaps to be engineers or designers – 
they will discourage solutions that are unsustainable. The rest of us need to 
adopt this mindset; we can’t think we can have a growing business in a failing 
planet.Livia Bizikova, director – SDG Knowledge Programme, IISD 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiNpaG2qvjPAhXDQBQKHTCdB4sQFggeMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.iisd.org%2F&usg=AFQjCNG5r9tSp8QbfnNpicITaugJ1X1PFA&sig2=ARn2Nxyb6klOMHR7SktxsA>
,@LiviaBizik <https://twitter.com/LiviaBizik>, @IISD_news 
<https://twitter.com/IISD_news>

Blue carbon schemes: conserving coastal areas or commodifying nature?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/22/blue-carbon-schemes-conserving-coastal-areas-or-commodifying-nature>
7 | Monitor industrial developments continually

As well as the traditional tools used in environmental impact assessments, 
there is a key need for trustworthy oversight. A factory or mine may be 
designed to minimise environmental harm but unless someone is there to monitor 
emissions, standards might slip. This process of safeguarding and achieving the 
best development outcomes is set out in various documents (such as the African 
Development Bank’s Safeguard Policy). The key is to ensure they are implemented 
during and after construction as, unfortunately, when these major projects are 
operational, development practitioners have little or no influence. There is a 
key role for environmental NGOs here.Mike Webster, director, WasteAid UK 
<http://www.wasteaid.org.uk/>, @michaelgwebster 
<https://twitter.com/michaelgwebster>, @WasteAidUK 
<https://twitter.com/WasteAidUK>

8 | Host cross-sectoral events

I got to know some development NGOs at the UN general assembly and during the 
SDG process, but now the goals are being implementing, where do we meet up? 
Maybe the environment and development sectors need to have opportunities to get 
together more often.Sue Riddlestone

9 | Harness natural resources

Virunga National Park authorities have acknowledged that the four million 
people who live outside the park will not stop entering it to cut down trees 
(for charcoal), hunt wildlife and graze cattle. The Virunga Alliance has helped 
install three hydroelectric dams that generate electricity for villages outside 
the park. Children can now study and women can walk with greater safety at 
night, and businesses are arriving in the region. The project has begun to 
promote better relations between the park’s rangers and the local people, while 
building peace, stability and hope in North Kivu province. By harnessing the 
natural power of the park, the authorities have made great inroads to 
protecting its exceptionally rich biodiversity.Alex Jones 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10307636>

10 | Promote context-specific technology 

In the Maasai village where I live, we now have solar energy installed for 
lights and charging points, and a solar water pump means children have time to 
do homework and women can take literacy classes. We have switched to clean cook 
stoves, using cow dung as fuel, and are about to install proper waste treatment 
because the wind blows in plastics from across the Mara. We have done this at a 
village scale, which is now being repeated across the Maasai, while keeping all 
the cultural elements of pastoralism and a semi-nomadic life. The Maasai may 
live in a world of no money and little food, but it is a world where the best 
technology can help ensure the future of an important indigenous people.
Jacqueline McGlade, chief scientist, UN environment programme,@UNEP 
<https://twitter.com/UNEP> 

Discovering the secrets of Benin’s forests to improve nutrition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/01/benin-forest-food-security-nutrition>
11 | Tie funding to joint development and environmental outcomes

The environment and development sectors will need to build on the objectives 
of each other to attract critical funding. This will require them to rethink 
and expand their work, but will present the opportunity to leverage each other 
in developing a larger value proposition. We are working with The Nature 
Conservancy to develop an insurance product to protect reefs facing the 
damaging impacts of storms. While the traditional approach to reef protection 
has been to seek public or donor funding to support biodiversity, there is a 
big opportunity to increase funding to this critical natural infrastructure by 
layering in development objectives. The reefs provide crucial protection and 
tourism for the communities and businesses behind them.Adam Connaker, program 
associate – innovative finance,The Rockefeller Foundation 
<http://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/>, @RockefellerFdn 
<https://twitter.com/RockefellerFdn>

12 | Promote the links between environment and sustainable development

Early on, development was focused solely on economic growth, which was often 
achieved by extracting natural capital. Now there is growing recognition that 
nature serves as the foundation for development over the long term because 
natural systems support our food production, clean our water, regulate our 
climate, and safeguard the Earth’s biodiversity. The SDGs do a good job of 
integrating the economic, social and environmental dimensions of development.
Lina Barrera, senior director – international policy,Conservation International 
<http://www.conservation.org/>, @ConservationOrg 
<https://twitter.com/ConservationOrg>

Read the full Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/24/live-qa-how-can-the-environment-and-development-sectors-work-together-to-achieve-the-sdgs>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 