
The Now Play This festival took place this weekend at Somerset House in 
London, bringing together a vast array of interesting experimental game 
projects. Organisers Holly Gramazio and George Buckenham arranged the exhibits 
into themed rooms, with quieter areas for more intimate projects, and open 
spaces for a range of raucous physical games.

Here are some of our favourite titles from the weekend.

Chambara <http://chambaragame.com/> (Team OK, consoles)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F857a3bfdf0853506da38bb2b39c72dd1b0d0fb81%2F0_199_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F857a3bfdf0853506da38bb2b39c72dd1b0d0fb81%2F0_199_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
 Boys play Chambara at Now Play This festival. Photograph: Keith Stuart for the 
Guardian 
Team OK’s minimalist local multiplayer death match game takes place in an 
almost monochrome world where a player in white and a player in black hide from 
each other by blending into the stark backgrounds. The aim, of course, is to 
take out your foe, either with a sword or a projectile weapon. It’s all about 
watching for the slightest movements to pinpoint your enemy’s location, and, 
cleverly, if you try to peek at their side of the screen for clues, there’s a 
‘close eyes’ button which blanks it out entirely. It’s tense, fun and makes you 
think about the environment in very different ways. It’s due out on console 
later this year.

Slam City Oracles <http://janefriedhoff.com/slamcityoracles/> (Jane Friedhoff, 
PC)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13abab0b50b3f1320e03041c97c711628a7a2047%2F0_0_1471_883%2F1471.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13abab0b50b3f1320e03041c97c711628a7a2047%2F0_0_1471_883%2F1471.jpg>
 Slam City Oracles. Photograph: Jane Friedhoff 
Described by creator Jane Friedhoff as a kind of Riot Grrl mash up of Katamari 
Damacy and Grand Theft Auto, Slam City Oracles is about smashing up everything 
on screen by pummelling the “slam” button and letting your cute avatar collide 
with as many objects as possible. It’s exhilarating, confusing and sounds 
amazing thanks to the punk rock soundtrack from Brooklyn-based group Scully. 
Slam City Oracles is available for online for whatever you want to pay.

Hidden Folks <http://hiddenfolks.com/> (Adriaan de Jongh and Sylvain Tegroeg, 
PC/mobile)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb63e4dd73323bbd041e512a031c4e894c577dd8%2F0_0_3843_2304%2F3843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb63e4dd73323bbd041e512a031c4e894c577dd8%2F0_0_3843_2304%2F3843.jpg>
 Hidden Folks Photograph: Adriaan de Jongh, Sylvain Tegroeg 
The result of a collaboration between Fingle and Bounden creator Adriaan de 
Jongh and artist Sylvain Tegroeg, Hidden Folks is like an animated Where’s 
Wally in black and white. Each level is a crowded scene with a list of targets 
to track down, all with their own look and a clue to their whereabouts. Some 
are hidden in plain sight, while others lurk behind interactive objects like 
garage doors and vehicles. Absorbing and lightly funny, it’ll be perfect to 
play on a tablet in front of the television or with a friend on the TV itself.

Forager <http://foragergame.net/> (Nate Gallardo and Cat Burton, PC/Mac)

You play as an unidentified woodland creature in this gentle exploration sim. 
There are no predators and no hazards, you simply gather the resources you need 
to make a nest to hibernate in, while snacking on mushrooms and other forest 
foods. The environments are filled with natural colours and are fun to explore 
and experiment in. Co-creator Nate Gallardo says that a key inspiration for the 
project was Tony Hawk’s Pro Skate, because he wanted to create an environment 
that was similarly fun to interact with. It’s out soon on PC and Mac.

It’s Spring Again <http://itsspringagain.com/> (Asya Yurnia, iOS/Android)

Originally created as a puppet show by Asya Yurina, this beautiful app lets 
you guide a small orchard through the seasons, clicking on the bare branches to 
form blossom and eventually picking the apples that grow throughout the summer. 
When winter comes the clouds open their arms and release giant crystalline snow 
flakes. All the subtle interactions are accompanied by gentle musical notes so 
the user forms their own seasonal symphony. It’s available now for Apple and 
Android devices and works as both an educational toy and a relaxing aside.

Engare <http://www.engare.design/> (Mahdi Bahrami, PC/Mac/iOS)

In this puzzle game, you’re presented with one or more moving shapes that spin 
and pulse, while along the top of your screen there’s a target: a different 
shape formed of a continuous line. To solve the puzzle you click on a point on 
the moving shape, which acts like a drop of ink that is then set on a path by 
the shape’s movement. Guess right, and that path will draw the target shape. A 
gentle, beautiful game to sit and puzzle over. It’s coming out soon on PC, Mac 
and iOS devices.

Inks <http://www.stateofplaygames.com/work/inks/> (State of Play, 
smartphone/tablet)


The talented studio behind award-winning adventure Lumino City further cements 
its reputation for beautiful, stylish games with this digital pinball table in 
which the ball gathers up paint and streaks it across the board. For Now Play 
This, State of Play ran the game on a large screen placed in a pinball table 
they designed and built themselves – but it will still be beautiful played on a 
tablet.

Action Painting Pro <http://ianmaclarty.com/action-painting-pro/> (Ian 
MacLarty, PC/Mac/Linux)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffffdf590af95c54385a26d1a15201a276f54f55d%2F0_0_1134_680%2F1134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffffdf590af95c54385a26d1a15201a276f54f55d%2F0_0_1134_680%2F1134.jpg>
 Action Paiting Pro Photograph: Ian Maclarty 
Super Mario meets Jackson Pollock is a pretty accurate description of this 
gorgeous platformer in which you must maintain your inspiration, money and 
passion gauges while slathering the backdrop in paint. At times during Now Play 
This, huge crowds gathered around the screen to watch skilled players create 
near-instant abstract artworks.

Pico Park <http://picoparkgame.com/en/> (Tecopark, PC)

It was fascinating to watch Now Play This attendees work together to beat this 
multi-stage co-operative puzzler. Up to ten people can take part, forming human 
chains to reach over chasms, or working in exact synchronisation to jointly 
control one character on a simple platforming stage. There’s also a great 
Breakout challenge, where everyone has to keep multiple balls in the air while 
taking out blocks. The perfect team-building exercise. Developed by Japanese 
indie Tecopark, it’s just awaiting Steam approval.

Push Me Pull You <http://pmpygame.com/> (House House, PS4/Mac/Lunux/PC)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d08dfa47e911450864b9a9299146ea778061d90%2F0_0_1801_1080%2F1801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d08dfa47e911450864b9a9299146ea778061d90%2F0_0_1801_1080%2F1801.jpg>
 Push Me Pull you Photograph: House House 
There’s something almost grotesque in the aesthetic of this top-down sports 
game, with two pairs of players each controlling a long worm-like creature with 
a head and arms on each end. But its combination of co-operation and 
competition is fascinating. Each team must keep the ball on their side of the 
court for as long as possible, but to do so involves working together to wrap 
the worm’s body around the ball, each player only able to move their own end 
and stretch or shrink. Weird but wonderful, both to play and watch. It’s due 
for release soon.

The World is Flat (Aubrey Hesselgren, PC/Mac/iOS/Android)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F006deb1cd5871f89e5fe52ac7671fe8e814a342b%2F0_70_3264_1956%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F006deb1cd5871f89e5fe52ac7671fe8e814a342b%2F0_70_3264_1956%2F3264.jpg>
 World is Flat at Now Play This festival Photograph: Keith Stuart 
The developer, Aubrey Hesselgren, refers to this project as a “Mesmerising 
Geography Training Toy”, which is a perfect description. Players see a strange 
warped version of the globe, which keeps all of the countries in view, no 
matter where you zoom in on. The challenge is to find a series of countries and 
capital cities as quickly as possible by manipulating the map until the correct 
location is at the centre. For Now Play This, Hesselgren created a special 
version which used a giant rotating gym ball as the interface, which added a 
lovely level of tactility to the game. It’s due out this summer.

Snake Pit <http://fursr.com/projects/snakepit> (//////////fur////)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ae4c1525abb3f1f4bf9f42f2ec3884ce1dd30f2%2F0_305_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=13%20fascinating%20games%20from%20the%20Now%20Play%20This%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2F13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ae4c1525abb3f1f4bf9f42f2ec3884ce1dd30f2%2F0_305_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
 Snake Pit Photograph: Ben Peter Catchpole/Now Play This 
One of the most popular games with the crowds of children at Now Play This was 
a giant version of a game that came out before they were born. It is 
essentially a multiplayer version of Snake, which graced mobile phones years 
before Angry Birds. The game screen is displayed on the floor, with the 
directional buttons placed around the edge of the display, two on each side. To 
guide their snake toward dots, and away from the edges or their opponent, each 
player ends up running around the display to stamp on their buttons. Naturally 
there’s a lot of real-world interference in the form of shoving and sabotage, 
creating an interesting, very noisy, dynamic.

Guppy <http://www.ninjadodo.net/guppy/> (Christiaan Moleman, 
PC/Mac/iOS/Linux?Android)
 Guppy Photograph: Christiaan Moleman 
This simple, pretty game has you swimming around as a fish in a stylistic 2D 
environment, collecting food and avoiding objects and enemies. It’s viewed from 
a top-down perspective, and perhaps the most interesting feature is the way 
your fish is controlled by waggling the analog stick to flick its tail. Steer 
left or right by favouring one direction, and move faster by waggling more 
fiercely. It can be tricky to get the hang of manoeuvring around the lily pads, 
but with a little practice it soon feels strangely satisfying.
 