
When 13-year-old Ernest from Kenya contracted drug-resistant tuberculosis from 
his mother, he was treated at a Nairobi clinic. Even though he had to give up 
playing football with his friends to undergo the two-year treatment for the 
particularly virulent form of tuberculosis, his mother was hopeful. She too had 
received treatment for the disease and was cured.

Thousands of others are not so lucky. In 2014, 520 people died every day 
<http://www.who.int/tb/challenges/mdr/mdr_tb_factsheet.pdf> (pdf) of 
drug-resistant tuberculosis. Of theestimated 480,000 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs104/en/> tuberculosis cases that 
were resistant to treatment with antibiotics,only a quarter were diagnosed and 
reported. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/29/tuberculosis-deaths-rise-but-global-fight-paying-off-who-report>

Current treatment regimens are complex, expensive, lengthy, toxic and can 
cause side-effects including deafness and psychosis. Ernest suffered severe leg 
aches during his treatment. Patients have to take 14,600 pills over two years 
and undergo eight months of painful injections. Many patients travel for up to 
two days for intensive therapy at medical facilities. About half of those who 
start treatment fail to complete the course.

Treating multi-drug resistant TB in Ethiopia – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/mar/24/treating-multi-drug-resistant-tb-ethiopia-in-pictures>
 Resistance to TB medicines threatens to stall – or even reverse – progress in 
the fight against the disease. A2015 report 
<http://media.wix.com/ugd/309c93_f0731d24f4754cd4a0ac0d6f6e67a526.pdf> (pdf) by 
theUK’s parliamentary group on TB <http://www.appg-tb.org.uk/> suggests that 
multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) could cause millions of deaths, cost 
many billions of dollars and reduce global GDP.

If left unchecked, these trends could derail plans to cut TB deaths by 95% in 
the next 20 years, as enshrined in the World Health Organisation’s global
strategy <http://www.who.int/tb/post2015_strategy/en/>. Resistance to medicines 
also threatens progress towards meeting theUN’s global goals for 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
.

Left to their own devices, market forces will not deliver the solutions that 
the world needs.

The international community must do more to support public funding of 
research. Their support can play a catalytic role in helping to defeat this 
ancient scourge, which is still one of the most lethal infectious diseases.

First, we need to provide shorter, more effective treatment. Recent years have 
seen the launch of two promising new drugs,bedaquiline and delamanid 
<http://www.tbfacts.org/tb-drugs/>. Despite being the first new MDR-TB 
treatment options in more than 50 years, their adoption has been slow. 
<http://www.msf.org/article/access-just-2-people-severest-cases-drug-resistant-tb-currently-have-access-new-more>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fpills-treat-tb-research-multi-drug-resistant-tuberculosis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8638c3e5a0504ea155aed380bb907b3eb4a9ef0%2F0_0_4560_3043%2F4560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=14%2C600%20pills%20over%20two%20years%20%E2%80%93%20there%20has%20to%20be%20a%20better%20way%20to%20treat%20TB%20%7C%20Philippe%20Douste-Blazy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fpills-treat-tb-research-multi-drug-resistant-tuberculosis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=14%2C600%20pills%20over%20two%20years%20%E2%80%93%20there%20has%20to%20be%20a%20better%20way%20to%20treat%20TB%20%7C%20Philippe%20Douste-Blazy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fpills-treat-tb-research-multi-drug-resistant-tuberculosis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8638c3e5a0504ea155aed380bb907b3eb4a9ef0%2F0_0_4560_3043%2F4560.jpg>
 TB medication at a Médecins Sans Frontières clinic in Nairobi. In 2013, 90,000 
new cases of TB were diagnosed in Kenya; an estimated 20,000 cases went 
undetected. 
The $65m (£45m) End TB project, 
<http://www.unitaid.eu/en/resources/press-centre/statements/1433-unitaid-joins-health-partners-to-launch-new-treatment-for-drug-resistant-tb>
 funded byUnitaid <http://www.unitaid.eu/en/>, will speed access to the two new 
drugs for 2,600 patients in 16 countries. Results from this study are expected 
to lay the groundwork for broader and appropriate use of bedaquiline and 
delamanid.

In the long term, new regimens could transform the treatment of MDR-TB more 
fundamentally, such asall-oral drugs, shorter treatment and much higher cure 
rates <http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/92/1/13-122028/en/>. A study of a 
nine-month combination of existing MDR-TB drugs holds great promise. In 
addition,all-oral regimens 
<http://www.theunion.org/what-we-do/research/clinical-trials> are under 
development through several initiatives, including End TB, and trials sponsored 
by the product development partnershipTB Alliance 
<http://www.tballiance.org/about/mission>.

 Simplified treatments will benefit patients and foster healthier markets. 
More than 50 regimens are used to treat MDR-TB, which makes for a small, 
fragmented and fragile market, reducing incentives for manufacturers to get 
involved. Evidence supporting shorter regimens could consolidate the market.

MDR-TB is, however, just part of a wider story.

 Every year, 1.5 million people die from the disease 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs104/en/>. In 2014, 9.6m new cases 
were detected globally.

Tuberculosis drug designed for children nears market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/04/tuberculosis-drug-designed-for-children-nears-market>
 Additionally, 3 million people with TB are not aware they have the disease. 
Effective diagnosis is still proving challenging, particularly for children, 
who are especially vulnerable to this curable disease.

 Every day, 370 children die from TB. Although 1 million children need 
treatment each year,specially adapted drug formulations for children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/04/tuberculosis-drug-designed-for-children-nears-market>
 were not available until recently.

 In 2012, Unitaid committed $16.7m 
<http://www.unitaid.eu/en/addressing-neglected-childhood-tb> to the development 
of medicines for children in the right doses. In December 2015, these medicines 
became available. More work is needed to ensure that new formulations reach the 
children who most need them.

As well as improving treatment, we need diagnostic tools better suited to the 
needs of children, who often cannot produce the amount of sputum needed for a 
TB test.

 The WHO says preventive therapy is a critical component in changing the 
course of the epidemic. The risk of developing active TB isup to 37 times 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=5&ved=0ahUKEwjSiKH7xtTLAhUDuRoKHSIiBVUQFggzMAQ&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.gbchealth.org%2Fsystem%2Fdocuments%2Fcategory_1%2F9%2FGBCHealth%2520Issue%2520Brief_HIV%2520%26%2520TB.pdf%3F1311661979&usg=AFQjCNEJhDSKbGSMQKm1NZqOIJ2_yMiB8g&sig2=o8QiStuix9YMfDLlkkXs7w&cad=rja>
greater in people with HIV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/millennium-development-goal-6-15-achievements-on-hiv-and-malaria>
. One-quarter of HIV-related deaths are caused by a TB co-infection. Shorter, 
emerging regimens may help to reduce the risk of developing active TB, 
especially for people living with HIV.

New ideas can change the trajectory of the pandemic. They will provide the 
masterstroke that many are desperately counting on. We can make it happen 
together, working with the private and public sector. We can turn the tide 
against tuberculosis.
 