
For every significant moment in life, there is a soundtrack. Sometimes it’s 
personal, sometimes it’s shared with a wider group. And occasionally it feels 
like we come together on songs that denote powerful moments for us all.

So it was in 1967, the year Australians went to the polls to vote 
overwhelmingly in favour of removing discriminatory references to Aboriginal 
people in the constitution. Although the 1967 referendum did not improve 
Indigenous lives as much as was hoped, it was nonetheless a significant moment 
for all Australians.

Related: The Season review – family comedy gives wing to some spirited 
performances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2017/jan/13/the-season-review-family-comedy-gives-wing-to-some-spirited-performances>

Just as the US civil rights movement of that same era was underscored by 
powerful anthems, there was – and continues to be – a catalogue of songs that 
tell of the Indigenous Australian experience of that time. What better way to 
reflect on progress – or the lack thereof – than with a concert of those songs, 
performed by the rising generation of Indigenous performers?

Tuesday night saw the world premiere of 1967: Music in the Key of Yes 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/1967> at the Sydney Opera House as part 
of Sydney festival. It brought together Indigenous singers Dan Sultan, Thelma 
Plum, Ursula Yovich, Leah Flanagan, Emily Wurramara, Radical Son, Alice Skye 
and Yirrmal, with rock performer Adalita joining the lineup as a special guest.

Yolngu man Yirrmal opened the show <http://onepagelink.com/yirrmal/> with 
Garruku, a powerful Indigenous-language song. Then each of the artists stepped 
into the spotlight: Emily Warrumara and Alice Skye sung Warumpi Band’s 
ever-popularRonu Wanga/My Island Home 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yZEodxUx2ME>, before Radical Son performed 
Archie Roach’s Took the Children Away 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=br83o_JpIFw> and Sam Cooke’s A Change is Gonna 
Come. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wEBlaMOmKV4>

The songs were fitting for both the occasion and each performer. Adalita 
stepped forward for a rocking version ofGoanna’s Solid Rock 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qjzCDNOBicw>, then Patti Smith’s People Have 
the Power <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pPR-HyGj2d0>. With her mighty voice, 
Ursula Yovich performed a rendition of Nina Simone’sI Wish I Knew How It Would 
Feel to Be Free <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JeXtfmAwvvY>, while Thelma 
Plum put her own spin on Simone’sFeeling Good 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D5Y11hwjMNs>.

Black and white archival footage of the referendum campaign played on screens 
behind the performers. It told of two very different Australias: the casual 
racism of those in cat-eye glasses and house dresses juxtaposed with the 
impoverished circumstances ofIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians>. Just as US 
civil rights anthems were scattered throughout the set list, there was also 
footage of what was happening in the United States at that time, with weirdly 
grimacing ads for 50s hair products sitting next to footage of bloody protest 
clashes.
 Alice Skye, Emily Wurramara, Leah Flanagan, Ursula Yovich, Yirrmal (centre), 
Dan Sultan (behind), Adalita, Thelma Plum and Radical Son perform in 1967: 
Music in the Key of Yes at the Sydney Opera House.


 Photograph: Prudence Upton/Sydney festival 
The campaign’s momentum was marked by footage of speeches by Aboriginal 
leaders including Faith Bandler and Pastor Doug Nicholls. There was also 
footage that showed both the Labor and Liberal parties encouraging Australians 
to vote in favour of the changes. The 90.77% yes result was resounding in 
itself, yet it’s even more notable given how difficult it is to imagine an 
issue that would unite so many Australians today.

Much of the show’s joy came from the diversity of genres, ranging from Alice 
Skye’s stark ballad You Are the Mountains giving way to Yirrmal’s Deep Blue 
Sea, then to Leah Flanagan’s funky version of Curtis Mayfield’s We The People 
Who Are Darker than Blue. Kudos, too, to the musical direction that fused 
electric guitars and violins with traditional instruments such as the 
didgeridoo and clapsticks.

While Sultan and Adalita were notable headliners, all performances were 
strong, with only the talented Thelma Plum somewhat underutilised. The 
unquestionable standout was Yirrmal, who sung all his songs in language.

The finale saw all nine artists on stage for Midnight Oil’s Beds are Burning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/midnight-oil-beds-are-burning-australian-anthems>
. Despite the strong individual performances, the sum of vocals felt most 
powerful and there was a swell of emotion from the crowd as the group moved on 
to the finale, Yothu Yindi’s Treaty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/03/treaty-by-yothu-yindi-a-trojan-horse-in-the-culture-wars>
.

Related: Another Day in Paradise review – a raw, emotional insight into Bali 
Nine artist's life on death row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/14/another-day-in-paradise-review-a-raw-emotional-insight-into-bali-nine-artists-life-on-death-row>

For an encore, Sultan stepped into Joe Cocker’s boots for a passionate version 
ofWith a Little Help From My Friends 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8y2RHMGqbWk>. Emily Wurramara’s cover of the 
Beatles’ Blackbird <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=swUlDc3v3DE> was given 
particular weight by Yirrmal’s traditional dance performed behind her. Then 
Yirrmal stepped forward for the final song – Wukun.

Talented musicians singing about civil rights issues combined with a dash of 
60s nostalgia made for an inspiring and satisfying evening. Yet there was a 
palpable sense of how much a comparable civil rights fight and similarly 
impassioned songs may be necessary in our current political climate, and this 
hung heavily over the audience as we drifted into the hot Sydney night.
 