
While we are a diverse and ever-changing nation of individuals, the latest 
census snapshot reveals that if there is indeed an average Australian she is a 
healthy 37-year-old woman.

She may need to do a little more exercise and take care about what she eats to 
live up to her ideals, but at this time in her life there are no major health 
issues on the horizon.


However, like the nation itself, she is getting older, and this is where our 
problem starts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-healthy-are-we-really&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20healthy%20are%20we%20really%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-healthy-are-we-really>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20healthy%20are%20we%20really%3F&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-healthy-are-we-really&media=>
How healthy are you really? Watch the video above to find out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/philips-healthier-brighter-future/video/2015/sep/21/how-healthy-are-we-really>
Within 20 years – or just about the time she is statistically more likely to 
need help – our ageing population will have become an unsustainable burden on 
the system we currently rely on to provide it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F092dd059ea4b910f3de32147ff567140adf59d97%2F120_72_625_730%2F625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2020%20vision%3A%20a%20model%20change%20for%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2020%20vision%3A%20a%20model%20change%20for%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F092dd059ea4b910f3de32147ff567140adf59d97%2F120_72_625_730%2F625.jpg>
 Philips Australia and New Zealand managing director Kevin Barrow 
This is the challenge for healthcare professionals looking to leverage 
technology, policy and infrastructure to change our health ecosystem and 
deliver a functional model of patient care for our future.

“I’m not sure there’s anything more important for this country,” Philips 
Australia and New Zealand managing director Kevin Barrow says. “By the middle 
of the century it is predicted that there will actually be no national income 
to do anything else. No infrastructure, no schools, no roads, no defence, 
because it’s all going to health.

“Clearly our nation can’t deal with that if it doesn’t change the way it 
manages and delivers healthcare.”

According to ABS data, 7 million Australians are already affected by chronic 
health conditions, and Treasury modelling predicts our healthcare costs will 
swallow all revenue collected by the states by 2046*.
Non-communicable diseases 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/a-healthier-brighter-future/ep2/diseases.html>
The reality of Australia’s health profile is that most of our costs come from 
the top four non-communicable diseases (NCDs) of ageing and affluence: cancer, 
cardiovascular and lung disease and diabetes.

Cancer alone accounts for about three in 10 deaths in Australia, with an 
estimated 126,800 new cases diagnosed this year, as projected by the Australian 
Institute of Health and Welfare.

Kevin Barrow says while existing technology is there to enable methods like 
telehealth, future breakthroughs will come through looking at the whole 
continuum of care, and changing the way patients’ journey and how they enter 
the hospital system.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa01af3b7922ebca66f5421b97c0c6474cf49c951%2F235_149_4916_3595%2F4916.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2020%20vision%3A%20a%20model%20change%20for%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2020%20vision%3A%20a%20model%20change%20for%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa01af3b7922ebca66f5421b97c0c6474cf49c951%2F235_149_4916_3595%2F4916.jpg>
 Advances in healthcare monitoring mean doctors can intervene before problems 
happen. Photograph: Supplied/Philips 
“We’re looking to work with public and private health systems to manage that 
chronically ill population that frequently visit hospitals in a different way,” 
he says.

“The big four (NCDs) are driving most of the cost and as a consequence 
hospitals are just straining at the seams. There are not a huge number of new 
hospital beds being built and new green field sites for hospitals are 
relatively rare.

“What we are interested in is building an ecosystem for the future to support 
adequate coordinated care and that includes all the psychosocial elements of 
health beyond the actual chronic illness itself.”

Philips is currently working with a broad coalition in industry and government 
through research initiatives to help find ways to decrease this chronic care 
burden.

The company has just announced a major partnership with Queensland Health that 
promises to transform and improve healthcare for patients with multiple chronic 
diseases through connected home care services.

A child born for the next century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/philips-healthier-brighter-future/2015/aug/28/a-child-born-for-the-next-century>
The strategic agreement is being run through West Moreton Hospital and Health 
Service for patients in south-east Queensland, with the aim of reducing 
emergency department visits and allowing living and recovery in a supported and 
monitored environment at home.

West Moreton Hospital and Health Service chief executive Sue McKee says the 
plan will deliver major health, social and economic benefits to the people of 
Queensland.

“A significant proportion of our hospital resources are used to treat a small 
percentage of the population with multiple chronic conditions,” McKee says. “By 
partnering with Philips the program will leverage our respective expertise to 
transform the current, largely ‘reactive’ model of care.”

West Moreton currently provides care for 260,000 people but this population is 
forecast to more than double to 580,000 by 2031. The pilot program, which 
expects its first patients by December this year, is aimed at future proofing 
for the next generation and is scalable across the region, state and country, 
the partners say.
BMI generator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/a-healthier-brighter-future/ep2/bmi.html>
Internationally, Philips has also this month unveiled its personal healthcare 
programs at the major consumer electronics trade fair Internationale 
Funkausstellung (IFA) in Berlin. These include a combination of connected 
health measurement devices, app-based programs and cloud-based data analysis 
aimed at giving us greater and more active control over our health.

Future advances in healthcare monitoring and machine learning mean doctors 
have the opportunity to intervene before the problem happens.

Solutions may include wearable tech - like a bracelet to advise changes in the 
way a patient walks that may indicate an impending falls risk in the home. Or 
it may be blood pressure warnings that can be triaged in a different way to 
avoid a patient coming in and taking up an expensive bed in the ICU.


Another trend in healthcare technology is towards dual modality machines, 
which combine different therapeutic methods in the one device with benefits for 
both patients and doctors.

One example of this uses high-quality magnetic resonance (MR) images in 
conjunction with ultrasound to guide non-invasive surgical procedures, says 
clinical MR scientist for Philips ANZ, Iain Ball.

The high-intensity focused ultrasound 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/295585987;122538603;x> (HIFU 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/295597395;122540286;t>) treats cancer 
patients by using ultrasound waves to heat targeted cancer cells deep inside 
the patient to temperatures of up to 70C leading to cell necrosis (death) while 
keeping the surrounding healthy tissue outside cool.

“It’s essentially surgery without the knife,” Ball says. “Rather than doing 
invasive surgery we can target the tumour non-invasively through the use of the 
HIFU.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DknRdizOJSdg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DknRdizOJSdg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DknRdizOJSdg&media=>
 See how the latest technology is being used to target tumours without invasive 
surgery. 
“It’s quality of life for the patients and also it’s peace of mind. They don’t 
have to go under surgery and it’s a quicker recovery for all.”

The technology is being used to remove uterine fibroids, which are benign 
tumours affecting as many as 80% of women by the age of 50, and in palliative 
treatments for prostate and bone cancer patients.

The device can also be used for the targeted delivery of heat-sensitive 
anti-cancer drugs through lightly warming the affected internal area by just a 
few degrees.

“The drugs will be drawn naturally to that area and release their payload,” 
Ball says. “This is more effective for the clinician because it is more 
precise.”

But while the technological innovations will play their part, the challenge is 
providing an overall healthcare model that can cope with a rising chronic 
disease burden that is robust and scalable.

Kevin Barrow says the more prevention can play a part, the greater the benefit 
to the nation as a whole.

Cancer accounts for 29% of deaths; cardiovascular disease 31%; respiratory 
ailments 8.5% and diabetes 2.9% according to ABS figures, with the incidences 
rising as we get older.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3a400b2d7ef158c994546115c5d80bb5966ba82%2F0_70_5616_3372%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2020%20vision%3A%20a%20model%20change%20for%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2020%20vision%3A%20a%20model%20change%20for%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-healthier-brighter-future%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2F2020-vision-a-model-change-for-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3a400b2d7ef158c994546115c5d80bb5966ba82%2F0_70_5616_3372%2F5616.jpg>
 Modern healthcare technology is combining different therapeutic methods into a 
single device. Photograph: Supplied/Philips 
“Given the demographics and given the illnesses of ageing and affluence then 
this is coming,” Barrow says. “And it’s only 20, 25 years away.”

Whatever our eventual health ecosystem looks like, Barrow says the way ahead 
requires an innovative, long-range vision for how we deliver health that takes 
us well beyond the next budget.

“Our partnership with West Moreton reinforces our strong commitment for 
long-term strategic collaboration, allowing health systems to focus on what 
ultimately matters most – delivering better care to the people in their 
communities.”

(*From: One in Four Lives – The Future of Telehealth in Australia white paper, 
Lisa Altman et al, AIIA, Sydney March 2014)
Philips previous episode banner 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/a-healthier-brighter-future/ep2/next-prev.html>
Philips footer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/a-healthier-brighter-future/common/footer.html> 