
1. Ile de Porquerolles, France

Just off the Côte d'Azur, in the gulf of Hyères, this island is small (7km by 
3km) but special, complete with superb beaches, great snorkelling, pine forests 
and vineyards. Most of it is a national park and there's a strict limit on 
visitors, although you can reserve your place in advance by booking in at one 
of the hotels.

Getting there: Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>) flies to 
Toulon-Hyères from Stansted, followed by 10-minute bus ride to La Tour Fondue, 
and half-hour ferry to the island (return fare from €16.50, timetables at
tlv-tvm.com <http://www.tlv-tvm.com>) 

Where to stay: Le Mas du Langoustier (00 33 494 583009; langoustier.com 
<http://www.langoustier.com>) is a four-star hotel with a gastronomic 
restaurant, close to the beach (doubles from €179)

2. Sylt, Germany

With sovereignty passing between Denmark and Germany like a beach volleyball, 
Sylt is an improbable but utterly endearing blend of wholesomeness and deep, 
Michelin-ingrained luxury. The strandkorbe - wicker chairs that perch on the 
sand - are a joy, the beach saunas (after which you race into the North Sea in 
various states of undress) particularly Teutonic. Linked to the mainland by a 
train track (on to which many a Mercedes and BMW will be loaded in the course 
of a summer) this is the sort of island where you bicycle to a tea shop housed 
in a thatched cottage and then head to a beach bar for some stylish clubbing - 
we recommend Sansibar.

Getting there: Air Berlin (airberlin.com <http://www.airberlin.com>) flights 
from Stansted via Düsseldorf to Sylt cost from around £192 return

Where to stay: Hotel Reethuus (00 49 465 198550; reethues-sylt.de 
<http://www.reethues-sylt.de>) is thatched and serene; doubles from €120 B&B

3. Kvarken archipelago, Finland

The Kvarken is a collection of 7,000 islets stretching across 150km that Finns 
delight in canoeing between. The land is rising, by 8mm each year, meaning the 
shapes and sizes of islands are constantly changing. Scientists estimate that 
it'll be one solid (if slightly soggy) landmass in 2,500 years. Don't expect 
glamour, do expect to bond with your midge spray, but the scenery is stunning, 
the sense of peace tangible.

Getting there: Finnair (finnair.com <http://www.finnair.com>) from Heathrow or 
Manchester via Helsinki to Vaasa where bridges link the two main islands, 
Replot and Bjorko

Where to stay: Bjorko Cottages (00 358 505 262300; bjorkocamping.com 
<http://www.bjorkocamping.com>) has two log cabins by the sea on the island of 
Bjorko, plus the obligatory sauna, from €80 a night, €420 a week

4. Porto Santo, Madeira

More than just a satellite of its famous neighbour, this island, just 12km by 
7km, is now beginning to make its mark on the tourist map with smart spas, golf 
courses and more than 50 restaurants. Vila Baleira is the sleepy capital, all 
whitewashed houses, shady squares and a perpetual air of siesta. Above all, 
people come here for the beaches; the golden sand is said to have healing 
properties. Manchester United striker Ronaldo, born in Madeira, is said to be 
planning to build his own hotel here.

Getting there:  Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) to Funchal, 
followed by either a 20-minute flight (sata.pt <http://www.sata.pt>, from €105) 
to Porto Santo, or a two-hour ferry (portosantoline.pt 
<http://www.portosantoline.pt>, from €51) 

Where to stay:  The Hotel Porto Santo (00 351 291 98 0140; hotelportosanto.com 
<http://www.hotelportosanto.com>) is simple but is set on the beach. Holiday 
Options (0844 477 0452;holidayoptions.co.uk <http://www.holidayoptions.co.uk>) 
offers a week's package with flights (international and internal) and breakfast 
from £1,015pp

5. Skomer Island, Wales

Just off the coast of Pembrokeshire, this is a perfect Enid Blyton-style 
island (minus reprobate grown-ups). Measuring three square miles but packed 
with wildlife, including 6,000 pairs of puffins and a large colony of seals. 
Book well ahead for accommodation in September when the seal pups start 
swimming.

Getting there: By ferry (£17 adults, £6 children, 25-minute journey) from 
Martin's Haven between April and October

Where to stay: A farmhouse provides self-catering accommodation (01239 621600; 
welshwildlife.org <http://www.welshwildlife.org>). Sleeping up to 15, from £35 
per adult, £15 per child

6. Hamneskar, Sweden

Recently tipped for great things by Condé Nast Traveller. A 19th-century 
lighthouse is pretty much the only thing on this rocky outcrop on the west 
coast of Sweden, and now it presides over an acclaimed restaurant, while the 
buildings once inhabited by the light keepers are now a collection of hotel 
rooms. Walking around the island takes a grand total of 30 minutes.

Getting there: Scandinavian Airlines (flysas.co.uk <http://www.flysas.co.uk>) 
from Heathrow to Gothenburg, a bus to Marstrand (one hour), followed by a 
10-minute speedboat ride

Where to stay: Paternoster (00 46 303 61845; kurspaternoster.se 
<http://www.kurspaternoster.se>) charges from £154pp for accommodation, 
transport and evening meal

7. Amorgos, Greece

This place makes the average Greek island seem like Manhattan. Seriously 
quiet, seriously remote, although the new Blue Star Line ferries have made 
access faster. Above all, there's very little to do. This is a part of the 
Cyclades that has avoided such Grecian must-haves as museums or ancient ruins 
(although there are a couple of monasteries). Nightlife is centred on a handful 
of coffee shops in the extraordinarily calm town of Katapola. Shaped like a 
whale, take at least twice as many books as you think you'll get through.

Getting there: British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies from 
Heathrow to Athens, taxi to Piraeus port for Blue Star ferry to Amorgos (around 
seven hours, timetables onbluestarferries.com <http://www.bluestarferries.com>) 

Where to stay: Sunvil Holidays (020 8758 4758; sunvil.co.uk 
<http://www.sunvil.co.uk>) offers eight nights' half board accommodation at the 
two-star Hotel Pagali £1,094pp (two sharing), including flights and ferry 
transfers.

8. Vega Islands, Norway

Lesser known than the Lofoten Islands, the Vega archipelago now has the Unesco 
seal of approval. Like much of Norway, it's an ornithologist's dream. Chief 
among the bird population are eider ducks, raised for their feathers - the 
houses built for them to nest in can still be seen, alongside lighthouses, 
fishing villages and dramatic Nordic landscapes.

Getting there: Fly to Trondheim with SAS (flysas.co.uk 
<http://www.flysas.co.uk>) from around £235 (via Oslo). Get a hire car and 
drive to Bronnoysund. Ferry to Vega Islands from £7 (around 50 minutes, 
timetables at177nordland.com <http://www.177nordland.com>)

Where to stay: Vega Havhotel (havhotellene.no <http://www.havhotellene.no>) 
overlooks the Atlantic, doubles from £120 including breakfast

9. Gigha, Scotland

The most southerly of the Hebrides and just seven miles long by half a mile 
wide, Gigha is blessed by unusually good weather for the area produced by its 
proximity to the North Atlantic Drift. The mild climate has helped create the 
world-famous Achamore Gardens, and the sunlit beaches offer idyllic walks with 
a good chance of spotting seals and otters.

Getting there: The nearest airport to Gigha is Glasgow, which is two and a 
half hours drive from Tayinloan, from where Caledonian MacBrayne (08000 665000;
calmac.co.uk <http://www.calmac.co.uk>) runs ferries to Gigha taking 20 minutes 
(from £16 one-way for a car and two passengers)

Where to stay: The Gigha Hotel (01583 505254; gigha.org.uk 
<http://www.gigha.org.uk>) has double rooms from £48pp per night, B&B

10. Fanø, Denmark

Proof that Scandinavia has a knack with islands. Fanø, covering 56 square 
kilometres, is ringed by white sand beaches, laced with cycle paths and studded 
with villages, all with tasteful craft shops, cafes and bars. There's even a 
brewery, Bryghus Fanø. Very family-oriented and easy to get to from Britain, 
especially if you live in East Anglia.

Getting there: Ferry from Harwich to Esbjerg with DFDS (18 hours; 
dfdsseaways.co.uk <http://www.dfdsseaways.co.uk>) from £222 with car. Another 
12-minute ferry from Esbjerg to Nordby on Fano (timetables onfanotrafikken.dk 
<http://www.fanotrafikken.dk>); a car with up to nine passengers costs from 
370kn (£45)

Where to stay: Villa Qusisana (feriefanoe.dk <http://www.feriefanoe.dk>) at 
Fanø Bad, right on the beach) from 500kn (£60) a night

11. Walney, England

Just half a mile from Barrow-in-Furness in Cumbria, and connected to the 
mainland by a bridge, this is perfect for nature lovers; just 11 miles long and 
a mile wide, it's home to 250 types of birds, 450 flowering plants and 400 
species of moths and butterflies. There are two nature reserves; at South 
Walney Nature Reserve, the biggest gullery in Europe with lesser black-backed 
and herring gulls, visitors can witness a bird-watching spectacle so incredible 
that it has become known as "dive bomb alley".

Getting there: Drive over the Jubilee Bridge from Barrow-in-Furness.

Where to stay: The Brow Head Hotel (01229 473600; browheadhotel.co.uk 
<http://www.browheadhotel.co.uk>), doubles from £65, including breakfast.

12. Procida, Italy

Thoroughly out-glitzed by neighbouring Capri and Ischia and all the nicer for 
it. It is just four sq km and the main harbour town of Marina Grande is 
everything you'd want from an Italian harbour port; coloured houses, washing 
lines and rocky inlets. An especially enticing part of the Gulf of Naples, 
Procida's film-set quality has been been immortalised in The Talented Mr Ripley 
and Il Postino. Another island, Vivara, linked to Procida by a walkway, is a 
nature reserve.

Getting there:  Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies to Naples 
from Stansted and Gatwick, followed by a half-hour ferry (snav.it 
<http://www.snav.it>).

Where to stay: Hotel La Casa sul Mare (00 39 081 896 87 99; lacasasulmare.it 
<http://www.lacasasulmare.it>), doubles from €90, including breakfast

13. Lopud, Croatia

Croatia has islands to suit every mood but Lopud is one for purists. Only two 
miles wide, with no cars, the Dubrovnik elite have used it as a hideaway for 
decades. For somewhere so idyllic, it is rather easy to get to - there are 
regular ferries, as well as speedboats from Dubrovnik. No roads - and unusually 
for Croatia, there are sandy beaches here, especially Sunj with its gently 
shelving white sand.

Getting there: British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies from 
Heathrow to Dubrovnik. Jadrolinija ferries (jadrolinija.hr 
<http://www.jadrolinija.hr>) take 50-60 minutes and costs around £4 

Where to stay: La Villa is a homely, 16th-century seaside hotel on the island. 
Book throughi-escape.com/lavilla.php <http://www.i-escape.com/lavilla.php> - 
doubles range from €70-135 per night including breakfast

14. Ile d'Aix, France

Overshadowed by the all-Gallic glamour of nearby Ile de Ré, Ile d'Aix is an 
island with its own personality and character and is reached by ferry from La 
Rochelle. Tiny, but with an all-important bakery and several good restaurants. 
Napoleon spent his last week on French soil here; the house he stayed in is now 
a museum.

Getting there:  Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>) flies to La 
Rochelle, followed by ferry from the harbour, €13.20 return (20 minutes; 
timetables fromservice-maritime-iledaix.com 
<http://www.service-maritime-iledaix.com>) 

Where to stay: Le Logis des Paillotes sur L'Ile D'Aix (00 33 6 14 37 08 03; 
leslogisdespaillotes.com <http://www.leslogisdespaillotes.com>) has chic but 
low-key rooms from around €78 a night.

15. La Graciosa, Canary Islands

Lying just north of Lanzarote, La Graciosa is part of the Chinijo Archipelago, 
and was declared a nature reserve in 1986. The island has a population of just 
500 and is barely touched by tourism; long stretches of beach lie deserted, and 
the sandy streets mean there are few cars apart from the odd four-wheel drive. 
There is only one village, Caleta del Sabo, with a handful of fish restaurants 
and small shops. Life is simple, peaceful and utterly relaxed.

Getting there: Thomson (0871 213 4787; thomson.co.uk <http://www.thomson.co.uk>
) flies from Gatwick and several regional UK airports to Lanzarote. Ferries 
from the port of Orzola take 20 minutes to reach La Graciosa (lineas-romero.com 
<http://www.lineas-romero.com>).

Where to stay: Cachet Travel (020 8847 8700; cachet-travel.co.uk 
<http://www.cachet-travel.co.uk>) has a week at the Apartments el Sombrerito 
from £495pp per week, sleeping two, including flights and ferry crossings.

16. Sveti Klement, Croatia

The largest of the Pakleni Islands, which lie a short boat-taxi ride from the 
island of Hvar, Sveti Klement boasts sandy coves and pine-backed beaches and 
the picturesque hamlet of Palmizana where a clutch of elegant villas lie 
surrounded by pine forest. The Meneghello family have lived on Sveti Klement 
since the 19th century, creating a lushly beautiful botanic garden along with 
villas, bungalows and a renowned restaurant.

Getting there: Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies from 
Gatwick and Bristol to Split, then a two-hour ferry to Hvar (jadrolinija.com 
<http://www.jadrolinija.com>) 

Where to stay: Book a cottage at the Menenghello (00 385 91 478 3111; 
palmizana.hr <http://www.palmizana.hr>) from €80 per night and they can arrange 
a boat taxi from Hvar Town

17. Kastellorizo, Greece

The most far-flung of all the Greek islands, Kastellorizo is located east of 
Rhodes, close to the Turkish coast. There is only one settlement on the island, 
called Kastellorizo, or "Chora", which means "village", full of quiet 
alleyways, brightly coloured houses, neoclassical mansions and charming 
harbourside tavernas. The island has no beaches, although rocky grottos make it 
perfect for snorkelling.

Getting there: Thomson (flights.thomson.co.uk 
<http://www.flights.thomson.co.uk>) flies from Gatwick, Manchester and Cardiff 
to Rhodes, from where it's a six-hour ferry transfer to Kastellorizo 
(timetables atgtp.gr <http://www.gtp.gr>) 

Where to stay: The Margarita Hotel in Chora (00 30 273 6031711; 
hotel-margarita.com <http://www.hotel-margarita.com>) has 12 
traditionally-furnished rooms, which start from €60, including breakfast

• The following correction was printed in the Observer's For the record 
column, Sunday June 28 2009

 In the item above, we recommended the Margarita Hotel in Chora. In fact, this 
hotel is in a village with the same name on Kythira, not Kastellorizo.

18. Lismore, Scotland

Located in Argyll, Lismore's name comes from the gaelic word "lios-mor", 
meaning great garden - and the island's fertile soil means it lives up to the 
name, covered in wildflowers and home to more than 130 species of bird. Lismore 
offers simple pleasures; there is a good network of little-used footpaths and 
the relatively flat terrain means its great to explore by bike. Its location, 
surrounded by the waters of Loch Linnhe, means breathtaking views in every 
direction.

Getting there: Caledonian MacBrayne (08000 665000; calmac.co.uk 
<http://www.calmac.co.uk>) runs ferries from Oban to Achnacroish (around an 
hour; from £32 one-way for a car and two passengers).

Where to stay: The Old Schoolhouse (01631 760262; baligarve.co.uk 
<http://www.baligarve.co.uk>) is a B&B with two comfortable rooms from £17pp 
per night, with dinner available.

19. Alicudi, Italy

The volcanic Aeolian Islands lie off the north coast of Sicily, remote and 
peaceful with dramatically beautiful landscapes enriched by the volcanic soil. 
Alicudi is the furthest west - and quite possibly one of the most isolated 
islands in the whole of the Med. Electricity and TV only arrived in the 1990s, 
there are no marked roads and just one hotel and one restaurant. What there is, 
however, is crystal-clear water and utter, blissful peace.

Getting there: British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) fly to Catania 
from £160 return. It's an hour and a half by bus to Milazzo, from where ferries 
to Alicudi depart (around three hours; timetables atusticalines.it 
<http://www.usticalines.it>) .

Where to stay: The Hotel Ericusa (00 90 988 9902; alicudihotel.it 
<http://www.alicudihotel.it>) has doubles from €70 half-board.

20. Heybeliada, Turkey

Under an hour by ferry from Istanbul, Heybeliada is the second-largest of the 
Princes Islands that lie in the Sea of Marmara and far less crowded than its 
big sister, Buyukada. It is car-free, with horse-drawn carriage rides offering 
tours of the pine-clad hills and sleepy villages lined with tea-gardens. There 
are narrow beaches and the atmospheric 11th-century monastery of Ag Trias.

Getting there: British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies from 
Heathrow to Istanbul; ferries from the Kabatas port run regularly, cost about 
£2 each way

Where to stay: The Merit Halki Palace (00 90 216 3510025; halkipalacehotel.com 
<http://www.halkipalacehotel.com>) is a former 19th-century school converted 
into a luxury hotel, with doubles from €100, B&B.
 