
Next year’s series of 24 is make or break. With Kiefer Sutherland busy 
wringing his hands on the curiously underpoweredDesignated Survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/sep/30/designated-survivor-kiefer-sutherland-jack-bauer>
, 24: Legacy will be the first series of 24 not to jet along on the 
clench-jawed motivation of Jack Bauer.

But at least the 24 producers have had the grace to throw us a bone. It has 
been revealed that Carlos Bernard will be back in Legacy to revive his 
character Tony Almeida. “But didn’t Tony die in Day Five?” I hear you ask. Of 
course he didn’t – he turned up again two years later during Day Seven. You 
remember, the series where he stole a weaponised pathogen to punish a man who 
worked for a man who worked for the president, who had ordered the murder of 
his wife and unborn child. You remember, the season where Jack became exposed 
to the same pathogen and died, before coming back to life like nothing had 
happened. God, I love24 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/24>.

Anyway, if Tony Almeida can make it back into 24, maybe other peripheral 
characters can too. Here’s my wishlist:

Nina Myers
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgKkBzbdiqV0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgKkBzbdiqV0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgKkBzbdiqV0&media=>
If 24: Legacy wants to really get people excited, Nina Myers should be the 
next original character to return. Crucial to the legend of 24, it was Nina who 
turned on the government and killed Jack’s wife at the end of Day One. Did Jack 
shoot her dead halfway through the third series? Yes, but that shouldn’t 
necessarily impede her return. A woman this evil probably doesn’t even need 
blood.


Chase Edmunds 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS03hbWiusUY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS03hbWiusUY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS03hbWiusUY&media=>
Way back in Day Three, Jack reluctantly took on a partner. This was a mistake, 
as that partner was Chase Edmunds, his daughter Kim’s boyfriend. Things went 
about as well as can be expected, with Jack eventually lopping Chase’s hand off 
with an axe. Later, we’d learn that Kim had split up with Chase, after she 
became inconsolably grief-stricken when Jack faked his own death. Hopefully 
we’ll meet Chase next year, sipping from the World’s Least Desirable 
Father-In-Law mug he couldn’t quite bring himself to give Jack.


President Wayne Palmer
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5qHSQioJqe4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5qHSQioJqe4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5qHSQioJqe4&media=>
 The all-time worst 24 president. Worse than James “Reagan” Heller. Worse than 
Allison “Clinton” Taylor. Worse than Charles “Nixon” Logan. Worse, even, than 
Alan “Alan Dale” Dale. Wayne Palmer was the younger brother of all-time 
greatest 24 president David Palmer, and saw to his presidency like the horny, 
preening berk he was. Written out of the original show after an assassination 
attempt left him in a coma, we should now revive Wayne purely to see what a 
cap-wearing, Segway-riding ninny he’s grown up to be.

George Mason 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfrrG-1ITw_E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfrrG-1ITw_E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfrrG-1ITw_E&media=>
We last saw the corrupt former CTU director detonating a nuclear blast by 
crashing a plane into a desert as he succumbed to a fatal dose of plutonium 
poisoning. But this is 24, so he definitely isn’t dead. Despite his 
comprehensive burns, extensive injuries and near-constant facial haemorrhaging, 
George is still out there somewhere. Maybe he’s leading an underground 
counterterrorism unit like Bill Buchanan. That would be nice.

Aaron Pierce 

24: Legacy is already the best show of 2017. That's a guarantee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/24-legacy-is-already-the-best-show-of-2017-thats-a-guarantee>
God bless you, Aaron Pierce <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XOhfU2ASyiU>. The 
sole unanimous force of law-abiding good in the entire history of 24, Aaron 
Pierce was President Palmer’s bodyguard, then President Keeler’s bodyguard, 
then President Logan’s bodyguard, then the bodyguard of President Taylor’s 
daughter. Actually, come to think of it, this means he failed to stop two 
assassination attempts, another successful assassination and the 
presumably-fatal stabbing of a third president by his unhinged first lady, with 
whom he was romantically involved. God, Aaron Pierce was awful. Perhaps he 
should be the big baddie next year.

Caroline Fowlds 

In 24: Live Another Day, all Fowlds did was mutely stand behind Prime Minister 
Stephen Fry and scowl a lot, like she was definitely evil. But she didn’t 
actually do anything evil, so perhaps she can rock up during episode three of 
Legacy and punch Tony Almeida on the bottom or something. You know, for closure.

 