
“We lose 5% of our potential GDP every year, and African industries cannot be 
competitive without access to electricity,” says Akinwumi Adesina, president of 
theAfrican Development Bank <http://www.afdb.org/en/>. “I believe that’s why we 
can’t break away from reliance on exporting our raw materials – new industries 
will only go to where there’s power.”

He is speaking on the sidelines of the COP22 climate change conference in 
Marrakech, which ends on Friday.

Morocco lights the way for Africa on renewable energy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/17/cop22-host-morocco-lights-way-africa-renewable-energy-2020>
Adesina and colleagues from the bank have been using the conference to 
highlight its new initiatives on energy, including theNew Deal on Energy for 
Africa 
<http://www.afdb.org/en/the-high-5/light-up-and-power-africa-%E2%80%93-a-new-deal-on-energy-for-africa/>
, which will see $12bn (£9.7bn) invested in the sector over the next five 
years. “Africa is tired of being in the dark,” he says.

The African Development Bank (AfDB) has also created the role of 
vice-president on power, and been a major player in setting up theAfrican 
Renewable Energy Initiative <http://www.arei.org/>, which aims to generate 10GW 
of power from renewable sources by 2020 and up to 300GW by 2030. “This 
initiative was the major outcome for Africa of the Paris COP21 meeting last 
year, where G7 countries contributed $10bn towards it,” says Adesina.

Adesina says he is particularly impressed by the strides Morocco has taken to 
develop its capacity for solar energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/17/cop22-host-morocco-lights-way-africa-renewable-energy-2020>
. The AfDB was a major investor in the 160MW Noor solar plant at Ouarzazate, 
which was opened this year. The complex, which uses giant mirrors to reflect 
the sun’s heat on to liquid that then turns turbines, is being expanded to 
produce more than 500MW by 2018. Morocco has also recently signed a deal to 
build1720MW in new wind farm capacity 
<http://www.embassyofmorocco.us/energy.htm>.

“Africa should use what it has and not what it doesn’t have. We have limitless 
sunshine and great potential for wind, hydro and geothermal,” he says. However, 
he still believes there is a role for non-renewable sources of energy inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. “We need a balanced energy mix. 
Some African countries have gas and coal, which can be used in a clean way, and 
they should use it.”

Another major challenge is to increase the amount of money spent on climate 
change adaptation – or helping countries to rebuild systems when they are 
destroyed by the impacts of climate change. In Africa, for example, governments 
are coping with floods, extreme temperatures and major droughts in east and
southern Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/26/southern-africa-appeals-for-billions-el-nino-devastation-drought>
 and the Sahel.

Wealthy countries have committed $100bn towards helping poorer states cope 
with climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/07/almost-two-thirds-of-climate-fund-for-developing-nations-already-pledged>
, but one of the major topics on the agenda in Marrakech has been how that 
money should be divided between adaptation and mitigation. Until now, only14% 
of climate funds have gone to adaptation 
<http://allafrica.com/stories/201512081230.html>, and Africa, the continent 
most deeply affected by climate change, has received only 4% of the total green 
climate funds.

“We’ve been short-changed by climate change and we should not be short-changed 
in financing,” says Adesina. “South Africa has spent $700m this year dealing 
with the impacts of the drought last year; Mozambique $200m; Namibia $13m. 
These emergency costs are continuously displacing public expenditure which 
should be going to health, education and infrastructure development, and 
endangering macro-economic stability. My view is that we need to increase the 
amount to be spent on adaptation so that we can spend money on development.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fafrica-tired-being-in-dark-bank-chief-plans-boost-energy-akinwumi-adesina-cop22%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0505fb53790e5fa5ff36ac6dd61d9e302998293a%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Africa%20is%20tired%20of%20being%20in%20the%20dark%E2%80%99%3A%20bank%20chief%20on%20plans%20to%20boost%20energy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fafrica-tired-being-in-dark-bank-chief-plans-boost-energy-akinwumi-adesina-cop22%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Africa%20is%20tired%20of%20being%20in%20the%20dark%E2%80%99%3A%20bank%20chief%20on%20plans%20to%20boost%20energy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fafrica-tired-being-in-dark-bank-chief-plans-boost-energy-akinwumi-adesina-cop22%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0505fb53790e5fa5ff36ac6dd61d9e302998293a%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
 From left to right: the African Development Bank vice-president on power, 
Amadou Hott; President Akinwumi Adesina; and South Centre special adviser on 
sustainable development Youba Sokona at COP22 in Marrakech, Morocco, 16 
November 2016. Photograph: Courtesy of AfDB Group 
The AfDB is trying to garner support for an African insurance fund. An 
initiative called theAfrican Risk Capacity Insurance 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=4&ved=0ahUKEwjIyp-UpbLQAhVLDsAKHRBBB30QFggqMAM&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.afdb.org%2Ffileadmin%2Fuploads%2Fafdb%2FDocuments%2FGeneric-Documents%2FPANEL_IV-_African_Risk_Capacity_Mr._Simon_Young.pdf&usg=AFQjCNE4hrq58WVsHyEEJ1yw2djjgJYJDw&sig2=6jBMI5-zW9MsxXnlsxDdlg&cad=rja>
 has been launched, but of 32 countries that signed up, only seven have been 
able to pay the premiums. Adesina says the idea for the insurance fund was 
welcomed on Wednesday at an African heads of state meeting chaired by Morocco’s 
King Mohammed VI, and that one way in which climate finance can be better 
targeted to help African countries is for green climate funds such as the GEF 
(Global Environment Facility) to start paying the premiums for the African 
countries. He hopes that this could pave the way for action.

“Whenever these drastic climate events like drought, flood or extreme 
temperature happen, the world has words of comfort for Africa,” says Adesina. 
“But words of comfort cannot pay the bills and rebuild when problems start.”
 