

Influential Labour MP Frank Field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field> has said the “clock is 
ticking” against companies who exploit workers trapped in the gig economy.

On Thursday ministers ordered a crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/hmrc-launch-crackdown-gig-economy-firms-agency-self-employed-staff>
 on companies using large numbers of self-employed or agency workers following
an investigation by the Guardian into low pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/hermes-couriers-paying-staff-less-than-living-wage>
 at the delivery company Hermes.

Ministers order HMRC crackdown on ‘gig economy’ firms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/hmrc-launch-crackdown-gig-economy-firms-agency-self-employed-staff>
Field warned that other firms could now face scrutiny, revealing his office 
had been contacted by couriers working for other delivery companies airing 
similar grievances to those raised by Hermes workers.


“This is the beginning of what will be a long process of investigating this 
sort of exploitation,” said Field, adding that he was delighted with the speed 
with which Theresa May’s government had tackled the issue. “Compared with the 
last three governments this is rocket speed. We have had a period where 
employers have been testing the law and no one has been pushing back. This is 
the beginning of the pushback.”


From parcel carriers delivering packages to online shoppers, to app-driven 
services such as Uber andDeliveroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deliveroo>, the gig economy, which has 
transformed delivery services, relies on large networks of self-employed 
contractors. Their status means they are not entitled to earn the “national 
living wage” or receive benefits such as sickness and holiday pay.

Self-employment status – who's next under the HMRC spotlight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/20/self-employment-status-hmrc-who-is-next-analysis>
The growing pressure comes as drivers for the taxi-app company Uber await an 
employment tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/12/uber-drivers-await-tribunal-verdict-employment-status-self-employed-taxi-app>
 verdict on their claim that they should be classed as workers rather than as 
self-employed.

Since taking over as prime minister, May has talked about the need to “reform 
capitalism” and promised to improve the pay, security and employment rights of 
ordinary working people. She has also hiredMatthew Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/matthewtaylorrsa>, the former head of Tony 
Blair’s policy unit, to head a review of workers’ rights and practices, which 
will try to address concerns that millions are stuck in insecure and stressful 
work.

Field wrote to May recently, asking her to examine a dossier of claims of 
false self-employment at Hermes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/hermes-couriers-paying-staff-less-than-living-wage>
. Scores of Hermes couriers’ testimonies revealed how their self-employment 
meant they received no paid holidays or sick pay – and in some cases were paid 
below the national living wage.

Field heard back this week from the financial secretary to the Treasury, Jane 
Ellison, who revealed that HM Revenue and Customs was establishing a specialist 
unit to investigate firms shirking employment obligations. In her letter she 
said the government was “committed to taking strong action where companies, to 
reduce their costs, force their staff down routes which deny them the 
employment rights and benefits they are entitled to”.

'It's about time': Hermes couriers welcome inquiry into pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/20/its-about-time-hermes-couriers-welcome-inquiry-into-pay>
Field said the action showed May’s sentiment about “protecting the soft flesh 
of Britain’s underbelly” was beginning to take shape.


“The gig economy has made it too easy for companies to unthinkingly exploit 
large tracts of that soft underbelly,” said Field. “They have been able to 
offer any terms in gaining flexibility. Clearly that flexibility should have to 
be bought at a higher price. I think these practices exist because companies 
could get away with it and now we are testing the law and HMRC rules. If they 
are found wanting I would expectHMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc>
 to change them.”

In a separate response, Edward Troup, the executive chairman of HMRC, said the 
Hermes dossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/delivery-giant-hermes-faces-hmrc-inquiry-into-low-pay-allegations>
 supplied by Field had been referred to the “appropriate compliance teams” for 
consideration. Troup said confidentiality prevented him from commenting on the 
tax affairs of individual companies but he fired a warning shot to unscrupulous 
employers: “Individuals cannot be opted out of employment rights and 
protections simply by calling them ‘self-employed’. We are committed to 
tackling false self-employment.

“If we find that companies have misclassified individuals as self-employed, we 
will take all necessary steps to make sure that they pay the appropriate tax, 
NICs, interest and penalties.”

In a recent case, agency workers at Sports Direct’s warehouse in Derbyshire 
were awarded £1m in back pay after it emerged that they had been paid below the 
minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
.

Field said he would be pressing HMRC for an update before Christmas – the 
busiest time of the year for courier firms. “If we haven’t got a timetable I 
will be putting pressure on them for one,” he said. “I would like to see them 
report back before Christmas because if you are being sweated, everyday is a 
horror.”
 