
What is the future of the internet in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>? How can tech save lives, educate 
and light homes, in communities where schools and energy suppliers are failing?

For the past three days young innovators, entrepreneurs and blockchain experts 
convened at the inauguralAfrica 4 Tech summit <http://africa4tech.org/> to 
discuss these questions. Here’s what we learned.

Silicon Valley took time to find its roots – African tech hubs will too

Silicon Valley, which had input from institutions including Nasa and Stanford 
University, took time to find its feet, and Africa’s tech sector will too. This 
is still a nascent space; one with 54 countries that all have “slightly 
different DNA”according to Juliana Rotich 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/juliana_rotich_meet_brck_internet_access_built_for_africa?language=en>
, the co-founder of Ushahidi and the iHub tech space in Nairobi, Kenya. “Of 
course entrepreneurship is entrepreneurship and we can learn a lot from Silicon 
Valley, but this is a very different environment ... in Kenya we only got the 
internet six years ago,” she adds.

A day in the digital life of Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/30/africa-a-day-in-the-digital-life>
Not all tech start-ups have to save lives, making money is OK too

There are tech companies that have a positive impact on the world – companies 
that save lives and fight climate change – but that’s not the only story,says 
Rotich 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/juliana_rotich_meet_brck_internet_access_built_for_africa?language=en)>
. “If you have a start-up that creates money and creates jobs, that is also 
something to be celebrated.” There is aschool of thought 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/andrew_mwenda_takes_a_new_look_at_africa> that 
argues that Africa needs business, not aid, to prosper. Perhaps the same logic 
should be applied to the tech sector.

Disruption in Africa is the opposite to disruption in the west 


Africa is fertile ground for tech disruption, but there’s a fundamental 
difference to how this happens in the west, where technology attempts to bypass 
existing systems. In Africa many of these systems don’t exist, so it’s about 
creating solutions for things like installing formal economies, says Stéphan 
Eloïse Gras, founder ofAfrica 4 Tech <http://africa4tech.org/>. 

Gras cites Uber as the best example of this. In the west the company is said 
to be disruptive because it provides a taxi service by connecting drivers with 
passengers without owning any cars – a system heavily criticised for neglecting 
workers’ rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/uber-awaits-tribunal-ruling-over-drivers-status-as-workers>
. But Uber in Lagos actually formalises the economy, giving drivers a way to 
register their cars, a standardised way to collect money and the ability to 
track the journeys they’ve been on. “A trend we should all pay attention to,” 
says Gras.


Facebook was a solution to Mark Zuckerberg’s immediate needs, African tech 
start-ups should adopt the same approach

Mark Zuckerberg’s $51.3bn fortune 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/mark-zuckerberg/> and almost guaranteed audience 
with any global leader came from one wish: to find out more about thepersonal 
status of his classmates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2007/jul/25/media.newmedia> at Harvard 
University. By 2005 “The Facebook” was Facebook.com; 10 years later it was 
being used byone in seven  
<https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10102329188394581>people worldwide. The 
lesson for African entrepreneurs is to look for the solutions close to home 
before thinking about scale.
Africa 4 Tech (@Africa4Tech) 
Have you heard of Sam Kodo (#Togo <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Togo?src=hash>) 
? Meet him and 39 african innovators at our#event 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/event?src=hash> in #Marrakesh 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Marrakesh?src=hash> Nov 2 - 4 #edtech 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/edtech?src=hash> #smartbag 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/smartbag?src=hash> #mwfcon16 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/mwfcon16?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/8sA4U7zuzB 
<https://t.co/8sA4U7zuzB>
 <https://twitter.com/Africa4Tech/status/787991120324259840> October 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Africa4Tech/status/787991120324259840> 
Sam Kodo, a young innovator at the conference, is one of many doing this. He 
created a low cost laptop for school children in rural Toga in the shape of a 
bag, with a screen on one side and a solar panel on the other to charge the 
device. At $150 (£120) it’s more affordable than tablets, which cost about 
$300, and while most of his customers are in his country, he has already sold 
500 machines to the US.

Africa's most innovative – and controversial – tech hacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/africa-most-innovative-controversial-tech-hacks-hackers>
Employ more women and you’ll make more money 

According to Intel, closing the gap  
<http://simplecore.intel.com/newsroom/wp-content/uploads/sites/11/2016/06/DahlbergReport-DiversityIG-WomenTech.jpg>
 between the number women and men who run tech companies could add $430-$530bn 
to the global economy. And in Africa, “it’s important for women to be part of 
the story from the very beginning”, saysRotich 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/juliana_rotich_meet_brck_internet_access_built_for_africa?language=en)>
, who encourages all new African start-ups to include women as co-founders. Not 
only does the data show that you will be more successful, at least half of your 
customers will be women. “And if you try to add them later it won’t necessarily 
work.”

Education is choking Africa’s creative talent before it has a chance to develop

From primary school to university, Africa’s education system is missing 
opportunities to spot and nurture entrepreneurial talent, say experts in the 
technology education sector.
TRUE AFRICA (@_TRUEAfrica) 
'If there's a problem with education in Africa, it's due to the government.' 
@kwame42 <https://twitter.com/Kwame42> from Ecole 42 tells it how it is #edtech 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/edtech?src=hash> #A4T 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/A4T?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/_TRUEAfrica/status/794138088461242368> November 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/_TRUEAfrica/status/794138088461242368> 
“Even if you have an idea, you don’t know where to go with it,” says young 
innovator Larissa Uwase, who recently set up a company creating new food 
products from the sweet potato, a staple crop in Rwanda. Africa’s budding 
entrepreneurs often have to rely on after-school clubs for coding, applying for 
specific mentoring schemes or, in the case of Kodo, start teaching themselves 
robotics aged eight.

But young Africans still want to be next Bill Gates or Steve Jobs

There might not be enough support in the tech sector, but young people still 
dream of creating the next big thing. “People used to want to be musicians or 
football players, but now we are in the trend of technology, students are 
inspired by innovation,” says Kodo. In Rwanda there are a lot of ideas but 
“support with implementation is the problem”, according to Uwase, who adds that 
60% of the start-ups in her country fail due to a lack of support or investment.

Only 20 people in the world truly understand blockchain – but it could be the 
solution to light up Africa
ENGIE Innovation (@innovbyENGIE) 
#BlockChain <https://twitter.com/hashtag/BlockChain?src=hash> in #energy 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/energy?src=hash> @LO3energy 
<https://twitter.com/LO3energy> #minigrid 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/minigrid?src=hash> #A4T 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/A4T?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/ob0uZ3SjGs 
<https://t.co/ob0uZ3SjGs>
 <https://twitter.com/innovbyENGIE/status/794641808936566785> November 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/innovbyENGIE/status/794641808936566785> 
According to Rick Dudley, there are only about 20 people like him: people who 
truly understand how blockchain works and what it can be used to do. The 
technology behind the digital currency bitcoin createsdigital property without 
the need for a central authority. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/blockchain-answer-life-universe-everything-bitcoin-technology>
It is currently being used to run the payment system for a micro energy grid in 
Brooklyn, New York, where a handful of houses create electricity with solar 
panels and sell it to their neighbours, <http://lo3energy.com/projects/>
bypassing the national power grid.

In sub-Saharan Africa, where 20m households live off-grid 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2016/06/24/483259247/what-s-the-secret-to-getting-people-to-sign-up-for-solar-energy>
, the possibilities of a such a bottom-up approach are endless.
 