
Ethiopia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> has blamed “foreign 
enemies” for the unprecedented wave of protests that has prompted the 
government to declare a six-month state of emergency.

The government is facing the biggest challenge of its 25 years in power, with 
anti-government protests spreading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/14/ethiopia-grand-renaissance-dam-egypt>
, foreign-owned companies targeted and a harsh security crackdown that has 
killed hundreds so far failing to quell the unrest.

Ethiopia: many dead in anti-government protest at religious festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/ethiopia-many-dead-anti-government-protest-religious-festival>
“The kind of threats we are facing, the kind of attacks that are now targeting 
civilians, targeting civilian infrastructures, targeting investment cannot be 
handled through ordinary law enforcement procedures,” said the communication 
minister, Getachew Reda.

Protesters from the majority Oromo and Amhara ethnic groups say they are 
marginalised by the minority Tigrayan-led government, which they accuse of 
monopolising power and controlling the economy.

But Getachew claimed Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> was 
influencing the protests, and had allegedly trained and financed the rebel 
Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), regarded by Ethiopia as a terrorist group behind 
the protests.

“We know for a fact that the terrorist group OLF has been receiving all kinds 
of support from Egypt,” Getachew said. “Its leaders used to be in Asmara 
[Eritrea] now they are in Cairo.”

He said “elements in the Egyptian political establishment” were fomenting 
rebellion, seeking to promote “historical rights” over access to the River Nile.

Ethiopia is building a hydropower dam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/03/eu-diplomats-reveal-devastating-impact-of-ethiopia-dam-project-on-remote-tribes>
 on the Nile close to its source in the Ethiopian highlands, raising fears in 
Egypt, which depends on controlling the flow of the Nile’s waters for its 
survival.

Ethiopia's Nile dam project signals its intention to become an African power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/14/ethiopia-grand-renaissance-dam-egypt>
Last week Ethiopia’s foreign ministry summoned Egypt’s ambassador to discuss 
“the current situation”, according to Ethiopian state media.

“The government has every responsibility to restore order,” Getachew said, a 
day after the government announced the state of emergency.

Getachew said the “extraordinary situation” demanded the state of emergency 
but insisted it did not amount to a “blanket ban on civilian life”.

He raised the possibility of concessions to protesters such as a government 
reshuffle and a “broadening of political space”.
 