
Fifty-four years later, one might suppose that the famous dress came on to the 
stage of its own accord, as if it had life as well as destiny. But yes, in 
1962, there was a warm body inside it. This was 19 May 1962, andMarilyn Monroe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marilynmonroe> was bringing happy birthday 
wishes to the president of the United States. She was 10 days early: the actual 
birthday of John F Kennedy, his 45th, would not be until 29 May. So what? The 
Democratic party wanted to have a super fundraiser at Madison Square Garden in 
New York City, so they needed not just JFK himself, but a hook and bait. The 
birthday was a pretext until the breathy song, “Happy birthday, Mr President 
...”

That was Marilyn Monroe. But did the Dems ask her or did the president himself 
arrange it? Sometimes a president can be an instrument in his own PR. Marilyn 
would be 36 on 1 June, which would prove to be her last birthday. On 5 August, 
she was found dead in her bed in Brentwood with just a sheet around her.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEqolSvoWNck&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEqolSvoWNck>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEqolSvoWNck&media=>
Happy Birthday Mr President feels so directed an incident, you have to wonder 
who was running the show. Was it Peter Lawford, the president’s brother-in-law, 
who seems to have been the onstage host for the event, dapper in his tux, 
looking off into the wings, waiting for a bright light, calling for her but she 
never shows, until at last he can welcome “the late Marilyn Monroe” – does he 
hear what he’s saying?

Or was it Marilyn’s own doing? There is a thought now, decades later, that 
says she was the victim of her time, that she was a wistful actor who wanted to 
play Chekhov or O’Neill. But still, you have to note how, time and again, 
hanging on to what was called her career, she did these far-fetched things that 
catered to male dreams – such as playing Sugar Kane in Some Like it Hot, 
kissing Tony Curtis and being the dumb blond in a dirty joke for us.

You can say that only demonstrates her victimhood and makes her wishing more 
wistful. But then you have to see the plain delight with which she did these 
preposterous things, these moments, as if she could not resist or do without 
the comfort that came with the gasps and the whistles at Madison Square Garden 
when she came into the platinum light, shrugged off her wrap and stood there, 
with her massed blonde waves jutting off to one side, like the control on tower 
an aircraft carrier, in a dress that could have been painted on her. And she 
did not seem like the hesitant neurotic of fame and constant lateness when she 
broke into the birthday song. Just take a look. She seems happy, and an actress 
is hired to give us some sort of good feeling. This is maybe her greatest 
moment – the most reckless – and she knows it, even if the summer of 1962 is 
her hell.

That dress didn’t just happen. It was the work of Jean Louis. Born in France 
in 1907, he had come to the US as a fashion designer and then got into the 
movies. He did work for the Duchess of Windsor, and he also created the black 
satin dress worn by Rita Hayworth in Gilda (1946). Hayworth does a restrained 
striptease (drawing off her elbow-length gloves) in the Put the Blame on Mame 
number, which was thought daring in its day. After the war, a pressure grew in 
movies (it was censorship fighting desire) in which we were asked to imagine 
what a woman would look like without clothes. It was as if there was a cultural 
blooming that had to break out of its sheath.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhappy-birthday-mr-president-the-story-of-marilyn-monroe-and-that-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8749e0b45810439cf78aef06eb200075d6597ae0%2F0_180_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Happy%20Birthday%2C%20Mr%20President%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Marilyn%20Monroe%20and%20that%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhappy-birthday-mr-president-the-story-of-marilyn-monroe-and-that-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Happy%20Birthday%2C%20Mr%20President%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Marilyn%20Monroe%20and%20that%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhappy-birthday-mr-president-the-story-of-marilyn-monroe-and-that-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8749e0b45810439cf78aef06eb200075d6597ae0%2F0_180_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The dress on display at Christie’s in Los Angeles, in 1999. Photograph: Scott 
Nelson/EPA 
Louis was an important figure in that history: he also did the black bathing 
suit that Deborah Kerr wears on an Hawaiian beach in From Here to Eternity, 
when she’s rolling in the surf with Burt Lancaster. That scene looks charming 
now, but in 1953 it was close to the outrage audiences were urging. There was a 
silly British gangster film in 1960, Too Hot to Handle, where Jayne Mansfield 
wore such a dress, and about which the story was promoted that the movie was so 
risque a few extra sequins had had to be painted on to the film to protect (or 
fetishise) Jayne’s nipples. But the Happy Birthday Mr President dress was the 
climax of this quest.

That summer was a frenzied time for Marilyn, and there are signs of how far 
she yearned to break out of not just a dress, but every setup that imprisoned 
her. Twentieth Century Fox put her in a new picture, Something’s Got to Give, 
for which she shot a promotional nude swimming scene – though censorship would 
not have allowed the sequence. It was as if she was breaking out already. Her 
illnesses or her anxieties slowed the film but then she took that unexpected 
excursion to New York to sing to JFK – and seemed camera-ready. Fox fired her 
and replaced her with Lee Remick.

That swimming pool scene and a silent screen test she had done with George 
Cukor are the most radiant and eloquent things she ever put on moving film. And 
in the same summer, with Bert Stern, she shot some semi-nude still pictures – 
this became the famous “last sitting” whereshe seems to look like a would-be 
Kennedy or a plaintive beauty 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/53035820@N02/sets/72157629529716033/> more 
appealing for being freed from so many stereotypes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhappy-birthday-mr-president-the-story-of-marilyn-monroe-and-that-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd32b595c6c7fbaee12aaa8b8d49253e13ccf65de%2F0_0_1500_1098%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Happy%20Birthday%2C%20Mr%20President%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Marilyn%20Monroe%20and%20that%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhappy-birthday-mr-president-the-story-of-marilyn-monroe-and-that-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Happy%20Birthday%2C%20Mr%20President%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20story%20of%20Marilyn%20Monroe%20and%20that%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhappy-birthday-mr-president-the-story-of-marilyn-monroe-and-that-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd32b595c6c7fbaee12aaa8b8d49253e13ccf65de%2F0_0_1500_1098%2F1500.jpg>
 Marilyn Monroe still wearing the dress, with Steve Smith, Kennedy’s 
brother-in-law, at a reception at Madison Square Garden. Photograph: Cecil 
Stoughton/AP 
There were also stories of a terrible weekend at the Cal-Neva Lodge, on the 
borders of California and Nevada, where Marilyn was passed around a circle of 
powerful men. The details are not clear, but you do not really want clarity. 
She was dead in just over a week, and that death (ahead of JFK’s)would have so 
many stories told about it that we’ll never know 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-1299496/Marilyn-Monroes-weekend--told-time-eyewitnesss-account-row-Frank-Sinatra-friends-fear-signed-death-warrant.html>
.

The dress remains, and I daresay it has provenance, although we are accustomed 
to be wary with such relics. Every now and then, people buy the Rosebud sled 
from Citizen Kane, amid mounting suspicion that there were several sleds. Why 
not? It was a movie, not a life in Colorado.

The dress itself, with all its inserted rhinestones, was said to have cost 
$12,000 in 1962. In 1999, it was sold for $1.3m (then £790,000),and now it is 
up for auction again, with some other Monroe mementoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/07/marilyn-monroes-happy-birthday-mr-president-dress-for-sale>
. Should it be purchased by the Smithsonian, or will some Trump-like figure buy 
it, to wonder if any woman he knows would fit in it? The dress must be cold now 
– it’s likely kept in a temperature-controlled vault – to guard against decay 
or disintegration. But one night in May 1962 it would have been the object of 
farcical preparation and infinite imagining. And for a few moments at least, it 
was warm.
 