
It was just before noon on 18 July when the soldiers grabbed Theresa*. She was 
only metres away from safety, a short dash from the UN gate that marked the 
entrance to her home, a camp for internally displaced people in Juba, the South 
Sudanese capital.


Even though they were in plain sight, the soldiers took their time, discussing 
Theresa’s fate before offering her a choice between two cruel options. “I could 
choose the one who would rape me, or they all would,” Theresa, not her real 
name, recalled. “I begged them to kill me instead.”

The five men, all members of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), the 
national military force, dragged her a few metres to the side of the road. Then 
they raped her – in broad daylight, right there on the side of the road.

Theresa is not the only woman to have suffered such a fate. In the immediate 
aftermath of deadlyclashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/10/south-sudan-capital-juba-violence-salva-kiir>
 earlier this month between government and opposition forces in Juba, dozens of 
women were reportedly raped in close proximity to the UN Protection of 
Civilians (POC) site, home to more than 30,000 displaced people.

Gender-based violence has become a defining feature 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=17207&LangID=E>
 of South Sudan’s civil war over the past two years. A culture of impunity 
within the armed forces and a limited peacekeeping presence outside the UN’s 
own bases are largely to blame.

As lawlessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/19/south-sudan-violence-fear-looting-juba>
 descended on some parts of the capital in the aftermath of the most recent 
clashes, soldiers preyed on women driven out of the POC by hunger, exploiting 
the vacuum left by an international community whose focus had shifted to
evacuating 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-southsudan-security-un-idUSKCN0ZU29R> its 
own staff.

Community leaders told reporters that more than 120 women were raped over the 
course of a few days, a figure that tallied with the number of casesdocumented 
<http://www.un.org/press/en/2016/db160727.doc.htm> by the UN. Several rape 
survivors recounted how soldiers who had set up shop along the road leading 
past the UN camp attacked women in what appeared to be systematic, ethnically 
driven violence against civilians. Most of the women were members of the Nuer 
community, the ethnic group of opposition leader Riek Machar, who fled Juba 
amid the most recent fighting.

“The objective is to impose punishment on a [segment of] society that is 
perceived to be sympathising with a particular group,” said Edmund Yakani, 
executive director of the Community Empowerment for Progress Organization, 
which lobbies for government accountability.

With young Nuer men often suspected of being rebel supporters, they rarely 
leave the camp’s perimeter. When the UN’s food supplies were looted, it was the 
women who set out to nearby markets in an effort to feed their families.

One of them was Nyanene, a quiet 15-year-old. “I saw that many women were 
going outside that day to get food,” she recalled. “I thought if I went along 
with the others, I’d be safe.”

As Nyanene made her way back from the market, two soldiers quietly pulled her 
away from the group. She was dragged into a nearby hut and raped by both men.

The army spokesperson, Brig Gen Lul Ruai Koang, blamed attacks near the POC on 
“bad elements” within the force, denying widespread violence against civilians 
by SPLA forces.

Wary of being ostracised by their husbands and the wider community, rape 
survivors rarely report incidents or seek professional help.

“In our culture it’s very difficult to admit that you have been raped. Often I 
have to guess what really happened to the women,” said Angelina John, a 
community leader who has been trying to gauge the scale of the attacks.

Many women would claim they were beaten but managed to escape. Others 
pretended to be witnesses of rape, recounting incidents in the third person, 
but with a level of excruciating detail that left little doubt about the truth.

Since the beginning of July, only 20 survivors of gender-based violence – a 
number that aid workers believe to be the tip of the iceberg – have registered 
with the International Rescue Committee to receive psychosocial support in the 
POC.

Yet even women who did seek help didn’t always get it. Theresa was brought to 
a clinic run by the International Medical Corps (IMC) the same day she was 
raped, but was only given painkillers, not the antiretrovirals she needed to 
reduce her risk of contracting HIV.

Mounting reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/11/south-sudans-soldiers-allowed-to-rape-civilians-civil-war-says-un-government-torture>
 of mass rape so close to UN premises have sparked renewed outrage among the 
displaced population, who already blame peacekeepers for abandoning their posts 
when thecamp came under fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/22/malakal-camp-south-sudan-un-united-nations-says-response-violence-marred-by-confusion>
.

The UN mission in South Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, 
Unmiss, maintains that it has protected civilians to the best of its ability 
but been thwarted by restrictions on movement imposed by government forces. “We 
were going as far as we could but, both around the POC site and inside the 
compound, there was still a robust level of patrolling going on,” said 
spokesperson Shantal Persaud.

The idea that Unmiss required permission to patrol from the very authorities 
that were responsible for perpetrating atrocities against civilians cast doubt 
on the effectiveness of its mandate. “If Unmiss doesn’t have the capacity to 
move beyond its bases in times of crisis, then the whole concept of protection 
of civilians is pointless,” said Yakani.

Theresa has lost her faith in the UN’s ability to protect her. “The security 
guards and the peacekeepers at the gate saw me being captured,” she recalled. 
“But they did nothing.”

* Some names have been changed to protect identities
 