
He may have crossed oceans solo, but it was a storm off the coast of Ireland 
that swept one-armed yachtsman Keith White overboard. The sailor – who has 
since become the first disabled man to cross the Atlantic unassisted – was 
circumnavigating the British Isles against the prevailing winds back in 2005, 
when he was hit by a force-11 gale.

His yacht capsized several times in the 10m-high waves, and when the RNLI 
lifeboat finally reached him21 hours 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/crew-may-be-honoured-for-sea-rescue-1.464623> 
later, he was thrown overboard, managing to somehow climb back on to his yacht 
to safety before he was towed back in. Even with three cracked ribs, he refused 
to halt his challenge. “I discharged myself and got the sails fixed by the end 
of the week and sailed back home,” he tells me over the phone from his home on 
the Isle of Wight. “I was frightened to get sailing again, but I had to do it.”

Talking to the 68-year-old today, it’s hard not to listen open-mouthed at his 
refusal to be cowed by anything life throws at him. In 1991 he was at the 
centre of a 14-vehicle pile-up when a lorry crossed the central reservation and 
hit the van in which he was a passenger. “The police thought I was dead,” he 
tells me. White had stopped breathing. “They told the ambulance not to rush – 
but when they got there [the paramedics realised] I still had a pulse, and 
revived me.” White survived, but his left arm was crushed beyond repair, and he 
lost his memory for two years.

A former builder, electrician and computer engineer, White previously could 
speak German and Italian, but lost this facility, as part of his problems 
recalling words. His pilot licence was removed and he could no longer follow 
his passion for scuba diving. But he had been sailing since he was 16, and so, 
in 2004, he decided to buy a boat, fitting it out so he could sail it 
singlehandedly. “I didn’t know at that point if I could sail with one hand,” he 
says. “But at the back of my mind I had always thought I could do anything if I 
put my mind to it. I think this comes from my mum – she always said I had the 
ability to do anything I wanted to.

“You have to try to visualise things in your head before you start. Planning 
is important; to know what you are about to do and how you will do it. I can do 
a bow line and tie my laces up with one hand. You just learn a technique.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fi-didnt-know-whether-i-could-sail-with-one-hand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5e31b1b523ab3b684c72596d1ac7bade9edef8%2F0_21_630_378%2F630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20know%20whether%20I%20could%20sail%20with%20one%20hand'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fi-didnt-know-whether-i-could-sail-with-one-hand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20know%20whether%20I%20could%20sail%20with%20one%20hand%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fi-didnt-know-whether-i-could-sail-with-one-hand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5e31b1b523ab3b684c72596d1ac7bade9edef8%2F0_21_630_378%2F630.jpg>
 Keith White: ‘I never have a negative thought – you have to have positive 
mental attitude.’ 
Within a year, White, a father of seven, had taken on the challenge of being 
the first one-armed sailor to circumnavigate the British Isles. Then he crossed 
the Atlantic alone in 2008. Last year he attempted to become thefirst sailor 
with a disability to circumnavigate the globe 
<http://www.yachtingmonthly.com/news/disabled-yachtsman-aims-to-sail-solo-around-the-world-32926>
, but had to postpone the challenge after a storm off the coast of Sierra Leone 
caused mechanical failures.

Sailing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sailing> single-handed for weeks 
requires mental, as well as physical, strength – you have to be constantly 
alert and completely self-reliant. Especially when you are alone in the face of 
the huge storms White has had to battle. So how does he do it? It’s a question 
that makes the yachtsman laugh.

“When you have seven children it’s lovely to have a little time on your own! 
It’s heaven,” he jokes. “I’m a sociable person: I do like lots of people 
around. I don’t think about being alone at sea, because I am so busy.

“I do a log every hour, and my diary, and I read a few books. I have very 
little sleep. It took six weeks to sail back across the Atlantic, and I got 
about 26 hours’ sleep.”

Answering emails and chatting over Facebook can help stem any loneliness, he 
says. Staying optimistic helps for everything else. “Don’t I worry I will die? 
No, I am a cat! I never have a negative thought: you have to have positive 
mental attitude.

 “You are too busy to think. I don’t panic, I just try and assess the 
situation and deal with it.

“I don’t back down and I don’t like things to control me – even fear. Fear of 
failing is the biggest fear for me. I’m not trying to be a hero, I just try to 
do my best.”

After weeks alone at sea, he says, there are physical challenges to walking on 
dry land. “On my longest voyage back to Dartmouth, my legs hurt for two weeks 
because I wasn’t used to walking anymore. I just hadn’t been using those 
muscles.

“If I turned too quickly, I had the sensation of losing my balance because you 
aren’t on a boat.”

But mentally, he thinks, he adjusts to life on shore quickly now – the trick, 
he says, is to stay equally busy on land and sea. “Today I decorated my 
bedroom. Yesterday I was fitting an alternator on the boat. Before that it was 
the water pump, and I had to strip the engine back.

“My days fly by and I feel like I am 20 years old. I just try and treat every 
day as something new and enjoy it.”

When he made his first Atlantic crossing he was, he admits, disappointed to 
have his peace and quiet broken by his arrival on land – when he was still 
halfway through reading his novel. But, he says, he threw himself into meeting 
new people, which soon counteracted his irritation. “I made sure I caught local 
buses so I could chat to people – I fill my life with people.”

In between adventures, he prepares his boat, and then I ask him how he 
relaxes. “I go sailing! I like sailing with people who haven’t tried it before. 
Or I get involved in yacht races with friends.”

Perhaps the main reason for his success in adjusting to life after a big 
adventure, he says, is that he always has an idea for a new one in his back 
pocket; from raising money for charity to sailing races. “It keeps me ticking 
over – there’s always something new to do. I just like challenges and one leads 
to another.

“My mum always said the worst part of any job is starting – the rest comes 
easy. Unless you make the first step you aren’t going to get anywhere.”
 