
In Washington on Friday, the incoming president will place his left hand on 
the bible and, with his right hand raised, repeat the following, led by the 
chief justice:

“I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the office of president of 
the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and 
defend the constitution of the United States.”

That’s assuming chief justice John Roberts doesn’t muck up the lines, as he 
did in 2009 requiring Barack Obama to be sworn in again at the White House a 
day later.

The oath is required by the US constitution itself. President Trump is likely 
to add the optional extra, “so help me God” or maybe surprise everyone with an 
“Inshallah”.

Reciting the oath of office is unlikely to cause too much difficulty for the 
incoming president, even though he gives the distinct impression he has little 
idea what the constitution is about.

Related: What shall I wear to Donald Trump’s inauguration if ‘all the dress 
shops are sold out’? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2017/jan/16/donald-trump-inauguration-fashion-advice>

He does have the let-out proviso – “to the best of my ability” – which leaves 
plenty of room to accommodate his skew-shift views about what he thinks needs 
preserving, protecting and defending.

A group of US law professors recently wrote to Trump imploring him to get a 
grip on the constitution <http://bit.ly/2jZ8BFv>, to uphold and adhere to the 
rule of law, to take responsible positions on constitutional issues, to make 
executive and judicial appointments that will unify rather than divide and to 
denounce hate crimes.

There’s fat chance that Donald will pay the slightest bit of attention to what 
pointy-head professors think, which reinforces their concerns that the US 
constitution is in for a blistering time.

After all, this is a man who in the face of the first amendment’s protection 
of freedom of the press wants to “open up our libel laws 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/on-media/2016/02/donald-trump-libel-laws-219866> 
so when they write purposely negative and horrible and false articles, we can 
sue them and win lots of money ... we’re going to have people sue you like 
you’ve never got sued before”.

Actually, people can already sue for articles that are deliberately false, 
nonetheless it’s the new horizon where the media can be punished for being 
negative about him or the oligarchs, plutocrats and, in all likelihood, 
kleptocrats, who make up his administration.

He has said that he wants to punish and revoke the citizenship of Americans 
who burn the flag, contrary to at least two supreme court decisions that 
protect political expression. The court also has found that the government is 
constitutionally prohibited from removing citizenship on the basis of hostility 
to the state.

We know that Trump has called reporters who question his motivation “dishonest 
... disgusting ... scum” and some were banned from his campaign. Now there are 
fresh reports of proposals toremove the entire press corps from the White House 
<https://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/report-trump-administration-white-house-press-corps>
 and relocate the press room to the old executive building or an annex.

Meanwhile, Trump’s own freedom of expression continues unhinged. He Tweets 
personal abuse and lies about those who criticise his policies and 
pronouncements with the result that his supporters unleash their invective on 
these insubordinate citizens.

Robert Reich, a professor of public policy at the University of California, 
Berkeley, and aformer Secretary of Labor in the Clinton administration wrote 
<http://www.truthdig.com/report/item/donald_trumps_capricious_use_of_power_to_denigrate_critics_20161211>
: “No president or president-elect in history has ever before publicly 
condemned individual citizens for criticising him. That occurs in two-bit 
dictatorships intent on stamping out dissent.”

If it’s not reporters, the media and free speech whose constitutional 
protection is under threat, it’s Mexicans and Muslims. Trump has variously 
pledged to prohibit all Muslims from entering the United States, to “strongly 
consider” closing mosques along with vague ideas about creating a register of 
Muslims. These edicts change in the breeze, so it’s not entirely clear what 
Trump means at any given moment.

As the law professors point out in their joint letter, identification of a 
entire group of people for different treatment based on religious or ethnic 
background, “raises extraordinary troubling questions about how your 
administration will understand the rights of religious minorities”.

Those rights are protected by the “free exercise” clause of the first 
amendment: “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, 
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, 
or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to 
petition the government for a redress of grievances”.

Further, the fifth amendment provides for equal protection under the law – 
about which Trump has barely given a cursory thought as he trundles out his 
threats and bombast.

Mexicans also had better watch out and not just because of the wall. Those 
with Mexican heritage are likely to be abused for doing their job, as was the 
experience of federal judge Gonzalo Curiel who presided in civil litigation 
where Trump was a party. The then presumptive Republican nominee for president 
accused the judge of having a conflict, because of his ethnicity. For good 
measure he embroidered his abuse by claiming that Curiel was a “hater of Donald 
Trump ... a disgrace”.

Trump’s inflammatory rhetoric has let the mad dogs off the leash with hate 
speech against minorities increasing significantly 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/hate-on-the-rise-after-trumps-election>
 since the election, as white supremacists like the Ku Klux Klan and the 
“alt-right” get a new veneer of legitimacy.

Abortion is another confused area 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/04/03/donald-trumps-ever-shifting-positions-on-abortion/?utm_term=.9c903c61e3bf>
 in Trump’s closet of constitutional variables. In 1999 he announced he was 
“pro-choice”, then he swapped to being pro-life. Later, in 2015, he said he was 
pro-choice, but got muddled and said he really meant to say he was pro-life.

During his run for the nomination he announced that women who have abortions 
should be “punished”. This was later modified to say the doctors who performed 
abortions should be punished because the women were “victims”.

He also said he would appoint judges to the supreme court who would overturn 
Roe v Wade, the 1973 landmark decision that struck down state and federal laws 
restricting access to abortions, with the majority of the judges deeming 
abortion a fundamental right under the constitution.

Related: Inauguration boycott grows as Donald Trump meets Martin Luther King 
III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/inauguration-boycott-donald-trump-martin-luther-king-iii-john-lewis>

It’s unlikely he will find anyone more regressive than supreme court judge 
Antonin Scalia, the who died last year following an afternoon of quail 
shooting. The Republicans refused to hold confirmation hearings for president 
Obama’s nominee, Merrick Garland, leaving the seat vacant for Trump to fill.

To swear on Friday that as president he will “preserve, protect and defend the 
constitution” while simultaneously threatening its very tenets will be one of 
many exciting challenges ahead.

Here on Australian soil, political leaders don’t have to swear to uphold any 
high-blown constitutional protections, probably because we have precious few of 
them. They simply swear, or affirm, that they will be “faithful and bear true 
allegiance” to Her Majesty the Queen. Unlike Donald, they are not even required 
to do that to the best of their ability.
 