
Father and son are circling one another. “I could put you on your back, smart 
arse, and I’ve got you covered in the rookery, too,” says Ben Duncan, 60, 
played by the actor Kelton Pell in a black singlet.


“Is that a challenge, old man?” his son Ritchie (Luke Carroll), 30, fires 
back. “First one to 15 birds.”


Grandson Clay Duncan (James Slee), 16, wearing a baseball cap turned 
backwards, is assigned to count each man’s catch ofshort-tailed shearwaters 
<http://dpipwe.tas.gov.au/wildlife-management/animals-of-tasmania/birds/complete-list-of-tasmanian-birds/short-tailed-shearwater>
.

Blaque Showgirls review – Indigenous take on cult film is loud, proud and camp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/18/blaque-showgirls-review-indigenous-take-on-cult-film-is-loud-proud-and-camp>
Shearwaters, a type of muttonbird, also called yolla or moonbird, are 
harvested for food (the meat tastes like mutton), feathers for mattress fill, 
and the omega-3 rich oil, which is squeezed out of the birds’ guts, for 
medicinal use. Harvesting is a confronting job to outsiders: chicks are pulled 
from their burrows and their necks are quickly snapped.


Today, chequered tea towels substitute for the birds. We are in a Melbourne 
rehearsal room. The play, The Season, first presented as a work-in-progress 
public reading in Sydney last year at theYellamundie 
<http://www.southsydneyherald.com.au/theatre-review-yellamundie/#.WE92Hndh2u4> 
Indigenous playwriting festival, is edging towards its formal premiere at 
Sydney festival, at the Sydney Opera House.


The Season was written by the first-time playwright Nathan Maynard 
<http://www.tasperforms.com/2016-2/the-season> as a tribute to Indigenous bird 
harvesting culture. It’s a tradition being kept alive, Maynard tells Guardian 
Australia, despite pressure “to assimilate” after authorities “moved our fellas 
off into mainstream Australia, basically to try and breed the black out of us”. 
Maynard says he wrote the play because he wanted to “pay respect to them old 
fellas” for surviving, and keeping the culture thriving.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa4d07aea044ee58a77d089f98a179a29e81ba6a%2F0_0_5525_3683%2F5525.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20something%20to%20celebrate%E2%80%99%3A%20Indigenous%20playwright%20tackles%20tradition%20in%20The%20Season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20something%20to%20celebrate%E2%80%99%3A%20Indigenous%20playwright%20tackles%20tradition%20in%20The%20Season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa4d07aea044ee58a77d089f98a179a29e81ba6a%2F0_0_5525_3683%2F5525.jpg>
 Kelton Pell and Luke Carroll in rehearsal for The Season. Photograph: James 
Henry 
Indigenous people have been catching muttonbirds for thousands of years 
<http://www.utas.edu.au/library/companion_to_tasmanian_history/M/Muttonbird.htm>
. “Millennia,” Maynard emphasises. “It’s just evolved. Our old fellas used to 
go to the rookeries, and get these birds when they were there because they were 
a great food source; a seasonal tucker.”


Dog Island, where the muttonbirds are harvested in Maynard’s play, is named 
for Great Dog or Big Dog Island: a 354-hectare granite isle filled with tussock 
grassland, off the south coast of Flinders Island in Bass Strait, where 
commercial birding operations have existed for more than 200 years. Maynard’s 
father didn’t take him muttonbirding on Big Dog, his family’s “spiritual home”, 
until he was 15, because birding season, which runs late March through late 
April, clashed with the school term. Maynard, though, takes his eight-year-old 
son each year.


Maynard is a Trawlwoolway man and descendant of Mannalargenna 
<https://griffithreview.com/articles/channelling-mannalargenna/>, a leader of 
the north-east Tasmanian Indigenous peoples, who led resistance against British 
soldiers in the early 19th century.

In 1995 the Tasmanian government handed back 
<http://www.utas.edu.au/library/companion_to_tasmanian_history/A/Aboriginal%20land%20rights.htm>
 several sites, including Great Dog and Babel islands, to Indigenous people in 
an acknowledgement of Aboriginal dispossession. Maynard carries on the 
self-determination fight: in 2011 he wasarrested 
<https://idisentangler.wordpress.com/2011/04/18/tas-police-rub-salt-into-the-wounds-of-aboriginal-tasmania/>
 during a smoking ceremony protesting against a road going through an important 
cultural meeting place at Kutalayna, in Tasmania’s lower Jordan valley.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F165d4cc94d8976ffaa4c61c465310e34eba8f5b4%2F524_0_3840_3840%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20something%20to%20celebrate%E2%80%99%3A%20Indigenous%20playwright%20tackles%20tradition%20in%20The%20Season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20something%20to%20celebrate%E2%80%99%3A%20Indigenous%20playwright%20tackles%20tradition%20in%20The%20Season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F165d4cc94d8976ffaa4c61c465310e34eba8f5b4%2F524_0_3840_3840%2F3840.jpg>
 Indigenous playwright and author of The Season, Nathan Maynard. Photograph: 
James Henry 
The Season is being presented in a wider Sydney festival program marking the 
50th anniversary of the 1967 referendum, which voted to count Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islanders in the census and amend two sections of the 
constitution that discriminated against Indigenous people.


Maynard says he wants a treaty now for Indigenous Australia, and does not 
support the current constitutional recognition campaign. “What does 
[recognition] do? It tells us we’re here. We know that we’re here. Why can’t 
being recognised be part of a treaty?”


His play is delightfully funny and, while culturally specific, the family 
dynamics it depicts are universal. All seven actors in The Season, as well as 
the writer and the director, Isaac Drandic, are Indigenous – a rare combination 
in Australian theatre.


In the rehearsal room corner, crouching shirtless and in shorts, script open 
on the floor, the bushy-bearded actor Trevor Jamieson is about to spring into 
action. Jamieson has imbued his character, a rival muttonbirder named Neil 
Watson, with a slightly hunched posture, comical tiptoeing and a helium-sucking 
voice, inspired partly by the antics of a Noongar friend in Western Australia 
who visits kids’ hospitals as a clown doctor.


Behind Jamieson, on the wall as inspiration, are classic black and white 
images of muttonbirders by the photographerRicky Maynard 
<https://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/artists/maynard-ricky/> – Nathan 
Maynard’s older cousin – from collections entitled The Moonbird People and 
Portrait of a Distant Land.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6082875c9cb8a1639c8a464b4e0393f4139310df%2F0_0_1104_711%2F1104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20something%20to%20celebrate%E2%80%99%3A%20Indigenous%20playwright%20tackles%20tradition%20in%20The%20Season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20something%20to%20celebrate%E2%80%99%3A%20Indigenous%20playwright%20tackles%20tradition%20in%20The%20Season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6082875c9cb8a1639c8a464b4e0393f4139310df%2F0_0_1104_711%2F1104.jpg>
 Jason Thomas, Terry Maynard and David Maluga, 1985, from The Moonbird People. 
Photograph: Ricky Maynard 
The Season’s characters are north-eastern Indigenous Tasmanian people, so 
Jamieson – whose father was Pitjantjatjara and mother Noongar – has to adopt 
what he calls a Tasmanian “southern twang”. There is a sprinkling of local 
vernacular in the script, such as “coe”, a synonym for “fellas”.

After rolling a smoke during the break, Jamieson explains how he approaches 
the challenges of dialogue that varies across Indigenous language groups: 
“Where you live geographically – it’s the way you speak, the way the air blows, 
and on country, the vibrant energy it all gives you.”

On stage, Jamieson has played the Arrernte painter Albert Namatjira 
<http://www.abc.net.au/local/reviews/2011/10/07/3334349.htm>, in an accent 
influenced by German Lutheran missionaries, as well as the fictional Darug 
warrior Ngalamalum in Andrew Bovell’s adaptation of Kate Grenville’s novelThe 
Secret River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/10/the-secret-river-review-a-masterful-portrayal-of-australias-dark-past>
 for Sydney Theatre Company. In the ABCminiseries 
<https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2015/june/1433080800/steve-dow/history-wars>
 version of The Secret River, the character was called Gumang, or Grey Beard.


“You get the fuck off my rookery, Watson,” yells the senior Duncan at 
Jamieson’s character, resting on his shoulder a wooden spit which slightly 
resembles a spear but is thicker and carved to a point at both ends, on to 
which the slaughtered birds are threaded.


In the next scene Jamieson’s character is in strife with his lover, Aunty 
Marlene, 62, played by Lisa Maza. “Sweet cheeks,” he implores, “sight for sore 
eyes.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3ac062c61784fac1fdbeb7730db1d9e79f318df%2F0_0_5205_3470%2F5205.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20something%20to%20celebrate%E2%80%99%3A%20Indigenous%20playwright%20tackles%20tradition%20in%20The%20Season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20something%20to%20celebrate%E2%80%99%3A%20Indigenous%20playwright%20tackles%20tradition%20in%20The%20Season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fi-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3ac062c61784fac1fdbeb7730db1d9e79f318df%2F0_0_5205_3470%2F5205.jpg>
 Trevor Jamieson as Neil Watson and Lisa Maza as Aunty Marlene in rehearsal. 
Photograph: James Henry 
“I’m not your fuckin’ bird island fling,” she admonishes, then scorns his 
“freckled dick prick”. Watson slinks off, and Aunty Marlene says in soliloquy: 
“He had his light on and I flew straight into it.”


There is a Dreamtime story that muttonbirds come from the moon, hence 
Indigenous birders are sometimes dubbedthe moonbird people 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3028827-moonbird-people>. Less 
romantically, the birds, blinded by light, have a habit of flying into the 
plucking sheds at night.


Muttonbirding became the commercial mainstay of the islands by the mid-19th 
century <http://eprints.utas.edu.au/21596/> after European sealers hunted seal 
colonies to near-extinction. Tasmania and the surrounding islands attract some 
18 million birds every year. The chicks are “taken under strict controls”, says 
Tasmania’s Department of Primary Industries, Parks Water and Environment, 
although a poor breeding season a couple of years agoraised concerns 
<http://www.themercury.com.au/news/tasmania/shearwater-shortage-sparks-alarm-with-bass-strait-island-colonies-devoid-of-chicks-and-annual-mutton-bird-harvest-looking-grim/news-story/4ce1e48f52b5047656ebd0465d0f0dc2>
 about their survival.


Reimagining The Drover's Wife: Leah Purcell weaves Indigenous Australia into 
classic tale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/12/reimagining-the-drovers-wife-leah-purcell-weaves-indigenous-australia-into-classic-tale>
The Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre <http://tacinc.com.au/>’s 2014-15 monitoring 
<http://tacinc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/2014_15-Muttonbird-Monitoring-on-Aboriginal-Islands.pdf>
 report indicates that bird occupancy rates at burrows at Big Dog and Babel 
have improved, although animal rights groups want an end torecreational killing 
<http://www.animalsaustralia.org/factsheets/mutton_bird_hunting.php>, mostly 
distinguishing hunting by non-Indigenous people from that by Indigenous people 
with a cultural connection to the land.


That cultural connection ensures care is taken to maintain the muttonbird 
population, and the habitat is kept in balance so that the birds come back. “We 
play a part in making sure everything else around them is sustainable, too,” 
says Maynard.


Issues such as land rights and cultural maintenance may inform his work, but 
Maynard knew from the beginning of this play that he had a comedy on his hands.


“This being my first play, I didn’t want to write something sad,” he says. 
“There was a lot of sad stuff out there. And I wanted something to celebrate. I 
wanted blackfellas to be able to go to the theatre and go, ‘That was cool.’”

• The Season plays at Sydney festival 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/the-season> 10 to 15 January and Hobart’s
Theatre Royal <http://www.theatreroyal.com.au/shows/season> 16 to 19 March 
during the Ten Days on the Island festival
 