
Hermes couriers have welcomed the announcement that the parcel delivery firm 
faces an inquiry by HM Revenue and Customs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/delivery-giant-hermes-faces-hmrc-inquiry-into-low-pay-allegations>
 into allegations that couriers are paid at levels equivalent to less than the 
“national living wage” and claims they may have been wrongly classed as self 
employed.

A Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/hermes-couriers-paying-staff-less-than-living-wage>
 revealed in July that some self-employed contractors were taking home less 
than £6 an hour.


“I am just glad they are going to start looking into it,” said Cherie Nolan, a 
long-term Hermes courier from Manchester who quit in the summer when a regular 
customer threatened violence in a dispute over whether a parcel had been 
delivered. Nolan said it was “about time” that big companies were scrutinised.

Self-employed earn less than in 2001 – and will be hit by welfare cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/self-employed-earn-less-than-2001-hit-welfare-cuts>
 “I hope they are going to realise that the little man is not always the 
skivvy, that we are people and we have rights. I was convinced I was a worker 
and was not self-employed. We were being dictated to too much. I would like to 
see the couriers receive backdated money.”

A current Hermes courier in Manchester, Marie, 42, who estimates she earns 
£3.50 an hour after expenses, welcomed the government move. If HMRC does find 
that the workers are not self-employed, they will be entitled to the national 
living wage, currently £7.20 an hour for those aged 25 and over. “I feel like 
we are now being listened to,” Marie said.

“My customers are asking me if it’s true I am earning less than the minimum 
wage and when I say yes they are disgusted.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fmission-impossible-the-truth-about-being-an-online-delivery-driver-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mission%20impossible%3F%20The%20truth%20about%20being%20an%20online%20delivery%20driver%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fmission-impossible-the-truth-about-being-an-online-delivery-driver-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mission%20impossible%3F%20The%20truth%20about%20being%20an%20online%20delivery%20driver%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fmission-impossible-the-truth-about-being-an-online-delivery-driver-video&media=>
Mission impossible? The truth about being an online delivery driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/video/2016/jul/18/mission-impossible-the-truth-about-being-an-online-delivery-driver-video>

After the Guardian ran its initial investigation, Hermes invited couriers who 
felt they were being underpaid to request a review of their parcel delivery 
rates. Marie said she wrote to her bosses six weeks ago requesting a rise on 
her 45p per parcel rate, but has heard nothing since. “I can’t be patient,” she 
said. “I am working for nothing. I am at the bottom end of the parcel rates.”

She said she was now looking for a second job to subsidise the expenses of 
working for Hermes, which have recently risen because of higher petrol prices.

Hermes said it was “confident in the legality of our self-employed courier 
model and we will cooperate fully with any investigation should there be one.”

It said: “Three out of four of the pay-rate cases that were reviewed by the 
service complaints panel in its first month received a rate increase. We also 
have an external independent ombudsman service that is able to make an 
independent decision on matters that are referred to it, and Hermes has 
committed to always accept the decision of the ombudsman.”

Couriers have complained that their self-employed status makes work highly 
precarious and they fear losing their rounds if they are not able to work on 
certain days through illness, bereavement or vehicle breakdown.


“It is fantastic that couriers’ concerns are finally being taken seriously on 
this,” said a Hermes courier from Yorkshire who asked not to be named. “Most 
couriers have homes and families to support and we should all be able to work 
and do our job without the threat of instant removal of work for something 
outside your control. If we are self-employed then we should be able to run the 
business as we see fit, able to turn down work, and then it is real self 
employment.”

Another worker who has been with the company for five years welcomed the 
investigation, but said he would earn less if he was moved to the national 
living wage rather than the parcel rate. “I can deliver 100 parcels in 3.5 
hours and make around £1,300 a month – but for someone who is new and still 
learning it would take them much longer to do the same work,” he said.

He said he only felt self-employed “when I get paid and I have to pay my own 
tax ... we can’t just take time off, we have to get cover”. Recently he had to 
cancel a planned break because there was no one to cover his work. “They asked: 
‘Are you registered with HMRC? Then you’re self-employed and you need to get 
your own cover.’”
 