
Notable speeches by Indigenous Australians: 'We refuse to be pushed into the 
background'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/26/notable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background>
A Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/thepresets/posts/10153336613456129?pnref=story> by 
the Presets calling 26 January the “cruelest of anniversaries” has gone viral. 
The Sydney band have suggested other dates which Australia Day could be moved 
to, including the birthdays of writer Henry Lawson or Indigenous activist Eddie 
Mabo.

The band said 26 January marked the anniversary of the British settlement of 
Australia, a day “white man arrived with his guns, his alcohol, his church, his 
flus and other unknown illnesses”.

“Out of all the days of the year that we could possibly choose to celebrate 
this wonderful nation of Australia, we think it’s frankly sickening that we 
continue to celebrate on this cruelest of anniversaries, January 26.”

At time of publish, the post had been liked 20,700 times and shared by more 
than 3,300 Facebook users.

The Aria award-winning electronic music duo, Julian Hamilton and Kim Moyes, 
said they looked forward to a time when “a new day is chosen to celebrate our 
great nation – a day that we can all truly get behind”.

They said there were better dates to choose than the anniversary of 
Australia’s federation, 1 January – an alternative that has been widely 
suggested.

Australians invited to commemorate Survival Day at Indigenous events
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/22/australians-invited-to-commemorate-survival-day-at-indigenous-events>
They proposed 16 August to honour the date in 1975 when then prime minister 
Gough Whitlam travelled to the Northern Territory and handed back land to the 
Gurindji people. “There he famously poured a handful of soil into the hands of 
Gurindji man Vincent Lingiari to symbolically mark the handing back of Wave 
Hill station to the Gurindji people.”

“Just imagine if we could all get behind and celebrate a symbol as potent and 
as positive as that, in the same way that we, say, commemorate the memory of 
young soldiers storming the beaches of Turkey on Anzac Day.”

However, not everyone was supportive of the post. Among the most liked 
comments was one by Candy Camilleri who said she was part Aboriginal and loved
Australia Day <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day>. “It’s 
our country’s day to celebrate our country, that’s it. If we wanted to sit and 
stew about our ancestors past experiences we could pick any friggin day of the 
year. Each to their own, I have relatives that hate it.”

Australia Day is a time for mourning, not celebration | Nakkiah Lui
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/26/australia-day-is-a-time-for-mourning-not-celebration>
Another popular comment was posted by Nathan Sorensen-Salman. “How dare you 
insult a day that is about everyone and turn it into a political discussion 
which has a typical agenda pushed not by indigenous people, but by white 
do-Gooders.

“Australia Day is totally about inclusion of everyone and is a celebration – 
not a commiseration.”
 