
The retired cyclist Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> is set to turn his attention 
to winter sports as he takes part in celebrity skiing competition The Jump.

The eight-time Olympic medallist, who called time on his cycling career at the 
end of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/28/bradley-wiggins-announces-retirement-from-cycling>
, will follow in the footsteps of sporting stars such as the rower Sir Steve 
Redgrave, gymnast Beth Tweddle and swimmer Rebecca Adlington, all of whom were 
forced to pull out of the competitiondue to injuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/25/the-jump-channel-4>.

Sir Bradley Wiggins’ cycling legacy depends on Ukad judgment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/bradley-wiggins-cycling-legacy-final-judgment-ukad>
The former Tour De France champion, 36, does not seem fazed by the show’s 
history and said he is looking forward to taking his other favourite sport to 
the next level. “Skiing is a big passion of mine, it was a mix of that and the 
other committed names this year that made me want to sign up,” Wiggins said. 
“Major retiring Olympians such as Sir Steve Redgrave have also trod this path, 
I see this as a sporting challenge and want to go out there and win it. Just 
don’t call me a celebrity.”

Wiggins’s comments jar slightly with those made in an interview with the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/bradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns>
 last year, when he made his thoughts on reality shows clear: “You don’t want 
to become just this pointless celebrity who’s here, there and everywhere, going 
on Can’t Cook, Won’t Cook. I don’t want to become a captain on Question Of 
Sport and go on every week playing the fool.”

Having recently retired from a 15-year cycling career with five Olympic gold 
medals under his belt, Wiggins will be joining the former England rugby captain 
Jason Robinson, Olympic gymnast Louis Smith and two-time Olympic taekwondo 
champion Jade Jones in the show’s fourth series. Also taking part are the 
former Liverpool and England footballer Robbie Fowler,Gareth Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gareth-thomas> – who won 100 rugby union 
caps for Wales and four as in rugby league – and Paralympian Kadeena Cox, who 
won gold, silver and bronze across two disciplines at Rio 2016.

Wiggins is the 14th and final name to sign up to the six-week competition, 
which will see participants take on challenges in snow sports. The Jump will 
return to Channel 4 within the next few months but a start date has yet to be 
confirmed. The channellaunched a safety review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/channel-4-launches-safety-review-jump-celebrity-casualties>
 after last year’s series saw a string of injuries, the most serious of which
was to Tweddle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/jump-beth-tweddle-operation-to-repair-neck-injury-after-accident>
, who underwent surgery to fuse fractured vertebrae. In all seven of 16 
participants – including replacements – eventually withdrew from the show.

The full list of contestants: Bradley Wiggins, Gareth Thomas, Jason Robinson, 
Robbie Fowler, Spencer Matthews, Mark Dolan,Louis Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/louissmith>, Jade Jones, Kadeena Cox, Vogue 
Williams, Lydia Bright, Josie Gibson, Emma Parker-Bowles and Caprice Bourret.
 