
Premature babies who were breastfed exclusively and kept warm through 
continuous skin-to-skin contact have become young adults with larger brains, 
higher salaries and less stressful lives than babies who received conventional 
incubator care, according to a study published this week.

The research 
<http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/pediatrics/early/2016/12/08/peds.2016-2063.full.pdf>
 (pdf), in the journal Pediatrics, compared 18- to 20-year-olds who, as 
premature and low birth-weight infants, were randomised at birth in Colombia to 
receive either traditional incubator care orkangaroo mother care 
<http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/9241590351/en/> (KMC) – 
a technique whereby parents or caregivers become a baby’s incubator and its 
main source of food and stimulation – until they could maintain their own body 
temperature.

Inequality has transformed surviving childhood into a global postcode lottery 
| Flavia Bustreo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/infant-child-death-inequality-surviving-childhood-global-postcode-lottery>
The kangaroo method involves the baby nestling in a “kangaroo” position on the 
caregiver’s chest as soon as possible after birth, accompanied by exclusive 
breastfeeding. Parent and child leave the hospital together as soon as possible 
after birth, after which there is rigorous monitoring of baby and mother for 
one year after the infant’s original due date (rather than the actual birth 
date).


Researchers investigated 264 of the KMC participants who weighed less than 
1.8kg at birth, and found that the technique offered significant protection 
against early death. The mortality rate among incubator-treated babies was 
7.7%, more than double that of those in the KMC group (3.5%). Almost every 
other area investigated revealed further advantages: average hourly wages of 
the KMC group were nearly 53% higher than their counterparts; cerebral 
development was significantly higher; family life was found to be more 
nurturing and protective; and children spent more time in school and were less 
aggressive, hyperactive and stressed.

“This study indicates that kangaroo mother care has significant, long-lasting 
social and behavioural protective effects 20 years after the intervention,” 
said lead researcher Dr Nathalie Charpak, of the Kangaroo Foundation in Bogotá.

“We firmly believe that this is a powerful, efficient, scientifically based 
healthcare intervention that can be used in all settings, from those with very 
restricted to unrestricted access to healthcare.”

According to the World Health Organisation, nearly one in 10 babies worldwide 
is born preterm <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs363/en/> (before 
37 completed weeks of gestation), with resulting birth complications theleading 
cause of death among children under five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/17/preterm-births-complications-main-killer-children>
. Preterm birth rates are rising globally every year, yet more premature babies 
areborn in low-income countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/infant-child-death-inequality-surviving-childhood-global-postcode-lottery>
 (9%) – where they face a greater risk of complications – than high-income 
countries (12%). In Malawi, for example, 18 in every 100 births are preterm.

Many survivors face a lifetime of disability – including learning disabilities 
and visual and hearing problems – and require extra care to avoid illness and 
death from secondary, preventable complications including hypothermia. In 
developing countries, where incubators are often scarce and unreliable, 
kangaroo mother care could save lives, said Dr Peter Singer, chief executive 
officer of Grand Challenges Canada, which supported the research.

“A premature infant is born somewhere in the world every two seconds,” he 
said. “This study shows that kangaroo mother care gives premature and low 
birth-weight babies a better chance of thriving. Kangaroo mother care saves 
brains and makes premature and low birth-weight babies healthier and wealthier.”

While the technique does not replace modern science or neonatology, it is an 
excellent complement, said Charpak. Hospitals in Scandinavia, among them the
NICU in Uppsala, Sweden <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VVwbVJpfgAc>, are 
using KMC to stabilise preterm babies. Grand Challenges Canada is fundingtwo 
“centres of excellence” and 10 treatment centres 
<http://www.grandchallenges.ca/grantee-stars/0737-05/> to deliver kangaroo care 
across Cameroon and Mali, where preterm birth rates are among the highest in 
the world.

The study’s positive findings are impossible to attribute to one reason alone, 
said Charpak. Rather, they result from a multidisciplinary approach involving 
regular skin-to-skin contact, breastfeeding, education of the mother and 
family, and support over a 12-month follow-up period.

“One of our hypotheses is that, by placing the infant in the mother, father or 
caregiver’s chest, the infant’s brain is in a less stressful environment,” said 
Charpak. “KMC also creates a climate in which the parents become progressively 
more aware of the child and more prone to sensitive caring.”


In contrast, said Charpak, a preterm baby born at 30 weeks could spend seven 
weeks in an incubator, where it is separated from its mother and faces a steady 
stream of light and noise. “It is easy to understand why this may not be the 
place for the baby’s immature brain to grow correctly,” she added.

Although a Cochrane review of 21 randomised control trials 
<http://www.cochrane.org/CD002771/NEONATAL_kangaroo-mother-care-reduce-morbidity-and-mortality-low-birthweight-infants>
 concluded that kangaroo mother care significantly reduces mortality among 
preterm babies and is a safe and effective alternative to conventional care, 
global use of the technique remains low. TheEvery Newborn 
<https://www.everynewborn.org/> action plan, endorsed by the World Health 
Organisation in 2014, set a target to reach at least 50% of the world’s low 
birth-weight infants with kangaroo mother care by 2020.

Charpak is hopeful that research efforts like the Colombia study will change 
attitudes to the care of preterm babies, not least among health workers.

“There are barriers related to the implementation of KMC programmes, 
particularly from health staff,” she said. “We believe long-term results will 
help convince the doubtful about the benefits of implementing KMC.”
 