
Screen time and how to control it has replaced homework and healthy eating as 
a parent’s main concern,according to charity Action for Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/06/fears-children-addicted-online-games>
. After the Observer reported the findings of its survey last week we asked 
parents to share their experiences and perspectives.


Fears grow for children addicted to online games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/06/fears-children-addicted-online-games>
While some who contacted us expressed concerns about their children’s habits, 
most had found constructive ways to see the positives in activities such as 
online gaming. Many were pragmatic in their approach to parenting in an age of 
iPads, gaming and constant connectivity that, as one parent puts it, “is not 
going to end”. Below are some of their views.

‘For our son, who has anxiety, gaming was a way to fit in’


Screen time for my children varies dramatically depending on the time of year. 
As soon as spring comes until autumn, they’re hardly ever inside. With the 
darkness comes TV and gaming, probably for around 15 hours per week, though to 
me it hasn’t become an addiction as they can easily stop when asked to.


Video games are often presented as detrimental to children: this may or may 
not be true, but in my personal experience, our two children seem to have 
mostly gotten joy, fun, learning and confidence from gaming.


Our oldest has anxiety and gaming was a way for him to fit in with his peers 
and does make life easier for him. He’s very sociable and it’s a helpful way 
for boys especially to chat, while gaming together. Without a doubt gaming gave 
him an area to fit in with and often be better than his peers at something.


At 11 he was one of the last of the boys in his class to have a certain ‘18’ 
rated video game and he was bullied mercilessly for this. We relented, but have 
kept it on a game to game basis, and we research things together to see if it’s 
OK. Pausing our parental discomfort with the age rating wasn’t easy and is 
socially frowned upon, but the important thing for us was to keep talking 
together, to be involved with what they are both doing, which can be 
challenging.

Many parents and adults aren’t aware of the enormous development, 
sophistication and variety of games there are for every age group, and often 
aren’t aware of the social aspects of modern gaming life. Safety is of course 
important here, that kids who chat online genuinely know each other, but with 
proper guidelines and parental safeguards and input it can be a really fun 
experience.


The industry could help parents by making games with more intricate story 
lines, skill sets similar to adult games, or options for less violent graphics 
in existing games as some have done. Children like a challenge. Parents like 
feeling that their children’s minds are safe.
Claire, London, two children aged 8 and 13.

‘Parents need to be engaged with the screen time too’

In general I’m unconcerned about the amount of screen time my children have, 
especially when it is gaming, which engages the mind more than just TV – that 
said I believe it’s important to ensure that outdoor activity is more or equal 
to the time in front of screens.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmy-son-overcame-his-anxiety-parents-on-how-screentime-isnt-all-bad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58c0c65321c2f44a1a558d73df90488d0e7916a4%2F0_283_750_937%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='My%20son%20overcame%20his%20anxiety'%3A%20parents%20on%20how%20screentime%20isn't%20all%20bad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmy-son-overcame-his-anxiety-parents-on-how-screentime-isnt-all-bad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27My%20son%20overcame%20his%20anxiety%27%3A%20parents%20on%20how%20screentime%20isn%27t%20all%20bad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fmy-son-overcame-his-anxiety-parents-on-how-screentime-isnt-all-bad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58c0c65321c2f44a1a558d73df90488d0e7916a4%2F0_283_750_937%2F750.jpg>
 Chris and family 
I think concerns around screen time are always too broad. The types of things 
done and the supporting activities around screen time define whether it is 
healthy or not. It also boils down to the parents being engaged. I know the 
names of a wide number of cartoon characters and me and my kids discuss them a 
lot. In the same way I play games I’m interested in with the kids, and we again 
talk about motivations, actions, hair styles, etc of computer characters from 
Sonic toLux <http://gameinfo.na.leagueoflegends.com/en/game-info/champions/lux/>
.

Using educational apps and interactive stories on the iPad has improved my 
children’s language, counting, reading etc. They benefit from not only 
educationally focused apps/games, though, but also from conversations that 
arise from gaming. They enjoy time with me playing a variety of games from 
Hearthstone to Marvel Lego to League of Legends. They also play and other 
family members, sometimes online when they wouldn’t otherwise be able to see 
them.
Chris, 30, Sheffield. Has two children, aged 4 and 2

‘If we harness the options they give to educate then that will be a great 
achievement’

It’s a concern in that my son cannot separate himself from an iPad, which has 
replaced the TV for him – even when playing on his PS4. YouTubers are the 
pinnacle of cool to a 10 year old – but even with security settings in place 
there are random and inappropriate options appearing. I cannot (and do not want 
to) police his every move – so we talk about it and I have to have a degree of 
trust that he will not click through to the barely covered women who appear in 
the sidebar. Honestly he’s not that interested in them at 10 – but that is very 
likely to change. I’d say the tablet is an addiction but not gaming yet, though 
he probably spends 25 hours in front of a screen each week.

The only thing he loves more than FIFA is actually playing football – so all 
hope is not yet lost as he does play quite a bit.


It’s not going to end; iPads, tablets and gaming are the future. If we harness 
the options they give to educate then that will be a great achievement.Pokemon 
Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/ive-never-walked-my-dog-so-much-readers-review-pokemon-go>
, for example, has been amazing in getting kids (and others) out and active – 
our response as parents needs to be reasoned and appropriate. I don’t want to 
ban any of this – I do want to know how I keep my child safe online and need 
more evidence about the possibility of addiction.
Kate, Nottingham. Has a child aged 10.

‘We also make sure that time spent together is quality family time’

My husband and I are also gamers and our children spend equally as much time 
in front of a screen as we do, around 20 hours per week: it is part of our 
everyday lives.

 Christina and family 
My son is allowed to play non-realistic violent games such as Plants vs. 
Zombies, driving games, other adventure games, and he loves creative mode in 
Minecraft. He also enjoys socializing with online friends and watching videos. 
My daughter, only three, plays Sesame Street games. Positives I think they get 
are through socializing in creative worlds, math skills and problem solving.


We are alright with time spent in front of a screen because they jump at the 
chance to do other activities with us like swimming, camping, or baking. As 
long as homework and chores are done my kids are free to do what they want. My 
daughter still plays with toys and books and my son plays with Lego and Nerf 
any time screens are off or friends are over. In addition, we try to make sure 
to eat dinner at the table as a family.


We all spend more time in front of screens than most families do I think, but 
we also make sure that time spent together is quality family time, even if it 
is all of us cozied up on the couch with some popcorn watching a movie.
Christina Jones, Edmonton. Has two children aged 9 and 3.

‘Games for children are clearly designed to be addictive’

My children are allowed 30 minutes per day on the iPad or computer. I have to 
make sure they stop when the time is up – which they resist. They seem obsessed 
with having their computer time and often can’t think of anything else until it 
is over.


I feel that playing computer games is too easy a way to pass the time, and 
means they don’t have to use their imagination as much, or put in the same 
amount of effort a they would to a real life project. The lack of physical 
activity when playing computer games rather than real games is a concern to me.
Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> for children are clearly 
designed to be addictive and they don’t have the self control to ration their 
own time. That said I am happier if they play creative or educational games 
such as Minecraft, or learn to use programs for drawing and coding.


They can get very frustrated when asked to stop because the allotted time is 
up. However, generally they accept that it makes sense to have an allowance.


Thinking of the positives: they are very IT literate. In some games they learn 
useful skills such as logic, problem solving and cooperation. My daughter is 
learning basic programming usingScratch <https://scratch.mit.edu/>. In the 
future IT will be ubiquitous so it is important for them to have these skills. 
My latest concern is their interest in watching gaming videos on YouTube. They 
use their TV time to watch Minecraft videos. I am going to stop them from doing 
this, as it becomes an extension of computer time: I would rather they watched 
something on the BBC designed for children to watch, for variety.
Tamsin, north Wales. Has two children, aged 3 and 6.

 * Some names have been changed
 