
On the night of 13 November 2015, Anne Hidalgo witnessed first-hand the 
carnage at the historic Bataclan music hall, where terrorists had just gunned 
down 80 mostly young concert goers.

“I’d never seen a war zone before,” she recalled later 
<http://www.liberation.fr/france/2016/01/01/anne-hidalgo-demain-la-vie-ne-peut-reprendre-normalement_1423890>
. “Those haggard faces, the bodies I saw, they were just youngsters, hipsters. 
Some had bullets in the head … The heads of those youngsters were the heads of 
my children. I knew life could not continue as normal.”

Sitting in Paris’ Gare du Nord waiting for a train to London, the mayor of 
Paris is living that night again. She frowns and looks pained. It was, of 
course, the second major terror attack on the French capital in less than a 
year; Hidalgo knew several of the murderedCharlie Hebdo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/charlie-hebdo-attack> cartoonists, and was 
one of the first on the scene that day too. Now the people of Paris were 
looking to her for guidance again.

“That night, as I tried to console those who survived, I found people wanted 
to touch,” she says. “They wanted to hug. It was a very physical need; the need 
to feel others around them.”


Hidalgo describes seeing the dead laid out on the pavement outside the 
Bataclan: “It had all been planned, but the killing was so random. When you 
looked at the names of those who died, you saw they came from everywhere, and 
in a way this united all Parisians, wherever they were from.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9719b3aacaea681283072d2e40fe1e45a96bf5ac%2F0_212_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently'%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently%27%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9719b3aacaea681283072d2e40fe1e45a96bf5ac%2F0_212_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
 Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo accompanies German Chancellor Angela Merkel and 
French President Francois Hollande as they show their respects to the victims 
of the November terror attacks. Photograph: The Asahi Shimbun via Getty Imag 
At that moment, the old-fashioned socialist policies (she calls them 
“humanist”) that have bitterly divided the capital since Hidalgo took office 
were put to one side, as she stepped into the role Rudolph Giuliani took on in 
New York after 9/11.

“She could have been defeated, but she held the city together,” Mathias 
Vicherat, her chief of staff,told Libération 
<http://www.liberation.fr/france/2016/01/01/anne-hidalgo-demain-la-vie-ne-peut-reprendre-normalement_1423890>
. “She succeeded in finding a balance between the compassion she was clearly 
feeling and that I could see on her face, and a kind of determination.”

Throughout the day that I follow her, Hidalgo demonstrates her fondness for 
physical contact; continually giving her security team the jitters by breaking 
away to say hello to fellow Parisians. As she is rushed through the Gare du 
Nord to catch the Eurostar train, “la Patronne” – as City Hall staff call her – 
stops to shake hands and exchange a few words with cleaners, security officers 
and waiters.

Her appearance, like her image, is understated: Hidalgo sports her usual 
combination of black trousers and matching tailored jacket. There is no 
expensive jewellery, barely a trace of lipstick, no nail varnish.

The mayor is on her way to London with her sports adviser, former rugby 
international Pierre Rabadan, to watch the Champions League return leg between
Paris Saint-Germain and Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/09/chelsea-psg-champions-league-match-report>
 at Stamford Bridge. It is a flying visit to London, and she will not be meeting
her counterpart Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-hidalgo-london->, 
who she insists – perhaps a littletoo strongly – that she admires: “He’s such a 
character, cultivated and intelligent ...”

London brings out a competitive streak in Hidalgo, who famously once dismissed 
the British capital as “a suburb of Paris”. After some petulant huffing from 
across the Channel, she tactfully added: “Seen from Shanghai, both cities are 
suburbs of each other” – but she had made her point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa781c99be467c122445b1754be41d6404ea79c68%2F0_97_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently'%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently%27%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa781c99be467c122445b1754be41d6404ea79c68%2F0_97_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Anne Hidalgo watches France v Nigeria on a big screen outside Paris City Hall 
during the 2014 World Cup. Photograph: Gonzalo Fuentes/Reuters 
Hidalgo says she is surprised – and disappointed – by Johnson’s Brexit 
campaign, and jokes that she is tempted to turn the tables on him. “Remember 
when a socialist government was elected, and he offered to roll out the red 
carpet for French businesses that wanted to leave? I’m going to offer to do the 
same for British companies if you leaveEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.” She smiles, but it is clear 
she is only half-joking.

Rabadan has recently become a father, and photographs are duly swapped during 
the journey. Hidalgo, who has two grown-up kids and a teenage son, all of whom 
have gone through state education, discusses their academic and sporting 
achievements like any proudmaman. She talks warmly about her parents – father 
Antonio, an electrician, and mother Marie, a dressmaker – who live in their 
native Spain (Hidalgo herself was born near Cádiz), and her elder sister Marie, 
who is in Los Angeles.


Running Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> leaves Hidalgo 
precious little family time but, after two hectic years in office, she insists 
it is still her dream job. “It’s a role where you can really change things on a 
human level; we are involved in all aspects of people’s daily lives. One minute 
I am looking at the organisation of public services like creches, childcare and 
school canteens; the next, wider issues like pollution and street cleaning.”

On an average working day, she will be up at 6.30am to read the newspapers and 
any reports that need dealing with. She is at her grand office at City Hall 
overlooking the Seine – at 155 square metres, the biggest public office inFrance
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> – at 8am. Staff say she is rarely 
home before 11pm, and this particular day she will not get home before 4am.

Today has begun with a visit to a “flood crisis centre”, where a simulation of 
the Seine rising by up to 6.5 metres above normal is being enacted. The 
exercise sprang out of a wider reflection of how to deal with crises after the 
November attacks, including flooding.

It is not an idle threat: in 1910 after heavy rain, snow and ice, the river, 
normally around 2m deep, rose to 8.63m, inundating the city’s drainage and 
sewerage system, sending torrents of foul icy water down the streets and 
causing 400 million francs – the equivalent of €1.6 billion today – of damage. 
Experts say it is only a matter of time before the Seine rises again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2693d018115ca28b41014233e2cc884bdb4c7e7%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently'%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently%27%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2693d018115ca28b41014233e2cc884bdb4c7e7%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Hidalgo attends the Socialist party’sUniversité d’été summer meeting in La 
Rochelle. Photograph: Stephane Mahe/Reuters 
In the crisis centre, officials jump to their feet as “Madame La Maire”, as 
she insists on being known (Le Maire is grammatically correct), arrives. 
“Pretend I’m not here,” she tells them, as photographers and camera crew jostle 
around her. It is day three of the pretend catastrophe: the Seine is 3.2m 
higher than normal, 210,000 people are without heating, the mobile telephone 
networks and refuse collection are threatened. Schools will have to close.

True to character, Hidalgo asks detailed technical questions; more fodder for 
those who accuse her of being a technocrat. The officials are delighted. The 
journalists yawn.

Then we are off in the mayoral “limousine” – an electric Renault Zoe – for a 
crawl across the city to the 19tharrondissement, where Hidalgo is opening Le 
Cargo <http://www.lecargo.paris/>, an immense “digital business incubator” (the 
biggest in Europe until the end of this year, when another,Halle Freyssinet 
<http://1000startups.fr/?lang=en>, will open in Paris and become the biggest in 
the world).

Attracting new business and global investment is one of the totems of 
Hidalgo’s programme for the French capital. Where the City of London has 
marketed itself as the financial capital of Europe, Hidalgo is on a mission to 
make Paris the continent’s digital hub.

Our progress is slowed by demonstrations at the Place de la République over 
work reforms proposed by France’s socialist government. Hidalgo, one of the few 
Parti Socialist figures whose popularity is rising, launches into a critique of 
the government and certain ministers. She has publicly opposed reforms that 
have led to clashes between riot police and protesters, claiming the measures 
will worsen working conditions. “This, from a left-wing government … hard to 
believe,” she says.

At Le Cargo, Hidalgo is joined by Valerie Pecresse, a former minister from the 
centre-right Les Republicains party who, after a surprise victory in December’s 
local elections, controls the regional council. Pecresse speaks first: her 
speech is brief, jovial and short on detail. Hidalgo follows: hers is long and 
serious.


Critics accuse Hidalgo, who took a while to emerge from the shadow of her 
mentor and City Hall predecessor Bertrand Delanöe, of having little charisma. 
She counters: “When it comes to taking decisions, if you know the details you 
know what’s at stake.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe12f98aac41517d3146a7a27b3d2a281803fa53f%2F0_249_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently'%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently%27%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe12f98aac41517d3146a7a27b3d2a281803fa53f%2F0_249_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Hidalgo with United Nations special envoy for cities Michael Bloomberg and 
some of the 500 mayors attending the COP21 climate summit in Paris in December. 
Photograph: Christophe Morin/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
As she leaves, Hidalgo is baited by a TV reporter over her working 
relationship with Pecresse; it is no secret the two have fundamentally opposed 
political views and little in common. Hidalgo’s smile drops briefly, and the 
response is what the French call “sec” (curt).

“We have different political ideas, but we work well together,” she says. “I 
know the media prefers women in politics to be hysterical so they can portray 
us as aliens, but it’s hard enough already for a woman to get to the top in 
politics.” With that she smiles, turns and walks off.

Before leaving for London, Hidalgo has a hastily scheduled meeting with 
Congolese gynaecologist Denis Mukwege, who won the 2014 Sakharov Prize for his 
work with raped and sexually abused women, as well as victims of Female Genital 
Mutilation.

Hidalgo wants to know – in detail - what she and Paris can do to support the 
doctor’s work. Her interest is not for the media (apart from The Guardian, none 
are present) and as the clock ticks, jittery assistants appear at the door, 
shuffle their feet and look at their watches, but she will not be hurried.

Since taking office two years ago, Hidalgo has set out to change the landscape 
of French capital with a series of innovative ideas. Her insistence that the 
city’s wealthierarrondissements must bear their fair share of both social 
housing and centres for the city’s growing population of homeless and refugees, 
have proved divisive to the point of public revolt. At one recent meeting in 
the chic 16th arrondissement, one of Hidalgo’s deputies – sent to explain 
details of a proposed centre for the homeless in the area – was called a 
“crook”, “collaborator”, “bastard” and “son of a bitch”.

Hidalgo is clear that housing and pollution are the twin prongs of her mayoral 
mandate – and the keys to achieving greater social equality in Paris. Following 
the success oflast September’s first car-free day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/27/all-blue-skies-in-paris-as-city-centre-goes-car-free-for-first-time>
, this summer a large stretch of highway along the Seine will be closed to 
vehicles, and eventually transformed into a pedestrian walkway from the 
Bastille to the Eiffel Tower. The most polluting cars are to be progressively 
banned from the city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe716ca75e464f6862016f3ef9424cbadfb5c0dc3%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently'%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Paris%20has%20changed%20permanently%27%3A%20a%20day%20on%20duty%20with%20mayor%20Anne%20Hidalgo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fparis-changed-permanently-mayor-anne-hidalgo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe716ca75e464f6862016f3ef9424cbadfb5c0dc3%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Hidalgo plans to pedestrianise the right bank of the Seine. Photograph: Luxigon
Paris’s symbolic squares, including Place de la Bastille and Place de la 
Nation, will also be given makeovers including more pedestrian and cycle space. 
Motoring organisations are outraged and claim shutting streets to vehicles will 
gridlock surrounding areas – adding to, not reducing, pollution. But Hidalgo 
will not budge on the issue, insisting Parisians have to be weaned off their 
dependence on private vehicles. And polls show a majority of people support 
her: even the most divisive, the closure of the Seine highway, issupported by 
60% of Parisians 
<http://www.lejdd.fr/JDD-Paris/SONDAGE-Les-Parisiens-clives-sur-le-bilan-d-Anne-Hidalgo-779475>
.

But that’s far from the end of her ambitions. Hidalgo has promised to make all 
Paris’s public transport electric by 2030, all its public buildings energy 
efficient by 2050, and has introduced “participative democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/08/parisians-have-say-city-first-20m-participatory-budget>
” – an annual poll in which Parisians propose and decide on ideas for 5% of the 
annual municipal budget (a sum amounting to around €20 million).


“I’ve been elected at a time of major economic crisis, and a crisis of 
confidence, in France,” she says. “We have to ask how we respond to that, and 
give added value by being responsible politicians. So we have introduced more 
participative democracy, with closer relations between the elected, the 
administration and the people. Parisians are now actors in this process and 
they often have good solutions. They feel more implicated in their city.”

The city, though, is divided, according to a recent poll in the Journal du 
Dimanche 
<http://www.lejdd.fr/JDD-Paris/SONDAGE-Les-Parisiens-clives-sur-le-bilan-d-Anne-Hidalgo-779475>
 (JDD), which found that 52% of Parisians judged her record since taking office 
“favourably”. While this rose to 72% of those who consider themselves left 
wing, and 60% among the under 35s, on the right, 70% of those asked were 
“unhappy” with her record. The JDD concluded that this was both “disappointing 
and encouraging” for Hidalgo.

“On one side, there’s a Paris that is young and female … on the other, a Paris 
that is older and male, settled in the bourgeois arrondissements and very 
critical [of Hidalgo],” says Frédéric Dabi, of the pollsters IFOP. “She’s very 
strongly appreciated by her electorate on the left, and she is, overall, 
maintaining that support – which is encouraging for her when you see the 
catastrophic state of the left at national level.”


Hidalgo says she is “reflecting” on the criticism, admitting: “Sometimes we 
need to shift boundaries and upset the way things have always been done to 
become more efficient, but these changes can disturb people.”

Story of cities #12: Haussmann rips up Paris – and divides France to this day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/31/story-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon>
The mayor is also behind the “Reinvent Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/feb/03/reinventing-paris-10-winning-urban-designs-transform-city>
” scheme, an international competition to find environmentally friendly urban 
designs to transform neglected and run down city-owned sites. If elected 
president of theC40 global cities group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/feb/07/mayors-world-unite-c40-summit-muniaries>
 – she recently announced her candidature – she hopes to take the idea 
worldwide.


From the ground, however, those details can look like broad brush strokes. One 
of Parisians’ biggest grouches is how the city seems increasingly grimy: thedog 
dirt on pavements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/12/why-cant-french-cities-clean-up-after-their-dogs-montpellier>
; the tons of cigarette ends casually tossed into the street (not to mention 
the flouting of no-smoking laws); the motorcyclists and parked cars on 
pavements … the details that blight everyday life.


Hidalgo nods. “I know, I know … we are looking at these issues. But sometimes 
there are other priorities.”


Paris may be deeply divided along right-left lines, but November’s attacks 
have made her impatient to be rid of “petty power games”. She is equally 
dismissive of any talk of being a future presidential candidate (the current 
incumbent, François Hollande, is in freefall in the popularity ratings), 
insisting – as most mayors do – that she has the “best job in the world” until 
her mandate ends in 2020.


For Hidalgo, it has already been an extraordinary time in office. “Paris has 
changed permanently,” she tells me. “After the attacks, there was suddenly a 
sense of community, of closeness; a need to stand up and be together. I felt 
that change in people and I can still feel it. It fills me with hope.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 