
Intrepid founder Darrell Wade caught the travel bug in Hawaii, flying in on a 
Boeing 707 as a six-year-old kid from Geelong.

He had just arrived in Honolulu to meet his parents, who were returning from a 
business trip to the US, and can still vividly recall the smell of the kerosene 
lamps on the beach in the tropical sunset.

“I remember getting out in Honolulu and it was hot and amazing,” Wade says 
today as head of the world’s largest adventure travel company. “I thought this 
is the best thing ever, and I’ve been hooked on travel ever since.”

Wade still spends about six months of the year travelling with the Intrepid 
Group, which he owns with co-founder and friend from his college days at 
Melbourne University, Geoff Manchester.

The pair started Intrepid Travel in 1989 after organising an eight-month 
overland trek through Africa with 12 other travellers in a refurbished council 
tip truck.

After returning to Australia, they decided to start a travel company with the 
then novel idea of running the same sort of grassroots, community-based 
journeys that they both loved.

Intrepid Travel now has a staff of 1600 running more than 1000 of these types 
of local itineraries to more than 120 countries, with an annual turnover of 
$300 million.

Wade also helps run The Intrepid Foundation philanthropic fund which has so 
far distributed more than $5 million towards healthcare, human rights, child 
welfare and environmental and wildlife protection programs in the communities 
in which Intrepid operates.

The genesis for the Foundation came in 1992 when an Intrepid staff member 
working in Borneo opened a community bank account for a local village that had 
been refused payment for accommodation on cultural grounds.

The unofficial fundraising continued through a number of Intrepid Travel tour 
leaders internationally until the company decided to formalise it by setting up 
the Foundation in 2002.

“We want to change the way people think about the world and the way they 
interact with the world,” Wade says. “We want to really extend people. It is 
about making a continual organic change as you explore opportunities for what 
is possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fpurpose-beyond-profit-drives-intrepid-founders-big-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8f7d6f9f0442f4a24e8b811dcf1efbadae214bb%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Purpose%20beyond%20profit%E2%80%99%20drives%20Intrepid%20founder%E2%80%99s%20big%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fpurpose-beyond-profit-drives-intrepid-founders-big-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Purpose%20beyond%20profit%E2%80%99%20drives%20Intrepid%20founder%E2%80%99s%20big%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fpurpose-beyond-profit-drives-intrepid-founders-big-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8f7d6f9f0442f4a24e8b811dcf1efbadae214bb%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The Intrepid foundation works in partnership with NGOs in developing countries 
like Nepal, which experienced devastation after the earthquake in 2015. 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The Intrepid Foundation currently works with partner NGOs in developing 
countries on projects that range from emergency relief – like the $750,000 
donated after the Nepal earthquake in 2015 – to helping to build sustainable 
value in local communities.

The next two projects are partnerships with the Australian government’s 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) to develop business accelerator 
programs in Nepal and Myanmar.

“The aim is to generate wealth and opportunity for local communities rather 
than just ‘band-aid’ a problem,” Wade says. “Overseas aid plays an important 
role, but it is most effective and sustainable when it’s a catalyst for 
communities to generate their own wealth.

It is about making a continual organic change as you explore opportunities for 
what is possible.

“If you inspire local entrepreneurship to create jobs and opportunity then 
that’s a good thing we can be involved in.”

The projects both aim to give locals the skills to start their own businesses 
in tourism – from hospitality to accommodation and transport.

In Nepal, the Intrepid Foundation partners with environmental group WWF to 
help preserve important habitats for species including endangered rhinos and 
tigers by encouraging local farmers to get involved in wildlife tourism.

“We hope the community will see wildlife as an economic necessity to them – 
rather than a threat,” Wade says. “This logic has been proven by WWF before in 
Nepal and elsewhere around the world.”

Any donations to the Foundation are matched by the Intrepid business and funds 
go entirely to specific projects. The Intrepid Foundation plans to invest 
another $3 million in local communities over the next three years.

Wade says the commitment to working sustainably with local communities has 
been with the company from the start and he increasingly looks for a “purpose 
beyond profit”.

“I get bored pretty easily and I like looking for different angles and 
opportunities,” he says. “Taking a highly responsible view of business is part 
of that agenda because there’s a better way to do things.

Muddy start leaves rich environmental footprint for conservation head
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/nab-meet-the-changemakers/2016/jun/23/muddy-start-leaves-rich-environmental-footprint-for-conservation-head>
“Having purpose in what you do is really important – whether you are a bank or 
a tourism operator. Having a real purpose is really exciting – it gets you out 
of bed in the morning. It’s just fun grappling with new projects.”

Intrepid is a NAB business banking customer and Wade says the relationship has 
been essential in running an international business dealing with travellers 
from all over the world.

“It’s a really complex transactional web,” he says. “They have to supply us 
with the technology and the foreign exchange hedging and payment gateways and 
it works very well.”

The Intrepid Foundation has also collaborated with NAB on fundraising and 
environmental initiatives, with both organisations sharing the same vision and 
passion.

Executive general manager of NAB Business, Cindy Batchelor says the bank is 
proud to partner with Intrepid Travel as the business continues to grow and 
evolve, as well as collaborating on a philanthropic level with the Foundation.

“It’s a powerful example of how banks and customers can work together across 
multiple levels to create terrific outcomes,” Batchelor says.

“At NAB, we strive to become Australia and New Zealand’s most respected bank. 
Support for our business customers is at the heart of that strategy: ensuring 
they have the right tools in place to do business easily and readily. Their 
success is our success – and the Intrepid journey is certainly one that we feel 
very proud to support.”

The next steps on the journey for Darrell Wade will focus on growing the 
business further and engaging staff to “keep the excitement high”, he says. The 
latest itineraries on offer include a range of cycling trips across 18 
countries.
 