
Many small developing countries are so administratively stretched that they 
cannot fill in all the complex forms needed to access climate money to help 
them to reduce emissions and adapt to increasing global temperatures, rising 
sea levels and extreme weather.

Although billions of dollars of climate money is theoretically available, in 
practice red tape and paperwork makes it is extremely hard and slow to get hold 
of, says theCommonwealth Secretariat <http://thecommonwealth.org/>, the central 
institution of the 53 Commonwealth countries, who are among the hardest hit by 
climate change.

Those who contributed least to climate change are fighting for survival | Gyan 
Chandra Acharya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/02/climate-change-paris-talks-those-who-contributed-least-fighting-for-survival>
Fiji’s high commissioner in London, Jitoko Tikolevu, said the process of 
applying for climate funds was “very cumbersome”. “We need to be trained how to 
access the money. It’s one thing having it available, it’s another getting 
access to it.

“We have many climate adaptation projects identified, to move villages and 
other settlements, but they depend on getting climate money. We know what we 
need to do, but to do it we need to understand the process,” he said.

Rich countries together pledged to mobilise $100bn 
<http://www.cop21.gouv.fr/en/one-hundred-billion-dollars/> (£77bn) a year by 
2020 in last year’s Paris climate talks. But, according to new analysis by the 
Commonwealth Secretariat, since 2009 only $726m has been received by the 
smallest 31 small Commonwealth states, including Dominica, Guyana, Namibia, 
Nauru, Solomon Islands, St Kitts and Nevis, Tonga and Vanuatu.


Low institutional capacity, convoluted forms, and a complex and slow approval 
process all but denies small countries, says the secretariat, which is to pay 
for experts to work with small Commonwealth countries to help them access money.


The secretariat will on Wednesday launch in Mauritius a central “hub” offering 
small Commonwealth countries advice and technical assistance. In addition, 
advisers will work in ministries to help them identify and apply for money.

“Donors are at last creating climate funds, but too often they are tied up in 
red tape and [are] tremendously complicated to access, especially for small 
countries with limited capacity. The money isn’t getting to those who need it 
nearly fast enough. This Commonwealth initiative will make the difference in 
unlocking much needed capital for adaption and mitigation,” said the 
Commonwealth secretary general, Patricia Scotland.

“There are a lot of finance mechanisms which have sprouted up over the years 
but the issue is accessibility, particularly for small countries like ours with 
small administrations,” said Makurita Baaro, Kiribati’s ambassador to the UN.


Climate change deal: five reasons to be glad, five to be gloomy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/15/climate-change-deal-five-reasons-glad-five-reasons-gloomy>
“In a lot of cases, whether the submission is for a $100m project or a $20,000 
project, the paperwork is still the same, and that needs to change. It doesn’t 
make sense at all.

“Multilateral funds for climate change mitigation or adaption measures can be 
costly and cumbersome to access, meaning many small islands states are put off 
by the enormity of the task.”

Money is theoretically available from the Green Climate Fund, the Adaptation 
Fund and climate investment funds, as well as private sector finance.


The Green climate fund (GCF) <http://www.greenclimate.fund/home>, which is 
based in South Korea and will become the world’s main channel for climate 
finance, has been pledgedabout $10bn so far by rich countries 
<http://www.un.org/climatechange/blog/2014/12/green-climate-fund-surpasses-10-billion-goal/>
, but has only approvedinvestments of about $424m in 17 projects 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwie0Ij6h57PAhUGBsAKHSVqDZMQFggcMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.greenclimate.fund%2Fdocuments%2F20182%2F226888%2FGCF_B.13_16_-_Consideration_of_funding_proposals.pdf%2F7b9179d0-6d4f-4a3e-96a9-9619cb224abb&usg=AFQjCNHd3k0-fRKhPLycwzj0hDltZGfK0w&sig2=YPn0OqToV3d_zMw9f5h1TA&bvm=bv.133178914,d.ZGg>
 (pdf) since November 2015.

It has an “aspirational goal” to commit $2.5bn this year, which many observers 
say it is unlikely to meet.


The first countries expected to receive assistance from the hub are: Antigua 
and Barbuda, Barbados, Dominica, Guyana, Jamaica, Mauritius, Namibia, Nauru, 
Solomon Islands, St Kitts and Nevis, Tonga and Vanuatu.

 