
After the disappointment of Miitomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/31/miitomo-first-look-review-nintendo-mobile-app-any-good>
, Nintendo has once again ventured into the world of smartphone gaming with 
Super Mario Run.

Following on from the success of the release of Pokémon Go in the summer, the 
anticipation from fans craving the nostalgia of classic Nintendo games has come 
to an end. But withsome unhappy about the price of the iOS exclusive app 
<https://www.inverse.com/article/25374-super-mario-run-nintendo-mobile-game-pricing>
 we asked readers what they really think of the game.


‘Hardcore gamers might prefer to stick to their console versions’


Rating: 3.5 out of 5 

The inability to run backwards is often quite frustrating. With previous Super 
Mario <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> games it’s fun to 
explore each level to make sure you’ve covered all ground. Because Mario is 
running forward continuously, it feels like you’re running past hidden 
features. I think it’s more a game for the busy commuter who likes to pass the 
time by fiddling with their iPhone. It only really requires half your 
attention; I feel as though Nintendo deliberately tapped into that market to 
get people who don’t normally play games to download the app. But you can’t 
help but question how much you’re really ‘playing’ the game when you’re merely 
tapping the screen.


You can actually leave Mario up to his own devices for a while and he’ll do 
his own thing. It would be the perfect game for zombies. Apart from that the 
look of the game is awesome. It’s very sleek and shiny and looks especially 
good on an iPad Air screen, much better than Super Mario on the 3DS. I think 
it’s great that they’re developing games as an app; you can basically choose 
your own hardware now.


I can’t believe people are upset that they’ve had to pay 8 quid to then 
discover they don’t like it, especially considering they get the first three 
levels for free. Because it’s an app they feel they are entitled to it for 
nothing. My advice is, if you don’t think you can face the disappointment of 
not liking it, don’t buy it. Hardcore gamers might prefer to stick to their 
console versions.


Jonathan Chadwick, Sydney

‘Slick, charming, and well-produced’


Rating: 3.5 out of 5 

Nintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> have a long, 
celebrated history of creating and perfecting platform games, so it comes as no 
surprise that Super Mario Run has the tight mechanics and precision-based 
jumping that we’ve come to expect from the world’s most famous gaming mascot.


At a price of £7.99, they have exceeded what the casual mobile gamer is 
willing to pay for on-the-go entertainment. Additionally, it’s only playable 
with an internet connection, which seems like a ludicrous caveat when you’ve 
already paid almost £8.


The game itself is a slick, charming, and well-produced endless runner that is 
playable with one hand. The level-design is fantastic; each of the 24 stages 
has been crafted to be re-playable with harder difficulties in the shape of 
collectible coloured coins. I happily repeated the same levels several times, 
trying to figure out the exact route I needed to take, and when executed 
correctly it felt very rewarding. Super Mario Run is a polished, meticulously 
designed, and ultimately fun mobile title that does more than just appeal to 
nostalgia. However, it comes at a price that many casual gamers will find hard 
to justify.

Zia Murad, Dubai

‘I finished all the levels in one day which I think is a bit fast’


Rating: 4 out of 5 

I think the one hand operation is good. Most people dislike that Mario moves 
automatically, but I think this makes the game more challenging - like getting 
pink coins or grey coins. Most people just play the first three levels and 
stop, but I think the game just gets started from that point! I finished all 
the levels in one day which I think is a bit fast =(


For 9.99 the price is a bit high. It would be great if it was a free game but 
a one time payment is fine. It would be better if there was more of a social 
aspect, mini game option, or even the ability to battle with friends.


M, Hong Kong
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60074702dd1d24c9a52652ec967c2d64f42c01ac%2F103_249_821_1026%2F821.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Slick%2C%20charming%2C%20and%20well-produced'%3A%20readers%20review%20Super%20Mario%20Run&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Slick%2C%20charming%2C%20and%20well-produced%27%3A%20readers%20review%20Super%20Mario%20Run&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60074702dd1d24c9a52652ec967c2d64f42c01ac%2F103_249_821_1026%2F821.jpg>
‘My favourite thing about the game is they let me pay for it’


Rating: 4.5 out of 5 

Nintendo has built a Mario game that feels like a Mario game, but is not 
hampered by the limits of a mobile. Mario looks like Mario, sounds like Mario, 
and most importantly for a Mario game jumps like Mario. Unlike an endless 
runner the stages are handcrafted, built to provide a modest challenge with 
precise positioning of coins, blocks, and enemies. The challenge of collecting 
five specific coloured coins drives you to retry each stage multiple times, and 
when you succeed, the five coins will be placed elsewhere.


It’s a great game for a quick dip in and out of. A run takes mere moments 
which is perfect. It handles wonderfully, one thumb touch which does everything 
you want it to do. The design choice of having a chunk of unused space at the 
bottom of the screen means that unlike most mobile games I never feel like my 
touching the screen gets in the way of seeing the action. But my favourite 
thing about Super Mario Run: they let me pay for it. A one off payment unlocks 
everything I need. There is nothing pushing me to drop more money to buy new 
lives, or buy gems which are needed to purchase levels or anything like that. A 
one off £8 payment for a quality game single handedly solves every problem I’ve 
had with other mobile games. I look forward to completing it during the 
excessive loading times when fast travelling in Final Fantasy XV.


John Price, Plymouth
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33243b690c2fb47c95c1ef5e9a596027b452c88f%2F69_117_820_1025%2F820.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Slick%2C%20charming%2C%20and%20well-produced'%3A%20readers%20review%20Super%20Mario%20Run&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Slick%2C%20charming%2C%20and%20well-produced%27%3A%20readers%20review%20Super%20Mario%20Run&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33243b690c2fb47c95c1ef5e9a596027b452c88f%2F69_117_820_1025%2F820.jpg>
 Sullivan, Brooklyn 
‘Terrible marketing’


Rating: 2.5 out of 5 

Paying 10 bucks after a few levels is terrible marketing. I’m not sure if 
they’ve checked out popular games but the money comes in the items not the 
actual gameplay. If I have to pay 99 cents for a special move, fine, but I 
shouldn’t have to pay money to play the next level.

Sullivan, Brooklyn

‘A crafted product with depth and replay value’


Rating: 4.5 out of 5 

I can’t get my head around the negative reaction to this game. Its easily 
worth £7.99 in my opinion. You play the first three levels, then decide if you 
want to pay - seems perfectly reasonable to me. I don’t know why so many people 
expected to play the whole game for free.


This isn’t your average iOS shovel-ware - it’s a crafted product with depth 
and replay value. On one hand it concerns me that people don’t seem to be able 
to tell the difference - on the other, I suppose this is an inherent risk when 
aiming a product at the mass market. Yesterday, I spent £6.50 for two coffees 
and a slice of shortcake, and £7.99 for Super Mario Run. I know which purchase 
I think was better value.


Dani Thomas, Cardiff

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911555f2fa6c740b0cdced370b3136cfe0adef08%2F0_193_720_900%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Slick%2C%20charming%2C%20and%20well-produced'%3A%20readers%20review%20Super%20Mario%20Run&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Slick%2C%20charming%2C%20and%20well-produced%27%3A%20readers%20review%20Super%20Mario%20Run&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fslick-charming-and-well-produced-readers-review-super-mario-run%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911555f2fa6c740b0cdced370b3136cfe0adef08%2F0_193_720_900%2F720.jpg>
‘Mario for the modern world’


Rating: 5 out of 5 

Super Mario Run is a seemingly simple, yet deceptively complex mobile version 
of a gaming legend. The auto-run-forward of the portly plumber detracts nothing 
from the side scrolling platform action, instead allowing more attention to be 
paid to the at times frustrating pixel perfect jump. Speaking of pixels, the 
graphics are detailed and hi-res enough to satisfy modern eyes.


The Nintendo charm is ever present throughout and fans of Mario will be 
pleased with the look and tone of the package. Yes, the package. People 
bemoaned the £7.99 charge upon reaching the first Koopa confrontation. However, 
in my opinion there is enough to satisfy. Six worlds, three levels and a boss 
battle in each. There’s also a road rally which shifts the emphasis of the 
platforming action to style over course completion and enemy squashing. This 
leads to village building and toad pleasing mini games. There’s more than 
enough here to justify eight quid and it’s a few notches above other mobile 
gaming fare as well, as like it or lump it, Nintendo are still masters of the 
video game. This is Mario for the modern world. Quick bursts on the loo, on the 
tram/train/bus, while you wait for your wife to look through the whole shop and 
for some, while they walk around narrowly avoiding lampposts. Buy it. Enjoy it.

Tony Johnson, Manchester
 