
In a year marked by the ongoing violence toward black bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/11/ferguson-protests-police-militarization-humvees>
, the cultural appropriation of “black cool” seems more blatant and egregious 
than ever. From declaring thatthe big booty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/musicblog/2014/nov/20/jlo-iggy-azalea-ama-booty-show-banner-year-for-butt>
 is in, that white girls too can have Afros – the style is in fact a twist-out 
– baby hair and Timberlands on Paris runways, and morning show hosts giggling 
while discussing “on fleek”, the cycle seemingly never stops.

The true coup de grâce, however, came with the attempt to explain #SquadGoals 
(an aspirational term used on social media to highlight something you and your 
friends want to accomplish) – and as usual, nobody consulted their black 
friends about it as they plundered from black youth culture. Worse still, as 
when the establishment backflips on to the bandwagon, they not only ignore the 
trend’s roots, but actively whitewash the history. It’s a method so effective 
it could be an algorithm. The process is simple: first the trend is 
appropriated and misused, before quickly becoming the butt of jokes for old 
white folks who just “don’t get it”. The final step comes when the youth 
subculture is discredited, while simultaneously used to gain credibility (and 
sell products) to the very group being mocked.

Azealia Banks, Iggy Azalea and hip-hop's appropriation problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/24/iggy-azalea-azealia-banks-hip-hop-appropriation-problem>
Last week on Slate’s Culture Gabfest podcast, three white people attempted to 
dissect the roots of #SquadGoals. The hashtag trend has received a lot of 
traction due toTaylor Swift <https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> 
and her PR machine regurgitating it over and over on her recent world tour, 
while trotting out all her pretty friends. From the very beginning it was clear 
that the Slate teamwas going to botch the entire segment with ignorance as they 
attempted to explain it to the show’s “old white guy”.

Slate’s Katy Waldman mentions Waka Flocka Flame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/10/university-oklahoma-waka-flocka-flame-cancels-show-racist-song-video>
 at the start of the whole thing but couldn’t be bothered to do enough 
researchto learn how to sayGucci Mane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/29/gucci-mane-rap-music-surge> 
properly – she pronounces it “Gucci Manet”, only to then pause and wonder if it 
makes more sense as “Mayne”. (To make things worse, this is a rapper who drops 
his own name onevery single one of his records.)

The conversation makes a footnote of the 1017 Brick Squad, who have been 
yelling “SQUUUAD!” since at least 2009, and quickly jumps to Swift “bringing it 
to the mainstream”. (Waka Flocka Flame is a huge live draw and is one of 
hip-hop’s biggest contemporary names.) By the end of their chuckle-filled 
explanation of the trend, the old white guy declares that he finds the trend 
sad and that he would probably not want to have his young and impressionable 
daughter involved.

The show’s two main problems are its brazen lack of knowledge on the subject 
and zero inclusion. The speakersmention an article 
<http://grantland.com/hollywood-prospectus/going-way-too-deep-down-the-rabbit-hole-with-nicki-minajs-recent-bar-mitzvah-appearance/>
 written by Rembert Browne, a black writer at Grantland, but what would have 
made the gabfest better would have been to maybe ask Rembert to explain what 
the hell they were talking about. The larger point at hand is that anyone who 
listens to the podcast leaves with no greater understanding of what #SquadGoals 
is besides Taylor Swift’s new thing at her concert.

The bigger message seemed to be: “It’s cool that we’re clueless about this 
silly thing even though we definitely just used it as the title topic for our 
podcast this week!” But such is the way of whitesplaining things. The 
underlying tone is always: “It doesn’t matter when the black kids do it; let’s 
just focus on howwe found out about it.” It’s this privileged and assuming 
behaviour that very often leads to white media falling on their faces and 
getting these trends all wrong. (Your pancakes are not on fleek, and it’s not 
even funny.)

The Nicki Minaj debate is bigger than Taylor Swift's ego
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/22/nicki-minaj-debate-bigger-than-taylor-swifts-ego>
As we continue through the second half of 2015, every week seems a 
wash-rinse-repeat cycle of hashtags and think-pieces, explaining ourselves with 
the same simple logic. Being black is the coolest thing because it is currently 
(and has always been) the most dangerous thing to be in this country. What is 
not new, however, is that white people of the middle and upper class have 
always wanted in on our slang and dance moves. But just the same as they would 
never set foot into our neighborhoods, they don’t want to be reminded that 
their darling little Taylor Swift is basically quoting the language of the 
oppressed.

The daughter of Stephen Metcalf, the old white guy, would probably benefit 
from learning that black women and men are empowered by their squads and 
#squadgoals as they refer to the allies they’ve found in this life that is 
inundated by racism, sexism and elitism affecting those who look like them. A 
true and nuanced conversation about the topic featuring someone who uses the 
term daily might have revealed a history of empowerment through the community 
and the protection of a self-made family. Squad goals are filled with the tales 
of little black children who want to make it somewhere better and hope to find 
that somewhere filled with those they love who want the same success, not just 
white faces that don’t recognize or respect them.

There’s a defining moment in the conversation when Swift is described as an 
overdog adapting an underdog stance. In this moment I cringed, and then 
laughed: it was so ignorantly correct that it became the highlight of the whole 
thing. The truth is that yes, the overdog is always stealing from the underdog 
and hiding his hands behind his back. But the trend of taking what’s not yours 
and lying about it is the one I would never wantmy impressionable child to 
learn.

 * This article was amended on Sunday 16 August 2015. We initially said Megan 
Garber of the Atlantic appeared on the Slate Cultural Podcast. It was in fact 
Katy Waldman, of Slate.  