
The federal government believes there are substantial concerns within the 
community about freedom of speech as ethnic groups urge it to keep laws banning 
race hate speech intact.

A parliamentary inquiry into freedom of speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/government-to-launch-free-speech-inquiry-into-section-18c-of-the-racial-discrimination-act>
, and whether a controversial law banning speech that could insult, offend or 
vilify people because of their race or religion should change, has published 
135 public submissions.

They include many from community and ethnic groups that had led opposition to 
similar changes to the Racial Discrimination Act proposed under Tony Abbott’s 
leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/racial-discrimination-groups-unite-against-morally-repugnant-law-changes>
 in 2014.

Cabinet minister Scott Ryan does not believe there is a risk of community 
backlash should the inquiry recommend a change, but says he does not like to 
“get into predicting the future”.

Push to weaken Racial Discrimination Act opposed by ethnic and religious groups
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/10/ush-to-weaken-racial-discrimination-act-opposed-by-ethnic-and-religious-groups>
“There are substantial concerns in the community, reflected in the 
government’s referral of this issue ... to the Joint Standing Committee on 
Human Rights, because Australians value both a harmonious society and they also 
value the ability to speak freely about political issues and other issues that 
are issues of concern to them,” he said in Melbourne on Thursday.

Nevertheless, he acknowledged there were “substantial views” among Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> MPs who wanted to look 
at whether the laws were an inappropriate restriction on speech.

Groups including the Arab Council of Australia, the Australian Hellenic 
Council, the Chinese Australia Forum, the Executive Council of Australian 
Jewry, and the Ethnic Communities Council of Queensland have written to the 
committee urging it to maintain the laws as they stand.

The Chinese Australian Forum says it is deeply concerned by debate around 
changes to sections of the Racial Discrimination Act, which it says already 
protect freedom of speech.

The tirade about 18C is a massive piece of fakery, a culture war conceit | 
Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/the-tirade-about-18c-is-a-massive-piece-of-fakery-a-culture-war-conceit>
The Arab Council says the act sets Australia apart in the world by 
demonstrating a clear commitment to combating bigotry and discrimination. 
“Indeed, the current political environment warrants the strong backing of the 
RDA’s key provisions,” it writes. “The RDA is critical for protecting the 
community from predatory and malicious attacks.”

Labor says what the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, chooses to do now will 
be a test of his leadership. “If he has any backbone at all, he will accept 
that Australians do not want section 18C to be changed and rule out any further 
action,” shadow attorney generalMark Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mark-dreyfus> and opposition 
multicultural spokesman, Tony Burke, said in a statement.

They said it was not surprising public pressure on the government not to 
change the laws was mounting once again.
 