
David Blanchflower, professor of economics at Dartmouth College, New 
Hampshire, and former member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee 
(MPC) from June 2006 to May 2009:

These are still early days to determine what has happened to the UK economy 
after the Brexit vote because there are lags before any impact is felt; lags 
before there are measurable effects; and even longer lags until the data gets 
published. We only have hard data through August.

The bad news already is prices are rising, wage growth is slowing and 
unemployment is up. The volume of retail sales was flat in September versus 
August. The fall in the pound has already generated a pick-up in inflation. The 
consumer prices index was up from 0.6% to 1% in the latest ONS release and is 
expected to trend steadily higher soon. This is especially bad news for workers 
whose real wages are still about 7% lower than they were at the pre-recession 
peak in 2007.

How has the Brexit vote affected the UK economy? October verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/ng-interactive/2016/oct/24/how-has-the-brexit-vote-affected-the-uk-economy-october-verdict>
Real wages have been on the rise for the last couple of years as inflation 
tumbled. The latest data for the month of August shows that annual wage growth, 
not adjusted for inflation, was 2%, down from 2.4% in July. The concern is that 
by the middle of 2017 prices of goods will start to rise faster than wages, 
lowering living standards.Unemployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/unemployment> is on the rise again, 
although it is somewhat unclear by how much because the ONS data is so bad. 
Estimates range from 10,000 to 144,000 on the month.

The ONS last week published data for unemployment for the average of June to 
August, which it compared with the average of March to May and claimed that the 
number of unemployed rose by 10,000. But it seems the real jump was likely a 
lot larger than that.Deep inside the ONS website you can find the underlying 
monthly data 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/datasets/labourforcesurveysinglemonthestimatesx01>
. Here it is in millions.

March: 1.73m

April: 1.58m

May: 1.62m

June: 1.71m

July: 1.55m

August: 1.69m

Averages 

March-May: 1.64m

May-July: 1.63m

June-August: 1.65m

The data shows from the latest single month estimate, which is what every 
other major country in the world publishes, that unemployment rose 144,000 
between July and August. This may be too high, given that these monthly numbers 
are unstable. If you average the months together as the ONS does, then it is 
true that unemployment jumped by 10,000, from 1,646,000 in March-May to 
1,656,000 in June-August.

But that doesn’t seem the right comparator. If you compare the rolling quarter 
of May to July with June to August, which seems much more sensible, the rise is 
actually a really worrying – and more believable – 25,000. Whether the true 
rise in unemployment is 10,000; 25,000 or 144,000 the rise is bad news of 
course, as unemployment hurts. This is surely the lull ahead of an oncoming 
Brexit tsunami.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-lull-before-the-tsunami-economists-on-the-brexit-watch-data%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bfabff66d07ed190d6edb1dfef582c8bc63668b%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20lull%20before%20the%20tsunami'%3A%20economists%20on%20the%20Brexit%20watch%20data&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-lull-before-the-tsunami-economists-on-the-brexit-watch-data%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20lull%20before%20the%20tsunami%27%3A%20economists%20on%20the%20Brexit%20watch%20data&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-lull-before-the-tsunami-economists-on-the-brexit-watch-data%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bfabff66d07ed190d6edb1dfef582c8bc63668b%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Petrol prices are rising. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/AFP/Getty Images 
Andrew Sentance, senior economic adviser at the consultancy PwC and former 
member of the Bank’s MPC from October 2006 to May 2011:


Since the referendum result we have seen some mixed economic indicators. On 
the consumer side of the economy, growth has been resilient. Even though retail 
sales were fairly flat in September, third-quarter retail sales volumes were 
5.4% up on a year ago. This is roughly in line with the post-crisis high in the 
fourth quarter of 2014, and before that we have to go back to 2003-04 to find 
stronger retails sales growth.


Consumers, however, have continued to benefit from very low inflation. That is 
now changing – with CPI inflation picking up to 1% in September – though this 
is the tip of the inflationary iceberg created by the recent fall in the pound. 
CPI inflation is set to rise to at least 2.5-3% by the end of next year – and 
possibly higher. So consumer spending is likely to slow down over the next 
12-18 months as inflation bites into the growth of spending power.

The Brexit economy: falling pound and rising inflation fuel fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/brexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch>
An economic slowdown is already apparent in the labour market, with job growth 
easing – though it remains positive and the unemployment rate is still below 
5%. But the key test of how well the economy holds up during the Brexit process 
will be investment spending. At present, we have limited information about how 
investment has performed post-Brexit vote. There is anecdotal evidence that 
businesses are becoming more cautious about investment – particularly in 
sectors which could be affected by the UK leaving the EU, such as manufacturing 
and financial services. But it will take a while for this to feed through to 
real spending decisions in the UK economy. It will not be until 2017 or 2018 
that we see the full investment implications of the uncertainty created by the 
Brexit referendum decision.

Our PwC growth forecast remains at around 1% for next year, about half the 
recent UK growth rate. That will push the UK down the G7 growth league, below 
the US, Canada, Germany and France. So our economy will be taking a hit over 
the next year or two in the form of lower growth,but an outright recession 
should still be avoided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/uk-avoid-recession-2016-despite-growth-slump-ons-figures-show>
.
 