
When the Guardian asked community journalists in three of Rio de Janeiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rio-de-janeiro>’s biggest favelas to start a 
year-long diary last August, few could have predicted just how tumultuous the 
following 12 months would prove for their city and Brazil.

From the streets to the Games: Brazilian Olympians' extraordinary stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/olympics-rio-brazilian-athletes-boxing-wrestling-badminton>
The idea was for the young reporters – Daiene Mendes in Alemão 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-hopes-of-pacification-are-shattered>
,Michel Silva in Rocinha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event>
 andThaís Cavalcante in Maré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-games-have-made-things-worse>
 – to record life in their communities as the city geared up to host the2016 
Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> and Paralympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> – an event that has brought 
R$39.1bn (£9.1bn) in spending, but also far more police activity.

Many of their entries – extracted below – are filled with tension and violence 
as they describe being woken by police helicopters and going to sleep with the 
sound of shooting outside their homes. The number of killings is worse than 
some war zones. All too often, they write, the police are to blame.

Some of their views are contentious. For their own safety, the three reporters 
are limited in their ability to touch on the subject of the drug-trafficking 
gangs that still dominate their communities. Public security authorities 
dispute their claims that police pacification units (UPPs) in Alemão and 
Rocinha, and increased operations in Maré (which has no UPP) have led to more 
violence. Many academics believe the situation in Rio would be worse if police 
resources were only used to protect rich neighbourhoods. The city government 
says it has improved the lives of favela residents by building more roads, 
upgrading public transport and opening more schools and clinics.

But such benefits – which vary enormously from place to place – are 
overshadowed by conflict, which the diarists believe has worsened with the 
upcoming Olympics. They have also had to deal with theZika outbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus>, recession, government budget 
cuts, the impeachment ofpresident Dilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/dilma-rousseff-brazil-president-impeached-senate-vote>
 and (in Rocinha) mudslides.

By any measure, it has been an extraordinary year. But, what also comes 
through in the diaries is how residents in the favelas get on with their lives, 
celebrate festivals, share achievements and support one another. The Olympics 
and the police, it seems, merely get in the way.Jonathan Watts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a47814a54c5bc2dd66b255865b29383377fe7dc%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a47814a54c5bc2dd66b255865b29383377fe7dc%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Michel Silva, reporting from Rocinha. Daiene Mendes, reporting from Alemão. 
Thaís Cavalcante, reporting from Maré. Photograph: Jonathan Watts for the 
Guardian 
21 August 2015 – Rocinha


A teenage resident is killed today during a shootout between drug traffickers 
and police. It barely makes the news.Rio de Janeiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rio-de-janeiro> is more focused on the 
Olympic test events in the richer areas of the city. Shootouts and killings in 
favelas are rarely reported. There are many clashes between police and gangs. 
When two armed powers operate in the same territory, confrontation is 
inevitable.

A teenager is killed in a shootout between drug traffickers and police. Unlike 
the Olympics, it barely makes the news
Michel Silva 
23 September – Maré


My bus home is stopped by a protest. I don’t discover the cause until I arrive 
home. Hours earlier, 11-year-old Herinaldo Vinícius de Santana was fatally shot 
in the head on the way to buy a ping-pong ball. He is the second young victim 
this month in Maré.According to data released by Amnesty International 
<https://www.amnesty.org/download/Documents/AMR1920682015ENGLISH.PDF>, more 
than half of registered killings by on-duty police in Rio de Janeiro between 
2010 and 2013 were of young people between the ages of 15 and 29. Of those 
killed, 79% were black.

30 September – Alemão


At 10am, a young man, 20-year-old Deyverson Avelino, is shot dead in the 
Canitar neighbourhood of Alemão. The favela is flooded with police. Residents 
say Avelino died on the spot, but police claim he succumbed to his wounds at 
the emergency care unit. Sometimes the police lie. There have been times when I 
have seen something happen, then requested a press release from the police, who 
have provided a completely different story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aed965139cf83cf26826e001073cb0fc17fb4ec%2F188_251_2967_1780%2F2967.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aed965139cf83cf26826e001073cb0fc17fb4ec%2F188_251_2967_1780%2F2967.jpg>
 Favelas are often flooded with police. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty Images 
31 October – Alemão


The NGO Voice of the Community 
<http://www.vozdascomunidades.com.br/complexo-do-alemao/>, which I used to work 
for, holds a festival for children in Alemão’s Olympic Village, a large sports 
complex. The event lights up the community with the smiles of hundreds of local 
kids. It is a lot of fun. In the evening, the police hand out baskets of basic 
necessities in the Alvorada neighbourhood. It is an attempt to win over the 
residents. The gangs used to provide this service so now the police have sort 
of taken over the task.

17 October – Rocinha


Rocinha is very tense after the shooting of two young men in the favela in 
less than 24 hours. One of the injured, Adson da Conceição Figueiredo, 24, was 
shot by police during a raid. The other, whose identity was never revealed, was 
shot while hiking from Rocinha to Chacara do Céu in Leblon. Angry residents 
block a highway in protest and the UPP commander requests reinforcement to 
control the situation. Police use teargas, pepper spray and rifle fire to 
suppress the demonstration.

24 October – Alemão


Commerce in Alemão is ordered to shut down after police kill a 
drug-trafficking gang member, 26-year-old Paulo Ricardo da Silva, known as PL 
or Polho. The gang insists all shops close to mourn him.

2 December – Rocinha


A pregnant woman has to be rescued from a landslide in the Trampolim 
neighbourhood of Rocinha after a thunderstorm hits our community. Storms are 
always a concern because people build houses on slopes where the ground is not 
stable. Construction is supposed to be prohibited, but everyone knows the 
authorities won’t do anything.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44cfd5fa4ee3f4289e6b2955dccaccf17dc50021%2F1160_0_1600_2000%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44cfd5fa4ee3f4289e6b2955dccaccf17dc50021%2F1160_0_1600_2000%2F1600.jpg>
 ‘I am infected by the Zika virus. I don’t plan to get pregnant any time soon 
but, if I do, I will worry whether my baby will be born healthy.’ Photograph: 
Buda Mendes/LatinContent/Getty 
5 December – Maré


There is growing concern about the Zika virus in the news. It seems to hit 
favelas hardest. In Maré, I’ve seen at least six people who have been infected. 
I am one of them. Often, when we get sick, doctors at public hospitals will not 
see us because they are not being paid their salaries. And when they prescribe 
medicines, we are left to pay for them. I had to go home and wait until I got 
better. The reports say it can cause problems in foetuses, but we don’t have 
enough information. I don’t plan to get pregnant any time soon but, if I do, I 
will worry whether my baby will be born healthy.

6 December – Rocinha


Tour operators treat favelas like zoos, but that might end soon. A motion to 
reform the “safari trips” through favelas was tabled in the municipal 
government today by councillor Célio Lupparelli, who says the visits are 
arranged by companies from outside the favela who pay little heed to the 
cultural, historical and artistic aspects of our community. Instead, tourists 
just focus on degradation, poverty, violence and misery and leave without any 
interaction with local culture.

13 December – Rocinha


Rocinha social networks were buzzing today with a community appeal to raise 
money for a family who lost everything in a fire. It is often the case that the 
community fills the gap left by social services. If we waited for the 
authorities, it would take too long because of the bureaucracy involved.

25 December – Rocinha


Instead of Christmas cheer, there was fear in Rocinha after a shootout between 
police and locals that left one dead and six injured. Jorge Arui, a 49-year-old 
merchant, was killed on his way to the shops to buy bread. Locals said the 
gunfight started after the police demanded music from a party be turned off.

Olympic sailing ramp in Rio de Janeiro collapses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/olympic-sailing-ramp-in-rio-de-janeiro-collapses>
2 January 2016 – Alemão


It’s 5.40pm and I hear shots nearby. Over time, your ears grow accustomed. The 
volume and crack tell you how far you are from the gunfire and whether it is 
from a powerful weapon. I would rather not learn these things, but it is not a 
matter of choice: it is a question of survival. My ears are used to it, but my 
heart is not. The closer the shots, the stronger it beats. Each time, the 
symptoms are the same: pounding heart, cold trembling hands, eyes wide open and 
all senses on alert.

19 January – Maré


The construction of the Factory of Tomorrow School 
<http://educateachild.org/our-partners-projects/projects/schools-tomorrow> – a 
municipal educational project – is underway. It has been a long time since the 
authorities invested so much time and money in our children. The promises came 
only after they announced the World Cup and Olympics. It will be good to have 
more schools in Maré – but it’s frustrating that our demands are not met 
without political motivations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce055b250e230e60507a275dacedd1ac8171a768%2F0_254_3814_2289%2F3814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce055b250e230e60507a275dacedd1ac8171a768%2F0_254_3814_2289%2F3814.jpg>
 Ongoing preparation at Porto Maravilha ahead of the Olympics. Photograph: 
Bloomberg via Getty 

23 January – Maré


The community is full of energy today as we celebrated summer in Maré with a 
pre-carnival street party. Our goal is to have this event recognised as one of 
the city’sblocos or neighbourhood parades. Everyone met at the Lona Cultural, a 
hub for music and other events, in the heat of the afternoon and then we 
sweatily partied our way towards the Pontilhão at night. This is an area that 
was taken over by the military but today we occupied it with dancing and 
festivity. The drummers kept up a strong rhythm, people painted their faces, 
mothers in brightly coloured clothes brought their young children along. We 
will have other blocos at the Pontilhão. The police put their armoured cars 
there, but we bringbaile funk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/nov/23/worldmusic> and go to play at 
the nearby amusement parks and skating rinks. I think it’s important to occupy 
these areas as a form of resistance.

29 January – Rocinha


My sister, Monique, witnessed a shooting and robbery inside the Rebouças 
tunnel, which links the north and south zones of Rio. According to the military 
police, a motorbike was stolen and the victim was shot twice in the arm. The 
incident caused panic. Drivers feared it was a mass robbery and abandoned their 
cars to run outside the tunnel. There is a frightening climate of fear in this 
city. People head off to work each morning, not knowing whether they will 
return home in the evening.

9 February – Alemão


I go to a carnival party in Inhaúma, which ends in chaos at 2am when police 
try to drive through the crowd to turn off the sound. Locals throw beer 
bottles. Police respond with shots andstun grenades 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stun_grenade>. For more than 30 years, the state 
had not been present in Rio’s favelas, and now it is mostly represented by 
military police. The police can’t be the solution because they are protagonists 
and lack legitimacy.

I go to a party that ends in chaos. Locals throw bottles. Police respond with 
shots and stun grenades
Daiene Mendes 
22 February – Maré


Today, I have one of the worst experiences I can remember. On my way to 
college, I am almost caught up in fighting during a police action. I take 
shelter behind a car and cover my ears. The gunfire is very loud. So is my 
crying. I drop my food and go to college in a state of shock. When I return 
home, there are empty rounds of ammunition on the floor. The news reports that 
19-year-old resident, Igor Silva, 19, was fatally shot in the chest by an 
officer from the core special police unit. He worked at a local pharmacy, but 
the police insist he is a criminal. This is a day that makes me rethink my life.

8 March – Alemão


Last night, there was such a fierce gun battle that I could not go home. My 
WhatsApp groups warned of the tension in the favela, so a friend offered to let 
me stay at her house.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd709adf0b17174bffad3b1796efbdeeca2e4cda6%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd709adf0b17174bffad3b1796efbdeeca2e4cda6%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A police officer walks past distressed residents in the Alemão favela. 
Photograph: Felipe Dana/AP 
12 March – Rocinha


Heavy rain turns the community into a river. That’s not news. It is always 
like this in a storm. One resident – 58-year-old Carlos M da Silva – dies after 
being dragged into a ditch. When it rains, the volume of water and garbage that 
comes down the hillside is huge. Residents say Carlos was trying to unclog a 
manhole and was carried by the force of the current and debris. He was a street 
cleaner and worked clearing ditches. He died trying to help the community, as 
he had always done.

23 March – Maré


The country’s economic crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/rio-de-janeiro-financial-emergency-olympic-games-2016>
 is affecting many sectors of society. Teachers are on strike because of their 
low salaries. This has gone on for so many months that students have occupied 
more than 30 public schools to stake a claim to a better education. They sleep 
in the classrooms. My old high school where many Maré residents have studied – 
the Viscount of Cairo College – is one of the occupied schools.

17 April – Maré


A very important day for the country – the lower house votes on the 
impeachment of president Dilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/17/tensions-high-as-dilma-rousseffs-impeachment-vote-broadcast-live-in-brazil>
. We are experiencing a coup. There are protests across the country, but Maré 
does not raise its voice. We have not forgotten that thepresident approved the 
military occupation of all the favelas of Maré in 2014 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/3/30/rio-favela-occupiedinmilitarybackedpolicepacificationeffort.html>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d7957bad9784087d9bd1bff98aa0d21040b9882%2F793_0_2760_3451%2F2760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d7957bad9784087d9bd1bff98aa0d21040b9882%2F793_0_2760_3451%2F2760.jpg>
 Life on the margins of Rio’s upcoming Olympics. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty 
21 April – Rocinha


A newly built cycle lane collapses after being hit by a strong wave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/21/rio-de-janeiro-bicycle-path-collapse-death-brazil-olympic-games>
. Among the fatalities is a 60-year-old Rocinha resident, Ronaldo Severino da 
Silva, who used to go for walks along that cycle path on his days off. The 
construction,which was inaugurated in January 
<http://riotimesonline.com/brazil-news/rio-real-estate/rio-opens-new-bike-path-along-avenida-niemeyer-to-bumpy-start/>
, cost R$44m (£10m) but failed to account for the impact of waves. This is 
absurd because it was built on the coast. But it is not an isolated accident – 
Rio is full of botched work.

7 May – Rocinha


The Olympic committee hosts a one-day festival in the Rocinha sports complex, 
from 8am to 1pm, where people can try out popular and unusual sports and 
children can pose next to the Olympic and Paralympic mascots. There wasn’t much 
information about the event, and not many people come. It is the first time the 
mascots visited Rocinha. Until now, there hasn’t been any legacy for the 
community. Just marketing.

12 May – Maré


On the way home from my sister’s house, I hear shots ahead of me. I call my 
mother to check whether it is safe to return. Later, I learn that a core 
special police unit has killed a local resident – 24-year-old Oswaldo Rocha. 
This time, the lethal shooting doesn’t even make the newspapers. Violence in 
the favela has become trivialised. People have a new topic of discussion when 
they chat at bus stops and in checkout queues and lifts:Rousseff has been 
removed from the presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/may/11/dilma-rousseff-impeachment-brazil-senate-vote>
. And who will lose most from this? As always, it will be us. The 
vice-president,Michel Temer, who has taken over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/michel-temer-brazil-president-rebuild-impeachment>
, haspromised to reduce workers’ rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/brazil-rightwing-government-michel-temer>
. I’m worried about what will come next.

17 May – Rocinha


The extension of Metro Line 4, which will finally give Rocinha residents a 
subway station, has been delayed – andwhen it does open, we will not initially 
be allowed to use it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/2016-olympics-games-metro-extension-delay>
 because priority will be given to Olympic pass holders, including athletes, 
organisers and tourists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe83f461c307e4913c379363061ebeda3ca5af4d1%2F0_0_4875_3031%2F4875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe83f461c307e4913c379363061ebeda3ca5af4d1%2F0_0_4875_3031%2F4875.jpg>
 The cable-stayed bridge that will carry the new Metro Line 4 subway line into 
Rocinha. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty 
10 June – Rocinha 


A court has awarded damages to the family of Amarildo de Souza, a Rocinha 
resident who was tortured and killed by military police in July 2013 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-24362311>. About a dozen 
officers have been convicted for the case, which was a turning point in 
relations between the UPP police unit and the community. Since de Souza’s 
death, the UPP has lost credibility with the locals. The number of police 
officers has been reduced and the level of violence has increased. I used to 
think the UPP programme was good but, over the years, I have come to feel 
cheated. There is no point investing in security if there is a lack of other 
basic public services such as health, leisure and education.

19 June – Alemão 


On TV, I follow the Olympic torch passing through several cities of Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>. Nearer home, there is a major 
confrontation. Police are everywhere. I cannot leave the house – the shots are 
too close. Instead, I wait. Another resident, 31-year-old Roseli Jesus, has a 
different fate: she is shot in the back and dies instantly. Another local, 
19-year-old Luiz Felipe Alves, has to be hospitalised.

Ahead of the Olympics, police operations have become more intense. More people 
are dying. That could be my family, my friends, maybe even me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33ce827ee4df475ff28aae1744f692bc08672b1c%2F531_202_1433_1792%2F1433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33ce827ee4df475ff28aae1744f692bc08672b1c%2F531_202_1433_1792%2F1433.jpg>
 Both police officers and civilians have been injured in shootouts in Alemão. 
Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty 
22 June – Alemão 


A distressing day. I’m outside the favela, but my phone buzzes with messages 
throughout the day as people simultaneously report hearing shots at various 
locations. I don’t know how to return home. One resident, Isabel Martins, is 
hit by a bullet in the Alvorada community. It wounds her arm. In a shootout in 
my own neighbourhood of Nova Brasilia, a police officer is struck in the thigh. 
Given the terrible situation, the best response from the government would be to 
remove police from Alemão. The UPP has not worked. We want police who respect 
us as citizens.

24 June – Maré 


Today is the birthday of my older sister. We have spent the past week 
organizing a surprise party, but it proves difficult. We wake at 5am to the 
sound of shots. Live television coverage shows three armoured vehicles 
patrolling the neighbourhood. Amid all this uncertainty, my family decides to 
go ahead with the party. Outside, three men lose their lives. They are shot a 
short distance away from the house where we are. It is really sad to celebrate 
life amid so much death. But this is our way to resist.

29 June – Maré 


I go to sleep hearing gunshots and then I wake with them. This is becoming 
routine.BOPE special police forces 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batalh%C3%A3o_de_Opera%C3%A7%C3%B5es_Policiais_Especiais>
 have entered three Maré favelas. I have good news today – I have passed a 
college exam. But any joy I feel quickly fades when I receive a call from my 
mother telling me to be careful on the way home from work. I spend the rest of 
the day fearing that something might happen to my family and friends. I want to 
cry.

The police operation lasts more than six hours. It seems a police officer is 
shot. So is a bricklayer’s assistant, José da Silva, who is killed by stray 
bullet. A hospital worker, Carmen dos Santos, is hit in the arm.

30 June – Rocinha


Three men are shot a short distance away from where we are celebrating my 
sister's birthday
Thaís Cavalcante 
Until 2014, favelas were almost invisible on the internet, which fed the 
stigmatising of our communities. But now, with the help of local NGO 
AfroReggae, Google has mapped streets, alleys and 3,000 businesses in 25 
communities. This year, it aims to increase that by 25% with the help of 
community residents trained in digital cartography. Another digital-mapping 
initiative has been launched by the community newspaper Foreign Roca in 
partnership with the Memory and History Museum of Sankofa. According to the 
organisers, mapping is a way for the favela to assert its place in the city.

1 July – Alemão 


I am woken at 7am by shots that sound very close. The noise echoes through my 
little house. At times like this, I think about leaving Alemão, although I love 
living here.

On days when there is shooting, the whole routine of the favela changes. The 
climate of tension makes it difficult for people to return home and even the
mototaxis <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motorcycle_taxi> stop working. That 
means there is less trade and less money for many families. A single bullet can 
impact the routine of 120,000 residents here.

12 July – Maré 


After foreign visitors arrive for the Olympics, they will have to drive from 
the airport past the colourful murals on temporary barriers that hide our 
favela. Maré residents have nicknamed this the “wall of shame”. It was erected 
a few years before the2014 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2014>. Officials say the 
barrier is acoustic and reduces the noise of cars. I believe that is a lie. I 
think they are attempting to deny our existence, which is revolting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fa4ef57119c1860b760678afcf5956403bc9b3b%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20only%20Olympic%20legacy%20I%20see%20is%20repression%20and%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20a%20year%20in%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20favelas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Folympic-legacy-repression-war-rio-favela%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fa4ef57119c1860b760678afcf5956403bc9b3b%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 The ‘wall of shame’, which hides the Maré favela. Photograph: LightRocket via 
Getty/Brazil Photos 
1 August –
Daiene Mendes in Alemão 

Over the past 48 days, I have counted at least 25 days of gunfights, two 
residents have died, and another five, including two police, have been injured. 
Alemão was better off in the past when it was abandoned by the state. Now, I 
believe the state looks at us with the eyes of an assassin.

I hope the Olympic Games is over soon because the only legacy I see is 
repression, militarisation and war.

'Don’t put your head underwater': visitors warned over Olympics pollution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/rio-de-janiero-water-pollution-olympics-2016>
Thaís Cavalcante in Maré 


In the past year, the situation in Maré has become more intense than in 
previous years and everything indicates that this is because of preparations 
for the Olympics. On the one hand, there have been countless police operations. 
On the other, there has been more public investment in local culture. Community 
journalists have had the opportunity to tell the residents’ side of the favela 
story, yet the commercial media continues to blacken the name of our 
communities.

Michel Silva in Rocinha


There is a new subway station near our community, but this should have been 
built long ago. Apart from that, there may be a short-term boost from tourism. 
But what happens after the Olympics? Many of the subway construction workers 
are from Rocinha. Now the project has almost ended, they have been laid off. 
The building workers union estimates 30,000 people will lose their jobs. 
Meanwhile, the shootings continue. Over the past year, five residents have been 
killed and 14 wounded in shootings or violence. The government is trying to 
make the city seem safe for international visitors, but it is not safe for 
residents. I am glad the Olympics lasts only 17 days. After that, we need time 
to put our house in order.
 