
The moment the back hatch of the C-130 cargo opened at the militarised airport 
in Mogadishu [in 1992], a wave of intense heat hit me. The hot wind blew fine 
red dust that covered me before I even reached the tarmac. I knew this place 
would be unlike any other I had been to before. Unosom, the United Nations 
Operation inSomalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>, controlled the 
airport, and the property was surrounded by military vehicles, sandbagged posts 
and razor wire. It was a hive of NGO and UN activity, with shipments of relief 
goods and aid workers arriving hourly. I hitched a ride with the Save the 
Children convoy and stayed in their walled compound until I could find my way 
to our headquarters. The rest of the team, including [my partner] Julie, 
arrived the next day, and I joined them at the Samaritan’s Purse compound.


During our first night there, we heard yelling and running and machine gunfire 
just ouside of our room. After the first crackles of gunfire, I realised that 
all the windows to the bedroom were open. I yelled to Julie to roll off the bed 
and lie flat on the floor. Keeping the lights off, we crawled on our hands and 
knees out of the room and up the building’s two flights of stairs to avoid 
being shot through the open windows along the stairway. The gunshots now 
sounded like they were all around the house.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6e3dd730130dec38628c5517c8473796385e94f%2F4_0_672_1000%2F672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20ruined%20city%20of%20Mogadishu%20had%20a%20hellish%20feeling'%3A%20helping%20Somalia's%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20ruined%20city%20of%20Mogadishu%20had%20a%20hellish%20feeling%27%3A%20helping%20Somalia%27s%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6e3dd730130dec38628c5517c8473796385e94f%2F4_0_672_1000%2F672.jpg>
We scrambled our way on to the flat roof, where we found the other members of 
our team. A moment later, one of the surgeons appeared carrying an AK-47, and 
we all reflexively ducked as he swung up the stairs. I wondered which was more 
dangerous – the shooting down below or the gun-wielding surgeon on the roof. He 
laid the gun down, and we called the UN compound to report the event. By then, 
the gunfire seemed to have stopped, but we all waited for what seemed like 
hours before returning to bed.

I struggle to write about Somalia in ways that are not cliche. As my first 
humanitarian mission, it was so incredibly different and larger than life. The 
ruinedcity of Mogadishu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/26/somalia-fragile-security-aid-out-of-reach-mogadishu>
 had a hellish feeling, starting with its temperatures, which reached 110 
degrees fahrenheit. The buildings were pockmarked with holes from bullets and 
rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs). Somali militiamen wearing sunglasses and 
toting the universal AK-47s patrolled the streets in “technicals” – Toyota 
pick-up trucks that had been modified by welding large-calibre machine guns on 
to their beds. Even the peaceful-looking waters of the Indian Ocean teemed with 
sharks.

One day, Abdulahi, the Somali manager of all the compound’s staff, told me 
that we needed to have more weapons, even though we had hired security guards 
to protect the compound.

“Go to Bakara and buy some more weapons,” he said, “and then show your own 
guards that you have them.” So we went with our security guards to the Bakara 
market in central Mogadishu, the largest of the central markets. Bakara was a 
congested bazaar filled with fruit, trinkets, blankets, hanging meat that was 
collecting flies, and khat, a locally grown stimulant that looks like cilantro 
but acts like an amphetamine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86832751a8ee564e7cdc8e12bcdcfdb3821b7a1e%2F0_0_4242_2840%2F4242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20ruined%20city%20of%20Mogadishu%20had%20a%20hellish%20feeling'%3A%20helping%20Somalia's%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20ruined%20city%20of%20Mogadishu%20had%20a%20hellish%20feeling%27%3A%20helping%20Somalia%27s%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86832751a8ee564e7cdc8e12bcdcfdb3821b7a1e%2F0_0_4242_2840%2F4242.jpg>
 Daily life in 1992 in Mogadishu, where conflict, drought and food insecurity 
led to the US initiative Operation Restore Hope, aimed at protecting 
humanitarian workers from clan violence. Photograph: Patrick Robert/Sygma/Getty 
Images 
The arms market was surreal. We wove through its crowded, sweltering alleys 
and were directed to a dark plywood stall that looked like an arsenal. 
Automatic weapons hung on the walls like groceries. The Kalashnikov rifles, 
hand grenades and rocket-propelled grenades were all leftovers from the Soviet 
era, when weapons had flooded into the country. At one time, it was estimated 
that there were 300,000 automatic weapons in Mogadishu, about one for every 
three people in the city.

Somalia's fragile security puts aid out of reach for many who desperately need 
it | Kate Holt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/26/somalia-fragile-security-aid-out-of-reach-mogadishu>
We bought one AK-47 and ammunition for about $250 [£196]. Over the following 
weeks, in addition to our medical work, we all took lessons in cleaning, 
storing and shooting AK-47s with the US marines stationed in Somalia. I must 
admit, however, that it was no comfort to me or any of the staff to have 
weapons in our home, but they were everywhere in Somalia – a strange reality. 
About a month later, the weapons shops at the Bakara market were shut down by 
Unosom forces in an attempt to disarm the citizens of Mogadishu. This 
ultimately proved to be futile.

As part of the medical team, I helped organise mobile clinics – trucks loaded 
with medical equipment, supplies and personnel – that would take us around the 
capital and to inland towns like Baidon and Baardheere and their surrounding 
villages. I also helped select appropriate sites for our clinics and negotiated 
safe passage with the local elders and warlords. On one memorable day in March 
1993, we set up a clinic inside an abandoned movie theatre. It was an odd 
sight. The hot, cavernous old building had its own war wounds – its ceiling was 
crumbling, the old screen was in tatters, and RPGs had left car-sized holes in 
its walls – but it was the best available space for our work. My colleagues and 
I had unpacked and were beginning to set up a station to triage the ill and 
injured Somalis who had gathered when the leader of one of the warring clans 
barged in with family members in tow, demanding that we take care of them 
immediately. We told him, through a translator, that we had to treat the 
sickest people first, and that his relatives – who seemed comparatively healthy 
– would have to wait.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cae0a0598c6485c530d9d41710afd416db43916%2F0_0_5188_3404%2F5188.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20ruined%20city%20of%20Mogadishu%20had%20a%20hellish%20feeling'%3A%20helping%20Somalia's%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20ruined%20city%20of%20Mogadishu%20had%20a%20hellish%20feeling%27%3A%20helping%20Somalia%27s%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-ruined-city-of-mogadishu-had-a-hellish-feeling-helping-somalias-sick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cae0a0598c6485c530d9d41710afd416db43916%2F0_0_5188_3404%2F5188.jpg>
 Years of civil war and drought disrupted the economy and led to hunger in 
Somalia in 1992.
 Photograph: Bernard Bisson/Sygma/Getty Images 
Infuriated, the clan leader left. He soon returned with a half-dozen raggedly 
dressed militiamen carrying AK-47s and chewing khat. Shouting in Somali, the 
jumpy young men circled around us, rummaged through our supplies and terrified 
our patients. When we heard the crack of gunfire outside, I fully expected them 
to start shooting in the theatre. We stopped our triage, and I asked the clan 
leader to speak privately. After some conversation, we finally agreed that I 
would treat his wife first. Guards stood by while I quickly examined and 
treated her with Tylenol for her chronic back pain. I reassured the clan leader 
that his wife was in good health, and we were allowed to proceed with our 
clinic. It was the first of many compromises I would have to make in the field 
for the sake of keeping our relief programmes running.

 * The World’s Emergency Room: the Growing Threat to Doctors, Nurses and 
Humanitarian Workers 
<http://us.macmillan.com/theworldsemergencyroom/michaelvanrooyen/9781250072122>
, by Michael VanRooyen, is published by St Martin’s Press ($25.99)  