
UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon has warned of a “very real risk of mass 
atrocities” inSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> and 
that peacekeepers deployed in the war-torn country will not be able to stop 
such a bloodbath.

South Sudan peacekeeping commander sacked over 'serious shortcomings'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/02/south-sudan-peacekeeping-chief-sacked-alarm-serious-shortcomings-ondieki>
Ban told the security council in a report released on Wednesday that the 
United Nations must clearly define what actions it is prepared to take in the 
event of mass killings.

“There is a very real risk of mass atrocities being committed in South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, particularly following the 
sharp rise in hate speech and ethnic incitement in recent weeks,” Ban said.

While UN peacekeepers will resort to “all necessary means” to protect 
civilians, “it must be clearly understood that United Nations peacekeeping 
operations do not have the appropriate manpower or capabilities to stop mass 
atrocities,” he added.

Nearly 14,000 soldiers and police are deployed in the UN mission in South 
Sudan (UNMiss), but a recent report showed thepeacekeepers failed to protect 
civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/un-failed-to-protect-civilians-in-south-sudan-report-finds>
 during an outbreak of heavy fighting in the capital in July.

“The limits on UNMiss’s ability to protect civilians in the current 
environment have been demonstrated clearly,” he said in the report sent to the 
council last week.

Ban plans to dispatch a delegation to the African Union in Ethiopia’s capital 
Addis Ababa to agree on a joint plan to confront a possible outbreak of mass 
violence in South Sudan.

Violence, fear and looting grip South Sudan's capital Juba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/19/south-sudan-violence-fear-looting-juba>
The plan could include the creation of an over-the-horizon force that would 
quickly deploy in a crisis.

The world’s youngest nation, South Sudan descended into war in December 2013, 
leaving tens of thousands dead and more than 2.5 million people displaced.

The country won independence from Sudan in 2011, with strong support from the 
United States.

A peace deal between President Salva Kiir and rebel leader Riek Machar in 
August last year had raised hopes of peace, until clashes erupted in Juba four 
months ago.

The UN security council agreed to deploy a regional force to Juba to improve 
security, but the government has balked at the deployment of the 4,000 troops.

Seeking shelter at the UN’s Bentiu camp in South Sudan – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/nov/08/seeking-shelter-un-united-nations-bentiu-camp-south-sudan-in-pictures>
In a separate confidential letter to the council, obtained by Agence 
France-Presse, Ban said Kiir’s government had shown “piecemeal and limited 
consent” for the proposed regional force while continuing to impede UNMISS in 
its work on the ground.

The council, which will discuss South Sudan on Thursday, has threatened to 
impose an arms embargo on South Sudan for its refusal to cooperate, but it has 
yet to take action.

“South Sudan is inundated with weaponry, which is often turned on defenseless 
civilians,” Ban said in his report, adding that “under the present 
circumstances, stopping the flow of additional arms into the country is 
critical for the protection of civilians”.
 