
Madina Boru cradles her 18-month-old son as the health worker wraps the 
measuring tape around his skinny upper arm. The boy is one of more than400,000 
children in Ethiopia at risk of extreme hunger 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/ethiopia/unicef-ethiopia-humanitarian-situation-report-7-reporting-period-november-december>
 as the country grapples with the worst drought in decades, caused by a 
particularly severe occurrence of the weather phenomenon El Niño.

“All of our crops failed last year, after the rains didn’t come,” Boru says. 
“My son fell sick soon after.”

Health posts such as this one in the village of Ogolcho, about 160km south of 
the capital, Addis Ababa, are at the forefront of a government-led humanitarian 
response to 10.2 million people affected by the drought. Hand-drawn charts line 
the walls, displaying statistics on screening and therapeutic feeding 
programmes for children under five. Well-trained health workers distribute 
medicine and peanut butter paste, a nutritional supplement for malnourished 
children.

Ethiopia's agriculture boom yields a bare harvest for poor as El Niño bites | 
William Davison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/26/ethiopia-drought-el-nino-food-security-agriculture-poor>
In contrast with other humanitarian crises, such as the one in neighbouring 
South Sudan, where aid is delivered through international organisations, the 
government is the main channel for relief efforts in Ethiopia. It distributes 
food, digs irrigation canals, trucks water to dry areas, and has unleashed an 
army of 38,000health extension workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jan/09/ethiopia-model-families-social-transformation-healthcare>
 who detect and treat malnutrition.

“This is a genuinely collaborative effort,” said Paul Handley, head of the 
UN’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (Ocha) forEthiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia>. “If you like, it’s a humanitarian 
response through a developmental model.”

The government has committed more than £270m towards relief efforts and has 
pledged to dig deeper into state funds should international donors fail to meet 
the £1bn required. Only half has been secured so far.

“If the humanitarian partners fail to do their part, it will be the 
responsibility of the government to inject more money by shifting the 
development budget,” says Mitiku Kassa, commissioner at the government’s 
National Disaster Risk Management Commission.

But despite praise by international organisations and the government’s 
assurances that relief efforts are on track, signs of the operation’s 
limitations are visible on the ground. In Ogolcho, Boru complains that the aid 
distributed by the government doesn’t feed her whole family. “We are a family 
of 10, but only half of us received food rations,” she says. “I can’t say what 
we are getting is enough. If it was enough, I would have enough milk for my 
son, and you wouldn’t see him like this.”

While the funding gap is largely to blame for insufficient food aid, farmers 
also accuse the government of unfair distribution and corruption. “The local 
officials and those who lead the one-to-five groups, they use most of the aid 
that comes for themselves and give little to others,” says Ajo Mihesa, a 
farmer, referring to the government scheme to organise society at grassroots 
level – which human rights groups claim isaimed at controlling dissent 
<https://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/ethiopia0505/6.htm>. Mihesa’s family of nine 
received food rations for only two.

The drought is a setback for Ethiopia, which is proud of double-digit economic 
growth and aspires to middle-income status by 2025. After decades of work to 
shed a reputation as a poster child of poverty, the crisis has revived painful 
memories of the1984 famine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/22/-sp-ethiopia-30-years-famine-human-rights>
.

“Because of the government’s response, there is no single livestock or human 
who died as a result of the drought,” says Boru Jilo, deputy administrator for 
Fantalle district in Oromia region.

But Khamisa, a farmer who lives in the same district and preferred not to give 
her second name, paints a different picture. “This drought has severely 
affected us. Our cattle are dying. I lost four cows,” she says, pointing to 
dead livestock scattered around her house.

UK gives Ethiopia £30m to fight drought similar in scale to 1984 crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/23/uk-gives-ethiopia-30m-fight-drought-similar-in-scale-1984-crisis>
As the drought extends into its second year, aid workers worry that unless 
more money is raised in the next few weeks, malnutrition and child mortality 
rates are likely to rise. Yet the political sensitivity surrounding the drought 
could limit or delay full information on the crisis. Most data, including on 
child mortality, is collected by the government, which has already established 
that it “doesn’t expect any loss of life” due to the drought, according to 
Kassa.

Reporting on the crisis has also been controlled, with journalists requiring 
government approval to visit drought-affected areas. Afterthe government 
criticised the BBC for its “sensational” coverage 
<http://www.ethioembassy.org.uk/news_archive/PressRelElNinoUpdate.pdf> (pdf) in 
November, some aid organisations have shied away from taking journalists to the 
field. Officials at two organisations that declined to facilitate a visit for 
this report cited fear of ramifications and the difficulty of securing visas.

The government’s response to the drought has so far averted an escalation of 
the crisis. But as the donor appeal for Ethiopia,the third largest in the world 
<https://fts.unocha.org/pageloader.aspx?page=special-2016overview>, competes 
with disasters in Syria, Yemen and South Sudan, releasing timely and accurate 
information would better attract donors’ attention, experts say.

For now, the population is being left to cope with limited rations, forcing 
many to sell cattle to buy food. But as their livestock dwindles away, many 
dread what could come next. “We finished everything we had, and all of our cows 
are just dying,” says Mihesa. “Unless there is a miracle, we are simply waiting 
to die.”
 