
Two weeks shy of his first birthday, doctors began feeding José Wesley Campos 
through a nose tube because swallowing problems had left him dangerously 
underweight.

Learning how to eat is the baby’s latest struggle as medical problems mount 
for him and many other infants born with small heads to mothers infected with 
theZika virus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus> in Brazil.

“It hurts me to see him like this. I didn’t want this for him,” said José’s 
mother, Solange Ferreira, breaking into tears as she cradled her son.

A year after a spike in the number of newborns with the defect known as 
microcephaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/04/brazil-zika-virus-pregnancy-microcephaly-mosquito-rare-birth-defect>
, doctors and researchers have seen many of the babies develop swallowing 
difficulties, epileptic seizures and vision and hearing problems.

While more study is needed, Zika-caused microcephaly appears to be causing 
more severe problems in these infants than in patients born with small heads 
because of the other infections known to cause microcephaly, such as German 
measles and herpes. The problems are so particular that doctors are now calling 
the condition congenital Zika syndrome.

“We are seeing a lot of seizures. And now they are having many problems 
eating, so a lot of these children start using feeding tubes,” said Dr Vanessa 
Van der Linden, a pediatric neurologist in Recife who was one of the first 
doctors to suspect that Zika caused microcephaly.

Zika, mainly transmitted by mosquito, was not known to cause birth defects 
until a large outbreak swept through north-eastern states in Latin America’s 
largest nation, setting off alarm worldwide. Numerous studies confirmed the 
link.

Seven percent of the babies with microcephaly that Van der Linden and her team 
have treated were also born with arm and leg deformities that had not 
previously been linked to other causes of microcephaly, she said.

Heartbreak and hardship for women in Brazil as Zika crisis casts deep shadow | 
Sarah Boseley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/zika-crisis-brazil-women-heartbreak-hardship>
To complicate matters, there are babies whose heads were normal at birth but 
stopped growing proportionally months later. Other infants infected with the 
virus in the womb did not have microcephaly but developed different problems, 
such as a patient of Van der Linden’s who started having difficulties moving 
his left hand.

“We may not even know about the ones with slight problems out there,” Van der 
Linden said. “We are writing the history of this disease.”

On a recent day, José lay on a blue mat wearing just brown moccasins and a 
diaper, his bony chest pressed by a respiratory therapist helping him clear 
congested airways.

Jose, who has been visited by the Associated Press three times in the last 
year, is like a newborn. He is slow to follow objects with his crossed eyes. 
His head is unsteady when he tries to hold it up, and he weighs less than 13 
pounds, far below the 22 pounds that is average for a baby his age.

Breathing problems make his cries sound like gargling, and his legs stiffen 
when he is picked up. To see, he must wear tiny blue-rimmed glasses, which 
makes him fussy.

Arthur Conceicao, who recently turned one, has seizures every day despite 
taking medication for epilepsy. He also started taking high-calorie formula 
through a tube after he appeared to choke during meals.

“It’s every mom’s dream to see their child open his mouth and eat well,” said 
his mother, Rozilene Ferreira, adding that each day seemed to bring new 
problems.

Studies are under way to determine if the timing of the infection during 
pregnancy affected the severity of the abnormalities, said Ricardo Ximenes, a 
researcher at the Fiocruz Institute in Recife.

Also, three groups of babies whose mothers were infected with Zika are being 
followed for a study funded by the US National Institutes ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>. The groups include infants born 
with microcephaly, some born with normal-sized heads found to have brain damage 
or other physical problems and babies who have not had any symptoms or 
developmental delays.

At birth, Bernardo Oliveira’s head measured more than 13 inches, well within 
the average range. His mother, Barbara Ferreira, thought her child was spared 
from the virus that had infected her during pregnancy and stricken many 
newborns in maternity wards in her hometown of Caruaru, a small city 80 miles 
west of Recife.

But Bernardo cried non-stop. The pediatrician told Ferreira that her baby was 
likely colicky and would get better by the third month. Instead, the crying got 
worse, so Ferreira took him to a government-funded event where neurologists 
were seeing patients with suspected brain damage.

“At the end of the second month, beginning of the third, his head stopped 
growing,” Ferreira said. “Bernardo was afflicted by theZika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus> after all. I was in despair.”

In Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, the government has 
reported 2,001 cases of microcephaly or other brain malformations in the last 
year. So far, only 343 have been confirmed by tests to have been caused by 
Zika, but the health ministry argues that the rest are most likely caused by 
the virus.

The health minister, Ricardo Barros, said there was a drop of 85% in 
microcephaly cases in August and September compared to those months last year, 
when the first births started worrying pediatricians. He credited growing 
awareness of the virus and government attempts to combat mosquitoes through 
spraying campaigns.

Despite all the problems, some infants with the syndrome are showing signs of 
progress.

On a recent evening, 11-month-old Joao Miguel Silva Nunes pulled himself up in 
his playpen and played peek-a-boo with his mother, Rosileide da Silva.

“He is my source of pride,” Silva said. “He makes me feel that things are 
working out.”
 