
Put two foxes, a badger, a hedgehog and a squirrel on a trampoline and you 
have got an exceptionally cuteChristmas advert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/10/meet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video>
.

You’ve also got a bloodbath, filthy urban foxes, badgers with bovine TB and a 
hedgehog that isn’t actually British.

There has been a predictably polarised response to the new John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> Christmas campaign on social 
media, but one wildlife charity that rescues animals when they become tangled 
in trampolines and other garden netting has also called it “ludicrous”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmeet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lewis%202016%20Christmas%20advert%3A%20meet%20Buster%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmeet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lewis%202016%20Christmas%20advert%3A%20meet%20Buster%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmeet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video&media=>
John Lewis 2016 Christmas advert: meet Buster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/10/meet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video>
“I always look forward to the John Lewis advert but they’ve completely screwed 
up this one,” says Simon Cowell, chief executive ofThe Wildlife Aid Foundation 
<http://www.wildlifeaid.org.uk/>. Wildlife and pets being killed or injured by 
netting used in gardens is “a massive, massive problem,” he says. “We go out to 
tens if not hundreds of incidents each year where fruit nets, football nets and 
other garden netting has killed or injured foxes, deer, badgers and owls. We 
have been out to a fox that was stuck on a trampoline. Now we are bound to get 
some idiotic parent or child who will put their pet on the trampoline and get 
them to bounce up and down.”
 An African pygmy hedgehog. Photograph: Joel Sartore/Getty Images/National 
Geographic Creative 
Cowell also criticises the CGI advert for depicting what appears to be an 
African pygmy hedgehog, not a British one: any healthy native hedgehog should 
hibernate over Christmas.

In this respect, the John Lewis advert stands in a long tradition of cutesy 
anthropomorphising. When it was first published in 1908, The Wind in the 
Willows was greeted sniffily by many reviewers, including the Times, which
thundered 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=t1RsBgAAQBAJ&pg=PA431&lpg=PA431&dq=%E2%80%9CAs+a+contribution+to+natural+history,+the+work+is+negligible.%E2%80%9D&source=bl&ots=BNbpGUTA-D&sig=IIpmuTWwdgaDYcuF9YcSs5J_Dw8&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwit9efxoqjQAhVCShQKHfnmA4gQ6AEIIDAB#v=onepage&q=%E2%80%9CAs%20a%20contribution%20to%20natural%20history%2C%20the%20work%20is%20negligible.%E2%80%9D&f=false>
: “As a contribution to natural history, the work is negligible.”

John Lewis Christmas ads: watch all the previous ones here
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/john-lewis-christmas-ads-2016-buster-main-in-the-moon>
Many wildlife charities welcome the John Lewis fantasy, however, for its 
celebration of urban British wildlife.

The Wildlife Trusts’ backing <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/Christmas> for the 
advert might be expected because they receive 10% of the retail price of the 
adverts’ soft toys, but the Badger Trust andBrian May 
<https://twitter.com/DrBrianMay>’s Save Me Trust <http://www.save-me.org.uk/> 
are also enthusiastic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxtKYdG9r0Pk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxtKYdG9r0Pk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxtKYdG9r0Pk&media=>
“We get so much bad news about badgers,” says Dominic Dyer, chief executive of 
theBadger Trust <http://www.badger.org.uk/>. “John Lewis have done us a great 
favour. The advert inspires people to think about the beauty of wildlife that 
we can see in urban surroundings. It’s a beautiful use of CGI technology and we 
welcome it.”

Anne Brummer, chief executive of the Save Me Trust, says its rescue centre 
also takes in animals injured by garden equipment, but she welcomes the advert 
– alongsideWaitrose’s campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/13/waitrose-joins-john-lewis-journey-christmas-tv-ad>
 telling the story of a migrating robin – for inspiring people to care about 
wild animals.

“I could say the robins won’t migrate so far and the foxes and badgers weren’t 
anatomically correct and it wasn’t a British hedgehog, but these are two 
fantastic adverts celebrating wildlife. I love every second of them and I 
congratulate John Lewis for putting positive images out there.”
 