
A new global campaign that makes the case for investing in women and girls was 
launched on the opening day of theWomen Deliver <http://womendeliver.org/> 
conference in Copenhagen on Monday.

The Deliver for Good <http://womendeliver.org/deliver-for-good/> campaign 
highlights 12 critical areas that, with greater investment, could improve the 
lives of women and girls and speed up efforts to achieve gender equality.

“We can’t keep looking at girls and women as body parts or diseases. This has 
to be integrated,” said Katja Iversen, CEO ofWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> Deliver.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20women%20still%20die%20in%20childbirth%2C%20asks%20Emily%20Watson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20women%20still%20die%20in%20childbirth%2C%20asks%20Emily%20Watson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video&media=>
Why do women still die in childbirth, asks Emily Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/may/16/why-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video>
A panel of 25 experts pulled together existing data on each issue into a 
policy brief, which includes how each topic is linked to the targets of the
sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 (SDGs).


“These 12 investments take a gender lens to the SDGs, where we have to invest 
politically, practically and economically,” Iversen said.

“The Deliver for Good campaign will drive action toward what we know is true: 
investing in girls and women unlocks untapped potential, and creates a ripple 
effect that benefits families, communities and entire nations. It’s 2016. Now 
is the time to turn the conversation from ‘if and why’ to ‘how and now’.”

Among the policy briefs is the case for improving women’s access to 
technology. If another 600 million women had access to the internet, annual GDP 
could increase by as much as$18bn (£12.4bn) across 144 countries 
<http://womendeliver.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Deliver_for_Good_Campaign_Brief_7.pdf>
, it says. Another makes the case for keeping children in school for longer, 
arguing that every extra year of education a child receivesincreases the 
average annual GDP by 0.37% 
<http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0019/001902/190214e.pdf>. Meanwhile 
economists found that investing in the elimination of gender-based violence was
one of the most cost-effective targets of the SDGs 
<http://womendeliver.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Deliver_for_Good_Campaign_Brief_5.pdf>
.

The public are invited to sign up to the Deliver for Good initiative, and 
contribute their own suggestions and comments on the 12 policy briefs, which 
will be updated in September to mark the first anniversary of the adoption of 
the SDGs.

Gates Foundation commits $80m to plugging gender equality data gap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/17/gates-foundation-commits-80m-to-plugging-gender-equality-data-gap-women-deliver>
Monday also saw the launch of new World Health Organisation guidelines for 
improving healthcare 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2016/female-genital-mutilation-guidelines/en/>
 for those who have undergonefemale genital mutilation (FGM) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/feb/05/facts-you-should-know-about-fgm-video>
.

The recommendations focus on preventing the practice and better supporting 
those who have been cut. This includes treating obstetric complications, 
treating depression and anxiety as a result of the FGM and offering counselling 
to women about their sexual health.

The guidelines warn health practitioners against the medicalisation of FGM – 
when parents ask health workers to carry out FGM believing it will be less 
harmful for the child.


“Health workers have a crucial role in helping address this global health 
issue. They must know how to recognise and tackle health complications of FGM,” 
said Dr Flavia Bustreo, WHO assistant director general. “Access to the right 
information and good training can help prevent new cases and ensure that the 
millions of women who have undergone FGM get the help they need.”

More than 5,500 delegates from 169 countries are in Copenhagen this week for 
the four-dayWomen Deliver conference <http://womendeliver.org/>. Including the 
number of people watching the live stream of proceedings, the event is believed 
to be the largest global gathering to discuss women’s and girls’ health, rights 
and wellbeing in the past decade.


“This week, more than 5,500 world influencers … are gathered here in 
Copenhagen to make change [and] ensure that the world delivers for women and 
for girls,” said the prime minister of Denmark, Lars Løkke Rasmussen, during 
the opening plenary. “That is a joint responsibility. The fight for equal 
gender opportunities is not just a women’s fight [or] a fight for women. It is 
a fight for all of us – women and men. It is a fight for a better and more 
prosperous world.”

Other speakers included the head of the World Health Organisation, Margaret 
Chan,Nobel peace prize winner Tawakkol Karman 
<http://nobelwomensinitiative.org/meet-the-laureates/tawakkol-karman/>, former 
prime minister of NorwayGro Harlem Brundtland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gro-harlem-brundtland>, and singer and 
activist Annie Lennox. The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, sent a video 
message.

The conference opens as it emerged the UN agency responsible for ending deaths 
in childbirth and promoting family planningis facing a $140m shortfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/16/fears-that-maternal-health-funding-cuts-will-put-lives-at-risk>
 this year as major donors, including Denmark, cut funding.

 