
Does Trump's election mark the end of compassion in aid?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/11/trump-us-election-victory-end-compassion-aid>
As chair of the UK’s international development select committee, the Labour 
Co-operative MP for Liverpool West Derby,Stephen Twigg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephen-twigg>, spends his days 
scrutinising how UK aid is spent and delivered. After four months with Priti 
Patel at the helm of the Department for International Development (DfID), we 
asked him what has changed.

The committee released a damning report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/08/uk-slow-to-tackle-global-goals-at-home-mps-warn>
 in June, saying that the government wasn’t prioritising the sustainable 
development goals (SDGs). How do we ensure they are a priority?

The committee and I expressed concern last November, when the government 
published its new aid strategy, that the SDGs weren’t at the heart of it. I 
think many people found that shocking. It is important in our aid strategy that 
we are absolutely explicit about two things: that the reduction of poverty 
remains the central goal and, second, that the SDGs are a thread that runs 
through all of our work.

Which countries put the UK to shame on how its approach to the SDGs?

Germany and Colombia stand out for how they have approached implementing the 
goals domestically, because of chancellor Angela Merkel’s and president Juan 
Santos’s leadership. In the UK, leadership has to come from the centre of 
government, and domestic implementation should be a cross-departmental concern.

You’ve worked with Justine Greening and Priti Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel> as Conservative secretaries 
of state. How do their approaches differ?

I reject the suggestion that there is a choice between trade and aid
Stephen Twigg 
Justine’s passion for development was evident, in particular her commitment to 
tackling equality and gender issues. Priti, obviously, is new to the post. I’ve 
been encouraged in my dealings with her – she’s very open and has reconfirmed 
the 0.7% commitment. However, her political background is somewhat different 
from Justine’s. She’s said things in the past that are challenging for those of 
us involved in the development world.

What do you make of her trade instead of aid approach? 

I have no difficulty with an argument that says we need to ensure that trade 
works for the poorest countries, and the poorest people in those countries, but 
I reject the suggestion that there is a choice between trade and aid, because 
aid is partly about giving people the tools to be self-sufficient.

In 2015, 14% of aid went to other departments beyond DfID. How has this 
changed the face of UK aid? Are you worried about the securitisation of the aid 
agenda?

That figure is actually going to double: 27% will be spent through other 
government departments in 2016. Clearly there will be sensible measures taken 
through the Foreign Office and the business department. Our focus is to make 
sure that whichever department is disbursing aid money, it’s still spent most 
effectively and in-line with international law and our core principles.

On securitisation, I understand the concern but it’s dependent on the detail. 
There are situations where military involvement does fulfil an aid purpose – I 
don’t think anyone disputed the role of the military in the Ebola crisis. I 
also don’t think that the percentage of money being spent outside DfID rising 
is an inherently good or a bad thing – it depends where the money gets spent.

How can the select committee hold the UK government to account over the sale 
of weapons toSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> that 
might have been used in incidents that break international humanitarian law?


We talk about the Syrian refugee crisis as if it’s the first refugee crisis, 
it’s not.
Stephen Twigg 
One witness from Oxfam used the phrase “the paradox of aid” and made the point 
that, while the UK has a fine record of delivering humanitarian aid in many 
cases, the trouble in Yemen is that a significant part of that aid is relieving 
a situation that is a consequence of an armed conflict, where we are arming one 
side of that conflict. There needs to be an independent United Nations 
investigation of alleged violations of international humanitarian law by both 
sides. In the meantime we shouldn’t be selling arms to Saudi Arabia that might 
be used inYemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>.

Why has the UK government still not fulfilled its pledge to bring over 3,000 
child refugees?

It is complex. Let’s be blunt, public opinion towards refugees has varied. 
There was a genuine upsurge of public support in the summer of 2015, which led 
to the20,000 pledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/uk-will-accept-up-to-20000-syrian-refugees-david-cameron-confirms>
 by David Cameron. But following the bombing in Paris last year, we saw a shift 
in public opinion towards refugees. Cameron was then cautious about refugee 
numbers because he thought that could be a factor in the referendum, and now 
the atmosphere after the EU-referendum isn’t much more welcoming. There are 
also practical concerns.

Why the UK needs a stronger legal framework for aid spending
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/19/uk-needs-stronger-legal-framework-aid-spending>
Mayors from cities such as Liverpool, which wants to take in 100 refugee 
families, say quite rightly that the costs should be brought by central 
government, not by local authorities. These issues need to be resolved before 
bringing people over. But ultimately, we’ve signed up to a bunch of commitments 
– and they are not big numbers in total if you look at the numbers in Jordan, 
Lebanon and Turkey – let alone across Africa. We talk about the Syrian refugee 
crisis as if it’s the first refugee crisis, it’s not. We can manage 26,000 
refugees over five years.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 