
With glinting cartridge belts slung across his chest in cavalier fashion, 
Saifur Rahman once posed for the inevitable macho snapshot reprised countless 
times by each generation of young men sent off to war. It was an image that 
made his mother proud. The salary Rahman sent home while serving in the Afghan 
army’s 207 Zafar Corps enabled his family to eat meat three times a week and 
send two of his younger brothers to school.

Then, on 20 March, the first day of the Afghan new year, Rahman suffered such 
severe gunshot wounds that he was thrown into the back of a vehicle along with 
the bodies of colleagues killed in the same ambush. It was only when he was 
laid out in a row of corpses at a military hospital that he regained 
consciousness and began to scream. Now, like many thousands of other wounded 
Afghan soldiers and police, Rahman has returned home changed: the bread-winning 
hero has become a burden.

In the living room of a house hewn into a hillside overlooking Kabul’s 
haze-tinted sprawl, Rahman, 20, lies under a blanket, hollow-eyed and unable to 
walk, while his parents explain how the burden of care has upended family 
finances. His two brothers have been forced to drop out of school and take jobs 
as delivery boys. There has been no meat for weeks – only okra and bread.

“We’re not asking for anything from anyone. We just want the food and medicine 
he needs to get well,” says his mother, Aqlima. “Thank God he’s alive. That’s 
the most important thing to us.”

With Afghan security forces suffering heavy casualties in their fight against 
the Taliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/taliban-launches-major-assault-on-afghan-city-of-kunduz>
, the cost is measured not only in deaths, but in the anguish suffered by the 
wounded – and the punishing impact their disabilities have on their families.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsons-of-afghanistan-leaders-have-forgotten-us-war-against-taliban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2e5072beb38ce3c9eefbecb22d8087eaa352f1%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%E2%80%99re%20the%20sons%20of%20Afghanistan%2C%20but%20our%20leaders%20have%20forgotten%20about%20us'%20%7C%20Matthew%20Green&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsons-of-afghanistan-leaders-have-forgotten-us-war-against-taliban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%E2%80%99re%20the%20sons%20of%20Afghanistan%2C%20but%20our%20leaders%20have%20forgotten%20about%20us%27%20%7C%20Matthew%20Green&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsons-of-afghanistan-leaders-have-forgotten-us-war-against-taliban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a2e5072beb38ce3c9eefbecb22d8087eaa352f1%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Abdul Agha, a former Afghan National Police officer, was blinded when a mine 
exploded on a road he was patrolling in Logar province 
Young recruits often sign up because they see no other chance of a decent job. 
Relatives celebrate partly out of genuine patriotism, but also because they 
know that a son in fatigues means a steady pay cheque. But with growing numbers 
returning home missing limbs, blind or disfigured, parents are increasingly 
discovering that serving in the army is not elevating their family’s prospects, 
but driving them deeper into debt.

“We don’t care about ourselves; we can live on bread. But we can’t feed him 
properly,” says Rahman’s father, Sarwar Khan. “Sometimes we can’t control him – 
he screams and bangs his head against the wall.”

US generals have repeatedly sounded warnings about the unsustainable rate of 
attrition in the Afghan army and police since they took the lead in fighting 
the Taliban in 2014, following the withdrawal of most western forces. The 
Afghan government does not publish casualty figures but, in August, Gen John 
Nicholson, commander of US and Nato forces in Afghanistan, revealed the Afghan 
military lostmore than 900 men in July 
<http://www.voanews.com/a/afghan-forces-lost-900-men-in-july-us-commander-says/3487944.html>
. Britain lost456 personnel <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-10629358> in 
Afghanistan over 15 years. The latest figures suggest Afghan security forces 
might be on track for an even bloodier year than 2015, when more than5,000 of 
their number were killed and 14,000 wounded 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-afghanistan-casualties-idUSKCN0ZQ04H>.

The numbers illustrate the brutal price the Afghan army is still paying five 
years after the high-water mark of western intervention, when a surge of 
150,000 troops – mostly American – aimed to cripple the insurgency and create 
conditions for a peace settlement. Instead, with most of the foreign forces 
gone, the Taliban controls more territory than at any time since it was ousted 
in 2001 and frontlines have increasingly reached urban areas.

Dawlat Waziri, a spokesman for Afghanistan’s defence ministry, said the army 
provides treatment for wounded soldiers, with those discharged receiving 
lifelong pensions.

“Medical care will be provided throughout their lives, free of charge, and for 
family members as well,” Waziri said.

However, for the relatives of those who suffer life-changing wounds, such 
promises can ring hollow. Overstretched, distant military hospitals may have 
little to offer, and the expenses of caring for disabled young men rapidly 
mount. The impact is being felt by the next generation in terms of lost 
opportunities for education and livelihood as younger brothers are cast into 
roles as carers.

Abdul Wahid, 21, lost the use of his legs when he was shot this year while 
climbing down from a watchtower in Helmand province for evening prayers. The 
former soldier spends his days in a wheelchair at the family home in Kabul, 
where he is tended by Shahidullah, his 14-year-old brother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsons-of-afghanistan-leaders-have-forgotten-us-war-against-taliban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F936ae66de2265369d1d4f3779313efd043637de3%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%E2%80%99re%20the%20sons%20of%20Afghanistan%2C%20but%20our%20leaders%20have%20forgotten%20about%20us'%20%7C%20Matthew%20Green&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsons-of-afghanistan-leaders-have-forgotten-us-war-against-taliban%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%E2%80%99re%20the%20sons%20of%20Afghanistan%2C%20but%20our%20leaders%20have%20forgotten%20about%20us%27%20%7C%20Matthew%20Green&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fsons-of-afghanistan-leaders-have-forgotten-us-war-against-taliban%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F936ae66de2265369d1d4f3779313efd043637de3%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Abdul Wahid, 21, a soldier in the Afghan National Army who has been unable to 
walk since he was shot by a Taliban sniper in March, is seen in his wheelchair 
with his younger brother 
“I’m still being paid a salary but I’m not sure what will happen in the 
future,” Wahid said. “My greatest wish is that I get well soon and get back to 
the army – so I can help bring peace toAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.”

Shahidullah confided that his brother is not always so sanguine. “Sometimes he 
gets upset,” he said. “He doesn’t say anything in front of the family, but he 
sometimes says it would be better to be dead than to go on like this.”

This year, President Ashraf Ghani began making condolence calls to the 
families of those killed in action, signalling a break with the cooler attitude 
to the armed force’s sacrifices exhibited by his predecessor, Hamid Karzai.

However, the government, dependent on aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/afghanistan-seeks-aid-to-rebuild-nation-at-brussels-talks>
, has few resources to provide for the latest additions to a cohort of 
war-wounded generated by decades of uninterrupted strife dating back to the 
Soviet invasion in 1979.

We’re the sons of this country, but our leaders have completely forgotten 
about us
Abdul Agha 
Abdul Agha, a 31-year-old policeman, was blinded last year in an explosion in 
which he also lost his right arm. At his home, where his seven-month-old 
daughter dozed in a sling, he said he was given 80,000 afghanis (£1,000) by the 
government towards the cost of an operation in India that cost 250,000 
afghanis. The balance was borrowed from friends and relatives, as well as a 
loan taken out using his house as collateral.

In Afghanistan, a number of international organisations, including the Red 
Cross, offer emergency surgery and prosthetics. But for young men cut down in 
their prime, the shaded trellises of their parents’ gardens soon start to look 
like prison bars.

“We’re the sons of this country, but our leaders have completely forgotten 
about us,” said Agha. “It shouldn’t be like this.”
 