
Actor, comedian and journalist Liz Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jun/21/disability.socialcare> is 
disabled and in her 40s and says: "I never see anyone on TV that I can really 
relate to in terms of sexuality." This is not only because of her disability 
and her age, but also because she is gay.

According to the latest National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles 
<http://press.thelancet.com/NatsalPictureInfographic.pdf>, 16% of women said 
they had had a same-sex experience. Twenty years ago, that proportion was 4%. 
But if lesbian behaviour – or women's reporting of it, in any case – is now 
increasingly common, why aren't there more gay women in broadcast and print 
media? And are the gay women we do see an accurate reflection of what 16% of 
the female population looks like, anyway?

Speaking at "Lesbophobia in the Media", a debate held jointly by Women in 
Journalism <http://womeninjournalism.co.uk/> and lesbian magazine Diva 
<http://www.divamag.co.uk/> last week, Carr called for more realistic 
depictions of gay women on TV. She highlighted how unlikely it is for 
disability to be a characteristic of an on-screen lesbian. "I'm not seen as 
being capable of having any kind of sex as a disabled woman," she said. "I'm 
asexual. Disabled women are very much desexed."

Writer Iman Qureshi <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/qureshi-iman> said 
lesbianism is never "incidental to a character" in TV and film. "You don't wake 
up in the morning, have breakfast and think – I'm having breakfast as a 
lesbian," she said. "Why can't lesbians just be people?" Jane Czyzselska, the 
editor of Diva magazine, agreed that lesbians are either portrayed as heavily 
sexualised, wacky or asexual. "I don't see any butch dykes on television. I 
don't see any archetypes or role models and we definitely need more to move 
things on."

Czyzselska believes that the situation is just as bad in print. She described 
how fashion PRs deny Diva magazine clothes for shoots, and are reluctant to see 
their celebrity clients' sexuality foregrounded by appearing on the cover of 
Diva. "They're very happy to have their talent inside the magazine, but if we 
wanted to put them on the cover they would be really against that", she said.

Meanwhile, while young heterosexual women's sexuality is routinely exploited 
in the media, the opposite is true for young lesbians in the entertainment 
industry. "Younger lesbians at the beginning of their careers in music are told 
not to tell anyone that they're a lesbian – that's not commercial," said 
Czyzselska. "You need to present yourself as being fuckable by men, and you'll 
sell more records that way."

Journalist Stephanie Theobald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephanie-theobald> agreed younger lesbian 
role models are largely invisible. The X Factor contestantLucy Spraggan 
<http://xfactor.itv.com/2012/finalists/lucy-spraggan/> was the only example she 
could think of of an out young female celebrity. But she argued that once gay 
women reach a certain age, the media allows them to front primetime shows. 
Broadcasters Sandi Toksvig, Clare Balding and Sue Perkins are examples. "Sue 
Perkins is quite asexualised – she's nice and safe," suggested Theobald. "If 
you can get beyond the fuckable age then nobody cares," said Czyzselska.

The reasons why the media fails to represent gay women accurately are complex. 
JournalistJulie Bindel <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/juliebindel> 
suggested the problem lies in the fact that men, who largely still dominate the 
industry, fear losing precedence. "Men are deeply concerned that if you subvert 
the patriarchal norm, things will start to fall apart, including the masculine 
identity," she said.

So how can the media introduce more sexual diversity? Alice Arnold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alice-arnold> cited BBC drama Last Tango 
in Halifax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/23/last-tango-halifax-doctors-notebook-gogglebox>
 as a rare example of a TV show getting it right. "It has a lesbian storyline 
to it that is integral but is not the only thing – that produces change in 
people's attitudes towards lesbians."

Czyzselska suggested the media should make more casual references to 
sexuality, such as female television presenters flirting with other women on 
screen, as so often happens between talk-show hosts and their opposite-sex 
interviewees, and called for newspapers and magazines to include columns about 
everyday gay experiences, such as married lesbian life.

The panel also agreed that there was terrific lesbian content online. New 
Statesman columnistEleanor Margolis 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/writers/eleanor_margolis> argued that the internet 
is drawing gay women away from the mainstream. "There are lots of exciting, 
really funny lesbian web series," she said, namechecking US-producedF to 7th 
<http://fto7th.com/> and Little Horribles <http://littlehorribles.com/>.

Traditional media, on the other hand, has a long way to go. In January, Carr 
broke ground by appearing in the BBC dramaSilent Witness 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007y6k8/characters/clarissa-mullery> as 
Clarissa Mullery, a regular character whose disability is incidental to her 
profession as a forensic examiner, but whose sexuality is offbounds. The BBC's 
guide to her character describes her personal life as "a complete mystery 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007y6k8/characters/clarissa-mullery>".

• This article was amended on Wednesday 27 November 2013 to correct the 
attribution of two quotes by Jane Czyzselska and Stephanie Theobald.
 