
Nine’s 60 Minutes might have hogged the headlines with its kidnapping antics 
in Beirut this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/60-minutes-abduction-i-wont-do-any-more-kidnappings-adam-whittington>
 but in Australian TV current affairs it was the ABC’s Four Corners that made 
its presence felt.

The program’s shocking images from inside the Don Dale detention centre forced 
a royal commission into youth detention in the Northern Territory the day after
Australia’s Shame 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2016/07/25/4504895.htm> was broadcast. 

Four Corners’ investigation of the 2011 death of a young mother on Ten Mile 
Beach in northern New South Wales was one of the stories that prompted an 
independent review that led to charges being laid against two men. Both have 
pleaded not guilty. The sharp focus of Four Corners’ cameras on Lynette Daley’s 
brutal end inCallous Disregard 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2016/05/09/4456354.htm> has finally 
given her grieving family another chance to seek justice.

The reporter behind both these stories is Caro Meldrum-Hanna, 35, who has won 
five Walkley awards since she joined the ABC in 2000 including the Gold Walkley 
in 2015 for another scoop,Making a Killing 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2015/02/16/4178920.htm>, which revealed 
the extent of live baiting in greyhound racing. That led to an inquiry in New 
South Wales and Mike Baird, the NSW premierwent on to announce a ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/new-south-wales-to-ban-greyhound-racing-from-next-year-after-cruelty-investigation>
, which helater reversed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/mike-baird-confirms-backflip-on-greyhound-racing-ban-in-nsw>
.

Meldrum-Hanna spent 2016 churning out more stories that grabbed national 
attention, not all of it welcome. She’s been attacked by everyone from News 
Corp columnist Andrew Bolt to Northern Territory politicians to the Australian, 
which published a letter she had written requesting an interview for 
Australia’s Shame.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fyou-need-to-be-prepared-to-make-enemies-caro-meldrum-hanna-on-four-corners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd31a87119ccd21950d5f30e4fa55ad185ce27e9d%2F0_0_1702_958%2F1702.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You%20need%20to%20be%20prepared%20to%20make%20enemies'%3A%20Caro%20Meldrum-Hanna%20on%20Four%20Corners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fyou-need-to-be-prepared-to-make-enemies-caro-meldrum-hanna-on-four-corners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%20need%20to%20be%20prepared%20to%20make%20enemies%27%3A%20Caro%20Meldrum-Hanna%20on%20Four%20Corners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fyou-need-to-be-prepared-to-make-enemies-caro-meldrum-hanna-on-four-corners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd31a87119ccd21950d5f30e4fa55ad185ce27e9d%2F0_0_1702_958%2F1702.png>
 A screengrab of historical abuses against juvenile prisoners at Don Dale youth 
detention centre. The footage was obtained by ABC’s Four Corners. Photograph: 
Four Corners/ABC 
It’s not only Meldrum-Hanna who has dug up the compelling yarns. Colleagues 
Linton Besser, Deb Whitmont, Marian Wilkinson, Quentin McDermott and Geoff 
Thompson, led by executive producer Sally Neighbour, have produced one of the 
strongest years in the program’s 54-year history. At a time when the ABC is 
trimming its specialist, highly-resourced programming such as Radio National 
and the magazine-style Catalyst, Four Corners remains as a bastion of powerful 
journalism where it takes nine weeks to produce a single 45-minute program.

Neighbour says the nips and tucks may be continual across the ABC but Four 
Corners as an institution is safe. “The ABC has been doing a lot of soul 
searching recently about its purpose and its function and the role of news 
division in the digital era,” Neighbour told Guardian Australia. “And in all 
that soul searching it has always identified unique, original and investigative 
journalism as the central element of what the ABC delivers. In all the internal 
discussions Four Corners is held up as the exemplar of the type of journalism 
we should be doing.

Don Dale to the Nauru files: political response to the outrages couldn't be 
more different
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/12/don-dale-to-the-nauru-files-political-response-to-the-outrages-couldnt-be-more-different>
“Recently ABC news lost a tranche of funding that had been delivered under a 
previous government and it does get tougher and tougher but we are fortunate 
that we are well resourced to do proper investigative journalism.

Neighbour, who has been has been working on and off Four Corners for 20 years, 
nominates Besser’sState of Fear 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2016/03/28/4431284.htm> as one of the 
standout programs this year, along with The Forgotten Children about refugees 
kids on Nauru, Australia’s Shame and Callous Disregard.

Producing Four Corners is a costly and time-consuming business but when a 
program hits the mark the impact is immense. In the month after the July 
broadcast of Australia’s Shame, a total of 23,173 news reports discussed the 
treatment of the children at Don Dale. The day after the broadcast alone, there 
were 5,453 reports.

Australia’s Shame also of course prompted the federal government to launch a 
royal commission into youth detention in the NT, Gillian Triggs to call for an 
independent inquiry into the treatment of the detained children and the UN high 
commissioner for human rights, Prince Zeid bin Ra’ad, to say the footage aired 
by the ABC could be evidence of a violation of the convention on the rights of 
the child and the convention against torture.

But the program also unleashed a torrent of criticism against Four Corners and 
Meldrum-Hanna herself, forcing the ABC into weeks of defending itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fyou-need-to-be-prepared-to-make-enemies-caro-meldrum-hanna-on-four-corners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c8b77a2ebd8e125d85793b61c56cf7ee0c6beac%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You%20need%20to%20be%20prepared%20to%20make%20enemies'%3A%20Caro%20Meldrum-Hanna%20on%20Four%20Corners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fyou-need-to-be-prepared-to-make-enemies-caro-meldrum-hanna-on-four-corners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%20need%20to%20be%20prepared%20to%20make%20enemies%27%3A%20Caro%20Meldrum-Hanna%20on%20Four%20Corners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fyou-need-to-be-prepared-to-make-enemies-caro-meldrum-hanna-on-four-corners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c8b77a2ebd8e125d85793b61c56cf7ee0c6beac%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
 The Four Corners documentary on greyhound baiting sparked an independent 
inquiry into the sport. Mike Baird, premier of New South Wales, announced a ban 
before changing his mind. Photograph: Animals Australia & Animal Liberation Qld 
So rough was that patch, Meldrum-Hanna warns potential investigative reporters 
“to prepare for the blowback”: that the nine week cycle of three weeks 
research, three weeks shooting and three weeks post-production and editing is 
only the start of the assignment.

“If you’re going to rattle a cage you need to be prepared to make enemies,” 
Meldrum-Hanna told Guardian Australia.

“There was a point in the year where my phone was running hot almost 24 hours 
a day – when the greyhound ban was reversed around the time of the NT story. I 
would pick up the phone, it would be a private number and it would be just a 
tirade of abuse, ‘you are going to get what’s coming to you. You C.U.N.T. You 
bitch’. I think that was expected but you can’t take it on. Four Corners didn’t 
get the sport banned. The sport got itself banned. At the same time too we were 
getting criticism for the children in detention story. You know the pictures 
don’t lie. The videos don’t lie. The NT government’s election was coming and it 
was desperate measures.”

It was a glaring omission that that story did not win an award. It was the 
biggest story of the year
Sally Neighbour on Australia's Shame 
Meldrum-Hanna is not a typical Four Corners reporter, who generally come to 
the program as a seasoned foreign correspondent with decades of reporting 
behind her. She started as a researcher at the ABC straight out of a media law 
degree at the University of Technology, Sydney and moved through the ranks in 
record time, moving between reporting and researching in ABC news always with 
her eye on investigative journalism.

“I’ve always been a person to come in a different way,” she says. “I did have 
superiors early on telling me I had to be a foreign correspondent first, that I 
couldn’t just go back to 4C and I would say I don’t want to do that. I am very 
much an investigative reporter and a domestic reporter. There are so many great 
stories at home. There’s so much to uncover here.”

So how does an outsider like Meldrum-Hanna uncover stories many reporters 
covering a beat miss?

“Because of my background in researching I know how to infiltrate a new beat; 
how to go in cold. Journalists would say it’s a disadvantage if you’re not 
known in a round but I think that disadvantage is your greatest strength. If 
you don’t have these relationships you have loyalty to no one. You can report 
without fear or favour. That is how I can do the job that I do. Because I am 
not in bed, I don’t show favouritism and I don’t prejudge stories.

“I’ve had sports reporters say to me they come across these stories but they 
don’t break them because they’ll get nudged on the shoulder and contacts will 
say, ‘you can’t do that to me’. They’ll burn bridges they can never rebuild.”

The premier, the shock-jock, and the dogs: Baird lands awkwardly after his 
backflip | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/the-premier-the-shock-jock-and-the-dogs-baird-lands-awkwardly-after-his-backflip>
Meldrum-Hanna says the most rewarding story of 2016 for her is Callous 
Disregard because it goes to the heart of what good journalism should do: “If 
there is someone without a voice, if there is someone who is vulnerable, then 
it is up to us to shine a light into a dark place.”

The story of Lynette Daley sprang out of the page for Meldrum-Hanna when she 
read in a newspaper that her family was suffering terribly from the trauma and 
the lack of justice.

“I thought ‘what’s this all about?’ so I went to the coroner’s court and I saw 
Lynette Daley’s face and her photo was so arresting. The documents were just 
sitting there in the coroner’s court and all it took was someone to get them 
and ask the family for permission. I don’t know how it wasn’t picked up earlier.

“The most rewarding thing is that Lynette’s parents, Gordon and Thelma, stay 
in touch with me and Gordon asked me to escort Thelma to the arraignment.

“Often people say Indigenous stories don’t rate but we don’t say that at Four 
Corners. It’s not about ratings, which is the wonderful thing about Four 
Corners. It’s what I was meant to do and I give everything to it.”

Jeff Kennett attacks ABC over Don Dale reporting at campaign launch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/jeff-kennett-attacks-abc-over-don-dale-reporting-at-campaign-launch>
Meldrum-Hanna was nominated for a Walkley for Callous Disregard, Australia’s 
Shame andJackson and Lawler 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2015/10/19/4332251.htm>, the 
extraordinary program that took viewers inside Kathy Jackson and Michael 
Lawler’s home and picked up the former Fair Work Commission official doing a 
“bizarre yoga move” with his phone and uttering the very un-ABC word 
“cunt-struck”. Meldrum-Hanna: “It was an exhausting shoot and a highly 
stressful pressure-cooker environment.”

Meldrum-Hanna won a Walkley this year for Jackson and Lawler – in the category 
of best broadcast interviewer. Surprisingly, however, Australia’s Shame was 
ignored by the Walkley judges, leaving Neighbour gob-smacked on the night and 
still angry weeks later.

My strike rate is very good because I am so selective at the very beginning
Caro Meldrum-Hanna 
“It was a very bizarre outcome,” she told Guardian Australia. “The Walkleys 
are a strange and unpredictable beast and I love them – except when we don’t 
get them. It was a glaring omission that that story did not win an award. It 
was the biggest story of the year.

“I did bail up a couple of judges on the night. The Walkleys make no sense 
when the biggest stories, the most important stories, miss out.

“Australia’s Shame was an extraordinary story and we had talked for a long 
time about Indigenous incarceration and a compelling way to tell that story 
that would make people care. That story was about more than its footage and the 
impact of that story speaks for itself. Never, ever, has a royal commission 
been called immediately after a Four Corners story.”

But there was some comfort because the story that won in the best long-form 
category was another from the Four Corners stable: Besser’sMalaysia story 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-03-28/malaysia-four-corners-reporter-talks-about-detainment/7279100>
. “That was absolutely fantastic and incredibly impactful and it absolutely 
deserved to win,” Neighbour said.

Meldrum-Hanna is looking forward to 2017 and says she has some good projects 
on the boil already. “My strike rate is very good because I am so selective at 
the very beginning,” she says with characteristic bulletproof confidence. “I 
won’t proceed unless I am pretty confident or very confident I am going to get 
my hands on some amazing material or that killer interview – whether it be a 
psychological interview or an emotional interview – I won’t proceed without it.”
 