
After a mass strike in Zimbabwe this week, the country’s 92-year-old president 
was forced toconvene an emergency meeting 
<https://www.dailynews.co.zw/articles/2016/07/06/mugabe-s-zanu-pf-panics-over-zim-chaos>
 as the nation came to a standstill.

The strike, dubbed #Zimshutdown2016 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/zimshutdown2016?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Ehashtag>
 on Twitter, was not only unprecedented, but it was a rare moment of public 
defiance in a country that has been ruled by Robert Mugabe and his Zanu-PF 
party for more than 35 years.

Zimbabwe shuts down in peaceful protest against corruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/zimbabwe-shuts-down-peaceful-protest-against-corruption-thisflag-harare>
“We are not afraid any more. We are ready to bring the dictator down,” said 
Promise Mkwananzi, the leader of the #Tajamuka (we have risen) movement as he 
addressed a press conference a day after the strike.

What started as a localised demonstration launched by unpaid government 
workers quickly escalated into a rallying point for national outcry against 
regime corruption andthe worsening financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/14/zimbabwe-trillion-dollar-note-hyerinflation-investment>
.

Mugabe spoke to the country on Friday, denouncing the protests and suggesting 
the delay in paying salaries to civil servants was a “temporary problem” that 
should not have prompted teachers, doctors and nurses to go on strike.

But this isn’t an isolated event: this is the birth of a new kind of protest 
movement that is seriously challenging Zimbabwe’s ruling elite.

Wednesday’s strike is the latest in a continuum of public acts of defiance 
that first began two years ago, launched by activist and journalistItai Dzamara 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2015/09/zimbabwe-where-is-itai-dzamara/>
, who staged an occupy protest inHarare’s central Unity Square 
<https://www.facebook.com/Occupy-Africa-Unity-Square-386483044833537/>, a 
stone’s throw from parliament, the constitutional court and Mugabe’s office.

But it wasn’t long before he disappeared, allegedly abducted and killed by 
state security agents.His whereabouts remain unknown 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2015/09/zimbabwe-where-is-itai-dzamara/>
 nearly two years later.

 But instead of silencing Zimbabweans, as it was supposed to, his 
disappearance has merely motivated others. His brother, Patson, has has been 
tirelessly campaigning to raise awareness of his abduction.Small scale protests 
were held throughout 2015 
<https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2015/zimbabwe>, although many 
were met with violence by the police forces. In April, an elderly womaneven 
heckled the president at Harare airport 
<http://thezimbabwemail.com/headline-21264-mugabe-speech-interrupted-president-we-are-suffering.html>
. Taken by surprise, the visibly angry Mugabe just about managed to contain 
himself and told the woman to “put her demands in writing”.

 But the real shift came when protesters took their fury online. The most 
successful social media figure has beenpastor Evan Mawarire 
<http://www.bdlive.co.za/africa/africannews/2016/07/06/enough-is-enough-says-the-man-behind-zimbabwes-shutdown>
, who created the hashtag#ThisFlag 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/thisflag?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Ehashtag>
 and used Facebook and Twitter to reach out to thousands of angry citizens. 
Evidence that online movements can be more than just clicktivism, the hashtag 
also was instrumental in the broad mobilisation of the strike on Wednesday.

The entire crisis that has befallen our country is a result of poor governance 
and endemic corruption
Douglas Mahiya, war veteran Leandri J van Vuuren (@Lean3JvV) 
POWERFUL! 👊 Zimbabweans standing together against "corruption, injustice & 
poverty".#ThisFlag <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ThisFlag?src=hash> 
#ZimShutDown2016 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ZimShutDown2016?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/DFFbix0LIJ <https://t.co/DFFbix0LIJ>
 <https://twitter.com/Lean3JvV/status/750660621604118528> July 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Lean3JvV/status/750660621604118528> 
This isn’t the first time Zimbabwe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe>
 has witnessed the emergence of a protest movement, but what’s different this 
time is the diversity of those taking part. From bus drivers, traders, civil 
servants, youths, doctors, teachers and street vendors, citizens across the 
political spectrum are uniting.

And these dissenters include some of Mugabe’s most ardent former supporters. 
Onegroup that has been at the forefront of the criticism 
<http://www.iol.co.za/news/africa/succession-mugabe-warns-veterans-2032905> is 
the influential war veterans’ association, made up of men and women who fought 
for liberation from British rule in the 1970s.

 In the run up to the #Zimshutdown2016 protest, the veterans held a press 
conference to express solidarity with anti-regime dissenters. Douglas Mahiya, 
the association’s spokesmanwas reported to have said 
<https://www.dailynews.co.zw/articles/2016/07/05/war-vets-back-mass-protests>: 
“The entire crisis that has befallen our country is a result of poor governance 
and endemic corruption which is now bearing its evil fruits that are on the 
verge of consuming the entire fabric of Zimbabwean nationhood.” He was later 
allegedlyforced to retract the statement by Zanu-PF 
<https://www.dailynews.co.zw/articles/2016/07/05/war-vets-back-mass-protests>. 

Zanu-PF tried to destroy Zimbabwe. Now we are fighting back | Evan Mawarire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/zanu-pf-zimbabwe-fighting-back-thisflag>
The military is also undermining Mugabe’s quest to remain in power, ahead of 
the 2018 election. Speaking in April, the head of the army made it clear that 
he supports vice president Emmerson Mnangagwa as his preferred Zanu-PF 
candidate,forcing Mugabe to issue warnings against the army’s 
<http://www.radiovop.com/index.php/national-news/12969-mugabe-warns-security-chiefs.html>
 meddling in succession politics.

 This coalition of the army, the vice president and the revered war veterans 
has kept Mugabe in charge by legitimising his power and consistently crushing 
dissent since the 1980s. Without their backing, his reign is more likely to be 
compromised.

So while peace may have returned to Harare after the successful strike on 
Wednesday, it is a fragile calm before an oncoming storm. All that needs to 
happen is for the anti-regime dissenters to join up with the disgruntled 
figures within the ruling class, and Mugabe’s rule will finally implode.
 