
The night out 


Revving up
Once a turn-of-the-century Italian school Cezayir (Hayriye Caddesi 12, 
Galatasaray, Beyoglu,cezayir-istanbul.com <http://www.cezayir-istanbul.com/>) 
is now a swish and sophisticated bar. On warm spring nights, head downstairs to 
the bar's gorgeous back garden.Limonlu Bahçe (Yeniçarsi Caddesi 98, 
Galatasaray) is a secret courtyard garden (spot the bar's tiny sign out front), 
where the city's creative types sip mojitos among the lemon trees.

Why party on the land when you can bob between two continents? Su Ada (Ferry 
from Kuruçesme waterfront park,suadaclub.com.tr <http://suadaclub.com.tr/>) is 
an artificial island floating in the middle of the Bosphorus. A stunner for 
aperitifs at sunset.Urban (Istiklal Caddesi, Kartal Sokak 6/A, Galatasaray, 
Beyoglu,urbanbeyoglu.com <http://www.urbanbeyoglu.com/>) is a hip neighbourhood 
bar in a beautiful old pastry shop.

Live music
Performers range from Turkish stars to international hip-hop, jazz and reggae 
bands at Babylon (Sehbender Sokak 3, Asmalimescit, Beyoglu, +90 212 292 7368,
babylon.com.tr <http://www.babylon.com.tr/tr/anasayfa/>). Istanbul's premier 
concert venue, it recently drew Manu Chao and Kate Nash.

Dogz Star (Kartal Sokak 3, Galatasaray, +90 212 244 9147, www.dogzstar.com 
<http://www.dogzstar.com/>) is Istanbul's best venue for reggae, dub and punk 
shows.

Ghetto (Kamer Hatun Caddesi 10, Beyoglu, +90 212 251 7501, www.ghettoist.com 
<http://www.ghettoist.com/>) is a petite club that acts as a magnet for 
international biggies, including Tricky and The Charlatans.

Indigo (Istiklal Caddesi, Akarsu Sokak 1-5, Beyoglu, +90 212 244 8567, www.
livingindigo.com <http://www.livingindigo.com/>) is a heaving little hotspot 
popular for electronica and alternative gigs.

The legendary Nardis Jazz Club (Kuledibi Sokak 14, Tünel, Beyoglu, +90 212 244 
6327,nardisjazz.com <http://nardisjazz.com/>) is famous for jazz and blues 
nights.

Dance till dawn
Head to the Hodjapasha Culture Center (Hocapasa Hamam Sokak 5, Sirkeci, 
hodjapasha.com <http://www.hodjapasha.com/>) for Whirling Dervish sema 
ceremonies and traditional dancing.

The gaudy grande dame of Ortaköy's string of alfresco Bosphorus-side 
nightclubs isReina (Muallim Naci Caddesi 44, Ortaköy, reina.com.tr 
<http://reina.com.tr/>), where the city's elite groove to house and electro. 
NearbyBlackk (Muallim Naci Caddesi 71, blackk.net <http://www.blackk.net/>) and 
Sortie (Muallim Naci Caddesi 141, eksenistanbul.com 
<http://www.eksenistanbul.com/tr/sortie-index.htm>) are equally entertaining. 
The best club for hip-hop isRiddim (Siraselviler Caddesi 35/1, Beyoglu, 
riddim.com.tr <http://www.riddim.com.tr/enter.html>), where Ja Rule, Busta 
Rhymes and Lil Jon have recently played.
 Terrace at W Istanbul 
The place for cheesy, fun and very boisterous dinner and belly dancing shows is
Sultanas Nights (Cumhuriyet Caddesi, Kahan 40-D, Taksim, Beyoglu, +90 212 219 
3904,sultanas-nights.com <http://www.sultanas-nights.com/>).

At W Lounge (W Hotel, Suleyman Seba Caddesi 22, Akaretler, Besiktas, 
wistanbul.com.tr <http://www.wistanbul.com.tr/>) Turkey's top DJs shower the 
dance floor with house, funk and soul tunes; take a breather on W's moonlit 
terrace with a signature gingerita cocktail (tequila, orange liqueur and fresh 
ginger).

The recovery 


Kahvalti (breakfast) often includes baskets of stuffed puffs of pogaça bread, 
herby cheeses, homemade jams, marinated olives and much more. Expect to spend 
around £7 a head for a classic breakfast; £15-£40 for an unlimited Sunday 
brunch.

Classic
The tiny Bosphorus-side Kale Café (Yahya Kemal Caddesi 16, Rumeli Hisari, 
kalecafe.com <http://www.kalecafe.com/>) sits in the shadow of a 15th-century 
Ottoman fortress. Tables tremble under stacks ofgözleme (savoury stuffed 
crepes). Save space for a portion ofkaymak (rich clotted cream) and honey. 
Turkey's eastern provinces are said to offer the best breakfasts. TryVan 
Kahvalti Evi (Defterdar Yokusu 52, Cihangir, Beyoglu) where you can tuck into 
chunks ofotlu peyniri (salty, feta-like cheese with herbs), tahin pekmez 
(tahini and grape molasses) andmenemen (eggs scrambled with tomatoes and 
peppers).

All-you-can-eat Sunday brunch
Pace your way through more than 100 breakfast platters from the southern 
province of Hatay, including herby salads, pastries, nuts and cheeses at 
Akdeniz Hatay Sofrasi(Ahmediye Caddesi 44, Aksaray, +90 212 531 3333, 
akdenizhataysofrasi.com.tr <http://www.akdenizhataysofrasi.com.tr/>). Trendy 
rooftop restaurantVogue (Akaretler Spor Caddesi, BJK Plaza, A Blok, Besiktas, 
+90 212 227 4404,istanbuldoors.com <http://www.istanbuldoors.com/vogue.aspx>) 
overlooks Dolmabahçe Palace and serves a spread including spinach-stuffedbörek, 
miniature smoked salmon bagels, eggs Benedict and sesame-sprinkled, spiced 
pumpkin dessert. Reservations required; dress to impress … or to get a good 
table. At theFour Seasons Istanbul in Sultanahmet (Tevkifhane Sokak 1, 
Sultanahmet, +90 212 402 3150,fourseasons.com/istanbul 
<http://www.fourseasons.com/istanbul/dining/restaurants/seasons_restaurant/breakfast/>
) toque-topped chefs serve sushi rolls, French pastries and barbecued lamb in 
the glorious inner sanctum of Istanbul's former prison.

Kathryn Tomasetti and Tristan Rutherford are the authors of Istanbul à la 
Carte (alacartemaps.com <http://www.alacartemaps.com/?location=47&id=198>, 
£9.95), a map/guidebook/work of art
 