



“Every bookshop is an invitation to travel,” observes Jorge Carrión 
<http://www.mertin-litag.de/authors_htm/Carrion-J.htm>, the Spanish author who 
has offered me a walking tour of Barcelona’slibrerías. Carrión, also a lecturer 
at Barcelona’s University of Pompeu Fabra, knows all about the pleasures of 
discovering volumes in far-flung places, from Charing Cross Road to the 
boulevards of Buenos Aires.

Among its many cultural attractions, Barcelona’s unique and varied bookshops 
don’t feature heavily on many visitors’ hit lists. Yet they should. There are 
around 50 spread across the city.

We start by heading west, along the Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes – the 
longest street in Catalonia. The ones we see have English titles peppering 
their Catalan and Spanish selections. There are two dedicated English language 
bookstores which cater to the city’s expat set, although Carrión insists that 
the real treasures are to be found elsewhere.

Our starting point on Carrer de Bailèn is Gigamesh 
<http://www.gigamesh.com/libreria>, a Mecca for sci-fi fans, and Carrión’s 
childhood haunt. Coming to the city from his hometown of Mataró, he was spoilt 
for choice. “There were eight bookshops of comics, role games and fantastic 
science fiction,” he says. “It was a ritual to go on a Saturday morning.” 
Gigamesh is also a successful publisher; in 2002, it bought the Spanish rights 
to theGame of Thrones saga.

Around the corner, on the Gran Via, the boutique publisher Jan Martí has 
recently opened Blackie Books’ Lino. There you can find copies of books by Mark 
Twain alongsideGeorge Perrault’s fairytales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/12/charles-perraud-google-doodle-fairy-tales>
, housed in the concierge booth ofLa Casa Bonay hotel 
<http://casabonay.com/shop/blackie-books/>. Its post-siesta opening hours 
attract the cocktail crowd heading into Libertine, the bar at the end of the 
tiled passage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fbarcelona-bookshops-tour-bookworms-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F006d4ed860a915a87e62e6b6cd0aa11c17963334%2F0_87_4692_2815%2F4692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20bookworm%E2%80%99s%20tour%20of%20Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20librer%C3%ADas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fbarcelona-bookshops-tour-bookworms-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20bookworm%E2%80%99s%20tour%20of%20Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20librer%C3%ADas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fbarcelona-bookshops-tour-bookworms-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F006d4ed860a915a87e62e6b6cd0aa11c17963334%2F0_87_4692_2815%2F4692.jpg>
 Full of cultural treasures: Barcelona by night. Photograph: MartiGarcia/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
Bookshops in Barcelona haven’t always been allowed to flourish, explains 
Carrión. “We have a very important network of public libraries. It is like part 
of democracy,” he says. During Franco’s regime, however, booksellers were at 
the mercy of censors. “A lot of bookshops had a secret room [containing] the 
forbidden books by the authors in exile.”

Things changed in the 1980s and now Barcelona is the literary centre of 
Catalonia.Laie <http://www.laie.es/pauclaris>, on Carrer de Pau Claris, is a 
librería-café which offers international books alongside Catalan dishes. 
Further along Gran Via, the travel bookshop,Altaïr 
<http://www.altair.es/es/index.php>, matches regional guides to novels set in 
the area, a format familiar to customers ofDaunt Books 
<http://www.dauntbooks.co.uk/> in London.

Barcelona has become saturated by tourists in search of paella and sangria

As we bypass Plaça Catalunya and the busy Barri Gotic, Carrión explains how 
Barcelona has become saturated by tourism, a situation exacerbated by the 
cruise ships with their daytrippers in search of paella and sangria.

Avoiding the throngs, we head instead to an imposing modernist mansion near 
the Jardins de la Reina Victòria. A creaky cage lift takes us up to the second 
floor and the elegant Librería Anticuaria Comellas, Carrión’s “secret 
bookshop”. The selection of rare books, ranging from typography to gastronomy, 
is impressive and I’m particularly taken by a collection of gruesome volumes on 
ophthalmology, though less so by the eyewatering €250,000 price tag.

Returning to the heat and traffic, we turn down Carrer de les Ramelleres, past 
the ramshackle apartment once owned by the Chilean novelistRoberto Bolaño 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roberto-bolano>, to La Central 
<https://www.lacentral.com/> – “the best bookshop in Barcelona”, says Carrión. 
It used to be a maternity hospital and still has a hatch in the wall where 
abandoned babies were left for the orphanage. The feel is monastic with its 
vaulted ceilings and wooden floors. Its designer, Miguel Sal, created a similar 
sense of calm and space in Waterstones, Piccadilly, in London.

We continue through the Plaça dels Angels and around the vast goldfish bowl 
windows of theMuseu d’Art Contemporani de Barcelona <http://www.macba.cat/en/> 
to theCCCB cultural centre bookshop <http://www.cccb.org/en>, well stocked with 
the great intellectuals of the region, such as the medieval Majorcan philosopher
Ramon Llull <http://quisestlullus.narpan.net/eng/1_intro_eng.html>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fbarcelona-bookshops-tour-bookworms-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d1e0c750ec606ab6e0934e6a8693707b5929de8%2F0_159_4526_2715%2F4526.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20bookworm%E2%80%99s%20tour%20of%20Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20librer%C3%ADas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fbarcelona-bookshops-tour-bookworms-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20bookworm%E2%80%99s%20tour%20of%20Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20librer%C3%ADas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fbarcelona-bookshops-tour-bookworms-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d1e0c750ec606ab6e0934e6a8693707b5929de8%2F0_159_4526_2715%2F4526.jpg>
 Llibreria Calders, in Sant Antoni, is in a disused button factory. Photograph: 
Josep Lago/AFP/Getty Images 
Next is lunch at a café in the 18th-century cloisters close by, a setting that 
could have come from the pages ofCarlos Ruiz Zafón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/jun/18/carlos-ruiz-zafon-live-webchat>
’sThe Shadow of the Wind. Carrión rolls his eyes when I mention the gothic 
novel about a cigar smoke-steeped bookshop in the old town. “Tourism and 
bestsellers have this mechanism of recognition,” he says. “I’m not interested 
in recognition, I’m interested in discovering.”

After lunch, we visit Llibreria Calders <https://www.facebook.com/lacalders/>, 
in the Sant Antoni neighbourhood. This popular bookshop opened at the height of 
Spain’s financial crisis, in a disused button factory just off Carrer del 
Parlament, which Carrión says is “the most hipster street in Barcelona”.

It has a piano bar and a hectic programme of concerts and readings, where 
customers spill outside to drink under the plane trees. There’s also enough 
poetry, literary fiction and graphic novels to satisfy any contemporary 
bibliophile.

Although, notes Carrión, even the most enthusiastic bookworm needs to take 
stock occasionally. He has recently moved to a new apartment with his wife and 
children. “I had to give 1,000 books to a friend,” he says. “If you’ve got more 
than 5,000 books, you’ve lost control.”
 