
African governments are using technological advances as an excuse to continue 
neglecting systemic problems in health, education, energy and other basic 
services, a prominent entrepreneur has claimed.

“Over the past few years we’ve been talking a lot about leapfrogging health 
systems using mobile phones, but I am uncomfortable with the word because it 
implies that we can compromise local standards,” says Alain Nteff, founder of
Gifted Mom <http://www.giftedmom.org/index.html>, which gives pregnant women 
and new mothers potentially life-saving information.

Since the information platform launched in 2012 the young entrepreneur has been
heralded as a saviour of Cameroon’s mothers and children 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/02/17/africa/gifted-mom-cameroon-alain-nteff/>, 
but he is very clear that a mobile phone can never replace a midwife. Nor 
should governments stop investing in energy infrastructure because people are 
using solar lanterns, or stop supporting teachers becausechildren are learning 
with ebooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/e-reader-revolution-rwandans-switching-on-to-books>
.


Cameroon has one of the highest mortality rates 
<https://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/cameroon_2250.html> in the world with 
mothers dying forreasons that are common 
<http://www.maternityworldwide.org/what-we-do/three-delays-model/> across 
sub-Saharan Africa: a lack of information about when they need to seek medical 
help; long distances they have to travel to hospital; and delays in seeking 
adequate care when they arrive.


Gifted Mom helps to bridge this gap by providing vital information via text or 
smartphone app to women in remote rural areas. Women who text the word “mom” 
get a call from the Gifted Mom team in Cameroon’s capital, Yaounde, to log 
their details. They can then ask advice about their health and receive text 
reminders to attended regular antenatal checkups.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fa-cellphone-is-no-substitute-for-a-midwife-african-tech-prodigy-warns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce31d0431ce4d01c0f67a024d09fa3eb5722bd31%2F18_692_1928_2583%2F1928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20cellphone%20is%20no%20substitute%20for%20a%20midwife%2C%20African%20tech%20prodigy%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fa-cellphone-is-no-substitute-for-a-midwife-african-tech-prodigy-warns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20cellphone%20is%20no%20substitute%20for%20a%20midwife%2C%20African%20tech%20prodigy%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fa-cellphone-is-no-substitute-for-a-midwife-african-tech-prodigy-warns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce31d0431ce4d01c0f67a024d09fa3eb5722bd31%2F18_692_1928_2583%2F1928.jpg>
 Gifted Mom’s office in Cameroon, with Alain Nteff on the right. Photograph: 
Maeve Shearlaw for the Guardian 
Within two years of Gifted Mom’s launch, there was a 20% increase in women 
turning up for antenatal check ups 
<http://www.anzishaprize.org/fellows/nteff-alain/> across five rural areas 
across Cameroon. Theapp is funded 
<http://www.anzishaprize.org/fellows/nteff-alain/> by development grants and 
investments from mobile companies, meaning it’s free to use.

Staff in Gifted Mom’s office monitor a screen of inquires that come in from 
mothers across Cameroon. The latest is from a pregnant woman who thinks that 
she might have syphilis – a condition treatable with antibiotics but which, if 
left untreated, couldcause her baby to be stillborn 
<http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/rtis/syphilis/pregnancy/en/>. She 
is told to seek medical care as quickly as possible.

However, Nteff says that while “what we can do with SMS is amazing”, 
Cameroon’s whole health system needs to be overhauled. So while the mother 
worried about syphilis now knows she should seek medical care, it could still 
take her days to reach a hospital, where the staff may be overstretched, 
jeopardising her chance of being treated.

Gifted Mom is planing to expand its maternity services in to Haiti, Kenya, 
Nigeria and Ivory Coast and says the platform could be used to share vaccine 
information across communities that may have mobile phones but no local health 
centre.


Nteff’s other problem with “leapfrogging systems” is that it suits governments 
to say they are investing in tech hubs to fix problems, from Kenya’s“Silicon 
Savannah” 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/b/fa73fc02-c511-4824-806d-5656acdfae7c> 
to Cameroon’s“Silicon Mountain” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FNyYSl0OA8w>. 

Silicon Valley in California didn’t flourish because of the US government but 
because companies invested in talented individuals, he adds, saying tech 
entrepreneurs should be able to get on with their work while governments 
concentrate on making sure people have the services they need.
 