
During the Gezi protests earlier this year, the neighbourhood of Cihangir near 
Istanbul's Taksim Square earned its stripes as an anti-establishment stronghold 
as images of tear-gassed protesters being chased down its cafe-lined streets 
were broadcast around the world. The protesters were typical of the locals in 
this corner of Istanbul's Beyoglu district: artists, writers, actors and 
expats, drawn by the area's culture and equally lofty Bosphorus views. (Orhan 
Pamuk's office is here.) The demonstrations injected energy into Cihangir's 
laid-back bohemianism, and its bars are fuller than ever, as the simple act of 
drinking outdoors has become a symbol of solidarity.

You'll be considered an early riser if you roll out of bed before noon; 
breakfast is served until late afternoon in most places.Anne's Cafe 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/ANNES-CAFE/107421922636793> 1, is a relaxed, 
unpretentious option. Don't be put off by the name:anne means mother in 
Turkish. The home-style Turkish breakfast includessimit (crunchy bagel-like 
rolls with sesame seeds) andmenemen (scrambled eggs with tomatoes and peppers) 
and the outdoor tables have a glimpse of the Bosphorus. Another option is the
Savoy <http://savoypastanesi.com/> 2, a Cihangir institution established in 
1950. Select your pastries and savoury flakybörek from the glass display and 
either eat on the premises (watching brides arriving to have their photos taken 
at the Zümrüt studio next door), or get a takeaway and sip with a Turkish tea 
under the huge acacia tree by theFiruz Aga mosque.

View GuardianTravel A Day in Cihangir by Sevil Delin 
<https://maps.google.com/maps/ms?hl=en&ie=UTF8&oe=UTF8&msa=0&msid=205536492260434765239.0004eca2771a8d6162093&t=m&ll=41.030647,28.98423&spn=0.006151,0.009849&z=16&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
Grab a takeaway coffee from MoMo <https://www.facebook.com/istanbulmomo> 3, 
and cross the road to the garden ofCihangir mosque 4, for the best free 
Bosphorus view. The original mosque was built in 1559 in the name of Prince 
Cihangir, hunchbacked son of Roxelana and Suleiman the Magnificent, who died at 
the age of 22, giving his name to the neighbourhood. The current mosque dates 
from 1889. Its midday call to prayer inspired a poem – The Muezzin – by Vita 
Sackville-West, who lived in Cihangir in 1911.

The way to do Cihangir's narrow lanes, late 19th-century apartment buildings 
and homegrown boutiques is on foot.Mariposa <http://atolyemariposa.com/> 5, a 
Cath Kidston-esque boutique run by two sisters, sells vintage-inspired 
homewares and their own ultra-feminine clothing line.Hande Bilten 
<http://handebilten.com/> 6, has an onsite kiln producing Istanbul-inspired 
ceramic and porcelain bowls, silver and ceramic jewellery, and chunky Christmas 
decorations. CD shopOpus3A <https://www.facebook.com/opus3a> 7, has an 
extensive collection of music of all kinds, and is the best place to pick up an 
album by Fazıl Say or the Pekinel sisters. For lunch, eat with the locals at
Özkonak 8, which serves homely food including mantı (meat-filled dumplings with 
hot yoghurt sauce) and milk puddings sprinkled with cinnamon.
 Kiki bar 
Have weary muscles pummelled at 527-year-old Tarihi Galatasaray Hamamı 
<http://galatasarayhamami.com/en/hamam/index.html> Turkish bath 9. This is a 
less-touristy but equally impressive alternative to the more popular venues in 
Sultanahmet. As is sadly the case in many hamams, the men's section is much 
more opulent than the women's. The entrance fee is around £20, with extra 
treatments (scrub, suds bath, massage) costing £10-20. While not technically in 
Cihangir, it is a 10-minute walk away off Istiklal Caddesi.

No matter how great Cihangir's lattes and profiteroles may be (and Plus 
Profiterol's chocolate sauce-slathered pastries are the best outside France), 
a trip to Istanbul isn't complete without a Turkish coffee and some baklava.
Faruk Güllüoglu <http://www.farukgulluoglu.com.tr/> – son of a baklava-making 
dynasty – has a branch up the road on Sıraselviler10, serving trays filled with 
several varieties of the syrup-drenched morsels. Do like the locals do and flip 
the baklava upside down in your mouth to experience the full sugar rush.

Cihangir's restaurants and bars are honeypots for Turkey's paparazzi, so 
preparation for a night out requires a visit to aküafor for a manicure and 
blowdry (especially after a hamam bath).Sultan's Place 
<http://sultansplace.com.tr/> 11, has the bonus of a Bosphorus view. Men should 
experience a traditional Turkish shave, done with a cutthroat razor and 
followed by a surprisingly metrosexual massage atCihangir Erkek Kuaföru 12.
 Breakfast at Anne's Cafe 
Turkish cuisine is best experienced at a meyhane, a kind of taverna. An array 
of cold starters or meze are brought to you on a platter (with an emphasis on 
vegetables cooked in olive oil, and seafood), followed by a choice of hot 
starters (grilled calamari or octopus, for example), and then a selection of 
fresh fish. All of this is served with rakı, the anise-flavoured distilled 
grape spirit that is Turkey's national tipple. Cihangir has two top-notch 
meyhanes.Demeti <http://demeti.com.tr/site/index.php> is conveniently upstairs 
from Sultan's Place (also11), and has the same view (book a table on the 
balcony if possible).Hayat 
<http://hayatcihangir.com/Hayat_Cihangir/Hosgeldiniz.html> 13, meanwhile, has 
slightly superior mezes, but the view is of the street, not the water (great 
for people-watching).

For after-dinner drinks, head to Smyrna 14, a cafe-bar that is the hub of 
Cihangir's social scene. At weekends, crowds spill onto the streets. For drinks 
plus dancing, keep it in the family and head toKiki 15, established by the 
daughter of Smyrna's founder and offering club sounds and cocktail shots until 
4am.

Local's tip

Billur Karabenli, Airbnb host
Cihangir is great for kids, with child-friendly waiters willing to babysit 
while you finish your coffee. Hotel Momcierge (hotelmomcierge.com 
<http://hotelmomcierge.com/>) is a new service providing gear (car seats, 
pushchairs, high chairs) and services (nannies, recommendations) to families 
who want to travel light and rest easy.
 