
On a quiet side street in the otherwise buzzing Berlin-Neukölln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/berlin> is what looks like just another 
cosy vintage cafe: exposed brick, mismatched furniture, candles in jam jars. 
But Restlos Glücklich is Germany’s first anti-food waste restaurant, serving 
delicious dishes using discarded food.

It was opened in July by a group of volunteers, including an environmental 
scientist, an engineer and a bank clerk, and cooks almost entirely with surplus 
from farms or supermarkets. The food is not past its sell-by date, but rejected 
because vegetables are oddly shaped, packaging is damaged, or there’s a lack of 
storage space.
 A delicious veggie main course at Restlos Glücklich 
“We are 12 people who are united by one passion: the battle against food 
waste,” says co-founder and educational manager Leoni Beckmann. The 
not-for-profit organisation also runs harvest tours of farms, and classes in 
cooking with leftovers at home (€60pp).

Twice a week, the team collects discarded food from a total of 10 farms and 
organic supermarkets. With no control over what produce is available, founding 
chef Daniel Roick, who has a fine-dining background, has to be constantly 
creative. He does so with delicious results. Changing daily, the menu focuses 
on vegetarian and vegan dishes, such as seitan burgers and chilled cucumber 
foam soup (€6-€8).

A €22 three-course weekend menu might include goat’s milk panna cotta with 
thyme and honey, coriander rice cakes with smoked cauliflower cream, and wild 
berry chocolate cake. All items are also available in a smaller portion to 
avoid any leftovers.
• Kienitzer Straße 22, restlos-gluecklich.berlin 
<http://restlos-gluecklich.berlin/>
 