
Would you be tempted to sign up for an investment offering an 8% return 
<https://www.habhousing.co.uk/mini-bond> if Grand Designs frontman Kevin 
McCloud was involved in it?

The Channel 4 presenter and designer is director of a company that has 
launched a £3m “mini-bond” scheme, which is basically a way of raising money 
from private investors. This one is targeting people looking for something 
“social and environmental” as well as a decent interest rate.

A return of 8%, or 9% if you sign up before close of play on Monday, is way 
more than you’d get from a savings account, and 32 times the Bank of England 
base rate. However, those interested need to be aware of the risks attached to 
such an investment. This type of bond is not covered by the government’s 
Financial Services Compensation Scheme and, unlike other recent bonds, are not 
transferable and cannot be traded.

The mini-bonds have been launched by HAB Land, part of a group of companies 
that includes HAB Housing. This was set up by McCloud in 2007 “to change the 
way houses and housing schemes are built in the UK”. HAB stands for Happiness, 
Architecture, Beauty, and the company aims to build more than 500 homes a year 
by 2020, all underpinned by “sustainable values”.
 Kevin McCloud set up HAB Housing in 2007. Photograph: Jo Duncan 
During the past few years mini corporate bonds have become an increasingly 
popular route for companies seeking alternative sources of funding. Among those 
that have turned to this type of fundraising in the past few months are energy 
company Ecotricity andrugby club Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/23/harlequins-rugby-mini-bond-invest-risks>
. But several mini-bonds have failed, with savers losing all their money.

In January 2015 Guardian Money revealed how nearly 1,000 small investors who 
put £7.5m into“secured” energy bonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/29/investors-lose-millions-bond-company-administration>
 which promised to pay an income of 6.5% a year lost all their cash. Then in 
September 2016 we reported on how 800 small investors lost £8m after the 
failure oftwo “Providence” mini-bonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/07/investors-risk-losing-8m-in-failed-mini-bonds>
 that promised interest of up to 8.25%. Anyone thinking of putting their money 
into these schemes should tread very cautiously. If you do get involved, all 
you are buying is a promise from that firm or organisation – not a guarantee – 
that it will pay a fixed level of interest each year for a set period, plus 
return 100% of your capital at the end of the term. The major risk is if the 
company or organisation issuing them goes bust, either through misfortune or 
fraud.

The money raised via the HAB Land scheme will be invested in projects such as 
Elderberry Walk in Southmead, Bristol. This is a planned 161-home development 
that aims to turn a derelict city site into a sought-after location, more than 
30% of which would be affordable. Just before Christmas, HAB announced it had 
completed the sale of the final house at The Acre development in Cumnor Hill, 
Oxford, while its Lovedon Fields project at Kings Worthy, near Winchester in 
Hampshire, has sold more than two-thirds of its houses off-plan.

This isn’t McCloud’s first fundraising exercise – in 2013 HAB Housing 
attracted more than £1.9m of equity crowdfunding from 649 investors. But 
because mini-bonds need to be issued by public limited companies, a firm called 
HAB Land Finance plc is being created. This will be wholly owned by HAB Land 
which was set up in 2014 and will guarantee the bonds, “meaning there is an 
obligation on the whole HAB Land group to repay them, rather than just HAB Land 
Finance,” says the offer document. McCloud is a director of both companies.

The bonds offer an 8% gross return over five years, with the option to 
withdraw after two years and get 6%. The headline rate rises to 9% for those 
signing up on or before 16 January. The minimum investment is £1,000, and the 
bonds can be put into a Sipp but not an Isa.

However, signing up doesn’t mean you own shares in the venture – the bonds are 
basically an unsecured debt of the company. The offer document has several 
pages of risk warnings, and states that this is a “speculative” investment, 
adding: “There is no certainty or guarantee that the company will be able to 
repay them.”

Paying 8%-9% to investors arguably isn’t a bad deal when one reads in the 
offer document that HAB Land has a £2.5m facility with a company called 
WittenhamInvestments <https://www.theguardian.com/money/moneyinvestments> that 
is charging interest at an eye-watering 20% a year. That’s the sort of 
disclosure that might set alarm bells ringing. It turns out that Wittenham is 
an investment vehicle owned by Francis Lui, a major investor in HAB Land. “He 
has provided us with a very flexible facility – on demand and without 
security,” a spokesman explains, adding that only £500,000 plus interest is 
outstanding.
 