
There are thank-you cards to be written and those last few Celebrations are 
begging to be mineswept. (Milky Way, right? Always Milky Way.) But they are 
going to have to hold, because there is one job that cannot wait, and that is 
refreshing yourInstagram <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>. 
These are the crucial updates your feed needs for 2017.

1. The flat lay

🎅🏼🎄⛄️️ by @anddicted <https://www.instagram.com/p/BN4IR-fhTFs/>

A photo posted by Flatlays (@flatlays) on Dec 11, 2016 at 4:34am PST

You don’t know what a flat lay is? Seriously? OK, consider this. Those bird’s 
eye photos that get a lot of likes – a coffee cup with a foam heart, iPhone at 
a 45-degree angle, Ray Bans perched on top of a passport, scattered clementine 
segments adding a pop of colour – is that really how your kitchen table looks 
five minutes before you leave for the airport? No, it jolly well isn’t, any 
more than a pile of Pink Lady apples in your fruit bowl looks like a bloody 
Cezanne. The flat lay is the modern still life, and mastering it is essential 
for anyone with lifestyle aspirations. Never, ever mention in the caption that 
it took you 15 minutes to get rid of the annoying shadow and that you now have 
backache from craning over the coffee table.

2. The arm’s length selfie

Details. #commedesgarcons #levis501 #lumojewelry 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BGwydDLx5sb/>

A photo posted by Mija by Mirjam Flatau (@mija_mija) on Jun 17, 2016 at 9:29am 
PDT

Mirror selfies are for sexting, these days, not for OOTD. So if you are in the 
fashion gang and the goal is to capture your Look rather than what lies 
beneath, the arm’s length selfie is way cooler. Find somewhere photogenic to 
perch, then sit with one foot drawn towards your crotch (this is not 
comfortable but “reads” as relaxed, which is what matters) and hold the phone 
as far from you as you can, angled downward so that your body is in the photo 
but not your head. Advantages: the arm-away-from-the-body is always flattering, 
plus you don’t need to worry about the facial expression you pull when you are 
trying to keep your little finger out of the shot without giving yourself cramp.

3. The puppy nose ends here

On route to sing and surprise a Xmas party can't say as yet 👑😬😝 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BNz_EzQDnhG/>

A photo posted by mutya buena (@official_mutyabuena) on Dec 9, 2016 at 1:56pm 
PST

There is a whole separate essay to be done on Snapchat filters: the big Manga 
eyes, the baby animal features, the golden crowns that seem like innocent, 
child-like visual banter. But have you noticed how suspiciously flattering they 
are? How they make everyone look a little bit like a Disney bluebird? Hmmm. 
They are basically hot dog legs with added lols. These are a vanity project 
that has been well and truly rumbled. Cease and desist.

4. Be mysterious
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fa-guide-to-updating-your-instagram-for-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb60f50ea95fde0918828aaddc97d40a1eee6ced3%2F0_0_3089_3874%2F3089.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20guide%20to%20updating%20your%20Instagram%20for%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fa-guide-to-updating-your-instagram-for-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20guide%20to%20updating%20your%20Instagram%20for%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fa-guide-to-updating-your-instagram-for-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb60f50ea95fde0918828aaddc97d40a1eee6ced3%2F0_0_3089_3874%2F3089.jpg>
 Greta Garbo: not an Instagram fan. Photograph: Clarence Sinclair Bull/Getty 
Images 
What did the Kardashians and Gigi Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gigi-hadid> all do on Instagram toward the 
end of 2016? Get off Instagram, that’s what. In the era of oversharing, the 
most compelling thing you can do is to withdraw. Just as the very best parties 
have a social media blackout, so the most intriguing people don’t feel 
compelled to post their avocado every single freaking Sunday. Take a strategic 
break. For maximum drama, channel your inner Greta Garbo and loudly announce 
your departure from social media before deleting your account. So modern.
 