
I have read that it is now considered feminist to focus on a female athlete’s 
looks. What do you think?

Mark, by email

It’s an Ask Hadley special, this week, folks, and the theme is “Let’s look at 
what male columnists are saying about how women look.” Last week, a male 
sportswriter on another paper tweeted me an article he wrote a year ago about 
how women get feminism wrong. I missed this at the time, probably because I was 
so busy doing feminism badly, so I am grateful he has rectified my oversight. 
He describes his feminism as “radical 
<https://twitter.com/matthewsyed/status/750777902560579584>”, which is 
interesting, because I thought radical feminism involved exciting things such 
as describing pornography as rape. Apparently not: it’s talking about how 
female athletes look.

“It is inevitable,” he writes, “that beautiful female athletes should receive 
comments on their looks.” 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/sport/columnists/matthewsyed/article4537956.ece> 
And so it seems – from this particular writer’s perspective, anyway. Hehas 
described women’s tennis 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/sport/tennis/article2367882.ece> as “always 
[having] a soft-porn dimension … [straight out] of adolescent (and 
non-adolescent) male fantasy” and heonce opened an interview with an Olympic 
swimmer <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/sport/article2374267.ece> with the 
radical feminist sentence: “The first thing to say about Fran Halsall is that 
she is beautiful.”

Wimbledon, as ever, provides us with plenty of examples of male commentators 
displaying their radical feminism, fromAndrew Castle wishing that his dentist 
resembled Marcus Willis’s partner, Jennifer Bate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/03/andrew-castle-sexist-comments-wimbledon-marcus-willis-girlfriend>
, to John Inverdale sharing with the nationhis take on Marion Bartoli’s face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/20/john-inverdale-horror-criticising-marion-bartoli-looks>
. The argument in defence of this kind of behaviour invariably includes phrases 
such as: “But women like compliments!”; “This is political correctness gone 
mad!”; and, “Help me, nanny, I’ve thrown all my toys out of the pram!”

Allow me to assist these confused souls. There is a difference between a 
compliment, and believing women exist solely for you to rub your thighs at. 
Many women – and this might come as a shock – don’t want to know how much they 
turn on an ageing commentator. I know! It’s political correctness gone mad!

Yes, female athletes wear minimal clothing, but that is so they can do their 
job, not so that some journalist can share his sexual fantasies about them with 
the world. I can say with absolute certainty that every female athlete would 
rather people focused on their hard-won athletic skill than how they look.

Truly, it’s a rum old world when a fashion columnist is telling middle-aged 
men to stop focusing so much on women’s physical appearance. As for the idea 
that it’s “feminist” to celebrate women’s differences from men, I’d gently 
argue it’s more feminist to listen to women when they say they feel degraded by 
this kind of tragic male smuttiness as opposed to dismissing them as humourless 
feminazis who don’t understand how REAL ladies feel.

Did no one ever teach these men which thoughts should be shared aloud and 
which really should not? I might fantasise about these radical feminists from 
the sports commentariat fainting due to lack of blood in their brains and 
falling eye first on top of their microphones, but I don’t vocalise those 
thoughts, do I? Oh wait – oops.

You discussed reactions to Renée Zellweger’s appearance a while back. But why 
is it in the news again this week?

Melanie, by email
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftennis-marion-bartoli-inverdale-sexism-renee-zellwegger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d878a26a7fece1c73e088f524da586f5e94e633%2F0_122_2651_1591%2F2651.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20handy%20guide%20to%20female%20athletes%20for%20confused%20male%20commentators%0D%0A%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftennis-marion-bartoli-inverdale-sexism-renee-zellwegger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20handy%20guide%20to%20female%20athletes%20for%20confused%20male%20commentators%0D%0A%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftennis-marion-bartoli-inverdale-sexism-renee-zellwegger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d878a26a7fece1c73e088f524da586f5e94e633%2F0_122_2651_1591%2F2651.jpg>
 Renee Zellweger. Photograph: Karwai Tang/WireImage 
Ahead of the curve, that’s where I live, Melanie. In fact, my whole address is 
Ask Hadley, Ahead of the Curve, One Step Beyond, Up on the Moral High Ground. 
Please address correspondence accordingly.

I did indeed touch on this subject a fortnight ago. Since then, there has been 
something of a furore about the discussion of Zellweger’s face – specifically 
after Owen Gleiberman, the chief film critic of Variety magazine, wrote a weird 
article about it.

What was weird about it wasn’t his claim that Zellweger looks different these 
days, which is true, but his contention that her appeal has always been that 
she looks “ordinary”. But Gleiberman does have a slightly odd perspective of 
the average person’s physical appearance, given that he thinks Barbara 
Stanwyck, Joan Fontaine and Bette Davis “weren’t beauty contest-winners. They 
look like heightened versions of us.”

Now, I’ve never met Gleiberman but I’ve seen his photo byline and, let me tell 
you, I don’t look like Joan Fontaine and he ain’t no Bette.

But let us address the issue that Gleiberman stirred up, which is: can an 
actor mess with their face and still have a career? This is a fair question, 
given how many actors momentarily or otherwise derailed their careers through 
bad plastic surgery, from Jennifer Grey to Mickey Rourke.

But it’s also a damned if you do, damned if you don’t situation, especially 
for women: they are shunned if they have surgery, and shunned if they show any 
signs of ageing. And this, really, is what Gleiberman should have addressed, as 
opposed to writing at length about his personal unhappiness with Zellweger’s 
appearance, thereby putting precisely the kind of focus on an actor’s face that 
drives them to plastic surgery in the first place.

So let us end with this: instead of sniping at actors for having plastic 
surgery, let’s instead feel a little sad that we live in a world in which they 
feel they need to do so. And then, let’s get on with our day and let them get 
on with theirs.

• This article was amended on 11 July to correct the name of Jennifer Bate, 
who was wrongly referred to as Marisa Bate.
 