
Dear Priti Patel <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel>,

 Welcome to one of the most important jobs in government.

While some in the media focused on three Brexiters given key foreign affairs 
roles <http://www.cityam.com/245452/may-and-three-brexiteers-lead-britain> in 
Theresa May’s new government (Boris Johnson at the Foreign Office, Liam Fox at 
trade and David Davis at the department for Brexit), you, another advocate of 
Brexit, have been placed in a job that could be just as important in reshaping 
the UK’s global relationships in its post-EU era.

With an annual budget of £12bn, roughly the same amount as the UK now hopes to 
claw back from Brussels, theDepartment for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 has more clout than ever.

Less aid money, less influence: Brexit's likely hit to the UK's development 
role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/07/brexit-uk-development-role-less-aid-money-less-influence>
As someone who has followed DfID pretty closely in its near-20-year history, 
as well as the changing context in which it operates, here is some advice as 
you embark on a challenge you were probably not anticipating.

The most important thing to remember is that international aid and development 
is about balance.

It has been claimed that you called for DfID to be scrapped 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/689531/Priti-Patel-International-Development-Secretary-Theresa-May-Prime-Minister-Cabinet>
, but actually what you said was far more sensible – that our approach to aid, 
trade and diplomacy should be more integrated and coherent.

Trade and economic development are far more important than aid for many of the 
world’s poor communities. As we build post-Brexit trade deals with countries 
and blocs around the world, your department needs to be fully involved, making 
the case for the poorest people as terms are thrashed out.

The UK needs to get the balance right between great generosity as one of the 
world’s richest countries, with a continuing responsibility to alleviating 
poverty and helping development, andconcern for its own prosperity and security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/02/uk-aid-strategy-national-interest-uneasy-bedfellows>
.

There is a difference between spending that helps our economy by building up 
trading partners, and spending that directly supports British companies. 
There’s an equally important difference between spending that increases our 
global safety by reducing poverty and desperation, and spending that supports 
our military and security interventions.

In both cases, aid works when it is untied from short-term considerations, and 
it fails when it seeks to buy short-term economic or diplomatic gains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fletter-priti-patel-international-development-secretary-dfid-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09ad0508045ebfae5001fd7c266a87d037e1018c%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20letter%20to%20Priti%20Patel%2C%20the%20new%20international%20development%20secretary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fletter-priti-patel-international-development-secretary-dfid-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20letter%20to%20Priti%20Patel%2C%20the%20new%20international%20development%20secretary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fletter-priti-patel-international-development-secretary-dfid-trade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09ad0508045ebfae5001fd7c266a87d037e1018c%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 A DfID staff member supervises the unloading of UK aid from an aircaft in 
Kathmundu, after the Nepalese earthquakes in 2015. Photograph: Sgt Neil Bryden 
RAF/DfID 
As well as needing to demonstrate that aid is in the national interest, you 
will be under great political and media pressure to demonstrate results for the 
taxpayers’ money spent. So you may find yourself trying to centralise 
decision-making.

Be wary of such temptations: aid works best when it is owned by the recipient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/03/effective-aid-projects-teamwork-not-templates-jonathan-glennie>
. The more DfiD seeks to direct aid from the centre, the harder it will be to 
achieve results on the ground, where what matters most is wise decision-making 
in complex contexts. Build relationships of trust; don’t rely on the auditor.

Invest in long-term change, building systems and improving governance, rather 
than just looking for quick wins and happy photos. It is harder, but the result 
will be countries moving on from aid dependence – a hand up not a handout.

Talk of “charity” from northern benefactors is seen as outdated. Countries, 
large and small, seek to act with autonomy and dignity. Many will still need 
large amounts of financial assistance and beneficial trade deals, but they see 
it as a quid pro quo among equals, a living up to responsibility, not aid.

The proponents of south-south cooperation have led the way with the language 
of “mutual benefit”. It is a more honest and practical way to talk about 
international public finance.

It may be time to move on from the word “aid” altogether. Andy Sumner and I 
have proposed talking about “investment” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/aid-should-be-seen-as-foreign-public-investment-not-just-charity>
, which better implies spending that is meant to have a lasting impact, to 
build international public goods from which all countries benefit, including 
the UK. Think also about how the UK might invigorate relationships with Latin 
America and other parts of the world where our aid relationships have declined.

But as we modernise the way we talk about aid and carry out development, there 
is one thing we should remember – the generosity of British people. There are 
many communities going through tough times, and the economy needs a boost, but 
I have seen the public demonstrate generosity even in austere times.

Everything you need to know about UK aid and the 0.7% spending pledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/13/everything-you-need-to-know-about-uk-aid-spending-pledge>
The public knows that UK poverty is nothing compared with the problems and 
suffering faced by so many in the world, with billions still living in deep 
poverty. It expects the UK to fight for its interests, but not at the expense 
of the poorest.

Attempts to undermine our commitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/dec/05/aid-naysayers-illogical-inhumane-britain-aid-target-law>
 to spend 0.7% of national income on aid will be met with dismay by many, as 
will trade negotiations that seek to privilege UK interests over those of poor 
countries and communities.

Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> is hard to get right. 
Many have tried and failed. What I would urge is that you take the evidence 
seriously. There is a lot of rubbish talked about aid and development, and it 
is something of a political football.

You won’t be the first person to have entered this brief sceptical about its 
value. I have a sneaking suspicion you will emerge from it as much a champion 
for it as any of your predecessors.

• Who is in the new DfID ministerial team 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-ministerial-team>?
 