
A “poverty graduation” scheme in Bangladesh that has already transformed the 
livelihoods of 1.7m of the poorest households 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/06/has-bangladesh-charity-found-way-to-banish-extreme-poverty>
 is being analysed as a model for aid programmes to alleviate extreme poverty 
in the long term. Since it was launched more than a decade ago by a Bangladeshi 
charity, theTargeting the Ultra Poor  <http://www.brac.net/tup?view=page>scheme 
has offered not just a financial lifeline out of destitution but the education 
and skills needed to maintain prosperity.


As part of 16 days of activism against gender violence, Ruth Maclean reports 
on themothers trying to protect their daughters  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/07/democratic-republic-congo-drc-mothers-trying-to-save-girls-rape-sexual-violence>
and theelusive search for justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/09/rape-survivor-finds-justice-elusive-democratic-republic-congo>
 for rape survivors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where sexual 
violence remains widespread despite official efforts to portray the country as 
an example of how to combat it. Also, in ourvideo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/nov/29/international-women-human-rights-defenders-day-video-activists>
, female activists from four countries talk about the risks they face because 
of their work protecting women’s rights.


Elsewhere on the site

Crowdfunding medicine via Facebook is a lifesaver for sick children in Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/12/crowdfunding-medicine-via-facebook-is-a-lifesaver-for-sick-children-in-sudan>

Cash chaos shows India’s women need financial system they can bank on  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/12/cash-chaos-india-banknotes-shows-women-need-financial-system-they-can-bank-on>


Call for action as ‘honour’ killings in Jordan show sharp increase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/09/calls-for-action-as-honour-killings-in-jordan-show-sharp-increase-16-day-campaign-gender-violence>

Isis survivor says UK could save lives of Yazidi women by admitting refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/09/isis-survivor-says-uk-could-save-lives-yazidi-women-admitting-refugees-nadia-murad>

Prada found wanting in assessment of forced labour safeguards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/08/prada-found-wanting-assessment-forced-labour-safeguards-ralph-lauren-hugo-boss>

Madagascar’s £152m vanilla industry soured by child labour and poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/08/madagascar-152m-vanilla-industry-soured-child-labour-poverty>

Child labour ‘rampant’ in Bangladesh factories, study reveals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/07/child-labour-bangladesh-factories-rampant-overseas-development-institute-study>


Nigeria’s president accuses UN of hyping up humanitarian crisis for $1bn appeal
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/05/nigeria-president-claims-un-united-nations-hyping-up-north-east-crisis-for-1bn-appeal-buhari>

Five west African countries ban ‘dirty diesel’ from Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/06/five-west-african-countries-ban-dirty-diesel-from-europe-nigeria-ghana>

In depth

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flifeline-bangladesh-poorest-and-congolese-drc-victims-search-for-justice-sexual-violence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64d8448f631775c44df416790c1ddc18976cca5d%2F0_40_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20lifeline%20for%20Bangladesh's%20poorest%2C%20and%20Congolese%20rape%20victims%20search%20for%20justice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flifeline-bangladesh-poorest-and-congolese-drc-victims-search-for-justice-sexual-violence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20lifeline%20for%20Bangladesh%27s%20poorest%2C%20and%20Congolese%20rape%20victims%20search%20for%20justice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flifeline-bangladesh-poorest-and-congolese-drc-victims-search-for-justice-sexual-violence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64d8448f631775c44df416790c1ddc18976cca5d%2F0_40_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Madagascar’s £152m vanilla industry soured by child labour and poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/08/madagascar-152m-vanilla-industry-soured-child-labour-poverty>

Ogoni king: ‘Shell oil is killing my people’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/ogoni-king-shell-oil-is-killing-my-people>


Women tap into new roles as mobile internet scheme targets rural India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/05/india-women-mobile-internet-scheme-rural-digital-literacy>

Africa’s crackdown on tax avoidance nets £204m to boost development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/07/africa-crackdown-tax-avoidance-nets-204m-to-boost-development-undp-helen-clark>

Joana Foster: ‘She made African women realise they could do anything’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/02/joana-foster-african-women-do-anything>

Opinion


Kasia Staszewska – Britain champions female refugees abroad only to fail them 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/07/britain-champion-female-refugees-abroad-only-to-fail-them-at-home-sexual-violence-in-conflict>

Mark Goldring – Five questions we should be asking about the impact of UK aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/08/five-questions-impact-uk-aid-mark-goldring>


Jessica Neuwirth – How to end gender violence? Give money to visionary local 
groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/06/end-gender-violence-give-money-to-visionary-local-groups-16-day-campaign>

Isaac Bayoh – Ebola in Sierra Leone: ‘The scars still show. People are very 
angry’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/05/ebola-sierra-leone-scars-still-show-people-very-angry>

Yifat Susskind – Women the world over have shown the US how to deal with 
racism and sexism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/02/women-us-how-to-deal-with-sexism-racism-yifat-susskind>

Multimedia


‘They said they would rape me’: defenders of women’s rights speak out – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/nov/29/international-women-human-rights-defenders-day-video-activists>

Surviving war in Yemen: ‘I dream of going home’ – gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/dec/12/surviving-war-yemen-i-dream-of-going-home-in-pictures>


On the road with Uganda’s mobile sexual health clinics – gallery  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/dec/02/reproductive-health-uganda-mobile-sexual-health-clinics-in-pictures>


What you said


On the opinion piece by Kasia Staszewska, LionelBlurred wrote:

Amnesty International would do far more good by focusing on pressuring the UN 
to step up and deliver more rights for billions of women around the world who 
live in countries where they are second-class citizens. Most vulnerable women 
around the world aren’t even in a position to get together the money to pay 
traffickers.

Highlight from the blogosphere

For WhyDev, Megan Giles looks at a Civicus report that paints a grave picture 
of theglobal state of human rights 
<http://www.whydev.org/year-human-rights-decline/>. 

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. On Twitter, follow 
@gdndevelopment <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment>and the team – 
@LizFordGuardian <https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @BenQuinn75 
<https://twitter.com/BenQuinn75> and @karenmcveigh1 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%40karenmcveigh1&src=typd> – and join Global 
development on Facebook. <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>
 