
Evaristo is teaching me to make paella. You might, like I did, think you know 
already, but Evaristo lives and breathes the stuff – he has made it every day 
for over 30 years. We’re doing it in his barn, which adds challenges.

“Can you wash the tomatoes?” he asks and I wander off looking for a tap. There 
are sacks of walnuts, buckets of olives soaking in brine, a newly laid egg 
lying discreetly in a nest of hay under a workbench, but no tap.

I’m in deepest rural Spain, in the Vall de Gallinera, Alicante, the kind of 
Spain where you expect to bump into Laurie Lee’s ghost on every footpath. There 
are the ruins of an old convent on the next hill, and a ruined Arab fort beyond 
that. It’s a tranquil land weathered by mystery and tragedy, but only a day’s 
walk from Benidorm, with its 200 nightclubs and 1,000 bars. It does not seem 
possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35ad7463194cbda735dc0099e862526350c6b126%2F0_917_3840_4556%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20long%20way%20from%20Benidorm%3A%20rural%20regeneration%20in%20south-east%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20long%20way%20from%20Benidorm%3A%20rural%20regeneration%20in%20south-east%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35ad7463194cbda735dc0099e862526350c6b126%2F0_917_3840_4556%2F3840.jpg>
 Dish of the day … Evaristo with his paella 
Evaristo is not part of that Benidorm world. He slops a great puddle of olive 
oil into a pan the size of a Visigothic war shield. Around this he builds a 
defensive wall of salt, then slices red crescents of peppers into the gently 
simmering oil. “Now,” he says, “let’s go and check on the horses.”

His family, he tells me, came from the Balearics to the Valencian Country to 
help repopulate the valley after the Moors were ejected in the early 17th 
century. His mother tongue, I’m told firmly, is Valencian, not Castilian or 
Catalan. He is steeped in rural traditions that are slowly, inexorably, 
withering as the valley loses its population. But I’m here to witness an 
attempt to halt that. Evaristo is one of many locals who are taking time to 
introduce visitors to their forgotten, bucolic idyll. It’s an innovative rural 
regeneration scheme that gives the outsider a privileged introduction to a host 
of local characters and experiences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf59bb4a1261f16f3308d854fc1782d99e21bda5%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20long%20way%20from%20Benidorm%3A%20rural%20regeneration%20in%20south-east%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20long%20way%20from%20Benidorm%3A%20rural%20regeneration%20in%20south-east%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf59bb4a1261f16f3308d854fc1782d99e21bda5%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Alpatro sits on the edge of a deep ravine 
 I’d started my visit in the village of Alpatro, a tight-knit clutch of stone 
houses teetering on the brink of a deep ravine whose sides are thick with 
prickly pears, wild thyme and oregano. Down a narrow back lane I checked in to 
a homestay, a house stuffed with relics of an agricultural past that began its 
slide into obscurity with post-civil war depopulation.

Next morning, my first experience was to walk a few miles up the valley and 
meet olive grower Toni Civico, who showed me around the idyllic hamlet of 
Benissili: population 25.

Toni took me to meet his oldest olive tree, a gnarled veteran laden with 
fruit. “If that tree could talk,” he says, “he’d speak Arabic.” The Moors 
stayed here for six centuries and crops they introduced – almonds, mulberries 
and walnuts – still dot the crumbling stone terraces that contour the lower 
slopes like the fading fingerprints of previous generations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1eba42ee11a1180c6747ae91ef9c8dc50b8f7d4%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20long%20way%20from%20Benidorm%3A%20rural%20regeneration%20in%20south-east%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20long%20way%20from%20Benidorm%3A%20rural%20regeneration%20in%20south-east%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1eba42ee11a1180c6747ae91ef9c8dc50b8f7d4%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Toni Civico with his oldest olive tree 
Higher up, the land is covered in pungent herbs that are cropped by sheep: 
lamb from here was famous until supermarkets elbowed aside its lean, hardprimala
 meat, from year-old lambs, in favour of softer, blander fare. Now the main 
customers, ironically, are Muslim residents of Benidorm, who like to buy a 
whole, live animal. The only full-time shepherds are Antonio and Pavel. On 
another day I meet them too, walking with their flocks along green lanes that 
lead to the high mountain pastures.

Drinking is one tradition that shows no sign of disappearing, kept alive by a 
dedicated group of enthusiasts called men

Evaristo, my paella chef, also keeps a small flock in the old style. Back in 
his barn I watch him add pieces of lamb to the puddle of oil, plus white beans 
and sprigs of rosemary. With everything bubbling away nicely, we can kick back 
and drinkcazalla, an anise-flavoured spirit, with the toast “Para que nuestras 
mujeres no se queden viudas! (Let our women not be widows!)”.

We do, at least, have glasses. One of my other local experiences was to meet 
guide Joaquín for breakfast in Alpatro’s only remaining cafe. When he ordered 
red wine it came in a porrón, a glass jug with a tapering spout. The idea is to 
hold it high and pour the wine into your mouth, not down your shirt.

Drinking, it has to be said, is one tradition that shows no sign of 
disappearing, kept alive by a dedicated group of enthusiasts called men. For 
them a 10am breakfast porrón of red wine is preceded by a cazalla and followed 
with acremaet, flambéed brandy with a dash of coffee. Solid food can be taken, 
but who’d want to spoil their lunchtime paella appetite?

Evaristo is back at the pot, adding rice, water, garlic and saffron. We have 
another toast, “Força al canut!” The polite translation is “health and wealth”, 
but a canut is a bull’s scrotum, so I can sense where that one is going.

“Did I see you yesterday out walking?” asks Evaristo. There are no secrets in 
these parts. I had walked to a ruined village with local herbalist and healer 
Alicia, who introduced me to a vast array of wild plants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c8870e33a9f77721d712190105574cc4096c927%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20long%20way%20from%20Benidorm%3A%20rural%20regeneration%20in%20south-east%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20long%20way%20from%20Benidorm%3A%20rural%20regeneration%20in%20south-east%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbenidorm-rural-regeneration-south-east-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c8870e33a9f77721d712190105574cc4096c927%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Alicia the herbalist collecting wild mullein 
“There’s one for every ailment,” she said, picking armfuls of thyme, mullein 
and oregano. I was taught how to cookminxos, a kind of pasty stuffed with wild 
leaves, and afterwards scrambled up to the old fort for some superb views. The 
valley walks were wonderful and I wished I had more time to explore further 
afield. Above Alpatro I found ancient trails winding up through tiny meadows of 
flowers, the stones worn deep by centuries of travellers’ feet.

When I mention the flowers, Evaristo tells me the area once produced excellent 
saffron. He is poking at the paella. Another minute and he deems it ready. We 
eat direct from the pan, as the Moors might have done, and Evaristo shows me 
how to scrape for that delicious crusty bottom layer of rice, thesocarrat.

“Slow food,” he grins afterwards, reaching for the coffee and rum. Like all 
good things, like slow travel too, it takes a bit more time and trouble to do 
properly, but the results are worth it.

• The trip was provided by Village Ways (01223 750049, villageways.com 
<http://www.villageways.com/grass-routes/spain-the-vall-de-gallinera>), whose 
seven-night Spanish Rural Life trip to the Vall de Gallinera costs from £658pp 
based on two sharing, including self-catering accommodation and four guided 
tours (in a party of 3-4 the price is reduced to £471pp, or for 5-6 the price 
is £446pp). Flights (to Valencia or Alicante) and transfers extra 
 