
If you’re a fund manager who returned 3.2% in 2016, a year in which the UK 
stock market improved almost 17%, you need to offer your investors an 
explanation. Here’s Neil Woodford’s:it was a momentum-driven market and he’s a 
manager who looks for fundamental value 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/top-fund-manager-likens-trump-market-rally-to-dotcom-bubble>
.

He hunted for that value in some rotten places, such as Capita and Next, but 
he makes a fair statistical point. The market went crazy for oils and commodity 
stocks last year, sectors avoided by Woodford’s £9.6bn UK Equity Income fund. 
If you strip out the six biggest oil and mining heavyweights, plus HSBC, theFTSE
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> All-Share index improved by 8.2%, 
not the actual 16.8%.

Woodford argues he was right to ignore oil and mining heavyweights (their 
recovery since the lows for commodity prices in 2015 “goes way beyond what 
fundamentals would justify”) but then he makes a much bigger claim. He says 
current momentum market reminds him of 1999 and the tech and dotcom bubble. 
“Valuation has become significantly less important – indeed, arguably 
irrelevant in this sort of post-Trump period,” he says.

In other mouths, that might sound like a excuse too far for a bad year. But 
Woodford made his reputation by ignoring the turn-of-the-century new-technology 
obsession and sticking with supposedly dull dividend earners. After the bust of 
2000, he reaped the rewards.

There is no guarantee that history will repeat, or even rhyme, and Woodford 
has investors to keep sweet. But, on a day that the FTSE 100 index edged to 
another record close, the basic point should be well understood: the market has 
been led by a narrowly concentrated collection of stocks, which makes it 
fragile.

The Tesco supertanker is finding it tough to turn around

Once the Tesco supertanker turns, watch it plough through the flotilla of 
lesser food retailers, ran last year’s theory. Life is not working out so 
simply, or at least not yet. Trading from September to New Year was good enough
for chief executive Dave Lewis to declare himself “very encouraged” by 
“sustained strong progress” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/tesco-sales-festive-season> 
but investors were less impressed. The shares closed down 1.3%.

One can understand why. From UK like-for-like sales growth of 1.8% in the 
September-November period,Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> 
slipped to 0.7% over Christmas and its explanation descended into nit-picking. 
The chain didn’t repeat a “boost” promotion on loyalty points, which it reckons 
cost 0.8% on sales. But dropping the wheeze was a deliberate policy. The idea 
was to ween the punters off from promotional gimmicks by offering them “even 
more affordable prices”, as Lewis puts it. The outcome suggests limited success.

For true Tesco nerds, there was a profits upgrade within the statement if one 
looked hard enough. Instead of full-year operating profits of £1.2bn, the group 
now expects “at least” that figure. But that is nuance upon nuance. The big 
picture remains the same. Tesco’s recovery is happening, and it is regaining 
small slices of market share, but the process feels terribly slow.

Related: Tesco hails turnaround as festive sales increase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/tesco-sales-festive-season> 

To be fair to Lewis, he never said it would be quick. What’s more, after 
previous management’s catastrophic blunder in chasing self-defeating targets 
for profit margins, you can’t blame him for deciding the priority was to fix 
the offer for customers. Even so, Morrisons was in a similar pickle and is 
recovering faster. Maybe smaller supermarkets are just easier to turn around 
than big ones. Whatever Lewis says about being very encouraged, one suspects he 
would have hoped to have achieved more by now. This was his third Christmas in 
charge and the share price stands where it was after his first.

M&S knows sales are not just for Christmas 

Over at Marks & Spencer, Steve Rowe is new(ish) in post but knows the first 
lesson of Christmas: don’t read too much into it. For most of the past 
half-decade, the sight of growth in clothing and homeware sales –2.3% on a 
like-for-like basis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/m-and-s-christmas-clothing-sales-rise-marks-spencer>
 – might have been greeted with claims about corners being turned. It’s too 
soon to say that.


As M&S volunteered, the clothing improvement was flattered by five extra days 
in the reporting period. Call the real figure about 0.8% on a truer 
comparative. Such an increase was also merely part of the script as M&S 
attempts to rid itself of its addiction to short-term discounts to sell more of 
its clothes at full price. The company’s guidance that pre-tax profits will be 
£593m-ish this year was left intact. That was the significant point in the 
statement.

The chief revelations probably lie elsewhere. First, Next’s Christmas shocker 
looks even worse in light of M&S’ performance. Second, all retailers – 
especially the non-food variety – are staring at polls of consumer confidence 
and do not like what they say for 2017. Rowe referred to “the uncertain 
consumer outlook” but John Lewis, obliged to decide its staff bonus in March, 
has already concluded that a benign Christmas could be a poor guide for the 
year ahead.The bonus will be “significantly lower” this time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/john-lewis-cut-staff-bonus-market-waitrose-christmas>
, in part because “sterling is a dog that hasn’t barked yet”.

But it’s the bite, not the bark, retailers should fear. The effect on profits 
of the pound’s 18% devaluation against the dollar remains anybody’s guess.
 