
Looking round a small exhibition of nylon used for men’s wear (arranged by 
British Nylon Spinners, Ltd., at their Manchester office) I began to wonder why 
so few men of my acquaintance wear nylon shirts. These were the answers I 
provided for myself: (a) that someone told them, in nylon’s early days, that 
after much washing nylon takes on, irrevocably and irremovably, a dingy 
yellowish tinge; (b) that they associate nylon with the silkiness and, worse, 
the transparency of women’s lingerie; (c) that they want an immaculately 
smooth, if not starched, shirt front, and suspect nylon of being sloppy; (d) 
that they just do not like the idea of wet shirts dripping all over the 
bathroom.


Some of the objections are already outdated, others are on the way to being 
so. Nylon, as every woman knows, has now countless surface guises. It need by 
no means be either silky, shiny, or sloppy. It can be firm enough for a pique 
finish dress shirt. It can be as fluffy as angora wool, or it can have the 
warm, smooth touch of, say, winceyette or delaine. The shirtings which this 
wife would expect her husband to approve have the appearance of poplins, with 
pin stripes of blue, grey, red, or green. They are not shiny or silky, and they 
have a nice “body.” Shirtings line-checked in bright colours on cream look 
attractive for cold days.


Textured yarns
What few men outside the textile industry seem to realise is the widespread 
use now of “textured” nylons. Most of these attractive shirtings, for example, 
are made of Taslan, which is, literally, a “blown up” nylon yarn. That is to 
say, the multi-filament yarn is passed through an air jet which creates loops 
in the individual filaments. This gives more body, bulk, and opacity. There is 
no doubt at all that most men’s ideal shirt material is cotton poplin, and 
nylon will only please them when it is similarly smooth, matt, crisp, and 
opaque. (The thought of a shirt which reveals the outline of the vest below is, 
understandably, appalling to them.) Taslan has gone further than is generally 
known towards achieving the ideal. Has it quite achieved it?

As for the matter of nylon’s daily dip, my sympathies are entirely with the 
reluctant male. Nylon should, undoubtedly, be washed daily, if worn in the 
grime of an industrial city. Does the tired business man slosh it through in 
the bathroom basin, rinse, and drape over the edge of the bath or over the 
towel rail, to leave a puddle on the floor which is bound before long to rot 
the linoleum? Or does he leave it for his wife to run through in the morning? 
She would undoubtedly rather do her washing in bulk, however thankful she is to 
lighten the load of her ironing. Someone should surely put on the market a 
drying gadget which can be fixed to any wall (whether tiled, painted, or 
varnish-papered) and whose arms are made to take shirts and blouses hanging 
completely straight, and should market along with it a “drip tray” to protect 
bathroom and kitchen floors.

Against one use for nylon in men’s clothes I can find no single word of male 
objection or doubt - as a strengthener of pocket materials. A cotton material 
with 15 per cent of nylon showed no sign of a hole even after 30,000 “rubs,” 
whereas an ordinary cotton pocketing was worn to a hole after 12,000 rubs 
across the welt, 15,000 across the warp. A pocket which will keep his money 
safe as long as the suit lasts? That would be something to thank nylon for!

This is an edited extract, read the full article 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/03/24/nylon_plain_woman's_guide_Guardian_28_March_1958.jpeg>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnylon-menswear-wives-husbands-feminism-1958-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d6367dacf31e16a62a31bcf78c5f9673a144901%2F15_86_1874_1124%2F1874.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20plain%20woman%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20nylon%20for%20her%20husband%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnylon-menswear-wives-husbands-feminism-1958-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20plain%20woman%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20nylon%20for%20her%20husband%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fnylon-menswear-wives-husbands-feminism-1958-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d6367dacf31e16a62a31bcf78c5f9673a144901%2F15_86_1874_1124%2F1874.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 28 March 1958.  