
You may have visited San Sebastian, Spain – Donostia, as the locals began 
calling it again after Franco died in 1975 and the street signs began to revert 
back toEuskera [the Basque language]. Maybe you spent a couple summer days on 
the beach of la Concha during your tour of Europe after college, or perhaps 
you’d been waylaid on your way to the Guggenheim in Bilbao. And sure, you may 
know thepintxos loaded with plum-colored hams and oily sardines plated on the 
counters of oak bars in the old part of town, but everybody knows about the
pintxos. Even the guiri tourists, after a couple days in the Basque Country, 
will have their favorite plate at their favorite bars. Maybe you’ve even 
discovered the metallic taste of barely-cooked venison at the Bar Senra, or an 
inconspicuous door leading to a hash-filled basement nightclub on the harbor, 
or if you are of a certain age perhaps you will even know the tuxedoed waiters 
pouring Ballantine’s over ice for sunburned Brits at the Hotel Londres. But 
you, almost certainly, will not know the three mountains surrounding the city’s 
three harbors: Igueldo, Urgull, Ulia.

There is, I suppose, the off-chance that you do happen to know one of the 
three mountains surrounding San Sebastian (or the threemendiak as the young 
children who speak only Basque would say, or the threemontes, as their parents, 
the generation without language, would say). In this case, it is surely Monte 
Igueldo, the westernmost peak, the most traditionally handsome and accessible 
of the three sisters. You’ve gone to Igueldo, no doubt, to visitEduardo Chillida
 <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/aug/21/guardianobituaries.arts>’s rusted
sculptures <http://static.panoramio.com/photos/large/84116054.jpg> reaching 
from the sea at the base of the mountain, or you’ve taken the rickety funicular 
up to Igueldo’s battered old amusement park with a few friends and a Coke 
bottle half-filled with rum. A great way to spend the afternoon, if you’re into 
that sort of thing.

If you’re the adventurous type, or maybe just had one too many kalimotxos at 
the little café next to Cathedral San Telmo in the old part of town, then I 
suppose it’s possible that you’ve also wandered onto the stone pathway that 
spirals up out of the middle of the old part of town to the summit of Urgull, 
the second sister. It’s impossible to miss—a reaching promontory that shoulders 
the fifteen-foot rollers arriving from the Bay of Biscay during a winter storm. 
Above you leans a statue of Jesus, as tall as Godzilla looming over the old 
fishing boats in the harbor. You’ll take a picture from the old fortification. 
Everyone takes a picture.

But even in the unlikely scenario that you have, in fact, set foot on Igueldo 
and Urgull,surely you do not know Ulia. She is the sister with the blackened 
tooth and the one lazy eye. Neither the loveliest nor the most pleasing, Ulia, 
with her unmistakable history of violence and hidden beauty, is the sister that 
you will think the most of, that you will find yourself remembering in the 
twilight minutes before sleep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fa-postcard-from-monte-ulia-mountain-san-sebastian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde816d6653eb5619648dfcfda9f452c03ea94828%2F0_0_3720_2232%2F3720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20postcard%20from%20Monte%20Ulia%2C%20Basque%20Country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fa-postcard-from-monte-ulia-mountain-san-sebastian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20postcard%20from%20Monte%20Ulia%2C%20Basque%20Country&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fa-postcard-from-monte-ulia-mountain-san-sebastian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde816d6653eb5619648dfcfda9f452c03ea94828%2F0_0_3720_2232%2F3720.jpg>
 Monte Ulia, from Gros beach. Photograph: Gabriel Urza 
Ulia, the eastern bookend to the town of San Sebastian, is the lesser of the 
three mountains in many ways, the only peak unadorned by a roller coaster’s 
tiara or a statue’s crown. It requires conscious effort to find yourself at the 
end of the Gros Beach, in Sagüés, the last barrio in San Sebastian, or maybe 
simply a desire to see an end to things: to reach Ulia, you used to have to 
slip through a break in the chain link fence before disappearing on the goat 
trails; now the sidewalk simply ends. No signage, no invitation, just a few 
cinderblock paving stones trailing off into dirt and sea stone.

The goat trails from the end of the sidewalk lead to the lesser-known coastal 
routes of the famous Camino de Santiago de Compostela, and if you walked three 
hundred miles west (past those better known mountains of Igueldo and Urgull), 
eventually you would arrive at the desiccated bones of Saint James. If you are 
making the climb in the fall, the surfers on Zurriola beach below you will 
already be wearing their slick black wetsuits, and in the air you may detect 
the faint odor of a nearby farmer burning his chaff, or of teenagers burning 
hash in crookedporros, or the fetid smell of the tide pools at Mompas point.


All of these parts of Ulia elude both guide books and word of mouth – one day, 
perhaps, you will know them for yourself

If the sun is out and the sea breeze isn’t too cool, the old viejos verdes 
will be out on the lower shoulders of Ulia, stretched out naked in the grass or 
wearing women’s underwear, masturbating lewdly and ridiculously as hikers pass 
nearby. The frayed trails begin to braid and consolidate as you climb the ridge 
leading to Ulia’s sloping summit, and you will pick your way around crumbling 
lookouts where the old Basque whalers once drank young red wine from leather 
bags and waited for the schools of right whales to pass offshore, then past 
pillbox bunkers left over from one war or another. If you follow the path far 
enough you might come across a woman with long gray braids leading a group of 
children in handmade clothes that could be from another century, perhaps even 
the century of the vanished old whalers. When you see this strange group, you 
will know that you’re near the commune of mystics that offer beds to pilgrims 
along the Camino, and that they will insist on offering you tea and telling you 
of the meaning of the walk along the Saint James way.

These are just a few the imperfect beauties of Ulia, which you surely have not 
yet discovered in your forays around San Sebastian and her lesser mountains: 
the unlikely mixtures of mysticism and warfare, the asymmetries of sex and 
survival. There is a peak, of course, and if you follow the path long enough 
you’ll eventually land in the fishing village of Pasaia. All of these are the 
parts of Ulia that elude both guide books and word of mouth, but one day, 
perhaps, you will know them for yourself.


 * Gabriel Urza’s family is from the Basque region of Spain where he lived for 
several years. He is a grant recipient from the Kellogg Institute for 
International Studies and his short fiction and essays have been published in 
Riverteeth, Hobart, Erlea, The Kenyon Review, West Branch, Slate and other 
publications. His first novel, All That Followed, is available now from Henry 
Holt & Co. He is currently an assistant professor of Writing at Ithaca College.

 * Public Streets is a series curated by Ellis Avery for Public Books 
<http://www.publicbooks.org/>.
 