
In a coastal jungle in northern Madagascar, biologist Fanny Rakotoarivelo 
places a plastic bubble over a branch of papaya flowers. Inside, air currents 
run through the flowers, sucking out essential oils. The scented air that 
remains is funneled into another bag, which Rakotoarivelo places inside a metal 
briefcase. It will be flown and delivered to the German headquarters of 
Symrise, the second largest flavors and fragrances company in the world, where 
scientists will attempt to recreate the scent.

The mechanism Rakotoarivelo uses is, rather poetically, called a headspace. 
For the last thirty years, it has allowed scientists to recreate nature in a 
bottle,often in a far more environmentally friendly manner than tapping the 
real thing <http://www.etcgroup.org/content/case-study-vanilla>, according to a 
2013 study by watchdog conservation organization ETC Group.

Madagascar: the country that's poor but not poor enough for aid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/01/madagascar-the-country-thats-poor-but-not-poor-enough-for-aid>
Symrise pioneered artificial vanilla – vanillin – in 1874, but it continues to 
be a major supplier of the raw thing as well. Vanilla was first brought to 
Madagascar in the mid-1800s; today, it is referred to as the country’s “black 
gold”, supplying about half of the world’s vanilla flavor and fragrance. Some 
10% of that comes via Symrise, which works with more than a thousand local 
farmers inMadagascar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/madagascar>, where it 
opened an extraction plant in late 2014.

With its pristine beaches and roads lined with mango, banana and coconut 
trees, Madagascar recalls a pre-boom Hawaii. But while the island nurtures some 
of the world’s richest biodiversity, Malagasy people endure widespread poverty 
and corruption. As of 2010, more than 75% of the population lives in poverty. 
Despite its wealth of resources,Madagascar ranks 155th out of 187 countries 
examined in the UNDP Human Development Index 2014. 
<http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/HDI>

Symrise does not own its own farms. Instead, it sources from partners owned 
domestically, buying at fair trade prices. Vanilla is a labor-intensive crop 
that requires even more effort in Madagascar, where it is not a native species. 
About 1kg (2.2lbs) of vanilla requires extraction from 500kg (1,102lbs) of 
vanilla pods and hand pollination of approximately 40,000 flowers by workers 
wielding needles – most often women who are paid per stamen.

The price of vanilla can also fluctuate wildly. This year, prices reportedly 
soared to more than $200 per kg, up from $20 per kg five years ago. Madagascar 
is one of the few places in the world that grows vanilla that can support such 
a low price. When prices are high, however, theft of crops becomes rampant.

 On these Symrise scent expeditions, perfumers identify local crops that have 
the potential for growth on a global scale and to diversify local farmers’ 
output, so as to decrease sole dependency on vanilla. Vetiver, green pepper 
basil, black pepper, rumba and ylang-ylang are among those currently currently 
being vetted by Symrise.

Many, like ylang-ylang, already have a well established hold on the perfume 
industry, but the scents as they are commonly used have gone stale. “Ylang has 
a bad rap,” senior perfumer at Symrise David Apel explained. “It’s overused in 
everything from furniture polish to perfume.” The culprit? Synthetics, which 
are easy and cheap to make.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fperfume-synthetic-sustainability-vanilla-madagascar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3142ff0afb4b23fdc66c69894c3f6a1afadeb9a6%2F0_0_1024_653%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20sweeter%20choice%3A%20synthetic%20perfumes%2C%20while%20unpopular%2C%20are%20better%20for%20the%20planet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fperfume-synthetic-sustainability-vanilla-madagascar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20sweeter%20choice%3A%20synthetic%20perfumes%2C%20while%20unpopular%2C%20are%20better%20for%20the%20planet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fperfume-synthetic-sustainability-vanilla-madagascar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3142ff0afb4b23fdc66c69894c3f6a1afadeb9a6%2F0_0_1024_653%2F1024.jpg>
 A worker sorting vanilla pods at a production site in Anjombalava, a village 
36 km away from Sambava, in the middle of the most important vanilla production 
regions in Madagascar. Photograph: Patrick Mercier/AFP/Getty Images 
That’s not always a bad thing. In Chandler Burr’s 2008 book The Perfect Scent, 
he argues in favor of synthetics, which have become less fashionable with the 
demand for natural products in the past ten years. The industry takes the 
position that synthetics are more ecologically sound.

Burr uses sandalwood as an example, the natural use of which is decimating 
forests in India: “Most perfumers I know now refuse to use natural sandalwood, 
and their bosses support them, and it’s purely an eco question.”

 Burr argues that synthetics are often better than the real thing. For one, 
the belief they cause allergies is likely more true of naturals, since 
synthetics can have problematic molecules removed.

 But consumer desire continues to bend toward naturals. While the last two 
generations of perfumers leaned toward a potency that relied on synthetically 
derived animalics and spices (think YSL’S Opium), followed by sugary, candied 
notes (Mugler’s Angel), the current generation increasingly wants perfume to 
bring inspiration from the organic world with purer, cleaner origins and scents.

 The trend toward a minimalist aesthetic in fragrance can however be more 
harmful than it appears, particularly when it comes to flowers. The struggle 
major companies face is how to sustainably produce what is inherently an 
unsustainable product, especially as consumers demand more and more raw 
materials.

 “Flowers are very resource-intensive with low yield,” explains Torsten Kulke, 
senior vice president of global innovation & regulatory fragrances at Symrise 
who also published a scientific study on sustainability in fragrances in the 
July 2015 issue of Perfumer & Flavorist. Some 500kg (1,102lbs) of a flower, he 
noted, usually only yields 50 grams (1.1lbs) of essence. “Why do you want to 
waste hectares and hectares of productive land?”

Perfume manufacturers must cope with the scarcity of precious supplies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/04/chanel-perfume-legislation-guerlain-loreal>
Large scale fragrance providers are increasingly making these judgment calls. 
Symrise is one of the “big eight” global fragrance companies that provide the 
bulk of the formulas for the fine fragrance market: companies such as Givaudan, 
IFF and Firmenich have also developed vertical integration to ensure the 
sustainability of raw materials. According to its 2015 sustainability report, 
Givaudan, the largest fragrance house, began partnering with local producers a 
decade ago. IFF announced its Natural Ethics program in 2013 for its vanilla 
grown in the Sava region, which includes development of more biosynthetic 
vanilla. Firmenich works with a local partner in Madagascar that helped 1,300 
farming families to achieve Rainforest Alliance certification.

Naturals are still a vital industry to local laborers who farm raw materials 
and extract essences themselves locally. All-natural fragrance, to follow, is 
expensive, costing hundreds of dollars per ounce, making synthetic scent a more 
viable option for most fragrance houses as they assemble formulas for clients. 
Part of the new set of challenges faced by fragrance houses is weighing the 
benefits of real v derived.


“Rose costs thousands of dollars,” Kulke elaborates. “A 98% copy you can get 
for a fraction of the cost.”

A papaya flower could not feasibly be harvested for its oil, even in its 
native Madagascar – the cost, monetary and environmental, would be 
astronomical. The real thing is, no doubt, more complex, but in this case the 
copy smells just as sweet.



 