
The people of Thessaloniki are full of energy and innovative ideas – they’ve 
shown they can thrive in straitened times but I think a Grexit would be a 
catastrophe. This is Greece’s biggest student city – there are four 
universities. We’ve tried to create opportunities for these young people so 
that, alongside the city’s ancient monuments, we have fresh new businesses 
emerging.

The way and rhythm of life is different to other cities. We have an expression,
Halara, which means “take it as it comes”. It’s slower, more relaxed, people 
say good morning to each other, and you don’t have to have a plan. You can 
simply walk around, take in the sights and stop for excellent food.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthessaloniki-greece-mayor-yiannis-boutaris-way-i-see-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436524773477%2Fafdcb4b0-cd2c-41a1-865f-75fc769e4556-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20taste%20of%20Greece%20in%20Thessaloniki%3A%20the%20city%E2%80%99s%20mayor%20on%20the%20future%20of%20the%20country%E2%80%99s%20gastronomic%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthessaloniki-greece-mayor-yiannis-boutaris-way-i-see-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20taste%20of%20Greece%20in%20Thessaloniki%3A%20the%20city%E2%80%99s%20mayor%20on%20the%20future%20of%20the%20country%E2%80%99s%20gastronomic%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthessaloniki-greece-mayor-yiannis-boutaris-way-i-see-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436524773477%2Fafdcb4b0-cd2c-41a1-865f-75fc769e4556-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Yiannis Boutaris, mayor of Thessaloniki Photograph: Alexandros 
Michailidis/Demotix/Corbis 
I think it’s important not to let cities become museums. Each new generation 
must be allowed to leave its own imprint. Street art is an exuberant 
contemporary expression of human interests, and I’ve tried to ensure it 
flourishes here. There’s a huge mural on the wall of a building at the eastern 
end of Tsimiski Street, which shows a bird with chains for tail feathers rising 
above a pensive-looking woman. It was commissioned in 2012 to mark the 100th 
anniversary of the liberation of the city from Ottoman rule.

Thessalonians have lived through numerous invasions and natural disasters. The 
city’s history makes for a cosmopolitan atmosphere – it has been part of the 
Hellenic, Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman empires. At the beginning of the last 
century it was known as the “Jerusalem of the Balkans”, but nearly all of its 
56,000 Jews were sent to concentration camps in the second world war. We plan 
to build a Holocaust memorial centre at the railway station.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthessaloniki-greece-mayor-yiannis-boutaris-way-i-see-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436524993445%2F62d6ae1b-0e78-41d3-b61a-a36b1709a94c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20taste%20of%20Greece%20in%20Thessaloniki%3A%20the%20city%E2%80%99s%20mayor%20on%20the%20future%20of%20the%20country%E2%80%99s%20gastronomic%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthessaloniki-greece-mayor-yiannis-boutaris-way-i-see-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20taste%20of%20Greece%20in%20Thessaloniki%3A%20the%20city%E2%80%99s%20mayor%20on%20the%20future%20of%20the%20country%E2%80%99s%20gastronomic%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthessaloniki-greece-mayor-yiannis-boutaris-way-i-see-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436524993445%2F62d6ae1b-0e78-41d3-b61a-a36b1709a94c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The fourth-century Roman rotunda Church of Agios Georgios, Thessaloniki 
Photograph: Funky Stock/Paul Williams/Alamy 
The foodie traveller: fusion pastries in Thessaloniki, Greece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/30/foodie-traveller-bougatsan-pastry-thessaloniki-greece>
Thessaloniki is Greece’s second city, but it is first for gastronomy. The 
surrounding area is very fertile and the sea is on our doorstep, so the 
combination of fresh local produce and a new generation of chefs makes it a 
wonderful place to eat.Ouzeri Aristotelous 
<https://www.facebook.com/ouzeri.aristotelous#_=_> is a favourite of mine: it’s 
tucked away in a quiet courtyard, just off the huge Aristotelous Square (the 
biggest in Greece), and has a very good menu. I like the Greek meze, where you 
order five or six different meats or fish and share them with friends.

I’m an alcoholic and have been sober for 24 years. But, although I don’t drink 
any more, I still like the atmosphere of bars such asZucca 
<https://plus.google.com/118365346838944122673/about?gl=uk&hl=en>. The DJs 
don’t just play music; they create an atmosphere, one full of energy and life.
 Mural by the street artists DAL and Faith47. Photograph: Alamy 
Hiking, rafting and relaxing in Greece's Zagori wilderness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/13/greece-zagori-mountains-gorge-walking-holiday>
Thessaloniki is at the centre of the booming Greek wine business. I’ve worked 
for my family’s wine business all my life and now run it with my children. All 
the biggest companies are based here and we’ve established wine routes to 
vineyards in the regions. The best wines can be found in this part of northern 
Greece.

I would like to ban cars from the centre of the city. Greeks are very wedded 
to their vehicles, so it’s not an easy plan to execute, but we’ve started with 
traffic-free Sundays beside the promenade in summer. I want to be remembered as 
the mayor who freed the city from the occupation of the car.

I love strolling around the old town. One of my favourite places is the 
14th-century Byzantine Church of Saint Nicholas the Orphan, just inside the 
eastern wall. It has beautiful frescoes and an enormous sense of the past. It’s 
easy to imagine just how many lives it has touched. It’s a very humbling place, 
and reminds you that we are passing through, only ever a very small part of a 
much bigger picture.
 