
It was a walk past a frozen lake 10 years ago that got Ian Tansley thinking 
differently about global health. The Welsh inventor had spent decades 
travelling and developing solar technologies throughout Africa and Asia. Yet 
one puzzle he was keen to crack – how to deliver vaccines on a wide-scale basis 
to the poorest, most remote communities – had so far eluded him.

Vaccines are notoriously hard to deliver safely, requiring refrigeration at 
certain temperatures, which means having access to a constant power supply. Yet 
hot climates, intermittent availability of electricity, supply shortages and 
unreliable storage facilities mean that one in five children –more than 19m 
worldwide <http://www.unicef.org/immunization/> – do not get even the most 
basic immunisations to keep them healthy.


How Sri Lanka bit back at mosquitoes and wiped out malaria – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/oct/24/how-sri-lanka-bit-back-mosquitoes-wiped-out-malaria-podcast>
Using the frozen lake as his inspiration, with its frozen top but liquid 
bottom, Tansley developed a refrigeration system,Sure Chill 
<http://www.surechill.com/how-it-works/>, that harnesses water’s unique 
properties to keep vaccines cool at 4C – yet doesn’t require a constant power 
supply. The refrigeration compartment is surrounded by water, and relies on the 
fact that the liquid is at its heaviest at 4C, when it sinks. When the device 
has power, the water cools and forms ice above the compartment, leaving only 
water at 4C cooling the contents. When the power is switched off, the water 
warms and rises while the ice begins to melt, and water at 4C remains below to 
keep the vaccines chilled.

Sure Chill – which was awarded a $1.5m (£1.2m) Grand Challenges grant from the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation <http://www.gatesfoundation.org/> and is now 
used to deliver vaccines in 38 countries – has proved a major breakthrough in 
global health. Tansley’s immunisations cold-box can keep vaccines cool for up 
to 35 days in even 43C weather. And the technology is entirely scaleable, from 
a cool box up to a warehouse.

Naming it one of the top four innovations saving children’s lives, the Gates 
Foundation’s director of vaccine delivery, Dr Orin Levine, calls Sure Chill“an 
important tool in humanitarian response efforts” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/04/29/health/levine-world-immunization-week-innovations/index.html>
 and says it demonstrates, for the first time in decades, a global health issue 
“benefiting from significant innovation”.

Innovation is the theme of this year’s Grand Challenges global conference 
<http://grandchallenges.org/>, taking place in London this week. Experts from 
all over the world will address key questions in tackling global health 
challenges, including innovations in achieving thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals>, 
treating infectious diseases, and developing collaborations between north and 
south.

Equally problematic in the global health challenge is poor sanitation: 40% of 
the world’s populationcurrently lacks adequate toilet facilities 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/What-We-Do/Global-Development/Water-Sanitation-and-Hygiene>
, which in turn contributes to poor health and devastating environmental 
impacts.


Healers cure mistrust in Guinea's health system after horrors of Ebola
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/28/healers-cure-mistrust-guinea-health-system-after-horrors-ebola>
Loowatt <https://loowatt.com/global-sanitation-madagascar-toilets/> was 
granted a $1.3m investment to develop a waterless toilet system. Developed by 
Virginia Gardiner, an American journalist-turned-industrial design engineer, 
Loowatt has had a massive impact in Madagascar, where a pilot public toilet 
project has grown to provide 100 toilets for private use within family homes, 
and is set to be rolled out across other countries in sub-Saharan Africa.


The toilets seal waste into a portable cartridge within biodegradable film, 
and combine anaerobic digestion with pasteurisation in order to kill off any 
waterborne diseases. The waste is collected and converted into fertiliser and 
biogas, which is then used for cooking and electricity.

The toilets are particularly essential in regions where waterborne diseases 
are prevalent, or where shared – or a complete lack of – toilets prevent women 
and girls from going to the bathroom, says Gardiner.

“People are going from having pit latrines at home to our toilets in their 
homes, which means they’re not being exposed to eco-pathogens in their everyday 
lives any more,” says Gardiner. “The current model can support 2,000 people – 
in urban or rural settings – and is important in showing that in this global 
sanitation crisis, there is technology out there than can convert waste into 
energy.”

Both Gardiner’s and Tansley’s systems get to the heart of what the Grand 
Challenges are about – improving the lives of the world’s most vulnerable. 
Tansley has been surprised at just how much his Sure Chill technology has 
changed the face of medical outreach. “The people benefiting the most are 
generally the poorest people in the most remote places, the people you just 
wouldn’t normally see: rural agricultural communities far from any 
infrastructure or power grid,” he says. “Maybe they’re nomadic or very 
dispersed – they’re people who weren’t being reached before.”
 