
With forays into fashion, sport, photography and philanthropy it has been a 
busy year for the Beckhams. It has also been a year in which Victoria opted not 
to sing, but now Cruz has decided to give it a whirl. Here’s how things are 
measuring up for the Beckhams …

Cruz Beckham

The signs were there in October when 11-year-old Cruz was pictured in Rodney 
“Darkchild” Jerkins’s studio 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/david-beckham-cruz-beckham-recording-music_uk_581725a5e4b0ccfc95632f9d>
. This week, he released his grammatically questionable debut singleIf Everyday 
Was Christmas 
<http://www.nme.com/news/music/cruz-beckham-unveils-debut-single-every-day-christmas-1898811>
, joined Instagram, and was revealed to be under the guidance of Scooter Braun, 
who alsolooks after Justin Bieber 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/09/03/teen-titan> and Kanye West 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/7318601/kanye-west-scooter-braun-manager>
. Premiering the single on Capital FM (money goes to its Make Some Noise 
charity), Cruz noted that the song combines “two of my favourite things, 
Christmas and singing”. Is it fair to criticise the charitable work of an 
11-year-old boy? Absolutely not, but Scooter Braun is 35 and he’s on course for 
a potato in his stocking.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cruz%20Beckham%20to%20release%20Christmas%20single%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cruz%20Beckham%20to%20release%20Christmas%20single%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video&media=>
Cruz Beckham performs his debut single If Everyday Was Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/video/2016/dec/07/cruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video>
Victoria Beckham

The question here is not so much what Victoria has been up to – various 
garm-related escapades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/11/victoria-beckham-steers-a-clever-course-through-new-york-fashion-week>
 – but what she has managed to swerve, namelyGEM <http://spicegirlsgem.com/>, 
the catastrophic Spice Girls reunion project consisting of Geri, Emma and Mel 
B. GEM launched in the summer sans Posh and Sporty, with a shonky video that 
looked like it had been shot on an iPhone 3S; in November, a song called Song 
For Her leaked. Let’s just say it wasn’t a classic.

David Beckham

David started 2016 as the planet’s second highest-earning retired 
sportsperson, having made £45m in 2015 from fashion firms such as Kent & 
Curwen, Adidas, Breitling and H&M. Dave continued his work with Unicef (earlier 
this week, he unveiled a video in which his tattoos came to life to tell 
stories relating to violence against children), and in March he bought land in 
Miami upon which, at some point, he plans to build a Major League Soccer 
stadium.

Romeo Beckham

Having spent time training with Arsenal, 14-year-old one-time Burberry model 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/gallery/burberry-christmas-2015-campaign-billy-elliot-julie-walters-romeo-beckham-elton-john>
 Romeo hasknocked football on the head  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-3277323/Romeo-Beckham-set-follow-brother-Brooklyn-Arsenal-academy.html>
 and now plays tennis several times a week. In June hemet up with Andy Murray 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pRKeuZDQ3dA>, the tennis player, for whatever 
a kickabout is called when it’s tennis.

Brooklyn Beckham

After also “moving on” from Arsenal’s Hale End academy in 2015, the now 
17-year-old has spent most of 2016 building his brand. This included wearing 
top hat and tailson the cover of L’uomo Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.it/en/l-uomo-vogue/cover-story/2016/06/12/brooklyn-beckham/> 
(headline: THE NEW LEGACY), becoming the new face of Pull&Bear,landing a £100K 
ad deal with Huawei <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-37106220>, and 
announcinghis first photography book 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/photography/what-to-see/brooklyn-beckham-17-publish-debut-photography-book-see/>
to the delight of other photographers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/30/sheer-nepotism-brooklyn-beckham-burberry-shoot-angers-photographers>
). A promo clip for Pull&Bear included the phrase: “We all have a place in the 
world; jump barriers and be in the right place.”

Harper Beckham

It’s important to remember that Harper Beckham is only five years old so it’s 
far too early for her parents to help her “jump barriers” into the worlds of 
fashion, music, sport or photography. That said, the Sun reported last month 
thatHarper was training with the English National Ballet 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/2225944/harper-beckham-follows-in-mums-footsteps-and-starts-training-at-the-english-national-ballet-as-her-dad-david-does-the-ballet-run/>
, so let’s reconvene in 12 months.
 