
The ABC is not biased against business despite perceptions to the contrary, 
research by the Australia Institute has shown, but it does focus too much on 
the big end of town to the detriment of smaller enterprises.

The research, based on one week of ABC content across television, radio and 
online, found that big business received three to five times more attention 
than small to medium businesses despite the smaller companies making up a third 
of theAustralian economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy>.

Specialist programs such as The Business, hosted by Ticky Fullerton, cover big 
business five times more often than small business topics, the report found, 
and gave voice to inside industry commentators, such as analysts from research 
firms and banks rather than unions and consumers.

'She doesn't get what we do': has ABC boss Michelle Guthrie got the insiders 
on her side?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/09/she-doesnt-get-what-we-do-has-abc-boss-michelle-guthrie-got-the-insiders-on-her-side>
“It’s astounding that still there is this narrative out there that the ABC is 
anti-business and anti-big business in particular,” researcher Fergus Pitt told 
Guardian Australia. “The Australia Institute thought we had a role in providing 
some data that showed a different perspective to that argument.

“We were trying to understand the amount of air time that was given to small, 
medium and big business. And what we found was that the coverage the ABC gave 
to big business was disproportionate to their place in the Australian economy, 
admittedly on what was a fairly focused sample.


“So much of our interactions are with small and medium-sized businesses, which 
play an incredibly important role in our society and, like big business, some 
are fantastic and some act badly. And those parts of the economy deserve to be 
examined and have their perspectives heard.”


The Australia Institute report was released the week after Guardian Australia 
revealed that the ABC managing director, Michelle Guthrie,told the Four Corners 
team that the program would be better if it was kinder to business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/09/she-doesnt-get-what-we-do-has-abc-boss-michelle-guthrie-got-the-insiders-on-her-side>
 and did some profiles of successful business leaders.

Guthrie may have been echoing persistent criticism, largely from News Corp, 
that the ABC is anti-business.

The former ABC chairman Maurice Newman was quoted in the Australian earlier 
this year saying thatABC business commentary “tended to be from the left” 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/abc-reform/abc-business-coverage-poor-maurice-newman/news-story/5e9a1ce1ee4aa5ae8cb7a41b6a43790c>
.


The ABC board commissioned an independent review of the ABC’s business 
coverage, which was released in July. It concluded there was no bias but that 
the coverage was too unfocused.


Adviser to the review and former ANZ chief excutive Mike Smith admitted that, 
before he was asked to assist in the review,he believed the ABC was “inherently 
anti-business” but the evidence showed “this was incorrect and the coverage was 
generally unbiased” 
<http://about.abc.net.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Editorial-Review-8-Impartiality-of-Business-Coverage.pdf>
.


“I have observed that the ABC does a credible job across a range of media with 
quite limited resources when, compared to similar institutions, such as the 
BBC,” Smith said. “If there is a fault, I would say that business coverage is 
usually reported through a political rather than economic lens, which generally 
results in negative rather than good news.”


Michelle Guthrie, the ABC and the turning of a once-shining jewel into 
mainstream sludge | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/michelle-guthrie-the-abc-and-the-turning-of-a-once-shining-jewel-into-mainstream-sludge>
Pitt said the institute was not naive about the tendency for traditional media 
coverage to gravitate towards big business.


“Certainly traditional news values skew towards stories that have very very 
big impacts, so BHP is newsworthy because they employ an lot of people and they 
have a lot of shareholders,” Pitt said. “But, as a broadcaster that has a 
mission to represent diversity, their business coverage has a way to go.”

Like other media, when the ABC covers business it focuses on big business and 
the economic implications of public policy, the institute found. Radio current 
affairs program AM, for example, did 10 stories on ASX 100 companies but only 
three stories related to small businesses.

ABC News online’s business section covered ASX 100 companies and big private 
businesses five times more than small to medium businesses.

The Australia Institute report found that, while small businesses accounted 
for more than a third of private-sector jobs, they were rarely heard in 
business coverage on the national broadcaster. While chief executives were 
given a voice, consumers, consumer representatives and unions were rarely heard.
 