
It's a scene etched into our collective unconscious. The smiling couple waving 
to crowds from a black open-top limousine. Bright green grass. Her bright-pink 
suit and hat. Then something seems to catch his throat. She leans over to him. 
His head snaps back and forth violently. She rises out of her seat and reaches 
out across the boot in horror. The car speeds up and drives off.

Except something's not right. That's not Jackie Kennedy in the pink suit; it's 
a man in drag. And the president doesn't seem to be hurt after all. In fact, 
they've driven right round Dealey Plaza and the whole thing is happening again. 
This isn't Abraham Zapruder's infamous home movie; it's actuallyThe Eternal 
Frame <http://www.eai.org/title.htm?id=4109>, a brazenly irreverent reenactment 
of the Kennedy assassination, or more accurately, a reenactment of theZapruder 
film <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zmz4lz6l8Fs> itself. It was made in 
November 1975 by two San Francisco-based art collectives, Ant Farm 
<http://artsites.ucsc.edu/faculty/lord/AntFarm.html> and TR Uthco. Just before 
the "shooting", the actor playing JFK makes a television address. "I am in 
reality only another link in that chain of pictures which makes up the sum 
total of information accessible to us all as Americans," he says, in an 
exaggeratedly thick Boston accent.

"It was, of course, in bad taste," says Chip Lord 
<http://artsites.ucsc.edu/faculty/lord/>, Ant Farm's co-founder, now a film 
professor at the University of California Santa Cruz. "Just to do anything 
other than show reverence towards the Kennedy family and the myth was obviously 
a taboo in American cultural life. So that became an attraction of the project. 
I think we felt there might be some essential truth in going to Dallas and 
re-performing the event."

They didn't have any official permits, Lord recalls. They just turned up and 
started shooting early one Sunday morning. When no one stopped them, they went 
round and did it again, and again – maybe 20 times. A crowd of tourists formed 
to watch. Many of them assumed it was an official event. In the film, one woman 
sheds tears and calls it "a beautiful reenactment", which it clearly isn't.

JFK has been dying again and again ever since, particularly in the movies. The 
echoes of his assassination still resound through cinema. The post-JFK golden 
age of Hollywood conspiracy thrillers has been well chronicled, but what has 
arguably had a deeper impact is theZapruder film itself 
<http://emuseum.jfk.org/view/objects/asitem/term@Zapruder,%20Abraham/0/title-asc;jsessionid=7AF9CB056AF3153836E2D735D71F61D9?t:state:flow=04159013-ebf0-49f9-9b03-038f4d6d7f21>
. From the moment it recorded Kennedy's life horrifically cut short, it took on 
a life of its own. It is technically a short documentary: just 26 seconds long, 
486 silent, colour, 8mm frames. It is also an official piece of evidence, a 
historical record, an art object, a genuine snuff movie. Some have called it 
the foundation stone of citizen journalism – a harbinger of the current YouTube 
era, where anyone with a camera can create something of global broadcast value. 
To some, as well as JFK's death, the Zapruder film represents the death of 
cinematic truth itself.

None of this was anywhere near Zapruder 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JLqOGEBcjnI>'s mind when he strolled out to 
Dealey Plaza on his lunch break to record Kennedy's drive-past. Zapruder had 
actually left his camera at home that day. An assistant in his dress factory 
persuaded him to go back and get it. Within hours of the assassination, 
Zapruder had given copies of his movie to two men, thus setting it off on 
divergent but intersecting paths. The first was Secret Service agent Forrest 
Sorrels, who requested it for official investigatory use. The second man was 
Richard Stolley, an editor at Life magazine, who won the media bidding war for 
the movie. Zapruder sold it to Life for $150,000, with the promise that they 
never publish frame 313: the fatal shot itself.

The world knew about the existence of the Zapruder film almost immediately. 
CBS presenterDan Rather <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kiSoxFHyjGY> described 
its contents (inaccurately) on television, two days after the assassination.
Life printed still images from it in its commemorative issue a week later 
<http://life.time.com/history/kennedy-assassination-how-life-brought-the-zapruder-film-to-light/>
, and would go on to print images over the coming decade. But mainstream 
audiences would not get to see the entire, unedited film until March 1975, when 
it was shown on late-night TV. That was a few months before The Eternal Frame's 
reenactment, but, by then, Ant Farm and many others had already obtained 
bootleg copies of the film. Lord got his through a contact with "a 
conspiracy-type network," he says. "It was a 16mm copy. The colour was almost 
completely washed out." That didn't stop a local TV station asking if they 
could borrow it to broadcast.

By that time, the film had already seeped into popular culture. The Kennedys 
were rapidly co-opted into Andy Warhol's lexicon, since they ticked the boxes 
for both media celebrity and violent crime. Many ofWarhol's iconic images 
<http://www.artsconnected.org/resource/91183/sixteen-jackies> of the couple were
based on photos from Life magazine 
<http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/prints-multiples/andy-warhol-flash-november-22-1963-5622272-details.aspx>
. Like Ant Farm, he was commenting on the media portrayal of the event. "What 
bothered me was the way television and radio were programming everybody to feel 
so sad," he said at the time. "It seemed like no matter how hard you tried, you 
couldn't get away from the thing." Warhol turned Zapruder himself forhis 1966 
film Since 
<http://www.newmuseum.org/calendar/view/ghosts-on-the-screen-since-dir-andy-warhol-1967>
 – an unfinished, amateurish reconstruction using his regular Factory 
"superstars". In 1967, film artistBruce Conner 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_Conner> incorporated the Zapruder film in 
his influential Report, a stirring montage of news footage and voiceovers from 
the day of the assassination. Then John Waters restaged Zapruder in his very 
first film, 1968'sEat Your Make Up 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eat_Your_Makeup>, on his parents' lawn, with 
Divine as Jackie Kennedy. Now the Zapruder film is out there in the 
pop-cultural ether, reproduced and referenced in movies (fromKentucky Fried 
Movie <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nXaO89GODFo> to In The Line of Fire 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aWemepbqFPI> to Watchmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/126328/watchmen>), sitcoms (Seinfeld <>
, Family Guy) and music videos (Lana Del Rey's National Anthem 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxDdEPED0h8>).

But that other path the Zapruder film took, via the copies he handed to the 
Secret Service, created a parallel history. From Sorrels the film found its way 
to the investigating Warren Commission the following year. However, the 
commission's printed reproductions of it omitted some frames and switched 
around others, planting seeds of suspicion. Over the course of subsequent 
investigations of the Kennedy assassination, official and unofficial, the 
Zapruder film somehow became evidence of a cover-up. It still is today. A 
simple internet search throws up dozens of analyses of the footage, explaining 
why it is afake <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XCigDMyHisE>, how it has been 
doctored, why it doesn't match other official accounts, why there was another 
shooter – you name it.
 Billy Bob Thornton in Parkland. 
"You might think it would close down conspiracy theories but it opens them 
up," saysDr Clare Birchall 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/aboutkings/worldwide/initiatives/global/nas/news-and-events/events/eventrecords/50th-Anniversary-Event---The-Assassination-of-JFK.aspx>
 from the Institute of North American Studies at King's College London, who has 
written extensively on conspiracy culture. The fact that the Zapruder film 
"proves" so many conflicting versions of events says something about the 
inherent instability of film as factual record, and the gap between film and 
experience, she suggests. "The camera 'never lies', and yet it is precisely 
that which allows one to lie. Visual evidence is eminently interpretable. In 
that sense it already contains the possibilities ofconspiracy theory 
<http://www.academia.edu/259239/Knowledge_Goes_Pop_From_Conspiracy_Theory_to_Gossip>
."

You can see the same process in modern-day events such as 9/11, Birchall 
continues, where the same images have been used to support innumerable 
theories. "But in terms of disputed visual evidence, the Zapruder film is the 
classic. It's seen as the motherlode of conspiracy theory. The theories that 
draw in everything, from theIlluminati 
<http://gawker.com/5886988/a-comprehensive-guide-to-the-illuminati-the-conspiracy-theory-that-connects-jay+z-and-queen-elizabeth>
 to theNew World Order 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_World_Order_(conspiracy_theory)>, always have 
JFK in there at some point." Is cinema any different? What is a movie if not a 
selection of moving images arranged into a persuasive narrative? No wonder so 
many film-makers have been drawn to the subject. Within that golden age of 
Hollywood conspiracy thrillers, a few addressed the ambiguity of media directly 
– Antonioni's Blow-Up and Coppola's The Conversation. But in later years has 
come a new breed of film-maker committed to cracking the JFK mystery 
themselves. Prime suspect: Oliver Stone, and his 1991 movie JFK, in which 
district attorney Jim Garrison, played by Kevin Costner, pieces together a vast 
conspiracy involving Lyndon Johnson, the CIA, the mafia, the 
military-industrial complex, the gay community, possibly the Dallas Cowboys – 
it gets confusing.Ostensibly based on fact 
<http://22november1963.org.uk/how-accurate-is-oliver-stone-film-jfk>, it uses 
repeated playings of the Zapruder film to give credence to Garrison's on-screen 
argument, but in terms of historical accuracy, it'sas flawed and contestable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/28/jfk-oliver-stone-john-f-kennedy> 
as the crackpot YouTube theories.

Still, Stone's JFK struck a chord with an American public who felt they still 
weren't getting the truth. Its successprompted the US government to collect and 
make public 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/President_John_F._Kennedy_Assassination_Records_Collection_Act_of_1992>
 all the government records relating to the assassination to prove there was no 
conspiracy. Those records included the Zapruder film: the US government took 
possession of the film under the 1992 law known as the JFK Act, and in 1999 a 
special arbitration panel awarded $16m plus interest to the Zapruder family as 
compensation, after which they donated the copyright to the Sixth Floor Museum 
at Dealey Plaza. The asking price for use of it in a movie, such as JFK, is now 
$80,000.

Stone hasn't been the only one drawn back to Dealey Plaza. In 2011, 
Oscar-winning documentarian Errol Morris made a short film focusing on the
"Umbrella Man" <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iuoZWb9gqv0>– a background 
figure, caught in the Zapruder film incongruously holding an open black 
umbrella that sunny day. Was it a signal? A concealed weapon? Morris's film 
closes the case (no spoilers here), only for another esteemed film-maker, Alex 
Cox, to reopen it. Cox posted a YouTube response 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TL32WAzPrNk> effectively dismissing Morris's 
film. He's something of a JFK nut, it turns out. In another YouTube short,Cox 
questions the authenticity of the Zapruder film itself 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yVDV8L476Po>. He has recently published a book 
<http://presidentandprovocateur.com/> on JFK and Lee Harvey Oswald. Doing a 
considerably more thorough job is Irish film-maker Shane O'Sullivan, whose new 
documentary,Killing Oswald <http://www.killingoswald.co.uk/>, which sifts 
through the paperwork made public after Stone's JFK, and raises compelling new 
questions about the whole affair.

And finally we have Parkland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156224/parkland>, a new big-budget 
dramatisation of events, produced by Tom Hanks. Centred on the hospital that 
treated both Kennedy and Oswald after they were shot, it includes all the 
now-familiar suspects: agent Sorrels (played by Billy Bob Thornton), the Dallas 
police, Oswald and his family, and here's our man Zapruder, played by the 
eminently sympathetic Paul Giamatti. Parkland almost functions as a Zapruder 
"making of". Rather than restaging the assassination yet again, it homes in on 
Zapruder's face during those moments, registering his shock as he films. 
Similarly, the only time we see Zapruder's film, it's reflected in the 
spectacles of Zapruder himself. Giamatti found the experience overwhelming, 
says Parkland's writer and director, Peter Landesman. "He had a little nervous 
breakdown before he started. He's playing Zapruder, in Zapruder's clothes, 
where Zapruder was in Dealey Plaza. It was a very weird out-of-body experience. 
He enjoyed it but it was a very freaky thing."

Landesman, a former journalist, doesn't indulge in any conspiracy theorising. 
"There's no doubt where the bullets came from unless you really want to believe 
in Santa Claus." Instead, Parkland restores some humanity to events numbed by 
50 years of mediation and repetition, putting us in the emergency room as 
doctors frantically try to revive the dying president, as Jackie hands them a 
piece of her husband's skull she's still clutching.

The film also restores some humanity to Zapruder himself. Landesman had 
prolonged conversations with his family to obtain their permission, and he 
feels great sympathy for the man. Zapruder was the embodiment of the American 
dream: a Russian Jewish immigrant who worked hard to integrate and to make his 
fortune. Some accused him of greed for demanding money for the film, but 
Landesman (who also stumped up his US$80,000 for the rights) is more forgiving: 
"He was smart enough to know what was going to happen. He wanted some kind of 
compensation for what he knew was the end of his life as he knew it, but also 
it was the crushing of his American patriotism. Immigrants are converts and 
converts make the most vociferous ideologues. He was a flag-waving patriot, so 
to have his president have his head blown off right in front of him was a big 
deal."

Zapruder was haunted by the assassination for the rest of his life. He 
testified at both the Warren Commission hearings and the Clay Shaw trial in 
1969. He wept on both occasions. "I have seen it so many times,"he told the 
Warren Commission 
<http://www.aarclibrary.org/publib/jfk/wc/wcvols/wh7/html/WC_Vol7_0292a.htm>, 
having been effectively forced by law to watch his film again. "In fact, I used 
to have nightmares. The thing would come every night – I wake up and see this." 
He died of cancer in 1970. According to his family, after 22 November 1963, he 
never looked through a camera lens again.

• This article was corrected on 6 December 2013. The earlier version said "the 
[Zapruder] family sold the film to the government for $16m, though they still 
retain the copyright." In fact the family no longer retain the copyright, and 
therefore no longer license or receive payment for its use. The article has 
also been amended to clarify the process by which the family were compensated 
after the government took possession of the film.
 