
Have you ever wanted to plant your foot where no foot has been before? Is it 
necessary to do likeBear Grylls <http://www.beargrylls.com/> or Steve Backshall 
<http://www.stevebackshall.com/>, tackling terrifying climbs and delving deep 
inside the most remote corners of the Earth? You’d need Steve’s physique and a 
broadcaster’s budget, wouldn’t you? Actually, no – you can just go to 
Pembrokeshire.

I’d been watching the social media posts of a guy called Henry Castle 
<https://en-gb.facebook.com/henry.castle.509> for some time. There was usually 
a photo of an amazing cliff above a turquoise sea and a pristine strand of 
golden beach. Then Henry would write something like, “New routes to be done 
here”, or “No one’s been here for years!” I gave him a ring.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F586304e9b8efe5ba484ff8eae8242d7dcffa3a26%2F0_832_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abseil%20away%20%E2%80%A6%20to%20Pembrokeshire%E2%80%99s%20secret%20seascapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abseil%20away%20%E2%80%A6%20to%20Pembrokeshire%E2%80%99s%20secret%20seascapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F586304e9b8efe5ba484ff8eae8242d7dcffa3a26%2F0_832_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
 Henry Castle starts the abseil at Mowingword Cliff, Stackpole. Photograph: 
Kevin Rushby 
Some time later, I found myself standing on just such a beach near Stackpole 
Head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/may/13/stackpole-estate-pembrokeshire-walk>
, on Pembrokeshire’s southern shore. There were vast legs of stone all around, 
vaulted caverns lit by shafts of sunlight coming through blowholes far above. 
It was like walking with dinosaurs: we were the tiny mammals scampering under 
the bellies of immense, ancient creatures and there were no other footprints. 
“Let’s go up the far end of the beach,” said Henry. “We’re going to do a 
climbing route called Diedre Sud – it’s a classic.”

We wandered through a maze of caves. In one place a gush of freshwater came 
spurting from the floor. There were sparkles of crystals in cavern roofs, 
shards of shipwrecks, rockpools twitchy with prawns.

To get into this lost world we had abseiled 45 metres off a grassy clifftop, 
our lives hanging on a metal post that Henry assured me was secure. Not every 
abseil is quite so demanding, but all of Henry’s journeys do begin, 
necessarily, with a descent. My own experience began with a moment of 
self-examination, but when I heard Henry’s shout – “Kevin! Abseil when ready!” 
– I stopped the internal dialogue and went for it. Within a minute, I was an 
abseil addict. The views were magnificent and the sense of space exhilarating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a43424dea7e034a7f679f0e9dcca38429d7a7bb%2F303_370_3183_1910%2F3183.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abseil%20away%20%E2%80%A6%20to%20Pembrokeshire%E2%80%99s%20secret%20seascapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abseil%20away%20%E2%80%A6%20to%20Pembrokeshire%E2%80%99s%20secret%20seascapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a43424dea7e034a7f679f0e9dcca38429d7a7bb%2F303_370_3183_1910%2F3183.jpg>
 A cove between Stackpole Quay and Barafundle Bay best accessed from the sea. 
Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
On our first morning, we had climbed the cliffs at Penally, a mile south-west 
of Tenby: sea-washed slabs of rock, not vertical, and so a little easier. At 
low tide, we scrambled along to an inaccessible beach calledFrank’s Shore 
<http://www.panoramio.com/photo/121883909> and peeped up a blowhole that led 
all the way to the clifftop. “That’s Inner Space Hole,” Henry told me. “A 
35-metre abseil, ending on a beach inside a cave!”

Henry is a sea cliff evangelist: his passion evident in every story he tells, 
whether it’s about the flora and fauna, or the early climbing pioneers. On 
Diedre Sud we had to reroute ourselves to avoid disturbing a nesting seagull, 
then paused on a hands-width ledge to admire the staggering view. Henry told me 
about Colin Mortlock, who first climbed this 45-metre epic in 1967. It was the 
Summer of Love and revolution was in the air, but Mortlock had another 
transformation in mind: he wanted to inspire people to tackle real adventures. 
Not only did he pioneer Pembrokeshire climbing, he also began exploring the 
coast by kayak.

“They had blank canvases then,” says Henry. “They wouldn’t even climb anything 
that had been done before. It’s different now, but there are still plenty of 
new routes to be found, and some of these coves rarely see anyone.”

Is there adventure for climbing novices, and children?

“There’s something for everyone.”

With Mortlock’s inspiring example, I decided to continue my search for places 
without footprints. A few days later, with daughter Maddy (13), I took Henry’s 
advice and investigated some other lost corners, this time by canoeing and 
swimming.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff29158f05886fec0890ad135403af138250de1b7%2F0_201_3850_2310%2F3850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abseil%20away%20%E2%80%A6%20to%20Pembrokeshire%E2%80%99s%20secret%20seascapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abseil%20away%20%E2%80%A6%20to%20Pembrokeshire%E2%80%99s%20secret%20seascapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff29158f05886fec0890ad135403af138250de1b7%2F0_201_3850_2310%2F3850.jpg>
 Maddy swims through Church Doors. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
First we paddled from Stackpole Quay around to Barafundle Bay, stopping to 
inspect two beaches and several long caves – waterproof torch required. On a 
hot day, these caverns are magical: quiet and cool with, perhaps, the distant 
sound of waves slapping the smooth stones somewhere deep inside the Earth’s 
belly. On the far side of the bay, we tied the canoe to a buoy and swam through 
the double sea arch. Over our heads was a climb pioneered by Henry, called 
Rhino Ridge.

Our second discovery was Skrinkle Haven, a beach that is only accessible via 
its neighbouring cove, Church Doors, and then by a mysterious clamber through a 
narrow sea cave. There are some great wild swims here, but remember the rule of 
tides: in the six hours, approximately, between low and high tide, avoid the 
fastest flow rates in the two middle hours. (The bookWild Swimming: Hidden 
Beaches <http://www.wildswimming.co.uk/hidden-beaches/> gives further advice.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae47bfb59ebd1cb94ff9287ca9967d16f2dadad1%2F0_360_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abseil%20away%20%E2%80%A6%20to%20Pembrokeshire%E2%80%99s%20secret%20seascapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abseil%20away%20%E2%80%A6%20to%20Pembrokeshire%E2%80%99s%20secret%20seascapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fpembrokeshire-secret-coastline-abseil-canoe-swim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae47bfb59ebd1cb94ff9287ca9967d16f2dadad1%2F0_360_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
 Cliffhanger … rock climbing in Pembrokeshire. Photograph: Henry Castle/Climb 
Pembroke 
Not all of Pembrokeshire’s hidden delights are so difficult to reach. Another 
of Henry’s tips was to canoe the inland creek from Cresswell Quay to Lawrenny, 
home to a very good cafe (Quayside <http://www.quaysidelawrenny.co.uk/>). 
Further inland, far from main roads and towns, is another lost world on the 
banks of the Cleddau estuary, an area of winding, tranquil lanes and a creek 
fringed by small cliffs and ancient oak woodland. It’s a place that slipped 
from view when the railways took over from shipping, and is now left to the 
otters and the curlews. ArtistGraham Sutherland 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/graham-sutherland-om-2014> found 
inspiration here for much of his work, especially in the strangely twisted 
trees. From our cottage at night, we went badger watching and found otter 
tracks by the water.

And when the adventure is done, my advice is to head for Narberth: not exactly 
a place without footprints, but I certainly did not expect to find such a 
buzzing little town with a great cafe,Plum Vanilla <http://www.plumvanilla.com/>
, and a truly wonderful deli,Ultra Comida 
<http://www.ultracomida.co.uk/page/restaurants/narberth>.
• The trip was arranged by Visit Pembrokeshire 
<http://www.visitpembrokeshire.com/>. Henry Castle at Climb Pembroke 
<http://www.climbpembroke.com/> runs guiding and skills training courses, and 
rock climbing and abseiling days for groups and families; from £50pp for groups 
of four to six. For would-be climbers, Henry recommendsRock Climbing by Libby 
Peters <http://www.mountain-training.org/publications/rock-climbing>. For wild 
swimmers:Wild Swimming: Hidden Beaches by Daniel Start 
<http://www.wildswimming.co.uk/hidden-beaches/>. Ria’s Cottage (from £457 per 
week, 01348 837871,qualitycottages.co.uk 
<http://www.qualitycottages.co.uk/cottage-near-bluestone-oakwood>) near 
Landshipping, sleeps four and welcomes dogs. Rail travel was provided by
thetrainline.com <https://www.thetrainline.com/>
 