
There are countless cities around the world where you can walk the busy 
streets without receiving so much as a nod or a smile from locals and visitors 
alike. Caught up in the frenetic pace of city life, people go about their day 
with their heads down and their own responsibilities front of mind.

But not so with Melbourne. It may be Australia’s second largest city but it 
prides itself on a sense of community and a strong attitude of inclusiveness, 
meaning the best experiences don’t come with exclusivity. This is the kind of 
place where non-conformity is the norm and an unspoken open door policy extends 
city-wide.


In Melbourne, like many other cities, there’s a smorgasbord of premium 
experiences to stumble upon. But what sets it apart is that you’ll never have 
to go it alone or be made to feel like you’re out of place. From its art 
institutions to its bars, restaurants and even open spaces, Melbourne is a city 
that caters to all tastes.


Take the National Gallery of Victoria. It’s Australia’s oldest art gallery and 
one you would expect to be bound by tradition but an upcoming Brook Andrew 
exhibition titled The Right to Offend is Sacred will sit casually alongside Van 
Gogh’s masterpieces, and the avant-garde designs from fashion house Viktor & 
Rolf hold their own against internationally iconic portraits.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-premium-without-the-ego%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fopen-access-sophistication-how-melbourne-plans-for-inclusiveness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F391c6e9f06d75e88bb2d068c424fec87d1747cfa%2F0_125_3887_2333%2F3887.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Accessible%20sophistication%3A%20how%20Melbourne%20plans%20for%20inclusiveness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-premium-without-the-ego%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fopen-access-sophistication-how-melbourne-plans-for-inclusiveness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Accessible%20sophistication%3A%20how%20Melbourne%20plans%20for%20inclusiveness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-premium-without-the-ego%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fopen-access-sophistication-how-melbourne-plans-for-inclusiveness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F391c6e9f06d75e88bb2d068c424fec87d1747cfa%2F0_125_3887_2333%2F3887.jpg>
 National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia Photograph: Artie 
Photography (Artie Ng)/Getty Images 
Of course, people don’t live in galleries. Much of the joy to be found in 
Melbourne stems from the array of experiences woven into the city by good 
planning. Pedestrian bridges, for instance, are seldom thought of destinations 
in themselves but not the Southbank Pedestrian Bridge that spans the Yarra 
River.


Floating below one of the pylons is Ponyfish Island, a bar that has been 
labelled as a haven for wanderers and wonderers, and a destination for those 
who are hungry for something new. As waterfront as it gets, what’s refreshing 
about Ponyfish, and characteristic of Melbourne, is that there’s none of the 
pomp that often accompanies such a coveted location. The fitout may be 
strategically rough around the edges – picture an abundance of recycled timber 
and shipping pallets repurposed as stools – but the quality of their offering 
is anything but. A unique concept that’s built on the idea of bringing people 
together to simply enjoy each other’s company, fuelled of course by quality 
food and drink, Ponyfish is quintessentially Melbourne.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-premium-without-the-ego%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fopen-access-sophistication-how-melbourne-plans-for-inclusiveness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc9ea6885a2d52f2c3fc16de6db10134c37cda17%2F0_0_3800_2281%2F3800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Accessible%20sophistication%3A%20how%20Melbourne%20plans%20for%20inclusiveness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-premium-without-the-ego%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fopen-access-sophistication-how-melbourne-plans-for-inclusiveness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Accessible%20sophistication%3A%20how%20Melbourne%20plans%20for%20inclusiveness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-premium-without-the-ego%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fopen-access-sophistication-how-melbourne-plans-for-inclusiveness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc9ea6885a2d52f2c3fc16de6db10134c37cda17%2F0_0_3800_2281%2F3800.jpg>
 Australia, Victoria Melbourne Southbank Footbridge Ponyfish Island restaurant 
alfresco
Australia Photograph: Jeff Greenberg/UIG via Getty Images 
An even more surprising discovery is a hidden campground, perched in the 
centre of the CBD. Thanks to the creative forces behind the St Jerome’s music 
festival, the sky-high rooftop of the Melbourne Central Shopping Centre now 
offers all the communal friendliness of a traditional Australian campsite, 
combined with the convenience of the city and the luxurious touches expected of 
a high-end hotel.

Occupants of the rooftop’s 21 large canvas bell tents are treated to 
everything from an esky stocked with local craft beer and cider, deliveries 
from the much-loved Gelato Messina, cocktails from the on-site bar and café. 
And after a night spent making new friends among the Melbourne skyline, guests 
wake up to breakfast delivered to their tent, along with coffee from the 
on-site barista – this is Melbourne after all.


Touches like this have helped Melbourne secure the title of the world’s most 
livable city six years in a row, an accolade that can largely be credited to 
innovative urban planning, with the biggest game changer being the activation 
of Flinders Lane and Degraves St in the early 1990s.


Led by Gilbert Rochecouste, who is regarded internationally as a leader in 
place-making, the transformation of these neglected laneways included the 
creation of an arts cluster, the launch of the first ever Laneway Festival, 
various business development strategies, and measures to reduce traffic and 
encourage outdoor dining. Originally motivated by his own need for affordable 
office space in the heart of the city, Rochecouste’s lobbying, engagement of 
the broader community and ultimate activation of the area set an example that 
many other spaces in Melbourne would follow.


Describing his business purpose as the creation of authentic, vibrant and 
resilient places that are valued by their communities and admired by visitors, 
Rochecouste’s latest proposal is well-suited to a city that thrives on the 
opportunity to interact and spaces that allow them to do just that. Rochecouste 
has proposed that Elizabeth St, one of the main city thoroughfares, be ripped 
up, allowing Williams Creek to flow through. Impressions of the area show 
native scrubs and a thick canopy of trees lining the banks, along with 
restaurants, cafes, communal spaces and a piazza that would play host to an 
array of public events. Rochecouste described his idea for the area as, “a 
walkable green oasis full of quirky shops and spontaneous day and night 
experiences”.

Taken out of context, these words could equally be used to describe Melbourne 
more broadly. It’s a city that’s full of surprises and premium experiences that 
don’t have to be planned, or often even paid for. Wandering down a Melbourne 
laneway, you can never predict who or what you’ll discover.

The Bankwest More World MasterCard 
<http://www.bankwest.com.au/personal/credit-cards/compare-credit-cards/more-mastercard-rewards-credit-cards>
 - helping you open a world of real experiences with the people that matter 
most.
 