
In the mid-18th century, the maternal mortality rate in Sweden approached 900 
deaths for every 100,000 births 
<http://umu.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:142254/FULLTEXT01>. A hundred years 
later, the introduction of professional midwives had contributed to the rate 
being pushed down to 230. Today,four women die per 100,000 live births 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.MMRT>.

This goes to show that the midwifery profession and workforce have the power 
to save thousands of lives each year. Unfortunately, not everyone gets to enjoy 
the benefits of that power. Although global maternal and infant mortality rates 
have dropped by half since 1990, about800 women and girls worldwide still die 
from pregnancy <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs348/en/>- or 
childbirth-related complications each day. Almost all of them, 99%, die in 
developing countries. Every day there are more than8,200 stillbirths 
<http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/topics/maternal/maternal_perinatal/en/>
 and, each year, 2.8 million babies die within the first six weeks of life.

World making barely any progress on preventing stillbirths, says Lancet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/18/world-progress-preventing-stillbirths-lancet-africa>
These figures are troubling in themselves, but the fact that the majority of 
these deaths could have been prevented with the help of qualified midwives and 
doctors makes the situation even more frustrating. Added to that is a 
persistent and – in some places – growing resistance to the human rights of 
women, not least among violent extremist groups, who make the control of 
women’s lives, bodies and reproduction a central part of their ideology and 
rhetoric. Women’s human rights can never be taken for granted.

To help spread the word about the major part played by midwives in sexual and 
reproductive health, the Swedish foreign ministry teamed up with the
International Confederation of Midwives <http://www.internationalmidwives.org/> 
to launch theMidwives4All <http://midwives4all.org/> initiative. Our aim is to 
strengthen women’s human rights, improve access to health services and 
resources for women, and increase female representation. This year we’re 
celebrating the heroism of midwives by acknowledging those whose efforts make a 
real difference. Ourexcellence in midwifery award 
<http://www.internationalmidwives.org/news/?nid=336> is open to healthcare 
workers in 14 countries around the world.

Midwives not only improve the chance of a safe pregnancy and delivery, but 
also provide the full continuum of care throughout a woman’s life. By doing so, 
they play a key role in the empowerment of women and building sustainable 
societies. Access to a midwife is a big and important step in achieving sexual 
and reproductive health and rights for all. These rights are crucial for gender 
equality and are not merely a health issue.

Sweden has a feminist government and sexual and reproductive health and rights 
are seen as central to the struggle for women’s human rights. If women and 
girls can’t control their own bodies, decide whether or not to have sex with 
someone, and choose who to marry and when to have children, how can they 
participate on equal terms as men in society?

Sweden has a long tradition of being at the forefront on these matters, and up 
to 60% of Swedish development cooperation for health goes to promoting sexual 
and reproductive health and rights. In 2014, it amounted to 2.3bn Swedish 
kronor (£197m).

 We promote more and better midwife training, strengthened legislation, 
increased recognition of the profession, and better information on the role 
midwives play. Swedish aid helps women and girls in countries where maternal 
mortality is highest. During my trips as a minister in Afghanistan, Somalia and 
South Sudan, I have seen how this work saves lives and build better capacity 
for the future. In Bangladesh, Swedish midwives, in close cooperation with 
local authorities, have helped to build up a new profession from the ground.

We have the policy and the mindset to drive change for the better, but first 
and foremost we have the opportunity. Through the ambitious goals of the2030 
agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
,two of which explicitly relate to sexual and reproductive health and rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, world leaders have already agreed to invest in gender equality. Partly 
because it is the right thing to do, but also because, when women and girls can 
educate themselves and find a job they like, they bring economic development. 
This pays off: if every country matched the most gender-equal country in its 
region in terms of access to the labour market,the global GDP would increase by 
11% 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/how-advancing-womens-equality-can-add-12-trillion-to-global-growth>
.


Gender equality can truly be the key to ending poverty.

 * Isabella Lövin is Sweden’s minister of international development cooperation
 