
The United Nations secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, has said he fears genocide 
could start inSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> 
unless immediate action is taken, renewing his plea for the security council to 
impose an arms embargo on the country.

“If we fail to act, South Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>
 will be on a trajectory towards mass atrocities,” Ban told the security 
council.

 Noting that the UN’s special adviser on the prevention of genocide, Adama 
Dieng, has described genocide as a process, Ban said: “I am afraid that process 
is about to begin unless immediate action is taken.

 “The security council must take steps to stem the flow of arms to South 
Sudan,” he added.

Mass atrocities feared in South Sudan as ethnic violence is stoked by hunger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/18/mass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger>
Political rivalry between Salva Kiir, South Sudan’s president, an ethnic 
Dinka, and his former deputy, Riek Machar, a Nuer, led to civil war in 2013 
that has often followed ethnic lines. The pair signed a shaky peace deal last 
year but fighting has continued. Machar fled the country in July.

 “Reports suggest that President Salva Kiir and his loyalists are 
contemplating a new military offensive in the coming days against the 
[Machar-allied opposition troops],” Ban said. “Moreover, there are clear 
indications that Riek Machar and other opposition groups are pursuing a 
military escalation.”

 The US has been struggling to secure the minimum number of votes needed for 
the security council to impose an arms embargo on South Sudan. In order to be 
adopted, a resolution needs nine votes in favour and no vetoes.

 Diplomats have said that so far only seven members were in favour, with the 
remaining eight planning to abstain or vote no. While Russia and China, two of 
the five security council members with veto power, are skeptical of whether an 
arms embargo would achieve much in a country awash with weapons, diplomats did 
not expect them to block the measure.

“We think it’s extremely important to vote on this by the end of the year,” 
said the US ambassador to theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>, Samantha Power.

 South Sudan, a small oil producer that remains one of the world’s poorest 
nations, gained independence from Sudan in 2011.

 The slide into conflict has left many of the nation’s 11 million people 
struggling to obtain enough food.

 UN peacekeepers have been deployed in South Sudan since 2011. There are some 
13,000 UN soldiers and police in the country.

 “South Sudan is on the brink,” UN aid chief Stephen O’Brien warned the 
council. “How many more clues do you, do we all, need to move from our anxious 
words to real preventative action?“
 