
More than two dozen human rights and civil liberty groups have thrown their 
weight behindGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> as the tech 
giant challenges a Canadian court decision it warns could stifle freedom of 
expression around the world and lead to a diminished internet of the “lowest 
common denominator”.


In an appeal heard on Tuesday in the supreme court of Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, Google Inc took aim at a 2015 court 
decision that sought to censor search results beyond Canada’s borders.

The case stems from a longstanding dispute over intellectual property rights. 
In 2012, Canadian company Equustek won a judgment to have a company banned from 
selling a counterfeit version of Equustek’s product online.

Equustek then turned to Google for help in carrying out the court’s order. The 
internet giant, who was not party to the initial legal action, voluntarily 
removed more than 300 URLs listed on Google Canada. But as more sites popped 
up, Equustek went back to court – this time seeking a worldwide ban on the 
infringing company.

A court of appeal in British Columbia sided with Equustek in 2015, ordering 
Google to remove all of its search results linked to the company. It is this 
ruling that Google is now appealing.

The case is being watched closely by human rights and civil liberty groups 
across North America. Much of the attention, said Gregg Leslie of the 
Virginia-basedReporters Committee for Freedom of the Press 
<https://www.rcfp.org/>, focuses on the question at the heart of the 
precedent-setting case: if one country can control what you see on the 
internet, what is to prevent other countries from doing the same?

“It’s a worrisome trend, where we see individual countries trying to regulate 
the internet worldwide,” said Leslie. “And of course the consequences of that 
would mean that even countries like Russia and China could do the same thing 
and that will really affect the content available on the internet.”

Some 15 media organisations, ranging from the Associated Press and the 
Newspaper Association of America, have submitted briefs to the court backing 
Google’s position, driven by concerns that any precedent established could be 
used to target content providers as well.

“In this case it might be Google,” said Leslie. “In the next case it might be 
trying to tell an American news publication what they can and can’t put up on 
their site for anyone in the world.”


Equustek, the company whose intellectual dispute triggered the case, has 
argued in court that the issue of freedom of expression is extraneous to the 
case. Their focus on protecting intellectual property rights has been backed in 
court by a coalition of Canadian publishers, authors, composers and 
film-makers, as well as an international federation of film producers.

Aaron Brindle, the head of public affairs for Google Canada, said in an email 
that the tech giant’s filing to Canada’s supreme court “is grounded in a core 
principle of international law: that one country should not have the right to 
impose its rules on others”.

In its appeal the company argued that the court order runs contrary to the 
freedom of expression, fails to balance private interests against that of the 
public and could “lead to a significantly diminished internet of the lowest 
common denominator”, said Brindle.

Mark Zuckerberg accused of abusing power after Facebook deletes 'napalm girl' 
post
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/facebook-mark-zuckerberg-napalm-girl-photo-vietnam-war>
Human Rights Watch also submitted a brief to Canada’s supreme court, urging it 
to adopt a wider lens in considering the case. “We think that the Canadian 
court has to look at this outside simply the context of Canada,” said Dinah 
PoKempner of the organisation. “They have to say, ‘Is a global injunction 
actually necessary, and is it a proportionate measure given the likely global 
effects and difficulty this precedent could set?’”


 A court order to remove worldwide search results could threaten free 
expression if it catches on globally – where it would then be subject to wildly 
divergent standards on freedom of speech.

“Cases that are contested under differing hate speech standards, cases that 
are called glorification of terrorism in one country but provocative free 
speech in another,” could all be suppressed, said PoKempner, as could dissent 
to supposedly defamatory content.

The result, she said, could be a “global chilling effect”, where content 
providers and platforms would be constrained by the cost and risk of contesting 
global injunctions. “A lot of art, literature, dissent, unconventional thinking 
depends on it being able to be published outside the jurisdiction where someone 
seeks to suppress it,” she said. “You might wind up with an internet that 
simply features everything that is uncontroversial.”
 