
A call for the people of Rome to clean up their city and show some civic pride 
has gone viral following months of hand-wringing about the sorry state of 
Italy’s capital.

The demand by the Italian actor Alessandro Gassmann, who starred in The 
Turkish Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/75805/hamam>, for Roman 
citizens to roll up their sleeves and get to work came as something of a shock 
to residents famous for their resignation and shrugs in the face of their 
ancient city’s perpetual deterioration.


Gassmann, whose late father, Vittorio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/jun/30/guardianobituaries1>, was a 
critically acclaimed star of Italian cinema in its heyday in the 1960s, tweeted 
over the weekend with the hashtag #Romasonoio (I am Rome), calling on the 
city’s residents to be an example of civility and clean up their own little 
corners of Rome with pride.

“Stop the complaining, stop the insults, let’s do it,” he wrote from Uruguay, 
where he is currently filming.
Alessandro Gassmann (@GassmanGassmann) 
Proposta ai Romani che amano la propria città #Romasonoio 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Romasonoio?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/WSwM5YmWFL 
<http://t.co/WSwM5YmWFL>
 <https://twitter.com/GassmanGassmann/status/625058483386327040> July 25, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/GassmanGassmann/status/625058483386327040> 
The campaign was met with a mostly enthusiastic response, including by 
citizens who posted pictures on Twitter of themselves cleaning the streets.
valentina conti (@valedenina) 
Via Alberico II: Le due ore meglio spese della settimana. Grazie 
@GassmanGassmann <https://twitter.com/GassmanGassmann> #Romasonoio 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Romasonoio?src=hash> #FattiNonParole 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FattiNonParole?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/p68fa70Udw
 <http://t.co/p68fa70Udw>
 <https://twitter.com/valedenina/status/625269042237042688> July 26, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/valedenina/status/625269042237042688> 
Even Rome’s mayor, Ignazio Marino, who is under intense pressure to resign, 
thanked Gassmann for the initiative.
Ignazio Marino (@ignaziomarino) 
Apprezzo l'iniziativa #Romasonoio 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Romasonoio?src=hash> lanciata da @GassmanGassmann 
<https://twitter.com/GassmanGassmann> e grazie a @Retake_Roma 
<https://twitter.com/Retake_Roma> per suo impegno quotidiano 
http://t.co/Dc3ZiduEJk <http://t.co/Dc3ZiduEJk>
 <https://twitter.com/ignaziomarino/status/625351785184628736> July 26, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ignaziomarino/status/625351785184628736> 
But others, such as the actor Massimo Wertmuller, saw it as a needless 
provocation, saying people already pay hefty taxes for public services to pick 
up the rubbish and that there was only so much residents could do to salvage a 
broken Roman bureaucracy.

The desire to “take back” the Eternal City follows a string of stories in the 
international press, including byReuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/07/15/us-italy-rome-idUSKCN0PP0SF20150715>
, about Rome’s decrepit state. A front-page story 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/23/world/europe/romans-put-little-faith-in-mayor-as-their-ancient-city-degrades.html>
 in the New York Times last week, just months after it ran a glowing travel 
video 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/08/travel/what-to-do-in-36-hours-in-rome.html?_r=0>
 hailing the “magic” of Rome whose “beauty runs deep”, painted a dire picture 
of a city immersed in corruption investigations, whose services – from public 
transport to rubbish collection – are woefully inadequate for its nearly 3 
million residents.

The Roman problem is even more vexing given the fact that the city is due to 
host more than 30 million pilgrims from December, the start of the special 
jubilee year announced by Pope Francis.

Residents in Rome are seen as having relied for too long on the city’s innate 
beauty and greatness, which has at times lulled Rome into a sense of 
complacency about the importance of maintaining its basic infrastructure and 
services. An explosive series of revelations that began late last year, when 
news of a massive corruption scandal known asMafia Capitale first broke, has 
gone a long way to explain some of the city’s deficiencies: it was alleged that 
many of the contracts for public services, andeven housing for Gypsies and 
migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/rome-pledges-dismantle-roma-ghettos-court-ruling-italy>
, were the subject of bribes and skimming by public officials.

Rome's Fiumicino airport closed after terminal fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/07/romes-fiumicino-airport-closed-after-terminal-fire>
 The fact that its main airport, Fiumicino, languished at 60% capacity for 
weeks following a fire in one of its terminals in May, even at peak tourist 
season, became a symbol of Rome’s “can’t do” attitude.

The city’s patience for that view has worn thin now, however, especially with 
regard to the state of public transport. Metro users have lashed out at train 
drivers in recent weeks after the underground rail system nearly ground to a 
halt – on purpose – in the sweltering heat because of the drivers’ anger over 
new work rules and longer hours. Last week,panicked Metro riders 
<http://www.thelocal.it/20150724/rome-metro-runs-with-doors-open> took videos 
with their phones as the doors in their carriage failed to close even as the 
train was moving at full speed between stops.

Even the prime minister, Matteo Renzi, has let it be known that Rome’s mayor – 
a transplant surgeon who is seen as naive and ineffective but not corrupt – 
should either shape up or go home. For now, Marino is still in place – held 
there, it seems, by another distinctly Italian concern these days: his 
replacement might not be any better.
 