
Throughout the mountain stages of the Tour de France, the French television 
commentators watched Adam Yatesclimbing at the back of the general 
classification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/11/adam-yates-tour-de-france-2016-podium-dave-brailsford-cycling>
 contenders group with consternation. The 23-year-old from Bury was struggling, 
he did not have the look of a man on a good day, he might be on the point of 
cracking.

Five things we learned from Chris Froome’s third Tour de France victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/24/chris-froome-five-things-back-up-team-mountains>
In fact, every time the main group around Froome hit a major ascent, Yates did 
the same thing: he pedalled at a rhythm that suited him and rode in the way he 
always has. “I’ve done that all my life,” he says. “Not just at the Tour: watch 
any other race in the last two and a half years and I’ll be close to the back 
looking at the group, working out who looks good. It’s the way I like to ride. 
It works for me.”

His discreet style has earned him a nickname, The Shadow, which he says, “is 
weird, but I’ll take it”.

Just before the start of the final stage, Yates was on the point of becoming 
the first Briton to wear the White Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/19/adam-yates-future-force-tour-de-france-white-jersey-cycling>
 of best under-25 to Paris in the competition’s 41-year history. Past winners 
include Francesco Moser, Laurent Fignon, Greg LeMond and Andy Hampsten. His 
fourth place overall equals Robert Millar’s in 1984 and has only ever been 
bettered by Chris Froome and Sir Bradley Wiggins.

‘A directeur sportif must understand how much the riders are suffering’ | 
Nicolas Portal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/24/team-sky-directeur-sportif-tour-de-france>
In British terms, this is remarkable and it should not go unnoticed merely 
because Froome and Wiggins have set the bar so high; at least, it is worth 
comparing withTom Simpson’s sixth place overall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/26/tour-de-france-british-wiggins> 
in his first Tour finish in 1962. “I feel good, we’re here, it’s all done. It’s 
all been good experience. The plan wasn’t to ride for general classification at 
the start, but we rolled with it,” Yates said.

He added that the decision to switch from targeting stages to aiming for a 
high overall placing came after he moved into second overall in the Pyrenees. 
Clearly, he has relished the learning process. “Every day there has been 
something new, trying to save energy in the bunch; sometimes it’s hard to relax 
when there is so much stress so you have to learn to stay calm under pressure. 
Orica hasn’t been a general classification team, but it’s become more and more 
[that way] oriented over the race, all the team have been learning as well.” 
Indeed, on Saturday, when Yates’s overall place was under threat from Roman 
Kreuziger, Orica could be seen working at the front on his behalf.

Chris Froome deserves respect for Tour de France victory that puts him among 
greats | William Fotheringham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-2016-predictable-race-still-brings-joy-to-a-battered-france>
Understandably, Yates is reticent over the prospect of attempting to win the 
Tour in future, playing down the notionin the same style as his team manager, 
Matt White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/19/adam-yates-future-force-tour-de-france-white-jersey-cycling>
. “I hope in the future I can try for the win, but I have got a couple of years 
before [that], I’m only 23, this is my second Tour and I’ve come fourth, but I 
can’t imagine trying to win it all of a sudden. It’s not just about improving 
my climbing, it’s about time trialling, saving energy, riding in the wind – 
there are a lot of things I can work on.”

Yates had one off day in the three weeks, on Friday’s stage to Saint-Gervais, 
where he slipped off the podium after having trouble with his gears. Of an 
episode that sums up the learning process, he said: “I had a bike change, the 
pace went up for some reason” – the Astana team decided to hit the front of the 
peloton hard – “and it took a long time to come back. You waste a lot of 
energy, 100 kilometres from the finish, but that’s the Tour, those are the 
efforts you pay for in the end. But I’ll take one bad day out of 20.”
 