
Sir Dave Brailsford believes that the young Briton Adam Yates should try to 
maintain his high overall position in the general classification of the Tour de 
France rather than devoting his attention to stage wins, as was previously the 
plan for him and his Orica-BikeExchange team. Yates, who is 23 and competing in 
his second Tour de France, went into the rest day in Andorralying second overall
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/tom-dumoulin-tour-de-france-chris-froome-alberto-contador>
, just 16sec behind the double winner Chris Froome, and wearing the white 
jersey of best under-25 rider.

Tour de France 2016 so far: Chris Froome shows new moves but race remains open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/11/tour-de-france-2016-chris-froome>
“I hope he tries to hang on to the podium,” the Team Sky head said when asked 
what he would advise Yates to do. “I know he came in and was talking about 
stage wins, but it’s obvious he’s a terrific talent, that he’s a general 
classification contender. At that age unless you go all the way and find out 
what it’s like and start to learn, you’re not going to get to a point where you 
can step up and win. So I think he should continue racing as hard as he can for 
three weeks, test himself and see how he gets on.

“I don’t think if he drops off a little he should sit up and go for stage 
wins. It’s a terrific performance. He’s riding at a fantastic level and 
hopefully he can sustain it.” Albeit with a double negative, Brailsford agreed 
that Yates has the potential to win the Tour in future: “You can’t say he can’t 
be the next British Tour winner. It’s the first rest day, we’ve done the 
Pyrenees, he’s second overall, if that was a French or a Spanish rider they’d 
be jumping up and down about it.”

Brailsford and Froome spoke with one voice when asked whether they were 
surprised by the domination of British cyclists in the opening phase of this 
year’s Tour. British cyclists are in first and second position overall, have 
five stage wins –one for Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/chris-froome-wins-tour-de-france-stage-eight>
, onefor Steve Cummings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/steve-cummings-wins-stage-seven-tour-de-france>
 and threefor Mark Cavendish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/07/mark-cavendish-tour-de-france-stage-win-record>
 – and of the four classification jerseys, three are held by British riders, 
while Cavendish’s grip on the green points jersey has been supplemented with 
some strong sprinting from newcomer Dan McLay. “It’s not a fluke,” Froome said.

Brailsford said: “If you look how far British cycling has come in the last few 
years, there has been a plan there, a structure. There have been years of 
investment since 1997; Britain has invested heavily in the lower ranks, in 
development pathways. It doesn’t happen overnight, Britain has been brave 
enough to invest in sport and it’s paying dividends. We’re not brilliant at 
politics at the moment but we’re doing well in sport.”

Tour de France 2016: stages one to nine – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/jul/12/tour-de-france-2016-stages-one-to-nine-in-pictures>
Geraint Thomas said he felt that the Irishman Dan Martin – the nephew of the 
1987 Tour winner Stephen Roche and the son of former British international 
cyclist Neil Martin – who went into the rest day third overall, could stand a 
better chance of finishing higher up the standings than Yates. Martin, who is 
29 and was born in Birmingham, has ridden the Tour three times, finishing in 
the 30s overall, while his best Grand Tour placing to date is seventh in the 
2014 Vuelta a España.

“You’d put more money on Dan staying [in his overall position] than Adam 
maybe, just because Adam is younger and hasn’t ridden many Grand Tours,” Thomas 
said. “If I had to bet on one of [Yates] and Dan falling away it would be 
[Yates] because of his age and experience. Adam is young; he may have gone 
really deep these last three days and to keep doing that is tough. Dan has been 
around longer, [although] there’s no reason to doubt either of them really. For 
sure Adam is a future Tour winner.”

Thomas added that because of his mixed fortunes in the opening week, he has 
put his personal ambition of finishing high up the standings on hold. He fell 
on the opening stage, bruising his ribs, lost time on day two in Cherbourg, and 
then lost further time on Saturday’s stage to Luchon after opting to wait with 
Alberto Contador when they lost ground rather than riding hard and potentially 
bringing the Spaniard back to the leaders.

“The crash knocked me back, I lost a bit of time, then staying with Contador 
that day cost me a minute and a half,” said Thomas, who lies 16th at 3min 
20sec. “That’s not ideal, so I’m not thinking about it any more; if I hadn’t 
had that crash and was in the top 10 you’d think about it, but it’s over three 
minutes now.”
 