
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> had its hottest 
Christmas Day for more than 71 years, becoming the hottest state capital in the 
country. The temperature climbed to 40.7C at 3pm in the South Australian 
capital, the Bureau of Meteorology said, setting a record for the day.


“The last time when we had about 40C on Christmas Day was in 1945 and the 
temperature back then was 40.1C, so we’ve broken that record,” duty forecaster 
Kenneth Cheung said.

Other south-eastern states also saw the temperature climb into the high 30s, 
withMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/melbourne> reaching 36C for 
its hottest Christmas since 1998.

Hobart reached its high of 26.5C early in the day, with the temperature 
starting to fall after lunch, whileSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/sydney> saw a high of 27.4C at 2pm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Faustralias-capital-cities-hot-on-christmas-day-but-kimberley-faces-storms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F199bb0ee8596a2cabcc985b3fc946b8d5fcf0ddc%2F0_0_3500_2430%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20swelters%20through%20its%20hottest%20Christmas%20Day%20since%201945&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Faustralias-capital-cities-hot-on-christmas-day-but-kimberley-faces-storms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20swelters%20through%20its%20hottest%20Christmas%20Day%20since%201945&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Faustralias-capital-cities-hot-on-christmas-day-but-kimberley-faces-storms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F199bb0ee8596a2cabcc985b3fc946b8d5fcf0ddc%2F0_0_3500_2430%2F3500.jpg>
 Irish backpacker Genna Woods with a Christmas tree on Sydney’s Bondi beach. 
Photograph: David Gray/Reuters 
Meanwhile many Queenslanders had to celebrate indoors with downpours across 
much of the sunshine state.

Areas around Noosa had 112mm of rain on Sunday, while Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/brisbane> had about 37mm.

Flood alerts and wild wind warnings were in place for Western Australia’s 
interior as a tropical low crossed the state.

That low was set to head into South Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> by Monday, 
changing conditions quite dramatically for sweltering Adelaide locals. There 
would be an 11C drop in Adelaide’s maximum temperature to 29C, the bureau 
predicted.

A slight cool change was set to see Melbourne’s temperature drop to 31C on 
Monday while the rest of Victoria faced a heatwave until at least 29 December.

The Australian Medical Association urged people to look after themselves, stay 
indoors, drink lots of water and watch out for signs of dehydration.

Ex-tropical cyclone Yvette was expected to cross Western Australia’s Kimberley 
Coast on Christmas Day as a low pressure system before ebbing on Boxing Day.


Flood alerts and weather warnings remained in place for parts of the state, 
including the interior and Kimberley areas.

The Bureau of Meteorology’s Jenny Sturrock said a trough over WA had 
contributed to high humidity levels in the country’s south-east, with 
“noticeably muggy” conditions unusual for the time of year.
 