
The Advertising Standards Board has upheld complaints against high-profile 
campaigns forSBS’s Viceland channel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/04/sbs-viceland-youth-channel-created-in-partnership-with-vice-to-replace-sbs2>
 and the Northern Territory, with one advertiser warning of a threat to “the 
great tradition of the Aussie larrikin”.

ASB responded to separate complaints for both a street hoarding for the 
television show F*ck, That’s Delicious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/19/viceland-black-market-to-bong-appetit-the-dos-and-duds-of-vices-new-tv-station>
, and social media advertisements for merchandise bearing the slogan “CU in the 
NT”. It upheld both complaints.

The poster for the Viceland show hosted by Action Bronson showed the “rapper 
and bon vivant” holding a crepe beneath the overlaid text, “F*CK, THAT’S 
DELICIOUS”.

SBS Viceland: youth channel created in partnership with Vice to replace SBS2
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/04/sbs-viceland-youth-channel-created-in-partnership-with-vice-to-replace-sbs2>
It was one of four large-format street posters for SBS’ free-to-air Viceland 
channel, with others bearing the names of the programs Gaycation and Black 
Market.

ASB received a complaint about the language used by the ad, with particular 
concern over its being used “where young children can see it every day”.

In its response, SBS noted the poster did not display the word “fuck” in full, 
with the asterisk in place of the ‘u’ lessening its impact, and that it was 
“used in its colloquial sense, as an exclamation of pleasure”.SBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> also said the street hoardings were 
clearly not directed at children and were “not likely to be attractive” to them.

But ASB said, despite the asterisk in place of the ‘u’, “in the context it was 
clear what the word was meant to be”. It noted it had upheld previous 
complaints against posters for the bands Holy Fuck, Fuck the Reaper – both in 
2011 – and Starfuckers in 2015.

While a minority of the board said the use of “fuck” in a colloquial sense 
“was consistent with common Australian vernacular”, the majority said it was 
still considered to be obscene by most members of the community and not 
appropriate for advertising to a broad audience, including children.

Black Market to Bong Appetit: the dos and duds of Vice's new TV channel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/19/viceland-black-market-to-bong-appetit-the-dos-and-duds-of-vices-new-tv-station>
Advised of the ASB’s decision, SBS said the campaign had concluded and the 
street posters were no longer in circulation. A spokesman told Guardian 
Australia that SBS had no further comment to make, but noted that “the ruling 
was about someone objecting to the location of a street poster ad, not about 
the program itself”.

NT Official did not respond to the board’s determination that its Facebook 
advertisements for its “CU in the NT” merchandise used “strong, obscene or 
inappropriate language”.

The advertisements have the slogans “CU in the NT” and “The Top End. Different 
from the Bottom End” as do the associated line of shirts and souvenirs. Despite 
its name, the company is not a government initiative, though it was mistakenly 
reported as oneby Mumbrella when it first surfaced 
<https://mumbrella.com.au/cu-in-the-nt-406515> in November.

NT Official has described itself as a “guerilla group, which aims to promote 
travel awareness to theNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> region”. 
Responding to the initial complaint to ASB, it said its products had received 
“broad media coverage”, including on the ABC, which had generated more 
publicity than any media campaign. “The ASB should take into account the fact 
that there appears to have been no reluctance among any of Australia’s 
mainstream media to reproduce any of our social media posts and our product 
lines which feature the phrase ‘CU IN THE NT’.”

It also argued that “CU in the NT” was, “in a sense”, no different to acronyms 
such as “WTF” and “LMFAO”, which the ASB did not consider offensive language.

Upholding the complaint would set “a very dangerous precedent”, wrote NT 
Official. “Such a move would impose an overly strict moral view on a fine 
tradition of Australian humour and in particular the great tradition of the 
Aussie larrikin.”

The board found that the “‘c-word’ ... was obscene and not appropriate in 
advertising in any form”, and that it would continue to seek compliance from NT 
Official and Facebook.

Guardian Australia has attempted to contact NT Official for comment.

 * This article was amended on 3 January 2017 to clarify that an image of 
Uluru was not printed on merchandise and NT Official is not linked to NT 
Tourism.
 