
 Brexit and Donald Trump aside, it’s been a tumultuous year all round, and no 
less so in housing. Later eclipsed by other seismic news events, for several 
weeks earlier in the year, housing grabbed the headlines.

As David Cameron’s government sought to push through the housing bill, it 
became clear to casual observers, as well as seasoned housing experts and 
professionals, that the government either had no idea what they were doing, or 
simply had no desire to do anything other than enrich a few people in housing 
at the expense of the majority.

 For the housing sector, the biggest battle was against the housing and 
planning bill, before it became an act. Though many of the policy changes 
contained in the bill seemed extremely technical, there was a level of public 
interest and understanding. The housing crisis is far-reaching in its effects, 
rather than confined to a narrow and often-attacked socio-economic or social 
group. It’s rare to find anyone who doesn’t feel the housing crisis has touched 
their life in some way.

But if the beginning of the year dampened the spirits of everyone fighting for 
fairer housing, the end of the year had to some extent proved housing activists 
right, and provided a faint glimmer of hope. The first half of the year was 
dominated by the battles over the bill, which threatened to sound the death 
knell for social housing.

Housing needs will be pushed to one side in the confusion over Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jun/24/housing-needs-will-be-pushed-to-one-side-in-the-confusion-over-brexit>
Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> associations were 
railroaded into agreeing to voluntarily extend right to buy to their tenants, 
in turn councils were told their higher value properties would be forcibly sold 
to line the treasury coffers to enable right to buy’s extensions. No details on 
what would be classed as “higher value” were forthcoming – detail was not 
something the bill’s authors seemed concerned with. But Shelter estimated that 
London councils would be particularly hard hit, meaning that the very councils 
most stretched by the housing crisis and dealing with the increase in private 
rental sector evictions would be forced to sell many properties that could 
house locals, and not see a penny off the back of the sale.

But with Brexit came a change of leader, and as Theresa May stepped into No 
10, David Cameron and George Osborne’s plans for housing were up for 
reconsideration. The extension of right to buy was placed into limbo, with the 
turmoil and financial stress of Brexit blamed for the decision not to push the 
change through. In turn, councils pointed out, the sale of high value 
properties would not be needed, since the policy it was designed to finance had 
bitten the dust.

What is pay to stay and who will be affected?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/aug/31/pay-to-stay-social-housing-hit-low-earners>
The death of “pay to stay” – the controversial policy that required tenants on 
low pay to fork out extra rent to avoid eviction – also bit the dust. Many 
people got in touch to share their fears of being affected,and Tom’s story, of 
trying to raise his young baby with his wife in the family home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/sep/02/pay-to-stay-social-housing-hard-working-families>
, rightly angered many readers. AsColin Wiles pointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/death-pay-to-stay-government-housing-act-crumbling>
, very little in the Housing and Planning Act looked stable after the main 
pillars had been knocked down by May and chancellor Philip Hammond’s scrutiny. 
In many ways this was inevitable: almost every directive in the 200-plus page 
report required committees and departments to work out the details and finances 
post-fact, akin to a student handing in their maths homework by repeatedly 
scrawling “work it out yourself” in lieu of bothering to provide the answers. 
Naturally, when scrutiny was applied, it became clear it was unworkable, and 
with Cameron and Osborne out of office, the ideological will to force it 
through was no longer there.

The reduced benefit cap for large families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/03/reduced-benefit-cap-families-dwp>
 remains a huge concern in housing, as is the local housing allowance cap, 
which leaves thousands of households with a rent gapbetween what they receive 
in housing benefit and what their rent actually is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/dec/07/rent-gap-local-housing-allowance>
. For these households, many affected by both, paying for housing will become 
increasingly difficult.

So for 2017, what are we left with? A failed housing act, and a housing crisis 
that’s still with us. And though it looked for all intents and purposes as 
though the battle for social housing was lost after the bill passed into law, 
the victory came later, in the failed implementation.

It’s not too optimistic or outlandish to suggest that the reality of the 
housing crisis will force the government to admit that social housing needs to 
be heavily invested in, with a Labour mayor in London, the most stretched city, 
and the passage of the homelessness reduction bill through the parliament. 
Perhaps next year is the year social housing’s cheerleaders, rather than big 
developers, are listened to.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 