
Plans to demolish a century-old social housing estate in Chelsea and replace 
more than 200 affordable homes with luxury apartments for private sale are set 
to be rejected followinga two-year campaign by residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/12/chelsea-landlord-keith-exford-sell-off-william-sutton-social-housing>
 supported by the comedian Eddie Izzard.

Officials at the London Borough of Kensington and Chelsea have recommended 
that plans lodged to tear down the Sutton Dwellings by a leading social housing 
provider, Affinity Sutton, should be refused 
<https://www.rbkc.gov.uk/idoxWAM/doc/Committee%20Report-1776154.pdf?extension=.pdf&id=1776154&location=volume2&contentType=application/pdf&pageCount=1>
 because they do not include enough replacement social housing.

The borough also accused Affinity Sutton of overstating costs and understating 
potential revenues from the scheme in financial calculations setting out its 
viability in order to minimise the amount of social housing in the new 
development.

The recommendation for refusal is a significant victory for campaigners 
attempting to stop the sell-off of social housing in the capital which has seen 
numerous low-income families forced to move out of the city. It is also a blow 
to Affinity Sutton which has argued that it needs to sell off homes on the site 
to fund the continued provision of social housing on the site in the absence of 
sufficient government funding.Its plans have been likened to “social cleansing” 
by the Save the Sutton Estate campaign group and Izzard, who backed the campaign
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/mar/05/eddie-izzard-chelsea-sutton-estate-eviction-social-housing-video>
.

The homes were built in 1913 by the philanthropist William Sutton expressly to 
provide “houses for use and occupation by the poor”. Affinity Sutton now 
manages nearly 60,000 homes across the country and made a surplus of £145m last 
year.

“The proposal fails to demonstrate that the maximum amount of affordable 
housing is being provided and the proposals would result in a net loss of 
social rented floorspace,” said Graham Stallwood, executive director of 
planning at RBKC in a report to planning committee members recommending 
refusal. “There are no agreed section 106 obligations to secure affordable 
housing and appropriate infrastructure required to make the development 
acceptable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Faffordable-homes-in-chelsea-sutton-estate-may-be-saved%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6666708f63457dd67221c0e0b60cdfb0df47b1d9%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Affordable%20homes%20in%20Chelsea%20Sutton%20estate%20may%20be%20saved&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Faffordable-homes-in-chelsea-sutton-estate-may-be-saved%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Affordable%20homes%20in%20Chelsea%20Sutton%20estate%20may%20be%20saved&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Faffordable-homes-in-chelsea-sutton-estate-may-be-saved%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6666708f63457dd67221c0e0b60cdfb0df47b1d9%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 The Sutton estate, Chelsea. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Affinity Sutton said it was “deeply disappointed” and said its application was 
intended to “retain social housing in Chelsea” and for “providing our residents 
with good quality homes”.

It said it was “in fact exceeding the maximum [social housing space] that can 
be viably provided” and said it was wrong for the council to classify four 
vacant blocks as social housing for the purposes of the calculations because 
they are unfit for social housing.

But the move was welcomed by Labour’s deputy leader Tom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson> MP who also campaigned 
against the proposals.

“I’m delighted the residents of the Sutton estate in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> have won their fight to save their 
community and won’t now be priced out of their own area by developers,” Watson 
said. “In its damning report, Kensington and Chelsea council found that 
Affinity Sutton overstated the cost of the scheme and underestimated revenues. 
The fact the plans have been thrown out is a victory for everyone who believes 
that affordable housing should be a right not a privilege.”

The Sutton Dwellings are located in one of the most expensive parts of London, 
not far from the Kings Road in Chelsea. But for decades they have provided 
affordable housing at below-market rents. There are currently 462 flats spread 
across 15 mansion blocks, but Affinity Sutton believes four of the blocks are 
not fit for use anymore, and plans to demolish the whole complex. It wants to 
rebuild 343 flats with 237 for social rent and 106 for sale on the private 
market – some with multimillion-pound price tags.

The council’s planning committee will finally decide whether to refuse consent 
on Tuesday 15 November. They have been told that the London mayor also believes 
it should be rejected. A report from City Hall states: “Greater London 
Authority officers consider there should be no net loss of affordable housing 
floorspace and do not accept some of the key assumptions in the viability 
assessment.

“We are extremely happy that the officers are supporting the residents and 
supporting social housing over flats for overseas investors,” said Andrew 
Barshall, spokesman for the Save the Sutton Estate campaign.

Affinity Sutton said it was “staggering that one of the recommendations for 
refusal is based on design. In addition to pre-application meetings, Affinity 
Sutton has consulted with the architecture appraisal panel five times and 
received their endorsement of the proposals”.

It concluded: “We await the outcome of the planning committee next Tuesday and 
trust that it will halt the uncertainty around our residents’ homes and their 
future.”
 