
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> will face a grim 
winter of starvation and death on its eastern frontier, particularly among 
women and children, unless donors urgently find the money to fund emergency 
relief for more than half a million refugees who are returning from Pakistan, a 
United Nations official has warned.

Entire communities of Afghans who fled to Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> during the communist revolution 
and subsequent Soviet invasion in the late 1970s have begun moving back since 
mid-July, saying the level of harassment by Pakistani police has become 
intolerable, amid renewed tensions between their respective governments.

EU signs deal to deport unlimited numbers of Afghan asylum seekers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/03/eu-european-union-signs-deal-deport-unlimited-numbers-afghan-asylum-seekers-afghanistan>
Angelline Rudakubana, deputy country director in Afghanistan for the World 
Food Programme (WFP) <https://www.wfp.org/countries/afghanistan>, said the 
agency needs an immediate infusion of $66m (£58m) to enable it to take 
advantage of a month-long window to get supplies into position before 
temperatures plunge and snow starts to fall in the unforgiving mountains that 
straddle the border with Pakistan.

“If the donors don’t step up, then there’s going to be a humanitarian crisis 
in the border districts of Pakistan and Afghanistan,” Rudakubana said. “If we 
don’t respond now, it’s going to be catastrophic.”

Rudakubana was speaking before a conference in Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/afghanistan-seeks-aid-to-rebuild-nation-at-brussels-talks>
 on 4-5 October, where donors are expected to reaffirm their commitment to 
Afghanistan at a time when multiple crises – including conflicts in Syria and 
Iraq – are competing for funds, and the two-year-old government of President 
Ashraf Ghani isstruggling to prove that it can deliver meaningful reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/afghanistan-refugee-crisis-europe-pakistan>
.


The surprise exodus from Pakistan threatens to overwhelm aid agencies that are 
already overstretched, with the WFP estimating that around 600,000 Afghans will 
have returned by the end of the year – representing the biggest repatriation 
since millions of refugees chose to voluntarilyreturn from Pakistan and Iran in 
the years following the fall of the Talibanin 2001. 
<http://www.refworld.org/docid/414ed8b84.html>

“We’ll see what we can do in the next month to stop people starving or 
freezing to death, particularly women and children – they are the most 
vulnerable,” Rudakubana said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fafghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09c63dfed7309ccbff4e700be51e4e99022b6eda%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghan%20exodus%20from%20Pakistan%20could%20be%20'catastrophic'%20without%20urgent%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fafghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghan%20exodus%20from%20Pakistan%20could%20be%20%27catastrophic%27%20without%20urgent%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fafghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09c63dfed7309ccbff4e700be51e4e99022b6eda%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Afghan refugees wait for vaccinations at the UNHCR centre on the outskirts of 
Kabul. 
Even without the additional demands, the food agency was facing a $55m 
shortfall for existing operations targeting 3.2 million vulnerable people in 
Afghanistan over the next six months, according to a WFP official in Kabul.

The aid agency plans to launch an emergency appeal for an additional $66.8m in 
the coming week to boost its support to the returnees, who represent thebiggest 
wave of repatriation to Afghanistan 
<http://reporting.unhcr.org/sites/default/files/UNHCR%20Repatriation%20of%20Afghan%20Refugees%20from%20Pakistan%20SB%20-%20Sept-Dec.%202016%20--%2019SEPT16_0.pdf>
 since the fall of the Taliban.

 Even as international attention on Afghanistan has faded following the 
withdrawal of thevast majority of western troops deployed to fight the Taliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/09/uk-afghanistan-troops-increase-david-cameron>
, growing numbers of Afghans are on the move – whether they are returning, 
fleeing their homes, or migrating.

The WFP says that most of the current returnees are undocumented Afghan 
refugees who may have never been issued any formal identification papers, 
leaving them more vulnerable to harassment by Pakistani officials.

Afghanistan's women risk their lives to demand equal rights and protection | 
Sune Engel Rasmussen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/25/afghanistan-women-risk-lives-demand-equal-rights-protection>
In the first half of this year, only about 60-90 undocumented refugees were 
returning each day – a number that had swollen to 2,400 by late August, and as 
many as 7,000 in September, according to WFP figures. The agency estimates that 
about 400,000 undocumented Afghan refugees – and a further 200,000 who do have 
papers – will have returned from Pakistan by the end of the year.

In addition, aggressive attacks by insurgents near provincial towns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/11/afghan-army-reinforcements-taliban-lashkar-gah-helmand>
 have led to a dramatic increase in the number of Afghans being forced to flee 
their homes. The WFP expects the number of new internally displaced people to 
hit 400,000 by the end of this year – a much higher figure than previously 
anticipated. Meanwhile, desperate Afghans have increasingly gambled their 
futures on the perilous migrant trail across the Mediterranean, forming the
second biggest group of asylum seekers in Europe 
<https://www.easo.europa.eu/sites/default/files/public/EN_%20Annual%20Report%202015_1.pdf>
, after Syrians.

While the Afghans who take their chances with people traffickers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/27/afghanistan-family-germany-asylum-seekers-kabul>
 are driven largely by dismal job prospects and interminable violence at home, 
the returnees from Pakistan see their plight through a geopolitical lens: they 
believe they are human bargaining chips in a feud between Islamabad and Kabul.

Pakistan has looked askance as Ghani has sought closer ties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/india-invest-500m-iran-port-chabahar-modi-transit-accord-afghanistan>
 with its arch-rival India, while tensions spiked in June when Afghan and 
Pakistani forces exchanged fire at the border crossing at Torkham. The incident 
prompted Pakistan toimpose tougher restrictions 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-pakistan-afghanistan-refugees-idUSKCN11C17A> 
on Afghan refugees, who had previously been allowed to move freely through 
Torkham, amid rising reports of harassment by officials.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fafghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4023dce78af1565d8b8f723716c941866716651%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghan%20exodus%20from%20Pakistan%20could%20be%20'catastrophic'%20without%20urgent%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fafghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghan%20exodus%20from%20Pakistan%20could%20be%20%27catastrophic%27%20without%20urgent%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fafghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4023dce78af1565d8b8f723716c941866716651%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Afghan refugees in Kabul. Many of those returning are second- or 
third-generation immigrants, to whom Afghanistan is in many ways a foreign 
country. 
Rudakubana said most returnees had assembled in the eastern province of 
Nangahar, which borders Pakistan, but some were making their way to Kabul. At a 
tented reception centre on the outskirts of the capital, a steady trickle of 
extended families arrived last week. Many were second- or third-generation 
immigrants, to whom Afghanistan is in many ways a foreign country.

While women waited for health screening, their menfolk said they had been 
forced to leave Pakistan amid rising demands for bribes from police – and 
longer spells in custody for those who could not pay – since the Torkham 
incident.

“They’re beating us, they’re pushing us around – they’re treating us like 
animals,” said Badam Gul, a labourer who fled Afghanistan more than 30 years 
ago, and who had returned with 10 family members the previous night. “We can’t 
accept such insults, so we left.”


Kabul denies putting pressure on the refugees. However, Pakistani officials 
have long signalled that they want to find a way togradually and safely 
repatriate <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-pakistan-refugees-idUSKCN0ZG1H6> 
an estimated 2.5 million Afghans seeking refuge in their territory – who form 
the second largest refugee population in the world. But returnees say growing 
anti-refugee sentiment in Pakistan’s military and political establishments has 
fanned hostility in their host communities, leaving them no choice but to 
return to a country their children barely know.

“We spent three decades there, but we were pushed out in a very bad way,” said 
Bashir Gul, who had worked in Pakistan as a baker. “You can imagine how we 
feel.”
 