
A team of tax experts from Kenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> 
will be deployed to Botswana early next year in the latest round of an 
initiative that seeks to boost domestic revenue collection to fund national 
development plans.


The move was announced last week at the second global partnership for 
effective development cooperation meeting in Nairobi 
<http://effectivecooperation.org/events/2016-high-level-meeting/>, which 
brought together representatives of governments, civil society, the private 
sector and UN officials.

'A system of privilege and benefits': is a global tax body needed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/system-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd>
The Tax Inspectors Without Borders (TIWB) project 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/presscenter/pressreleases/2015/07/13/tax-inspectors-without-borders-oecd-and-undp-to-work-with-developing-countries-to-make-tax-audits-more-effective.html>
 focuses on tackling tax avoidance by improving local audit capacities, with a 
particular emphasis on ensuring multinationals conform with local tax laws. 
James Karanja, head of the TIWB secretariat, said that since the launch of the 
project in June last year, eight pilot projects in African, Asian and Latin 
American countries had netted more than $260m (£204m) in additional tax 
revenue. More than $100m of that was generated through tax audits in Zimbabwe.

The programme, which is supported by the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the UN development programme (UNDP), 
helps countries to recover revenue from multinationals that had been paying 
less than their fair share. It also seeks to build local audit capacity and is 
seen as key to meeting theUN’s sustainable development goals 
<http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/>. The 
African programme is being carried out in partnership with theAfrican Tax 
Administration Forum <http://www.ataftax.org/en/Pages/default.aspx>. 

The UN describes domestic resources as “the largest untapped source of 
financing to fund national development plans” 
<http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Domestic-resource-mobilization-and-taxation_IMF-and-World-Bank_IATF-Issue-Brief.pdf>
, and has listed support to build capacity of national tax audit systems as a 
priority.

In an interview with the Guardian on the sidelines of the conference, UNDP 
administrator Helen Clark said the tax auditors programme was part of a new 
agenda of global partnership that sees aid as “catalytic in supporting 
countries to be able to leverage other sources of financing. This is a great 
example of south-south cooperation that has the critical effect of boosting 
local systems while ensuring international companies that specialise in paying 
tax to nobody are compliant with local laws and contribute to domestic resource 
mobilisation.”

Clark said so much has changed since representatives of 161 countries endorsed 
<http://www.oecd.org/development/effectiveness/49650173.pdf> a plan for 
effective development cooperation in Busan, South Korea, in 2011 that all 
players needed to be adaptable and come up with new approaches to tackle 
multiplying crises around the world.

“It has been an extraordinary few years,” she said. “[Since 2011] Syria tipped 
over. Libya, Yemen as well. The crisis in South Sudan broke out, and you had 
the continued crisis in northern Nigeria as well as Mali. For Syria, the 
spillover effects of that were felt all the way into Europe, probably playing 
into Brexit and other developments.”

Clark said it was essential for aid to be aimed at seeking long-term solutions 
by improving local conditions. “You need to go beyond relief to investing in 
people to improve the circumstances that they find themselves in,” she said.

Emergency aid was still vitally important, she added, to avoid millions 
joining the queue of those displaced, which would make the refugee crisis more 
difficult to manage.

But, citing a visit to Mali, which has struggled to cope with an insurgency 
that broke out in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/16/mali-guide-to-the-conflict>, she 
said it was essential to tackle root causes. “People leave because of a lack of 
opportunity. When I look at all those photos of boats trying to come into Malta 
or Sicily I’m seeing overwhelmingly young African men of working age – 
bright-eyed people wanting something real to do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fafrica-crackdown-tax-avoidance-nets-204m-to-boost-development-undp-helen-clark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72375b7aaac5ab0a14c3d4f5038d38cbb803ac46%2F0_0_1620_1080%2F1620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa's%20crackdown%20on%20tax%20avoidance%20nets%20%C2%A3204m%20to%20boost%20development&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fafrica-crackdown-tax-avoidance-nets-204m-to-boost-development-undp-helen-clark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%27s%20crackdown%20on%20tax%20avoidance%20nets%20%C2%A3204m%20to%20boost%20development&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fafrica-crackdown-tax-avoidance-nets-204m-to-boost-development-undp-helen-clark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72375b7aaac5ab0a14c3d4f5038d38cbb803ac46%2F0_0_1620_1080%2F1620.jpg>
 The UNDP’s Helen Clark speaks at the global partnership for effective 
development cooperation meeting in Nairobi. Photograph: UNDP 
The former prime minister of New Zealand said opportunities could be provided 
through legal channels of migration to Europe and through significant 
investment to improve what she called “positive opportunities” domestically. “A 
senior UN official told me there are a lot of negative opportunities for youth 
in Mali. You can join a jihadist group. It pays more than selling wares at 
traffic lights. You can also join criminal gangs that do everything from 
trafficking people to drugs and arms. Or you can try to make the crossing into 
Libya to take a boat into Europe.”

Clark said improving local capacity and helping countries to boost domestic 
revenue streams and other sources of financing would continue to be a focus for 
the UNDP.

The OECD secretary general, Angel Gurría, who also spoke at the conference, 
hailed the “concrete results” achieved by the TIWB programme and said the 
initiative would be broadened.

Thirteen projects are under way – in Botswana, Costa Rica, Ethiopia, Georgia, 
Ghana, Jamaica, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Nigeria, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe. 
And next year, auditors will be sent to the Republic of the Congo, Egypt, 
Uganda, Cameroon and Vietnam.
 