
In 2005, the Guardian featured 10 newborn babies in countries across Africa. 
We revisited them in 2010, and again this year to speak to them and their 
families about how life has changed. Now aged 10, eight of the children share 
their daily challenges with us, as well as their hopes for the future. You can
read their stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/aug/31/africa-children-10-years-on-interactive>
 andlisten to our podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/aug/31/africa-children-10-years-on-podcast>
, which present an extraordinary picture of a continent undergoing dramatic 
change.

In Mumbai, an all-female taxi firm is helping to support women’s economic 
empowerment. Follow driver Dhanlaxmi Devendra inDriving Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/sep/10/mumbai-india-women-empowerment-priyardarshini-taxi-service-video>
, a six-minute film about the innovative taxi service and the challenges it 
aims to overcome.

And a World Bank study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/09/women-business-and-the-law-2016-getting-to-equal-world-bank-report>
 has found women’s prospects are limited by law in 155 countries. Of the 173 
countries studied for the report, 155 have at least one law limiting women’s 
economic opportunities, while 100 states put restrictions on the type of jobs 
women can do and 18 allow husbands to dictate whether their wives can work at 
all.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Afghanistan gunmen torch UN food trucks in latest attack on aid workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/14/afghanistan-gunmen-torch-un-food-trucks-in-latest-attack-on-aid-workers>
 * Destitute Syrian refugees in Jordan and Lebanon may return to warzone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/11/destitute-syrian-refugees-jordan-lebanon-may-return-to-warzone>
 * Socking it to malaria just the start for Africa’s new science alliance
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/10/alliance-for-accelerating-excellence-in-science-in-africa-malaria-gates-foundation-wellcome-trust-dfid>
 * Child mortality halved since 1990, but MDG goal missed, says UN report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/09/child-mortality-halved-since-1990-but-mdg-goal-missed-says-un-report>
 * Micro-insurance offers families in poorer countries protection from 
destitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/01/micro-insurance-families-poorer-countries-protection-destitution>
 * Poor monitoring renders millions of elderly people worldwide “invisible” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/sep/09/global-age-watch-index-2015-elderly-people-invisible-helpage-international>
Opinion

As world leaders prepare to adopt a new set of development goals at the 
upcomingUN general assembly 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/summit>, the toll of 
humanitarian crises should not be far from their minds, says Unicef chief 
Anthony Lake. He calls for agencies tobreak down the barriers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/11/sustainable-development-goals-target-millions-children-humanitarian-crises>
 between development and humanitarian response in order to reach the millions 
of children living in the midst of war and conflict.

On the refugee crisis, UNDP worker Mohamed Yahya described one man’s journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/07/bashis-journey-africa-europe-may-signal-bigger-refugee-crisis-to-come>
 from Africa to Europe, which he says could signal an even bigger crisis to 
come. UK Labour MP Mary Creaghwrote from a camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/08/syrian-refugee-crisis-lebanon-steps-up-britain-david-cameron>
 in Lebanon about Britain’s commitments to refugees in comparison with Lebanon, 
where people who have fled Syria now make up more than a quarter of the 
population.

Multimedia

Video: Being Laxmi: ‘I belong to the hijra, the oldest transgender community’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/sep/03/being-laxmi-narayan-tripathi-hijra-india-transgender-community-video>

Video: Bangalore or bust: can India’s clothing factories offer freedom to 
rural recruits? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2015/sep/14/bangalore-india-clothing-factories-freedom-rural-recruits-video>

Podcast: Africa’s children 10 years on: what happened next? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/aug/31/africa-children-10-years-on-podcast>

What you said: top reader comment

On the interactive piece Africa’s children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/aug/31/africa-children-10-years-on-interactive>
,Global_Nomad 
wrote:

We need to reflect on how recently many “developed” countries have moved out 
of this situation. These kind of lives were still common in the UK up to the 
50s, in the US perhaps even later. So despite the wealth of empire over 200 
years or so, it took a great deal of effort and slow change. Things are 
changing, but slowly, but in many ways they are already improved compared with 
the previous generation.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Overseas Development Insitute: If the SDGs are to “leave no one behind”, 
donors should get serious about social protection 
<http://www.odi.org/comment/9861-social-protection-sustainable-development-goals-sdgs-global-social-compact>


And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 