
The claim that the international criminal court unfairly targets Africans is 
gaining significant traction after the Gambia became the third country on the 
continent to announce its withdrawal from the Hague-based tribunal.

The move follows similar announcements from Burundi and South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, who informed the UN 
secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, of their decision to quit the court last week, 
making them the first countries to begin the year-long exit process in the 
court’s 18-year history.

Fatou Bensouda, the woman who hunts tyrants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/05/fatou-bensouda-international-criminal-court-tyrants>
Burundi’s parliament has claimed the court is merely “a political tool used by 
[foreign] powers to remove whoever they want from power on the African 
continent”.

The ICC had said in April it would investigate outbreaks of violence in Burundi
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi>, which has been mired in a 
political crisis for more than a year.

South Africa announced it would be leaving the court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/south-africa-to-quit-international-criminal-court-document-shows>
 on similar grounds, arguing that the ICC’s Rome statutes were at odds with its 
own laws granting leaders diplomatic immunity.

There have been a number of complaints that the ICC is biased, and some 
politicians have denouncing the tribunal as an instrument of colonial justice.

Of the 10 cases being investigated by the court, nine involve African 
countries, including all three trials. So far, ICC arrest warrants have only 
ever been issued for Africans.

While there may be sound reasons for this – five African countries have 
referred themselves to the court, for example, and 33 African states have 
ratified the Rome statute that established the ICC, makingAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> the largest continental bloc – the 
perception that it targets Africans exclusively has left the court vulnerable.

As a result, the court is facing what appears to be a coordinated revolt that 
risks destroying its legitimacy.

Why South Africa is wrong to leave the international criminal court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/14/why-south-africa-is-wrong-to-leave-the-international-criminal-court>
Among political analysts there is little doubt that more African countries 
will announce their intention to withdraw in the next few weeks, with Chad, 
Kenya and Namibia all likely candidates.

Allan Ngari, researcher at the Institute for Security Studies, said the 
announcements “must be part of a plan”, particularly the latest move by the 
Gambia.

“That Fatou Bensouda, the chief prosecutor of the international criminal 
court, is from the very state that has made the most recent withdrawal can only 
speak of a deliberate effort to hurt the court, particularly the organ which 
has had the most interface with African states, which is the office of the 
prosecutor,” said Ngari.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fafrican-revolt-international-criminal-court-gambia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7b94597e9f4c3b33e5d4b4c226aaa0bdf940af6%2F0_0_3980_2704%2F3980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=African%20revolt%20threatens%20international%20criminal%20court's%20legitimacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fafrican-revolt-international-criminal-court-gambia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=African%20revolt%20threatens%20international%20criminal%20court%27s%20legitimacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fafrican-revolt-international-criminal-court-gambia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7b94597e9f4c3b33e5d4b4c226aaa0bdf940af6%2F0_0_3980_2704%2F3980.jpg>
 Gambian president Yahya Jammeh. The country has announced it plans to leave 
the international criminal court. Photograph: Seyllou/AFP/Getty 
Bensouda, a Gambian citizen, took on the court’s leading job in 2012, and it 
was hoped by some that her nationality would assuage some of the court’s 
African critics.

But this week her country’s government resounding rejected the court. “The 
ICC, despite being called international criminal court, is in fact an 
international Caucasian court for the persecution and humiliation of people of 
colour, especially Africans,”said 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/10/gambia-withdraws-international-criminal-court-161026041436188.html>
 Sheriff Bojang, the Gambia’s information minister.

So what now for the ICC? Kelly-Jo Bluen, an expert at the Institute for 
Justice and Reconciliation, said the withdrawals would be a blow for the ICC, 
but suggested a mass African exodus was unlikely.

“I imagine we will see further withdrawals, but I am not convinced by the idea 
that there will be an Africa-wide withdrawal. Some states will remain ICC 
members because of ongoing support for the court, while other states view the 
court as a useful tool in maligning opposition domestically,” she said.

Some African countries, most notably Botswana, have not joined in the chorus 
of anti-ICC sentiment. In a statement released on Wednesday, the government 
reiterated its support for the tribunal.

“Botswana is convinced that as the only permanent international criminal 
tribunal, the ICC is an important unique institution in the international 
criminal justice system. Botswana therefore wishes to reaffirm its membership 
of the Rome statute and reiterate its support for a strong international 
criminal justice system through the ICC,”the statement read 
<http://www.news24.com/Africa/News/botswana-reaffirms-support-for-icc-regrets-sa-decision-20161026>
.

Senegal has declined to take an official position, but its justice minister, 
Sidiki Kaba, who also happens to be the current president of the assembly of 
state parties to the Rome statute of the international criminal court, has 
urged South Africa and Burundi to reconsider their positions.

So while it may be wounded, the ICC is not dead in Africa – not yet. The 
anti-ICC brigade is strong and growing, but it does not yet enjoy complete 
continent-wide support.

 