
Consumers worried about falling victim to online banking fraud should consider 
banks that give customers card readers and avoid those which rely on text 
messages, according to leading security expert Graham Cluley. He was speaking 
as Tesco Bank continued to deal with the fallout from the “systematic, 
sophisticated attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m>
” that resulted in £2.5m being taken from around 9,000 current account holders.

Meanwhile, another expert says that the Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> attack last weekend could be the 
first of many, and banks should be forced by regulators to up their game.

The bank was forced to suspend online banking for all its 136,000 customers 
after money – in some cases several thousand pounds – was stolen from accounts. 
It is thought much of it ended up in Spain and Brazil.

Although the number of customers affected was later downgraded from the 
original 20,000, Tesco has declined to reveal how the money was taken. It did 
say that personal data had not been compromised, leading some experts to 
suggest that the fraudsters had gained debit card details, or found a 
vulnerability in its app.

The National Crime Agency is investigating, but questions are already being 
asked about levels of security.

It has emerged that Tesco Bank used to issue customers with card readers – 
small devices that generate a unique passcode when you insert your card and key 
in your pin. These typically authorise your login and certain transactions. But 
the bank later moved to mobile phone verification, where it sends a code to 
your handset.

No bank can ever claim to be 100% secure and attacks by fraudsters are a fact 
of life

Cliff Moyce, global head of financial services at technology firm DataArt, 
told Guardian Money that the financial regulators need to take a stronger line 
if further incidents are to be prevented.

Moyce, who has worked in financial security for more than 25 years, says Tesco 
Bank customer losses were “almost certainly” not the result of a TalkTalk-style 
outside hack, but were more likely caused by a failure of its IT security and 
data protection processes.

“No bank can ever claim to be 100% secure and attacks by fraudsters are a fact 
of life. The problem is that the banks need to do a lot better – the regulators 
need to be forcing them to adopt the best practice… unless this happens it will 
only be a matter of time before there is another similar episode at another 
bank,” he says.

One line of investigation is likely to focus on the possibility of an 
“economic hack”, says Moyce, whereby an offshore employee is offered multiples 
of their annual salary in return for a tranche of customer data. One thing that 
might raise eyebrows is that the bank’s staff were seemingly encouraged to use 
their own smartphones and tablets for work, a trend commonly known as “bring 
your own device”, or BYOD.

In a 2015 interview 
<http://www.cio.co.uk/cio100/2015/chris-brocklesby-3607313/> Tesco Bank’s then 
chief information officer, Chris Brocklesby, revealed how he had “championed” 
BYOD, adding: “A trial has been successful and we will fully roll out in 2015. 
The initial release will be for phones and tablets.”

Moyce, who admits he has no idea if this was taken up at Tesco Bank, says such 
a move would be controversial. “BYOD always brings risks, especially in the 
areas of breaches of the UK Data Protection Act, as it is too easy for 
confidential and sensitive information to end up in a personal device that may 
be lost, sold or taken to another employment. There is also a risk of 
introducing malware into a secure network.”

He suggested good BYOD policies, implemented rigorously, can reduce the risks 
to the same level as any company-supplied devices. The question is whether your 
bank is operating good policies and practices.

Professor Alan Woodward, banking security expert at the University of Surrey, 
says he was surprised Tesco has been so coy about what actually happened. “The 
fact they have said that customers’ personal data was not compromised suggests 
that the hackers may have harvested customers’ debit card details and then used 
them in an automated mass attack. They really need to come out and give more 
details.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-bank-fraud-cyber-attack-card-readers-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6271bff3df9b7b132a651437739fddb3c68faf4%2F0_206_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Tesco%20fraud%2C%20are%20other%20banks%20vulnerable%20to%20cyber-attacks%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-bank-fraud-cyber-attack-card-readers-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Tesco%20fraud%2C%20are%20other%20banks%20vulnerable%20to%20cyber-attacks%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-bank-fraud-cyber-attack-card-readers-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6271bff3df9b7b132a651437739fddb3c68faf4%2F0_206_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Consumers should look for a bank that avoids the use of text messages as a way 
of identifying them when logging on or making a payment. Photograph: Felix Clay 
for the Guardian 
He says this is the first successful attack on a bank itself. Previously, 
fraudsters have targeted individual customers. He also predicts that security 
will become one of the ways some banks sell themselves in the future.

Last month the consumer group Which? criticised some of Britain’s biggest banks
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/20/banks-online-security-is-failing-customers-says-which>
 for failing to invest in security systems that would better protect their 
customers from fraudsters. It tested the UK’s 11 biggest banks and building 
societies and found that the security at five was not good enough.

It said Halifax, its sister brand Bank of Scotland, Lloyds, Santander and TSB 
had “consistently scored poorly” over the four years it had been analysing 
their security measures.

None offered “two-factor authentication” at login, despite having the 
technology to do so. This combines two different types of ID checks – typically 
something you know, such as a password or pin, with something you have, such as 
a card reader or a mobile phone on which to generate or receive a single-use 
passcode.

Tesco Bank, which was not tested by Which?, is a leading challenger bank – the 
new entrants trying to topple the domination of the traditional players – 
mostly appealing to younger customers with the promise of a user-friendly, 
hi-tech approach.

On a Tesco Bank web forum in 2015, a bank employee wrote 
<https://yourcommunity.tescobank.com/t5/Day-to-Day-Banking/Credit-Card-Security/td-p/1212>
: “It is hard to get the balance of security and convenience right for everyone 
using our online banking service. We used to have a card reader to protect 
online banking; however the overwhelming feedback from customers was that they 
didn’t like this method and they wanted something more portable. This was why 
we implemented a solution that allows our customers to receive a security code 
to their mobile phone.”

Some people, reading that now, may wonder whether the bank was right to make 
such a change.

Nationwide, which is one of the providers that still uses card readers, says 
on its website that it “provides an extra level of security when banking 
online... your card reader helps to prevent fraudsters from trying to log in as 
you, and transferring your money.”

Tesco Bank is not alone in shunning readers. Cluley says consumers can 
continue to trust online banking – for now. “Clearly this is not good news, but 
at the moment this is one incident. However, if it happens to a second bank 
then this would be a major source of concern that could result in a loss of 
trust.”

He says he is still happy to bank online as the risks are still outweighed by 
the convenience.

However, he suggests that consumers should be looking for a bank that avoids 
the use of text messages as a way of identifying their customer when logging on 
or making a payment.

“The banks are moving away from these as they are open to exploitation.Card 
readers that produce a code are much more secure.” He adds: “I always use a 
made-up mother’s maiden name. Only I know what I have picked and, unlike the 
real one, it’s not publicly available information.”

Tesco Bank told us that “robust security measures” are in place to protect 
customers. It says that as a security measure, to add a payee, customers are 
required to enter their unique security code, following which they will be sent 
a text confirming the new payee.

However, it adds: “To access the app, customers need to enter their unique 
security code.”
 