
Ahmed Musa scored twice but could not stop Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>, the Premier League 
champions, slipping to a 4-2 International Champions Cup defeat against 
Barcelona in Stockholm.

Leicester – who were beaten 4-0 by Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/31/leicester-city-paris-saint-germain-international-champions-cup>
 in the same competition in Los Angeles last weekend – appeared to be heading 
for an embarrassing defeat after Munir El Haddadi (two) and Luis Suárez scored 
before the break.

Leicester make fifth signing with arrival of Poland’s Bartosz Kapustka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/leicester-sign-poland-winger-bartosz-kapustka-premier-league>
However, the Nigerian striker Musa, Leicester’s record signing at a reported 
£16m from CSKA Moscow last month, scored twice as a second-half substitute 
before the teenager Rafael Mujica secured Barcelona’s victory late on.

Fed by his fellow substitute Shinji Okazaki, Musa announced his arrival within 
two minutes of his introduction when he outstripped threeBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> defenders from halfway and 
kept his composure to finish.

Musa struck again after 66 minutes when Jeffrey Schlupp won possession high up 
the pitch and the 23-year-old drilled his shot high into the Barcelona net to 
reduce the deficit to 3-2.

Leicester then had strong claims for a penalty when Musa tumbled under Javier 
Mascherano’s challenge but their hopes of a morale-boosting draw were ended 
when Mujica struck six minutes from time.

Claudio Ranieri, the Leicester manager, named both Jamie Vardy and Riyad 
Mahrez in his starting line-up just four days ahead of the FA Community Shield 
meeting with Manchester United at Wembley. But the Leicester defence were 
almost cut open at will with Barcelona pair Lionel Messi and Suárez too hot to 
handle.

Demarai Gray should have given Leicester a fourth-minute lead from Danny 
Drinkwater’s brilliant pass, but Barcelona’s slick approach play was eventually 
rewarded after 26 minutes. Messi caught out Danny Simpson with a clever ball 
inside the full-back and Munir’s excellent left-foot finish did the rest.

Suárez doubled the lead eight minutes later after he evaded Robert Huth and 
Ben Chilwell in a tight area and poked home past Ron-Robert Zieler. Huth and 
Andy King had chances to reduce the deficit and Leicester were punished on the 
stroke of half-time when Munir sprinted on to Suárez’s inch-perfect pass and 
finished nonchalantly.
 