
Is it too dangerous for aid workers to be in South Sudan?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/01/is-it-too-dangerous-for-aid-workers-to-be-in-south-sudan>
In September, South Sudan joined a club where the fees are exorbitant and no 
one really wants to be a member. Along with Syria, Afghanistan and Somalia, it 
became one of the countries that has producedmore than a million refugees 
<http://www.unhcr.org/uk/news/briefing/2016/9/57dbb5124/number-south-sudanese-refugees-reaches-1-million-mark.html>
.

We all know the story. The birth of South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> in 2011 brought with it such 
hope and promise. But now, engulfed in a deadly and bitter conflict fuelled by 
a power struggle leading to ethnic-related violence, hope is dying and the 
future looks bleak.

At Mercy Corps <http://www.mercycorps.org.uk/> the way we view the world is to 
find opportunity in crisis. But, for the first time in my career, I am finding 
this tough. The people of South Sudan are resilient, but with the number of 
people needing support to feed themselves and their families having doubled 
over the last year (now at 4.8 million) and most indicators of development on a 
downward spiral, it is difficult to identify the positives. And the truth is 
that although the war is at the heart of this crisis, short-term donor 
strategies and funding, crippling bureaucracy and a peace deal that the 
international community is holding on to, but which many South Sudanese have 
lost faith in, are all playing their part in making the situation worse.

No one is denying that conditions in South Sudan are gruelling. We work in a 
tense situation of ongoing conflict and violence trying to deliver aid to the 
most vulnerable. And while the fact that my team’s lives are on the line day in 
day out, is concerning to me as their country director, it is not what is 
keeping me awake at night. Our profession comes with certain risks, which we 
knowingly accept. As aid workers we are trained to manage and implement 
programmes in times of conflict. We do this responsibly and sustainably, so 
that despite the fragility of the environment, we can move people along the 
road from relief to recovery.

But in South Sudan, we are not able to do this and it is this that grieves me. 
Just to begin with, we are suffering from diminished humanitarian capacity in 
the country, after the surge in violence in July, many humanitarian and 
institutional staff left and are yet to return. Moreover, while the NGO 
community perseveres in continuing to share best practice and recommendations 
for programmatic responses – both for urgent relief and medium term recovery – 
we are consulted only occasionally by donors on their strategies despite our 
rich on-the-ground experience and knowledge of what communities want and need.

'The crisis in South Sudan can’t be solved with more money. We need peace'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/24/south-sudan-funding-humanitarian-crisis-famine-peace>
For example, NGOs implement more than 70% of all programmes in South Sudan, 
but yet the main support from state actors is provided through pooled funding. 
What this means is that money is firstly put into a common pot, and from there 
it is donated to NGOs. This is not only an expensive way to operate, but it 
slows down implementation. Donating direct to NGOs would be more efficient, 
especially as there is no shadow of a doubt that the needs of South Sudanese 
people are exigent and cannot wait.

However, the most pressing concern affecting recovery is that the vast 
majority of our funding is received in short tranches: a couple of months, a 
couple of months and then another couple of months. What this means is that we 
are unable to plan long-term and nothing is guaranteed. We establish our 
programme, hire staff, implement for perhaps five months, and then wind down 
the programme again. We may (or may not) receive more funding for that 
programme, and so we start the cycle all over again. This is the reality in 
which we are working. We can do better.

In July, Mercy Corps with support from the British government began 
implementing a programme to stimulate economic recovery in some of the most 
inaccessible areas in Unity state. This is a four-year programme, virtually 
unheard of in the recent times in South Sudan. We are providing cash transfers 
to households and traders to kick-start market recovery, as well as provide 
business training and livelihoods support for fishing and farming. It is 
precisely this type of programming that allows us to work sustainably in a 
manner that builds capacity and ultimately, enables the project to be taken 
over by the community. It is also more cost effective as we can plan 
efficiently, procure smarter, recruit better, and engage communities more 
meaningfully.

We cannot say that our programmes will not be interrupted by violence and 
conflict, but should this mean that we surrender all hope to help the South 
Sudanese people move forward beyond urgent relief and handouts? No. It means we 
adapt, we change our way of thinking and working. It means that donors become 
more flexible in their approach and understand that when there is an uptick in 
violence we will need to pivot from our recovery programmes to urgent relief, 
and then when we can, back again. Around the world, Mercy Corps has implemented 
programmes with such nimbleness to shift between relief and recovery to fit the 
context, it requires trust, partnership, and commitment.

My return to South Sudan: I want to see opportunities for all
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/01/my-return-to-south-sudan-i-want-to-see-opportunities-for-all>
Without this change in approach, I will not be surprised if more international 
organisations leave South Sudan, or scale back their operations in the next six 
months. While we must have a peace deal that is firm, assuring and definite, 
that ensures the protection of civilians as well as aid workers, we also 
desperately need donors to reinvest and recommit to the future of South Sudan.

Deepmala Mahla is the South Sudan country director for Mercy Corps. Follow 
@Deepmala_Mahla <https://twitter.com/Deepmala_Mahla> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 