
High-income countries now spend an average of 9% of their foreign aid budgets 
on hosting refugees,according to the OECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/aid-budgets-hosting-refugees-oecd-figures>
. Net aid spending reached a record high last year, with domestic refugee costs 
accounting for the bulk of the rise. Yet Publish What You Fund claims only a
quarter of of aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/big-aid-donors-failing-spend-cash-campaign-transparency>
 meets transparency standards. The campaign group analysed funds from 46 donors 
and found most had failed to meet commitments to publish enough details about 
their development projects.

Emma Graham-Harrison reports on the crisis in Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/15/nowhere-to-run-burundi-violence-follows-escapees-across-borders>
, where teams of thugs are crossing the borders into refugee camps in 
neighbouring countries to launch murderous attacks on exiles, according to 
survivors.More than a quarter of a million people have fled in terror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/burundi-ethnic-violence-refugees>
 but the world’s attention is elsewhere.

Elsewhere on the site

‘I lost my youth in prison’: Salvadoran women seek redress over abortion law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/14/guadalupe-vasquez-el-salvador-anti-abortion-law-lost-my-youth-in-prison-women-seek-redress>


On the frontline in Brazil’s war on Zika: ‘I felt I was in a horror movie’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/on-front-line-brazil-war-zika-virus-i-felt-horror-movie-no-cure>

Boko Haram: soaring numbers of children used in suicide attacks, says Unicef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/children-suicide-attacks-boko-haram-unicef-nigeria>

50 million years of work could be lost to anxiety and depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/50-million-years-work-lost-anxiety-depression-world-health-organisation-who>

‘A system of privilege and benefits’: is a global tax body needed? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/system-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd>

Ethiopia’s clampdown on dissent tests ethnic federal structure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/08/ethiopia-clampdown-dissent-ethnic-federal-structure>

Opinion

Governments should ensure street children have a legal form of ID so they can 
attend school and seek protection from violence,writes Usha Elumalai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/street-children-legal-identity-basic-human-right-international-day-street-child>
, a pavement dweller and child rights campaigner from Chennai in India. Marking 
International Day for Street Children, Elumalai writes: “Whenever someone from 
the street tries to enrol in school, they are asked for documents such as a 
birth certificate, which we simply don’t have. Without a legal identity, we are 
powerless.”

Multimedia

Migrant workers make up 94% of Qatar’s workforce, but they face daily 
segregation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/qatar-families-only-zones-entrench-segregation-of-migrant-workers>
 in the country’s capital.Pete Pattisson captured footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/apr/13/migrant-workers-forced-out-family-zones-qatar-doha-video>
 of men being escorted from public spaces.

The Ebola outbreak in Sierra Leone kept many women away from health clinics, 
and, now that the epidemic is over, they are slowly returning.Photographer Kate 
Holt visited the country’s free clinics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/apr/15/sierra-leone-saving-lives-mothers-babies-maternal-mortality-in-pictures>
 that aim to stop children and mothers dying.

Women smeared with red paint joined protests in the Peruvian capital, Lima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/apr/08/peru-election-forced-sterilisation-lima-protest-keiko-fujimori>
, to highlight the forced sterilisations overseen by former president Alberto 
Fujimori.

‘I don’t know when I last ate’: getting aid to South Sudan’s north 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/apr/09/i-dont-know-when-i-last-ate-getting-aid-to-south-sudans-north-in-pictures>
, in pictures.

What you said

On We street children need a legal identity. It’s a basic human right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/street-children-legal-identity-basic-human-right-international-day-street-child>
,Sam Wood wrote:

Dear Usha, lovely yet heart-rending article. Passing such high hurdles, to be 
in college is a tremendous achievement. Congratulations.

I am ashamed to say that I live in the same city and yet not particularly 
sensitive to those living on the streets. I probably have passed by your living 
space and yet blind. The fight against injustice is hard, prolonged and nasty, 
especially in the neoliberal, corporate-friendly governing structures in India 
at present. Your article hopefully would keep the fires of dissent burning. You 
didn’t mention your caste, perhaps deliberately so. But it is the doubly 
oppressed, i.e. the Dalits who would be in such a situation for three 
generations. If so, you are triply oppressed - Dalit, poor and a woman. You 
have risen up in spite of that. Congratulations.

Highlight from the blogosphere

What does it mean to “formalise” the informal sector? The International 
Institute for Environment and Development shares examples 
<http://www.iied.org/formalising-informal> of successful efforts to support the 
millions of people working in the informal economy.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team –@swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 