
The number of annual deaths caused by pollution is now greater than malaria 
and HIV combined, according to a recent study. The Guardian’s environment 
editor,John Vidal, examined the increasing severity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/16/winter-smog-hits-worlds-cities-air-pollution-soars>
 of toxic smogs in cities including Delhi, Kabul, Beijing and London.

Experts have warned world leaders that the humanitarian aid system needs 
substantial reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/17/fix-the-aid-system-or-you-will-fail-the-poor-experts-warn-world-leaders>
 to avoid failing the poor people. In a report commissioned by the UN ahead of 
theworld humanitarian summit in May <https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/>, 
the experts looked at alternative funding models, including micro-levies on 
corporations, a voluntary solidarity tax, and increased use of Islamic funding 
such as zakat religious contributions and Islamic bonds.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Burundi: ‘all alarm signals flashing red’ warns UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/15/burundi-all-alarm-signals-flashing-red-warns-un-as-reports-of-atrocities-mount>
 * In Ethiopia, anger over corruption and farmland development runs deep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/18/ethiopia-anger-over-corruption-farmland-development-runs-deep>
 * Last orders: South Sudan’s only brewery to shut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/15/south-sudan-only-brewery-shuts-civil-war-forex-shortage>
 * Cut from a different cloth: Palestinian textile company bridges the divide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/15/palestinian-artextile-company-gender-politics-israel>
 * Uganda determined not to let oil cash trickle away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/13/uganda-oil-production-yoweri-museveni-agriculture>
Opinion

The new global goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 to address poverty, inequality and climate change are universal in nature, so 
why is there no plan to achieve them in the UK? Jessica Toaleexamines the role 
of rich nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/18/poverty-inequality-uk-poorer-countries-sustainable-development-goals-climate-change-womens-rights>
 in implementing the sustainable development goals.

Who lives in the real world: global south pessimists or northern optimists? 
Jonathan Glennieexplores the breach between varying perspectives on development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/18/who-lives-in-the-real-world-global-south-pessimists-or-northern-optimists>
.

And Caroline Green questions why Britain isn’t doing more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/08/uk-national-action-plan-women-peace-security-war>
 to support the lives and livelihoods of women in conflict zones.

Multimedia

Video: Overseas domestic workers are being abused in the UK, often while 
living in some of London’s most exclusive neighbourhoods working for wealthy 
Gulf employers.Watch their story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/jan/11/i-was-just-a-slave-the-foreign-domestic-staff-living-a-life-of-five-star-serfdom-in-london-video>
 and meet the group of women helping them escape.

In pictures: Tunisia was dubbed the poster child of the Arab spring, but it 
faces economic, social and security challenges. International Alert spoke to
young people living in deprived suburbs of Tunis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/jan/14/tunisia-nothing-changed-since-revolution-ben-ali-in-pictures>
.

Take part

Which issues would you like to read about in 2016? Whether you’d like to see 
greater focus on a particular story, country or social movement,share your 
thoughts and help inform our journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/12/development-aid-which-issues-topics-countries-do-you-want-to-read-about-in-2016>
.

What you said

On If the world is getting better, where next for NGOs? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/06/world-getting-better-non-governmental-organisations-charities-sector>
,Jean Van Wetter wrote:

NGOs need to reinvent their funding models. The dependence on big 
institutional donors such as DfID and USAid is not sustainable. Social 
enterprises, impact investors and new age philanthropies will probably 
progressively have more influence than traditional donor-dependent NGOs.

There could also be some consolidation of the sector, with complementary NGOs 
merging. But more importantly, NGOs must innovate to remain relevant. This 
would mean more investments in research and development, and learning. It could 
also mean more partnerships with the academic and private sectors.

Highlight from the blogosphere

What’s happening to aid to the least developed countries? 
<http://www.iied.org/whats-happening-aid-least-developed-countries> from the 
International Institute for Environment and Development.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 