
Missing, believed lost, Alejandro Jodorowsky rolls into Cannes like a 
conquering hero. He has a room at the Croisette and a film in the directors' 
fortnight – a rambunctious sidebar away from the Palais. "I am like the rain, I 
go where I'm needed," the director explains. "If I were in the big house, with 
the red carpet and photographers and all the fancy women, I would be ashamed." 
He has always been happier way out on the fringes.

Jodorowsky turned 84 last birthday. He has white hair, bright eyes and a 
crocodile smile. It is now more than four decades since he thrilled the 
faithful asEl Topo <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/118037/el-topo>, a 
mysterious gunslinger in rabbinical black, and 23 years since he last sat 
behind a movie camera. We thought he was a goner, that it was all over bar the 
obit. Instead, it transpires, the man is barely getting started.

"Look at this, I show you something," he says, leafing through the pages of 
the magazine at his elbow. His tour leads us through a world of glossy 
advertisements. "Beautiful woman – selling things. Beautiful woman – selling 
things. The Great Gatsby – selling watches." It is the picture of Leonardo 
DiCaprio that really gets his goat. "Prostitution!" he roars. "He should be 
ashamed."
 Alejandro Jodorowsky stars in his 1970 film El Topo. Photograph: Alamy 

Jodorowsky's latest film, La Danza de la Realidad 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/18/cannes-2013-alejandro-jodorowsky-reality-dance>
, also feels like the first in that it unfolds as an exuberant magic-realist 
memoir of the director's own childhood, replete with iguanas, circus clowns and 
amputees. He shot most of the action in his hometown of Tocopilla, a dirt-poor 
Chilean village that he found had barely changed in the intervening decades. In 
a neat generational twist, the director's eldest son, Brontis, plays 
Jodorowsky's brutish Stalinist dad.

The whole thing was undertaken in a spirit of healing. "My father was a 
monster," he recalls. "A monster! I cut with my family when I was 23 and I 
never see them again. Oh yes, it was a terrible thing that I did. But what I am 
doing here is recovering them and giving them what they never had. My father 
had no humanity. So here, look, I am making him human."

As a boy, Jodorowsky was bullied for being Jewish and bullied for being 
bookish. Flight, he decided, was his only option. In Paris, he studied mime 
with Marcel Marceau and directed Maurice Chevalier in music-hall. In Mexico he 
outraged the authorities with an avant-garde theatre group. "In Mexico they 
want to kill me!" he marvels. "A soldier held a gun to my chest."
 Jodorowsky's magic-realist memoir of his own childhood, La Danza De La 
Realidad. 

By the early 70s he was a star of American counter-culture. El Topo, a 
demented peyote western <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ceHH3QGXvNw>, won an 
ardent fan in John Lennon and it was Lennon who helped secure the funds for 
1973's The Holy Mountain, in which the conquest of Mexico is re-enacted with 
chameleons dressed as Aztecs and toads playing conquistadors. And yet The Holy 
Mountain would prove too rich and wild a brew and, since then, Jodorowsky's 
career has been an infuriatingly stop-start affair. Here at Cannes, another 
festival picture (Jodorowsky's Dune) charts his endless, agonised attempts to 
spin a film out of the Frank Herbert fantasy tome. The film was eventually 
directed by David Lynch, while many of its visual ideas filtered through to 
Ridley Scott's Alien. Jodorowsky, for his part, was left out in the cold.

Such indignities might have undone a lesser man. Yet Jodorowsky claims to be 
altogether untroubled. The ticking clock means nothing to him. "Anyone who 
thinks they will get older and die has a big problem," he says. "Tarantino says 
that he will stop when he gets old because the pictures are for young people, I 
don't believe it. I am going to live 120 years."

Besides, he says, he has always been able to keep himself busy. At home in 
Paris he writes comic-books, reads the tarot and gives free lectures on his 
theory of "psychomagic", which strikes me as a peculiarly Jodorowskyan blend of 
psychotherapy and shamanistic mumbo-jumbo. "Lots of psychomagic in this film! 
My son playing my father. Psychomagic! The boy in the film is afraid of the 
night, just as I am. So he paints himself black. Psychomagic! Not afraid of the 
dark any more." He laughs. "People say I am mad. I am not mad. I am trying to 
heal my soul."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHHiA3w6Y3KA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHHiA3w6Y3KA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHHiA3w6Y3KA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HHiA3w6Y3KA>
From time to time, Jodorowsky even pops up in La Danza de la Realidad himself. 
He plays a kind of wise, white-bearded angel, grinning his crocodile grin and 
cradling the child in his arms. If he could really go back, what would he say 
to his bullied younger self?

"But this is what I did in the film," he says, as though I missed some crucial 
point; as if there is no distinction between his film and his life. "I say: 
'Listen, don't suffer, I am here. You are not alone because you are with me.' I 
felt so alone as a boy because no one wanted to be friends with me. But I say: 
'I am with you and just listen what you will do. You will be an artist, you 
will travel. You will be happy.'" Jodorowsky, it turns out, was who Jodorowsky 
was waiting for all along.
 