
Alessandro Michele has changed what the Gucci loafer means. At the beginning 
of 2015, beforeMichele’s promotion from accessories to the design hot seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/jan/21/-sp-gucci-names-accessories-chief-alessandro-michele-as-creative-director>
, the shoe was an international symbol for smooth, establishment sophistication 
and a certain type of expensive-restaurant sex appeal. After two seasons of 
Michele’s Gucci, the loafer – backless and fur-soled for autumn, raised on a 
pearl-studded heel for spring – stands for surrealism, androgyny and an 
avant-garde kind of luxury.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8fdbd66197417dd2072969b0f02615f744c9dd2%2F731_174_1072_3554%2F1072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alessandro%20Michele%20brings%20Milan%20fashion%20week%20under%20Gucci's%20heel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alessandro%20Michele%20brings%20Milan%20fashion%20week%20under%20Gucci%27s%20heel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8fdbd66197417dd2072969b0f02615f744c9dd2%2F731_174_1072_3554%2F1072.jpg>
 Gucci at Milan Fashion Week on Wednesday. Photograph: REX Shutterstock 
The reinvention of Gucci has been the fashion industry story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/25/milan-fashion-week-guccis-smart-revamp-ensures-brains-restore-fawn>
 of the year so far. A label that arguably stagnated under designer Frida 
Giannini, retreating from the sex-and-rock’n’roll image it had had under Tom 
Ford without finding a new direction, has invented an aesthetic – dubbed the 
glam Gucci geek, or the glitter geek – that is now setting the fashion agenda. 
As a result, Michele’s second major Gucci womenswear collection was the most 
high-stakes show on the Milan fashion schedule this week. Having written a 
gripping opening to his new Gucci story, the question now becomes whether 
Michele can sustain the momentum.

London fashion week: our favourite shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/sep/23/london-fashion-week-favourite-shows>
This season, the show venue moved from the theatre in central Milan which was 
favoured by both Giannini and Ford to a disused railway depot. Disused railway 
depot is, of course, fashion week shorthand for raw and edgy, a message 
underlined by the pouring rain that clattered on to the corrugated iron roof. 
The designer sent out a message that contrasted with the slick old-Gucci 
aesthetic in another way. Where once upon a time aGucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> invite could be replied upon to be 
a slab of expensively embossed gold paper or a scrap of white leather, this 
season it was a delicate pink mesh envelope, hand embroidered with tiny red 
roses.

There is no faulting Michele on the grandness of his vision for Gucci. These 
were not just clothes, he explained on notes handed out before the catwalk show 
began, but “psycho-geographic maps capable of recording the urban unconscious”. 
His vision for the show was based on two concepts, both of which are about the 
relationship between physical geography and maps, on the one hand, and the 
internal landscape of thought and emotion on the other. First, the Situationist 
concept of adérive <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%C3%A9rive>. This is an 
unplanned walk through urban landscape, the route determined by the walkers’ 
instinctive reactions to their surroundings, with new experiences and the 
discovery of both landscape and oneself as the objective. Second, Madeleine de 
Scudéry’s 1654 Carte de Tendre, a drawn map of a female emotion that shows how 
the road to tenderness winds via the village of love letters, and maps how a 
small detour could lead to a sad end in the lake of indifference. To Michele, 
clothes are “an atlas of emotions”. He said backstage that he had “tried to map 
what was in my head”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19609a6327061fc2a0e9e1959c894d44000cc1fa%2F0_408_1328_1990%2F1328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alessandro%20Michele%20brings%20Milan%20fashion%20week%20under%20Gucci's%20heel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alessandro%20Michele%20brings%20Milan%20fashion%20week%20under%20Gucci%27s%20heel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19609a6327061fc2a0e9e1959c894d44000cc1fa%2F0_408_1328_1990%2F1328.jpg>
 Michele’s background as an accessory designer came through in a new higher 
profile for handbags and shoes. Photograph: Daniel Dal Zennaro/EPA 
The collection built on last season’s ideas. Frump-length skirts came in 
disco-dolly fabrics; spectacles and plaits gave a nerdy edge to printed silk 
dresses. A green trouser suit was worn with a pink pussy-bow blouse, berets and 
neck ties and brightly coloured suitcases leant an eccentric glamour. The 
establishment of a core aesthetic is commercially essential, because the brand 
is currently designing new stores and packaging to fit Michele’s vision, and 
these will need to chime with collections some years in the future. (The Milan 
flagship, the first to be redesigned, is losing the wood panelling and gold 
hardware in favour of marble and velvet.) Michele’s background as an accessory 
designer came through in a new higher profile for handbags and shoes, with 
colourful and playful takes on the house classics.

If Gucci is to set the fashion pace, newness each season is essential. This 
season there was just enough – more heels, more sheer fabrics, more femininity. 
The aesthetic moved away from androgyny to something more female. (De Scudéry’s 
Carte de Tendre is considered something of an iconic feminist document, its 
public exploration of the complexity of a woman’s inner life being ahead of its 
time in the 17th century.) The backless, high-heeled loafers and racing-striped 
handbags have enough mainstream appeal to bring the Gucci customer along on 
Michele’s ride. For one more season, at least, he is leading the pack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F817c9f75bcdec507e4a5faed91983660b410e969%2F0_0_3280_4919%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alessandro%20Michele%20brings%20Milan%20fashion%20week%20under%20Gucci's%20heel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alessandro%20Michele%20brings%20Milan%20fashion%20week%20under%20Gucci%27s%20heel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Falessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F817c9f75bcdec507e4a5faed91983660b410e969%2F0_0_3280_4919%2F3280.jpg>
 A model presents a creation for fashion house Gucci. Photograph: Tiziana 
Fabi/AFP/Getty Images  