
In school plays, Alice Lowe always took the part the other children didn’t 
want. In Hansel and Gretel, she remembers little girls crying because they 
didn’t want to be the witch, a part that Lowe seemed to have taken on with a 
mixture of resignation and warped delight. Looking back, she says with a laugh, 
“I often think this is quite significant.” She never played Mary, for instance, 
in the nativity. Or Juliet. “I never got that gig. I would always be the weird 
character that nobody else wanted to play. I’m still the person who doesn’t 
mind being the ugly evil weirdo who murders people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e0ecc162233b5a4cd5cde8bf871b419c56a1872%2F0_7_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20mind%20being%20the%20evil%20weirdo%20who%20murders%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20mind%20being%20the%20evil%20weirdo%20who%20murders%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e0ecc162233b5a4cd5cde8bf871b419c56a1872%2F0_7_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 ‘I show pregnancy as this vivid, almost sci-fi experience’: Lowe in Prevenge. 
Photograph: Western Edge Pictures 
Recently, she has been killer caravanner Tina in the film Sightseers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sightseers>, which she co-wrote, and, this 
year, a con artist inBlack Mountain Poets 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CwxRVDDXOZY>. But most monstrous of all is 
Ruth, a homicidal mother-to-be inPrevenge 
<http://www.screendaily.com/news/alice-lowe-starts-shoot-for-feature-directorial-debut-prevenge/5095983.article>
, the film Lowe wrote, directed and starred in while she was seven months 
pregnant. She had been trying to get another film off the ground for several 
years, when suddenly she had this idea, but little time – she didn’t know if 
her bump would drastically change shape, or if she would get ill. So, she wrote 
the script in a couple of weeks, and it was shot in 11 days over three weeks. 
“In a way, being pregnant liberated me: I’m doing this, it might be my last 
chance to direct anything,” she says. “I don’t know if it was hormones, but I 
just felt like: ‘This is fine, I can do this.’ And if it doesn’t work, it 
doesn’t matter – it’s not the most important thing in my life.” Soon after 
giving birth to her daughter, she was looking over the rushes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62a280850f3f8491cf0f32731b186e47ac7619d2%2F54_191_1172_703%2F1172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20mind%20being%20the%20evil%20weirdo%20who%20murders%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20mind%20being%20the%20evil%20weirdo%20who%20murders%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62a280850f3f8491cf0f32731b186e47ac7619d2%2F54_191_1172_703%2F1172.jpg>
 Lowe with Steve Oram in Sightseers. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Lowe’s daughter is, she says, a “working baby” (she spent quite a lot of her 
first few months in the editing suite). They arrive together and we sit in the 
sunny garden of a cafe near Lowe’s home in south London. I wonder what her 
daughter , who is, of course, delightful and contented, will make of the film 
when she’s old enough to watch it. “I don’t think I gave that enough thought,” 
says Lowe with a laugh. “I hope she’ll know it’s not indicative of how I feel 
about her.”

In one scene, where Ruth is having an antenatal appointment with a midwife, 
she describes her unborn baby as having staged a “hostile takeover”. “It was 
more my fears put down into a script rather than what actually happened. I 
enjoyed my pregnancy. It was more about what I felt before I had a child. I 
don’t know if I’d write that same script now. When I watch the film I think: 
‘That’s another person.’ Someone who was scared of having a kid. I was going 
through all this emotional thing of do I have any choice over my own body, over 
my own life, my own will? I think it’s a post-millennial problem that we’re all 
such babies ourselves. The idea of someone else being the most important centre 
of your universe is quite scary to our generation.”

Sightseers: Alice Lowe and the secret terrors of caravanning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/23/alice-lowe-sightseers> 
Scare stories, familiar to any soon-to-be parents, piled up. “The number of 
people who told me I was never going to sleep again and all this stuff. Which I 
think is total bullshit.” People seem to take glee in passing on the idea that 
“your life is going to be over. I found the more I dreaded it, the more I’ve 
enjoyed it, because I wasn’t expecting to”.

As for depictions of pregnancy in film, most of it came from a male 
perspective. It’s all, she says, putting on a generic funny-man voice: “Ooh, 
she’s gone a bit mad, isn’t it funny. She’s giving birth and squeezing my hand 
– ow!” She grimaces. “I wanted it to be more this is fucking alien-type shit,” 
she says. “To me, it was vivid. There are so many hormones rushing through you 
that it’s almost psychedelic. I had days of euphoria, and other days where I 
would be really cross. I wanted to make something that showed pregnancy as this 
vivid, almost sci-fi experience. I wanted that with the music, imagery, the 
brightness.” Definitely no soft, babyish pastels, she says. “I wanted it to be 
something that felt fresh to people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88881fd4ba59f527200faf133205444974f5c308%2F0_15_697_418%2F697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20mind%20being%20the%20evil%20weirdo%20who%20murders%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20mind%20being%20the%20evil%20weirdo%20who%20murders%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Falice-lowe-killer-sightseers-prevenge-female-film-makers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88881fd4ba59f527200faf133205444974f5c308%2F0_15_697_418%2F697.jpg>
 Lowe in the horror parody Garth Marenghi’s Darkplace. Photograph: Channel 4 
And Ruth? We’re so conditioned to seeing pregnant women as nurturing and 
vulnerable, and in need of protection, but Lowe twists this spectacularly. She 
showed an early version of the film to another director and asked him for his 
comments – he said Ruth needed to be more likeable (Lowe ignored this). “What I 
wanted to say was people don’t really change when they have a baby – or I don’t 
feel like I have, anyway. I’ve got some different perspectives, but the core of 
me is the same. And that’s the thing that’s expected – that you will drop 
everything and become A Mother, and that’s the only thing you are.”

She’d had preparation for this. Lowe, who has been working for years mainly in 
TV comedy – as Dr Liz Asher in the horror parodyGarth Marenghi’s Darkplace 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Crrso-ZFq9Y>, popping up in Horrible Histories 
and in the Sky comedyThis is Jinsy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/This_is_Jinsy>
 – had started describing the roles she was being offered as “the crying mother 
role”. “You get past the age of 35 and suddenly you’re just going to play mums 
now and you’re weeping over something – whether the child is dead, missing, or 
being naughty, or you’re being really supportive and caring. Why is it that 
when you become a mother every other part of your identity is erased? You might 
be a nightmare as a person. But once you’re a mother in [TV and film] you might 
as well not have a name, you’re just Mother. I wanted to write a character that 
wasn’t that.”

Lowe has always been obsessed with television and films. As a child, she would 
look through the TV listings for late-night horror films, B movies or weird 
comedies and sneak downstairs to watch them when her parents were in bed. She 
went to drama club and liked it because she says she was a bit lazy, “and it 
wasn’t something I had to practice in between, like piano”. Her mum had tried 
to get her into more hobbies, but her main interest was watching the telly.

On my radar: Alice Lowe’s cultural highlights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/03/alice-lowe-on-my-radar-grimes-neil-gaiman>
She thought she might become a set or costume designer, but at Cambridge she 
became friends with Matt Holness, Richard Ayoade and Paul King. They would go 
on to create Garth Marenghi, which started as an Edinburgh show, and asked Lowe 
to be in it. After that became a much-loved Channel 4 series, she worked her 
way through a number of TV comedies: Black Books, The Mighty Boosh, The IT 
Crowd. She has a cult fanbase, but not mainstream success. Has that bothered 
her? “I’ve missed some opportunities, and I’ve probably screwed some up,” she 
says. “I’ve definitely been scared of being pigeonholed. I felt like if I was 
the lead in that sitcom, that would be it, the defining role and people 
wouldn’t let me do anything different.

I once had an agent who said it’s not that great, as a woman, to do lots of 
different performances and to look quite different [in each role], because 
people don’t remember you or know who you are. Whereas I think that’s a 
strength. That’s one of the themes of this film – the lead character is, to me, 
an anti-superheroine. What if female transformation was a superhero skill? 
She’s pregnant, not pregnant, she’s pretty, she’s ugly.”

Sometimes, she says, she thinks it would be nice to have a bigger house, but 
she says she likes the feeling of striving, always thinking what’s next. “I 
never feel like my best work is behind me. I always feel excited about what I’m 
doing and it has taken me a long time to believe that I’m good at it. Building 
confidence is like a work-in-progress for me, and I think it is for most women. 
You have to front this arrogance, especially as a director.”

There are still things that are new and taboo and open to being told by women

Lowe is working on another five projects, and has “endless ideas”. While she 
is waiting for someone to read her script, she just writes another one. “In the 
past I would have thought: ‘Maybe these aren’t good enough,’ but they are good 
enough, I could be making films all the time.” The problem is getting them 
made. It’s difficult for everyone who wants to make films in Britain, she says, 
but she has noticed that, for her and other female directors, it seems to be 
even harder. “There is a point where you’ve proved yourself and proved 
yourself, and [producers and people who fund films] still perceive you as a 
risk, and that doesn’t happen to men. That’s what I feel, I see men failing 
upwards and you go: ‘I’ve worked with them and they were awful.’”

It is changing, she says. “When I talk about the brilliant directors I’ve 
worked with in the past 10 years, I’m mentioning a lot of men. When I talk 
about the brilliant directors in the past couple of years, there are loads of 
women.” It means there is a wealth of women’s stories and perspectives that 
have a better chance of being seen. “There are still things that are new and 
taboo and open to being told by women.” Lowe stands up and bounces her daughter 
gently on her hip. “I like to be positive about it. I think, could a man have 
made this film? And I don’t think so.”

• Prevenge premieres at the Venice film festival on 31 August
 