
‘I don’t have the best feet,” Alicia Vikander says matter-of-factly midway 
through our interview. She doesn’t speak in the smugly self-deprecating tone of 
unnervingly beautiful celebrities eager to point out that they, too, are humans 
with physical insecurities; rather, it’s expressed as a shrugging statement of 
fact.

As politely as possible, I shift in my chair to glance at the feet in 
question. “Best” is a strong word, and I’m no podiatrist, but at worst, they’re 
on the elegant end of normal: petite, pedicured, housed in nude-coloured heels 
of purposeful height and pointiness. For a 27-year-old Swedish actor somehow 
striding into mainstream cinema from multiple doors at once, they appear to be 
holding her up just fine.

Yet for a ballerina, Vikander explains, they were less than ideal. At the 
Royal Swedish Ballet School, where she trained in her teens, they weren’t the 
fleetest or most fluid, and didn’t turn quite as well as some of the other 
girls’. Born and raised in Gothenberg, Vikander had dreamed of a life in tutus 
since a Christmas outing toThe Nutcracker at the age of five; at 15, she was 
permitted to move on her own to Stockholm to study ballet. Yet while playing 
the non-dancing, all-miming unisex role of the Witch in her academy’s 
production ofLes Sylphides, it occurred to the young dancer that maybe acting 
was her stronger suit. As the only child of veteran Swedish stage actor Maria 
Fahl Vikander, that can’t have come as the greatest surprise.

Another decade on, we can thank those faulty feet for making Vikander the most 
ubiquitous screen presence of 2015. Asked if even she knows how many of her 
films have hit screens this year, she lithely avoids giving a number. “They 
come out at different times in different places, I don’t keep track!” she 
laughs.

The answer is seven, chronologically bookended by the most prestigious. In 
January, audiences thrilled to Alex Garland’s sleek, slippery sci-fi provocation
Ex Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/25/ex-machina-review-mark-kermode-alex-garland-vikander>
, starring Vikander as Ava, the disarmingly sentient feminised robot who turns 
the tables on her male minders. Soon they’ll see her in a very different gender 
inquiry: in Tom Hooper’s lushly mounted period biopicThe Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/danish-girl-eddie-redmayne-tom-hooper-transgender-actors-venice>
, she plays painter Gerda Wegener, the emotionally conflicted wife of 
pioneering transgender surgery recipient Lili Elbe, played by Eddie Redmayne.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd88APYIGkjk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd88APYIGkjk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd88APYIGkjk&media=>
 Watch a trailer for The Danish Girl. 
Her roles between those two have varied wildly. Playing celebrated first world 
war diarist Vera Brittain, she anchored the handsome BBC weepieTestament of 
Youth with stout-hearted conviction; months later, she was on frisky female 
sidekick duty in Guy Ritchie’s well-clothed cold war rompThe Man from UNCLE. 
She brought a tang of romantic regret to the underperforming Bradley Cooper 
vehicleBurnt, and some Russian-accented femme fatale attitude to the breakneck 
Aussie thrillerSon of a Gun. And if we’ve forgotten she was in March’s dismal 
sword-and-sorcery bombSeventh Son, perhaps she has too; it never comes up in 
our conversation.

Even with such misfires, this portfolio more than justifies the “Year of 
Alicia Vikander” headlines currently peppering magazine racks — her celebrity 
profile having been further abetted by a closely guarded relationship with 
Michael Fassbender and herselection by Louis Vuitton 
<http://us.louisvuitton.com/eng-us/articles/series-3-the-fall-2015-campaign-with-alicia-vikander>
 as, in their own lofty words, “the new muse of the Maison”. Last week she 
receiveda brace of Golden Globe nominations 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/la-env-golden-globe-nominations-live-updates-htmlstory.html>
 forThe Danish Girl and Ex Machina. But she’s quick to point out that 
saturation wasn’t a strategy. “It’s a coincidence, really,” she says. “All 
these films that I shot at different times over three years simply all arrived 
together this year. Remember when Jessica Chastain was suddenly in so many 
films at once? I suppose it’s like that. I hope so, because she’s incredible.”

Vikander’s breakthrough does indeed recall the American actor’s multi-pronged 
screen assault in 2011; the Swedish ingenue was sufficiently dazzled by 
Chastain inThe Tree of Life to see it twice in cinemas – a year before the 
Oscar-nominated Danish costume dramaA Royal Affair, followed in short order by 
a film-stealing English-language debut as Kitty in Joe Wright’s diorama-style
Anna Karenina, brought Vikander to the attention of international viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/02/alicia-vikander-anna-karenina-interview>
.

Since then, she’s been shooting almost constantly, flitting in and out of her 
north London apartment as if it were a hotel – albeit one where she has, as she 
explains with disarming excitement, finally become acquainted with her 
neighbours: “It took me two-and-a-half years of living here with just three 
bags, but it has just about started to feel like home.” When we meet, in a 
silk-draped Claridge’s suite, she’s just a day off the plane from Washington 
DC, where she’s been immersed in Paul Greengrass and Matt Damon’s eagerly 
awaited return to the Jason Bourne action franchise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Falicia-vikander-danish-girl-interview-ex-machina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facba802d016511e0a78d404ac1acd70a8afe4084%2F0_0_1332_799%2F1332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alicia%20Vikander%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20made%20five%20films%20in%20a%20row%20before%20I%20had%20a%20scene%20with%20another%20woman%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Falicia-vikander-danish-girl-interview-ex-machina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alicia%20Vikander%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20made%20five%20films%20in%20a%20row%20before%20I%20had%20a%20scene%20with%20another%20woman%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Falicia-vikander-danish-girl-interview-ex-machina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facba802d016511e0a78d404ac1acd70a8afe4084%2F0_0_1332_799%2F1332.jpg>
 The actor plays Ava the robot in Ex Machina, a role that earned her a Golden 
Globe nomination last week Photograph: AP 
Her entry into the realm of such studio tentpoles has added an unfamiliar 
degree of promotional work to an already crammed timetable. Also new to her is 
the glad-handing and red carpet-grazing of the film awards season. The Oscars 
may not be until late February, but the four-month marathon of campaign 
receptions and precursor prize-giving ceremonies is already well under way. 
Vikander admits to being bemused by it all. “Up until 18 months ago, I thought 
the term ‘awards season’ was a kind of joke,” she says. “I had never really 
reflected that a certain kind of serious film came out later in the year. I 
just thought fall seemed like a good time to go to the movies. It’s colder, 
after all.”

We had both attended the British independent film awards – one of the 
circuit’s boozier, jollier shindigs – the night before. If I’m feeling worse 
for wear, her face betrays neither hangover nor transatlantic jet-lag, though 
she insists that she partied late. “I may not be a dancer any more, but I do 
love a boogie,” she says, lightly chair-dancing for emphasis. She takes 
alternating sips from a Diet Coke and a bamboo-hued herbal tea.

As for the awards themselves, it was swings and roundabouts: Vikander lost her 
best actress bid forThe Danish Girl to Brooklyn star Saoirse Ronan, but 
delighted in an unexpectedsweep of the night’s top gongs for Ex Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/07/ex-machina-wins-at-british-independent-film-awards>
. Halfway through the ceremony she was informed that the influential Los 
Angeles Film Critics Association had justvoted her best supporting actress 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/movies/moviesnow/la-et-mn-los-angeles-film-critics-awards-winners-2015-20151206-story.html>
 for Garland’s film. “This worldwide spread of recognition is insane,” she 
murmurs. “I was brought up in a small country. If you made a Swedish film that 
just got into a film festival somewhere, that was like the biggest thing you 
could wish for.”

Further accolades for her roles as Ava and Gerda are likely over the next 
weeks, and she’s equally deserving of honours for either. She is coolly 
heart-clutching inEx Machina as an android studying, both physically and 
psychologically, what it means to be a woman; inThe Danish Girl, she’s a 
vibrant, sensitive reflector for a biological man going through the same 
complex learning process. Her Oscar campaign has her classified as a supporting 
actress in the latter, though that rather misrepresents the film. Either 
Vikander’s Gerda or Redmayne’s Lili could be viewed as the Danish girl of the 
title, as the narrative dwells less on one spouse’s transformation than the 
evolution of their marriage as a result.

“It’s about them going through a transition, not just him,” says Vikander, who 
was greatly moved by Gerda’s split impulse between supporting her husband’s 
wish to be his true self and mourning the loss of a lover. “In any 
relationship, when you go through any big change, you struggle to find your new 
constellation, your new ground. It takes a while to determine what the new 
relationship between you is. I could relate to that. That got to me 
immediately.”

Three trans women told me they had felt a connection with Ava, and her dream 
of finally coming to full female fruition

Less obvious to Vikander at the time of filming was the thematic dovetailing of
The Danish Girl with Ex Machina as a story of adopted female identity. It was 
only when she represented the former at Champions of Change, a White House 
event celebrating LGBT media luminaries, that it became clear to her via 
feedback from transgender attendees who had seen both films. “Three trans women 
came up to me separately to tell me they had felt such a connection with Ava in
Ex Machina, and her dream of finally coming to full female fruition,” she 
remembers. “They had all cried; one said she was very emotional during the 
scene where Ava finally puts her skin on for the first time. I hadn’t really 
made that connection, yet that was very much what I felt when I did that scene. 
That longing.”

Vikander likens this to her own strong sense of desiring womanhood when she 
was a young girl: “I vividly remember watching women in films when I was nine 
or 10, picturing them being what I’d be like as an adult. I had these real 
female crushes on certain actresses. And I’d watch them thinking, one day I’ll 
be that. One day I’ll be a woman. It’s obviously not the same, but I get that 
wish to find your complete form.”

I ask if she can name any of these youthful crushes. Her creamy complexion 
pinkens. “Oh God,” she murmurs, eyes darting from side to side as if one of 
them might be lurking in the linen cupboard. “Helena Bonham Carter was one of 
my biggest crushes. And Rachel Weisz. I think I told her that when we were 
filming, which was probably a bit embarrassing.”

Weisz and Vikander co-star in The Light Between Oceans 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2547584/>, Blue Valentine director Derek 
Cianfrance’s adaptation, due in 2016, of ML Stedman’s emotive bestseller. 
Fassbender and Vikander play husband and wife. She saw the fourth cut on a 
recent trip to New York; she says she prefers watching her films in progress 
than after the final edit. “I’m very interested in the editing process – in all 
aspects of film-making, really,” she says, adding that she’d consider getting 
behind the camera at some point.

One of Vikander’s repeat collaborators is the Swedish playwright and film-maker
Lisa Langseth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n5YPyo4BYn4>, who directed her 
in her debut film role in 2009’sPure; they reteamed four years later for Hotell
, a darkly comic group-therapy study that currently marks the actor’s last 
non-English-speaking role. Despite the attentions of Hollywood, she’s keen to 
work with Langseth again, and to maintain a presence in European cinema. Ingrid 
Bergman managed that balance in the end, after all; Vikander, who earlier this 
year channelled the Swedish icon to narrate the documentaryIngrid Bergman: In 
Her Own Words <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TEh5Nh4a9WE>, is probably weary 
of the comparison, however flattering. Still, a similarly international A-list 
career beckons, straddling languages as fluently as genres. With endearingly 
girlish reverence, she cites French star Marion Cotillard as her key 
contemporary inspiration and dream collaborator.

Indeed, if Vikander has any one complaint about a thus far charmed career, 
it’s that she doesn’t get to work with other women nearly enough – a 
realisation that hit home on the set of another of her scheduled 2016 releases, 
the Tom Stoppard-scripted historical romanceTulip Fever 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0491203/>. “Of course I’ve had a run of great 
opportunities and characters to play, but I was shooting this scene with 
Holliday Grainger that just felt like something new,” she says. “It just came 
so easily, and we were having so much fun. And only when we were chatting 
afterwards did I suddenly realise why: I’d just made five films in a row, and 
this was the first one where I had a scene with another woman.”

So will she be more mindful of the Bechdel test – the feminist guideline that 
requires films to feature scenes of female characters in conversation, not 
about a man – in future? “Well, yes, but I just felt so embarrassed that I 
hadn’t realised that earlier. Women talking together – apparently it is a 
reality! Who knew? And while we talk about the lack of female leads in films 
today, male domination is just as strong in supporting roles.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Falicia-vikander-danish-girl-interview-ex-machina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7da4bdba8f224907421bea1961d5718bc2507f2%2F0_242_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alicia%20Vikander%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20made%20five%20films%20in%20a%20row%20before%20I%20had%20a%20scene%20with%20another%20woman%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Falicia-vikander-danish-girl-interview-ex-machina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alicia%20Vikander%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20made%20five%20films%20in%20a%20row%20before%20I%20had%20a%20scene%20with%20another%20woman%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Falicia-vikander-danish-girl-interview-ex-machina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7da4bdba8f224907421bea1961d5718bc2507f2%2F0_242_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Vikander, with Kit Harrington, as Vera Brittain in Testament of Youth 
Photograph: Allstar/BBC FILMS/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
With or without female scene partners (or directors, for that matter), a 
streak of feminist resolve has run through a number of Vikander’s recent 
projects, includingTestament of Youth, Ex Machina and The Danish Girl. Vikander 
describes feminism as essential to her own identity and upbringing – “where I 
grew up, it’s a word of equality for men and women, not something to question” 
– and certainly doesn’t pick such roles by accident, though she tires of the 
media equating “strength” in female characters with unyielding toughness.

“Gerda or Ava or Vera are all strong characters in different ways. I don’t 
think so much about whether I’m playing a strong person or not – it’s not that 
the character needs to be loud or straightforward,” she elaborates. “It can be 
a fragile, flawed person, but if they have enough dimension, and depth that you 
understand them even at their weakest, that’s a strong character to me. Then 
you have something to play, and play with. It’s about not being ‘the girl’.”

Is she concerned that she may be regarded as just that when taking a role in a 
project likeThe Man from UNCLE, in which her character is wooed by a burly male 
super-spy and gets to model a procession of Audrey Hepburn-style outfits? 
“Well, you need silly movies too! And what I liked about that script was that 
it wasn’t just dumb action or slapstick – it’s a comedy about strange 
characters clashing, and that chemistry is what’s funny.”

So, not every project can be chosen on the basis of its political or 
representational properties, then. But Vikander is optimistic that the gender 
balance in the industry is slowly shifting. “There’s a change happening, and I 
want to be part of that,” she says. “I’m so new, I’ve only been reading scripts 
for a few years on the international market, but you see something likeThe 
Hunger Games or Insurgent proving that a female role can carry a successful 
blockbuster, and that means something. You begin to feel their effect. When 
people in the industry and in the media are acknowledging the issue and talking 
about it, then you begin to look around and realise what needs to be done.”

Media interest has its flipside, of course. Vikander is newly confronting the 
through-the-looking-glass absurdity of paparazzi attention, having recently 
discovered a series of snapshots of her running errands in Soho – over 30 of 
them, taken over four hours – had surfaced on celebrity news sites. “There’s 
nothing to them: I’m just buying a book and meeting a friend for coffee,” she 
says. “It’s just very strange. And it’s hard to say anything’s tough when 
you’re getting to make a career out of what you love most, but I don’t think 
that’s anything you can be used to.”

“I like mystery,” she continues. “I like not knowing about my favourite 
actresses and actors. I love seeing Meryl Streep up there and knowing so little 
about who she is outside of what she’s playing on screen. But I meet 
journalists and even young girls who say, ‘Oh, we just want to know more about 
you.’ I guess it’s become another a character, a role in a way, for actors to 
play – this version of themselves to present to them. But it is a made-up idea 
of who you are.”

I tried it social media for two weeks but I felt this constant pressure to 
post. I was so stressed.

She eschews social media out of the same wariness. “I tried it once for two 
weeks but I felt this constant pressure to post. I was so stressed.”

If Vikander finds it comparably stressful to retain secrets while also giving 
hour-long interviews to the likes of me, she doesn’t let on. She’s a savvy 
operator, after all, having briefly signed up for law school after quitting 
ballet, before fate (or at least casting directors) intervened. You could argue 
that her catholic taste in film projects, her blithe veering between arthouse 
and multiplex, between Hollywood and Scandinavia and the UK, is a neat way of 
preserving her own actorly mystique, of preventing her audience from pinning 
her down, on camera or off. I ask if she ever misses ballet. It’s a more 
punishing calling, perhaps, but outside of performance, a less public one.

She shakes her head softly. “Of course, each time I go to the opera house and 
sit down and the curtain goes up, it hits me quite hard,” she says. “I cry, 
because, like art, it puts you in a place where you’re transferred somewhere 
else, and all these ‘what ifs’ come up in my head. But when the curtain goes 
down, I know I couldn’t keep up. I feel I’m just an outsider looking in, really 
impressed.”

The Danish Girl is released in the UK on 1 January
 