
You don’t have to be posh or clever to put on tweed, but historically if 
you’re wearing it, you are one or the other. Even now when you slip on some 
tweed it’s impossible not to look as if you’re making a sartorial statement 
about intellect or class. No matter how many hipsters wear an ironic flatcap, 
it will always belong to the country set. Tweed overcoats will always belong to 
the erudite or aristocratic, to Sherlock Holmes, Doctor Who or Robert Crawley, 
Earl of Grantham. When Coco Chanel used the fabric for womenswear in 1924 she 
was inspired by the wardrobe of her lover, the Duke of Westminster. You don’t 
get much posher than that.

It’s annoying because, as well as being an emblem of status or ability, it’s a 
useful fabric: tough, waterproof and attractive with its houndstooth, 
herringbone and windowpane weaves.

It will be interesting to see if the new season’s take on tweed makes any 
difference. This year designers have really, really tried to look at its plaids 
and checks in a whole new way. AtHouse of Holland 
<http://www.houseofholland.co.uk/> and Roberto Cavalli 
<http://store.robertocavalli.com/gb/robertocavalli?gclid=CIjJ-4X5pccCFU3LtAodRNcNHg&tp=98760>
 the traditional patterns were stamped on sequinned material and Lurex. The 
islanders of Harris would not approve. AtDior 
<http://www.dior.com/home/en_gb?gclid=CJjVxpH5pccCFfQatAodd_0CDQ> the coats 
came in acid green and the once demure skirts had multiple splits, which made 
the tweed feel refreshingly different. Young British designer Simone Rocha 
<http://simonerocha.com/> showed voluminous dresses in red and black and Miu Miu
 <http://www.miumiu.com/en> had it all ways – unusual clothes in typical tweed 
and crazy colours for traditional tweedy garments, such as overcoats and suits.

The high street has jumped on the bandwagon with enthusiasm. And why not? 
Adapting and modifying the fashion status quo should be part of what middle 
market retailers do.Kurt Geiger 
<http://www.kurtgeiger.com/women/shoes/courts.html?brand=brand%7CCarvela+Kurt+Geiger~~~Miss+KG&gclid=CO2nyuj5pccCFWnLtAodIAUKPg>
 has some lovely trainers in bright pink tweed – though I do wonder

if they’re as waterproof as the original fabric. If there are materials and 
colours to be fiddled around with, thenCos <http://www.cosstores.com/gb/> is 
always happy to have a go and this is no exception. Look on the website for 
some interesting reinterpretations, but this fading check sweatshirt is my 
favourite.

Also, good on Marks & Spencer <http://www.marksandspencer.com/> for creating 
this fondant-yellow jacket. I feel sorry for M&S. Every time the store’s sales 
rise or fall it’s reported as some sort of insight into the mores of the middle 
classes or evidence of the fallibility of a crumbling British institution, 
instead of just information about a shop which, you know, gets it a bit wrong 
now and again. It must be hard to focus on creating a strong brand against that 
backdrop. But this season promises to be a good one for fashion at M&S, so make 
sure you browse its rails long and often in the coming months.

Keeping an open mind about tradition is important, whether it’s tweed or M&S. 
The posh people might not like it, but it’s the clever thing to do.

Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>


Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 