
Well, we’ve made it through Christmas. Through the pigs in blankets and the 
easy peelers. The pass-agg family time and the ill-considered opinions blurted 
out after one too many glasses of Lidl prosecco. The drag of the Queen’s Speech 
andFrozen on repeat. Now comes the fun bit: New Year’s Eve.

It’s hard not to love a celebration that can be as big or as small as you 
want, which has no set meal, only one set song – of which people only know one 
verse. I’ve seen in the new year in clubs and at house parties. I listened to 
the countdown from under a pile of coats on a sofa once when I peaked early. 
I’ve been in Trafalgar Square and by the Thames for the fireworks among the 
jostling crowds. I’ve been to smart dinner parties. But I remember new years 
seen in on the sofa just as fondly. Clive James on the TV in the 90s, Jools 
Holland ever since.

New Year’s Eve is still significant when it’s just a toast, a hug or a kiss at 
midnight. Even if you’ve purposefully shut it all out, the buzz of your phone 
as texts arrive, the cheers from neighbours and the fireworks are inescapable. 
Comforting sounds, like rain against the window when you’re safe inside.

Obviously your itinerary for the evening dictates your dress, but I think that 
even if you’re not going any further than the kitchen you should still put a 
bit of effort into what you wear. Give in to the occasion – add sparkle.

This year it’s really easy to look fancy without appearing overdressed. 
Metallics, sheer dresses, embellishment and shimmery fabrics all graced the 
catwalks at show time and have been enthusiastically taken up by the high 
street.

Jewelled sweaters and sequinned skirts might sound a bit Dolly Parton, but 
this season’s embellished clothes are very sophisticated. Just keep the pizzazz 
to neat panels of sparkle and geometric patterns and it’s all surprisingly 
wearable.Whistles <http://www.whistles.com/> has always been a good port of 
call for grown-up sequins – this year is no exception. Also look atIris & Ink 
<http://www.theoutnet.com/Shop/Designers/Iris_and_Ink?sortBy=price-asc&cm_mmc=GoogleLDNc-_-LDN+-+EN+-+Designer+-+Iris+%26+Ink-_-Iris+and+Ink+-+Exact-_-iris%20and%20ink|e|c|g|35978763232|1t1||&mkwid=sZFLVcxrV|35978763232|iris%20and%20ink|e|c&gclid=CJ3q0_7qvcICFVDKtAodyEkAlA>
, the own-label collection from designer outlet sitethe Outnet 
<http://www.theoutnet.com/> – it specialises in trend-led clothes that aren’t 
stomach-wrenchingly expensive.

Check out Moda Operandi 
<http://modaoperandi.com/?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_term=moda%20operandi%27&utm_campaign=UK%20-%20Brand%20-%20General&gclid=CJSHz5PrvcICFSbnwgodKoUAhw>
’s sale. I love this luxury site. It carries unusual labels and stock tends 
towards the pretty and the decorative. It’s the perfect place to find a party 
outfit, and while its 60% off sale lasts, you can almost afford to shop there.

If you wear jewelled clothes, you can’t go for fancy NYE jewellery without 
looking like a Christmas tree. At this point in December, everyone’s tired of 
Christmas trees. If you must accessorise, go for something like these feathered 
Isabel Marant earrings or enamel Marc Jacobs numbers.

Obviously these clothes are more suitable for dinner or drinks than a big 
night out. That’s because I can’t imagine that many people heading out to clubs 
are interested in my advice on clothing, but a sparkly top goes down well 
anywhere at this time of year. Whatever you do, have fun.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <http://instagram.com/aliceefisher>
 