
When I was a kid I had a thing for asymmetric fashion. It was a look 
championed by the two women I idolised: Blondie’sDebbie Harry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/nov/02/debbie-harrys-glory-years-in-pictures#img-12>
 andBlake’s 7’s Servalan 
<http://www.blakes-7.co.uk/chars/Servalan/servalan.shtml>. Watching them I was 
torn between wanting to be a singer or a sociopathic intergalactic despot. 
Either way, I was sure that I wanted a life full of sarcastic quips, adventure, 
dancing, and a wardrobe full of great, one-sleeved tops.

Well things didn’t quite work out. Instead of ruling the galaxy I’m here, 
writing for you. Wearing a cardigan. I mainly listen to music in the car on the 
way to the supermarket and, though I am good at sarcastic quips, unless you’re 
devastatingly beautiful or intimidatingly violent, most people find that pretty 
annoying.

So this season’s trend for asymmetry brought up some painful memories. The 
lop-sided, off-balance look was everywhere at the shows. There were tops and 
dresses at Ralph Lauren and Roksanda Ilincic; skirts at Marni, tunics at 
Marques’Almeida, shirts with hems that rose and fell at Stella McCartney and 
mismatched earrings at Nina Ricci. The whole season was brilliantly wonky.

The trend has been enthusiastically picked up by the high street, too. I think 
Ms Harry would love Whistles’s Copacabana top and Servalan would look great in 
this space-age skirt by young designerD’Albert <http://www.dalbert-uk.com/>. 
Look out for Julia D’Albert’s work even if you’re not a dictator wanting to 
make an entrance. She’s very good.

If you find the severity and flesh flashing of these designs off-putting, you 
can still dabble. There are many clothes that play with asymmetry. This H&M 
shirt ticks so many trend boxes: it’s blue, its rolls of material give a sense 
of layering (also key in 2015) and you could wear it to an office. Stripes are 
another great cheat. Many dresses and tops switch the direction of stripes to 
give an illusion of a complicated interplay of shapes in a form that’s very 
easy to wear.

If you just want to nod to this trend, wear mismatched earrings. I’m sure 
you’ve got one stud, one long earring in your jewellery box, or buy this pair 
from Masterpeace. Evgenia Linovich reinterprets traditional Russian arts and 
crafts designs for the modern day. The results are ornate and bonkers.

The catwalk shot I’ve chosen here is from Jean Paul Gaultier’s final 
ready-to-wear collection, held last September. He quit because he says he’s fed 
up of the frenetic pace of the shows, that they don’t let him express his 
creativity. The collection was a joyous greatest hits among which were a 
section of Mexican wrestler-inspired clothes. Here’s one look: isn’t it lovely 
and ridiculous?

Looking at this and the many other asymmetric designs on Gaultier’s catwalk 
made me glad that Debbie and Servalan gave me such unrealistic ideas for my 
life and clothes. I’m never going to dance at Studio 54 nor annihilate a planet 
on a whim, but those aspirations have still shaped who I am. I get why Gaultier 
doesn’t want to put on shows that feel like a compromise. Sometimes dreams are 
meant to be just that.

Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 