
I’ve got one of those tradesman surnames that people like to chat about when 
they’ve run out of all other small talk. Fisher, eh? Ha, ha. Any fishermen in 
the family? Well, yes, actually. Unlike many Potters and Tailors out there, the 
Fishers were fishers until the 50s. My granddad worked a trawler out of 
Lowestoft.

My dad’s earliest memory is leaving Beach Village, a fishing community which 
grew from a huddle of upturned boats in the 1790s into a settlement of 500 
homes on Lowestoft’s grim old pebbly shore. It was razed during slum clearance 
in the 50s, but by then most of it had been destroyed anyway by thegreat flood 
of 1953 <http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/news/in-depth/1953-east-coast-flood>. My 
mum first heard my dad’s name when their headmaster read out condolences during 
school assembly: my granddad’s trawler was lost at sea, presumed destroyed by 
a naval mine left floating around after the Second World War.

So I feel a bit weird when nautical comes round as a trend. In fashion it 
tends to be kitsch: too much about shiny gold buttons and comedy anchors than 
the functional requirements of dressing for one of the most dangerous working 
environments known to man. So it makes me happy that this season’s nautical 
offerings are more lateral. JW Anderson showed loose sailor trousers and 
decorated his dresses and tops with rope. There were outsized peacoats at 
Lanvin and Céline. Everyone from Chanel to Givenchy did stripes. The ghost of 
the sea was there but no one got tooPierre et Gilles 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre_et_Gilles> about it.

Tibi <http://www.tibi.com/>, an American label that excels at bright colours 
and patterns, has a resort collection out now called “Dirty Sailor”. It 
features a tattoo print which is an interesting mix of flowers and ropes – 
beautiful but rough looking. It avoids all “hello sailor” campery. If you can 
afford it, buy it. If you can’t, look atCleo Ferin Mercury 
<http://www.cleoferinmercury.co.uk/>’s work. She makes silk scarves and 
collars, and her spring collection is also inspired by the ocean: specifically 
Hokusai-style waves and tropical seas.

For a simple accessory, the shark’s tooth has become a bit of a thing at 
Givenchy. You can buy earrings, bracelets and necklaces featuring the fashion 
house’s signature megalodon in everything from simple silver to diamanté. Or 
you could pay a bit less and pick up one byRachel Boston 
<http://www.rachelboston.co.uk/>. She’s an interesting young jewellery designer 
whose work focuses on strong natural shapes. Look at her website: there’s are 
lots of stings, claws and teeth. Ggggrrr.

Do buy a striped top, though. Every wardrobe must have one of these 
super-versatile tops that bring freshness and order to any outfit.Me + Em 
<http://www.meandem.com/> do nice ones, but you should really buy one from 
Seasalt Cornwall <http://www.seasaltcornwall.co.uk/>. This company works with 
local companies and uses sustainable textiles to create clothes that reflect 
Cornish culture. This means many a striped top. The business also makes charity 
products to help theFishermen’s Mission <http://www.fishermensmission.org.uk/>. 
I don’t know what my grandfather would think of me sitting here spraffing on 
about the wearability of Breton stripes, but I’m sure he’d approve of that.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 