
It’s not enough that I’m ginger. I’m also curly. The double whammy of mockable 
hair. There isn’t a derided, curly, ginger celebrity I haven’t been compared 
to, usually at high volume, in the streets, by complete strangers: “Oi! Mick 
Hucknall!”, “Oi! Matey out of the Spin Doctors!”, “Oi! Napoleon Dynamite!” – 
I’ve heard them all, and taken time to reflect on the boundless charm and 
invention of my fellow Britons.

The weird world of men's YouTube hair tutorials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/oct/30/the-weird-world-of-mens-youtube-hair-tutorials>
A couple of years ago, a photographer called Thomas Knight made it his mission 
torehabilitate ginger men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/dec/10/damian-lewis-redheads-red-hot-photography>
. Now, it seems, the fashion industry is embracing the male curl, with 
tousle-headed models bestriding the catwalks ofthe men’s equivalent to London 
fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-collections-men>. And 
yet, strangely, neither Knight nor the fashion industry seem to have turned me 
into an international style icon. Oh well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9275b2701172babe9b828d4e94d9a35c9c95033%2F0_0_3200_4669%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20tangled%20up%3A%20will%20curly%20hair%20for%20men%20ever%20be%20fashionable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20tangled%20up%3A%20will%20curly%20hair%20for%20men%20ever%20be%20fashionable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9275b2701172babe9b828d4e94d9a35c9c95033%2F0_0_3200_4669%2F3200.jpg>
 A model at the Coach Show on 9 January during London Collections Men 
Photograph: James Gourley/REX/Shutterstock 
I no longer think much about my hair. It just is, as most people’s is, I 
imagine – even those whose hair does not make them subject to frequent, 
unflattering public comment. But it wasn’t always that way. Pretty much every 
memory I have involving my hair involves unhappiness, starting from childhood: 
the pain as my mother tried to run a comb through it when I was a kid (pain I 
guiltily replicated as I tried to comb my daughter’s glorious long blonde curls 
when she was little).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febb25092e6c9d701cda90f941c42b95f6ba1fa04%2F0_0_2667_4000%2F2667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20tangled%20up%3A%20will%20curly%20hair%20for%20men%20ever%20be%20fashionable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20tangled%20up%3A%20will%20curly%20hair%20for%20men%20ever%20be%20fashionable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febb25092e6c9d701cda90f941c42b95f6ba1fa04%2F0_0_2667_4000%2F2667.jpg>
 A model at the Lou Dalton show during London Collections Men Photograph: 
Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
In my teens, I watched all those British movies with unending casts of 
beautiful young men with slightly floppy hair and longed to have locks so 
lustrous, so moveable, so controllable. When I fell in love with the Smiths, I 
longed to have a Morrissey quiff, but that was beyond my grasp. I remember 
reading about Chris Hillman of the Byrds, and the group’s requirement that 
every member have a perfect bowl cut. And his own misery at having to iron his 
curly hair into submission before every public appearance. That alone makes 
him, genuinely, the rock musician with whom I feel the greatest empathy.

There was never any point having a “style” with my hair – the minute it began 
growing it would take on a life of its own. And so, aside from one late-teenage 
attempt to recreate the Jesus and Mary Chain look – very short back and sides, 
piled curls on top – I have just let it be ever since. I wash it, and brush it 
after washing, and that’s it. Aside from that, I never touch it. I used to get 
it cut twice a year. Now I’ve moved up to four times a year, and at a local 
barber, never a salon. But no matter how little attention I pay to it, I know 
that for those who don’t know me, my hair will always be what defines me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff034fbfdc75dc66dd54509dbf018a5d205acd5ae%2F0_0_2992_1935%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20tangled%20up%3A%20will%20curly%20hair%20for%20men%20ever%20be%20fashionable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20tangled%20up%3A%20will%20curly%20hair%20for%20men%20ever%20be%20fashionable%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fall-tangled-up-will-curly-hair-for-men-ever-be-fashionable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff034fbfdc75dc66dd54509dbf018a5d205acd5ae%2F0_0_2992_1935%2F2992.jpg>
 The Jesus and Mary Chain look: one hairdo Michael Hann tried to master 
Photograph: STEVE CALLAGHAN / Rex Features 
Perhaps the men’s catwalks will prompt a brief rush of appreciation for curls. 
Perhaps. But it will be no more than brief, and I very much doubt it will 
result in a drip-down of appreciation for my hair. To be honest, I’d be 
slightly horrified if it did. Instead, I suspect the curly fad will drop away, 
like a cheap perm, as stylists realise they’re doubling the length of their 
working day trying to tame the more extravagant mops. They’ll demand a return 
to the straight and narrow. And curly hair will once again be something to 
laugh about, rather than something to envy.
 