
I’m standing in front of a decorative garden talking to a guy from Germany 
aboutPC <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> specifications. This is not 
really what I was hoping for from the future of online social communication.

The place I’m in is AltSpace, a virtual reality social world. It was launched 
in 2013 byAltSpaceVR <http://altvr.com/>, a small startup based in Redwood 
City, California. Although it’s early days for virtual reality as a consumer 
phenomenon, there’s been a lot of interest in the idea of virtual chatrooms – 
AltSpace VR has already attracted more than $15m (£10.6m) in venture capital 
funding, and Mark Zuckerberg has talked about multi-user VR as the future of 
social media. There are alternatives to AltSpace, such as vTime and VRChat but 
this one is getting a lot of interest due to its multi-platform compatibility 
and array of features. That’s why I decided to don a HTC Vive and spend an hour 
in the virtual world of chat.

It’s been ... odd.

When you boot up AltSpace you’re dropped into the welcome area. It’s a sort of 
futuristic living room complete with huge windows looking out over a peaceful, 
neatly trimmed garden. I keep expecting Kevin McCloud to pop by and tell me how 
much it cost to build. On one wall there’s a vast screen that gives hints on 
how to customise and name your avatar. On another, there’s a menu display that 
shows different rooms and areas to explore. There’s a diary of social 
get-togethers so you can meet up for karaoke or to play, say, Dungeons and 
Dragons. There are also special events such as standup comedy evenings and 
talks. In a couple of days time, for example, Emmy-nominated writer and 
comedian Heather Anne Campbell will be here doing virtual improv with Miles 
Stroth.

Organisers of real-life events can also arrange to stream live footage into 
AltSpace – there’s even a plush cinema viewing room where you can stand and 
watch. Facebook streamed the recent Oculus Connect 2 conference into the world.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Falone-together-my-weird-morning-virtual-reality-chatroom-alt-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F380c1f338621a51a7f30be2abb2137040b74aa96%2F242_44_1678_1009%2F1678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20together%3A%20my%20weird%20morning%20in%20a%20virtual%20reality%20chatroom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Falone-together-my-weird-morning-virtual-reality-chatroom-alt-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20together%3A%20my%20weird%20morning%20in%20a%20virtual%20reality%20chatroom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Falone-together-my-weird-morning-virtual-reality-chatroom-alt-space%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F380c1f338621a51a7f30be2abb2137040b74aa96%2F242_44_1678_1009%2F1678.jpg>
 The in-game menu shows different rooms to explore as well as upcoming special 
events. Photograph: AltSpace 
I’m here at 8.30am on a Thursday so it’s not exactly Piccadilly Circus. There 
are a few avatars roaming around the welcome room; some look like droids, some 
like blank-eyed cartoon men. I’ve gone with a sort of Asimov-style android in a 
white jumpsuit and pink sunglasses. This is basically what I wear in real-life 
anyway so I feel pretty comfortable.

When you hit an area, you can immediately hear everyone else chatting. The 
Vive and Rift headsets both have built-in mics so chatting is easy – and when 
you’re talking the name above your avatar lights up so people can tell it’s 
you. It’s also possible to bring up a little on-screen menu of emojis so you 
can make a smiley face or high-five symbol appear above your head. There is no 
escaping the emoji, even in virtual space.

At first, I start chatting with a post-production special effects manager 
based in Chicago. We do what people have always done in chatrooms: compare 
locations. We don’t have to ask about age or sex because those come through, to 
some extent, in our voices. That’s the first really intriguing thing about VR 
chat – if you talk, it’s harder to disguise your gender; you’re giving away 
much more real-world information about yourself. An AltSpace veteran told me 
that the VR community is overwhelmingly male and so when a female voice is 
heard it attracts a lot of interest.

Here’s where things get potentially uncomfortable. You can move in the world 
with a joypad or by pointing your head at an area of the map and instantly 
transporting there. If you’re using anHTC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/htc> Vive you can move around by 
actually walking but it’s quicker to just direct your cursor and teleport. When 
people do that to you they pop up right into your vicinity, and it’s super 
intimidating. Some get really close and you can find yourself in the middle of 
a huddle. Although it’s not really your body, you feel your personal space 
being pressed and pushed at. The polite barriers we put up in ‘meatspace’ (as 
cyberpunk authors used to call the real world), don’t yet exist in the virtual 
space. I can’t imagine how different that experience will be for a woman, I 
just know that I found myself stepping away from other avatars on several 
occasions.

At the same time, there’s no aural intimacy. If you’re in the same room with 
other people, you can hear everyone chatting at once and there’s little 
positional detail (even though the Rift and Vive support that function), so 
everyone is more-or-less the same volume. If there’s more than two people it’s 
a wall of chat. It’s likely that this will improve but it means, although you 
can be physically intimate in terms of body space, you can’t whisper. Maybe 
that’s a good thing, I don’t know.

The other weird thing is, you think you’re in the same space but you’re not: 
AltSpace users get different features depending on the tech they’re using. For 
example, in the welcome space, I could see a mirror on the wall that let me see 
my own avatar as well as everyone else in view but it didn’t show up for people 
who weren’t using Vive. “You get this interesting social hierarchy forming,” 
says Dan Page of Opposable VR, who was kind enough to lend me the tech. “You 
have users who are on Vive, on Rift, on Gear, and you can also use AltSpace on 
a 2D screen. But when I use Vive, other people can see the controllers 
represented on screen so they crowd round and ask me about the technology. Also 
anyone using the Leap Motion actually have visible hands on-screen. It’s like a 
technological class system.”

Page dons a Gear VR headset and we wander the space together. There’s a room 
where you can play frisbee golf and a decorative garden maze to explore. Things 
are pretty empty – we pass an Australian man and woman, who seem to be trying 
to help each other navigate but there aren’t many other people around. Page 
says the most people he’s seen in a room is 25, and that’s pretty common. “If 
you go on at around six in the evening, it tends to be at least 15 people,” he 
said. “I’ve bumped into people I know on Twitter. Quite often you meet the 
AltSpace community staff, they’re around quite a lot explaining the features of 
the space.”

For the most part though, I meet other men messing about with their new VR 
toys. The guy from Germany is fascinated that I’m using the Vive. When I tell 
him I’m a journalist he wants to know if the Vive is the best headset I’ve 
tried. Then the guy from Chicago teleports over and suddenly they’re discussing 
PC specifications and whether Valve is planning a VR-compatible version of its
Steam <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/steam> Machine platform. I 
realise that I am in a VR chat space having the sort of conversation that I 
could have at any real-world tech event with the same kind of people who would 
be there. It’s the sort of conversation I would desperately wish myself out of 
in meatspace, but in VR I can just bring up another menu, select a different 
room and, whoosh, I’m gone.

That is definitely a good thing. There are clearly a whole bundle of social 
rules and conventions that will need to be formed and regulated in these spaces 
– especially as a wider array of people come onboard. Imagine a Twitter storm 
in this space; imagine a troll; imagine being dog-piled when you can see and 
hear everyone yelling at you. It is possible to mute another user by pointing 
at the name icon above their avatar and clicking on the ‘ignore’ button, but if 
there’s more than one harasser it’ll take time. I suppose there’s a chance 
people will behave with more civility in virtual space where telepresence 
inevitably creates a different social atmosphere. I’m not sure I’d bet on that, 
though.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Falone-together-my-weird-morning-virtual-reality-chatroom-alt-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc31d3783a3f21863fecb42a48269439ac9519921%2F61_0_1795_1080%2F1795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20together%3A%20my%20weird%20morning%20in%20a%20virtual%20reality%20chatroom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Falone-together-my-weird-morning-virtual-reality-chatroom-alt-space%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20together%3A%20my%20weird%20morning%20in%20a%20virtual%20reality%20chatroom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Falone-together-my-weird-morning-virtual-reality-chatroom-alt-space%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc31d3783a3f21863fecb42a48269439ac9519921%2F61_0_1795_1080%2F1795.jpg>
 The human avatars are clearly meant to be unthreatening, but when you’re 
surrounded by them, their strange dead eyes staring at you, it can be ... 
strange. Photograph: AltSpace 
On the flipside, there is amazing potential here to bring likeminded people 
together in a way that replicates a lot of the social cues and parameters of 
the real world. Everything from social hangouts to business meetings are easily 
facilitated. I can imagine this will be fun, exciting and, well, sociable. 
Relationships will be formed, social barriers will be dropped, ideas will be 
generated.

Of course, we’ve had online virtual worlds like Second Life for years, and 
they’ll providesome clues on how this will all pan out – but in VR the dynamics 
feel very different – more intimate. As a games writer, I’ve seen how online 
multiplayer games have become interesting spaces that allow friends to chat 
about lots of stuff they may not be able to in real life – perhaps places such 
as AltSpace will be the same. Perhaps telepresence therapy will become a thing.

But it’s all so strange at the moment because our brains are still adapting to 
this brave new world. It is crazy to be both embodied and not embodied in a 
space. To have the visual cues of physical intimacy without any physical 
intimacy at all. There were times when I cocked my ear towards another speaker 
in the room to hear them better. Of course it made no difference but some part 
of me thought it would. All those little indicators of mood and intention that 
accompany our movements and facial expressions in the real world are lost here. 
We have our voices and weird, unresponsive metal bodies. We are souls in an 
alien world.

I did not want to talk about PC specifications. I wanted to talk about what 
the hell all this is going to mean when everyone else arrives.
 