
Artists across history have woven astonishing and delightful designs from 
precious metals. The V&A’s new galleries dedicated to theRosalinde and Arthur 
Gilbert Collection <https://www.vam.ac.uk/collections/gilbert-collection>, 
which opened this week, display ornate silver cups from Renaissance Germany, 
gold snuffboxes whose contents titillated the noses of 18th-century 
aristocrats, and even asuperb silver swan 
<http://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O156829/centrepiece-asprey-plc/> made by 
Asprey of London in 1985.

Yet gold and silver glimmer through human history as both dream and nightmare. 
As I admireda cup <http://m.vam.ac.uk/collections/item/O157613/cup/> made in 
the shape of a falcon with gold, silver and gems wrapped round a coconut that 
forms its body, a lovely thing made in Ulm in 1600, I couldn’t quite stop 
thinking of the image of Donald Trump meeting Nigel Farage in Trump’s realm of 
gold. Has he ruined this material, considered beautiful by human beings since 
prehistoric times?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwhy-gold-spells-heaven-and-hell-vanda-gallery-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37f89cd578ec476368c68918dc7702d566e32f1%2F0_0_3500_2441%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Always%20believe%20in%20your%20soul%3A%20why%20gold%20can%20spell%20heaven%20or%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwhy-gold-spells-heaven-and-hell-vanda-gallery-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Always%20believe%20in%20your%20soul%3A%20why%20gold%20can%20spell%20heaven%20or%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwhy-gold-spells-heaven-and-hell-vanda-gallery-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37f89cd578ec476368c68918dc7702d566e32f1%2F0_0_3500_2441%2F3500.jpg>
 Partridge cup, dated 1598-1602. Photograph: Victoria Jones/PA 
There have always been anxieties inherent in the cult of gold. The superbly 
crafted, sensuously shaped 16th- and 17th-century goblets, ewers, mugs and 
platters that abound in the Gilberts’ collection are strongly reminiscent of 
the luxury goods in Rembrandt’s painting,Belshazzar’s Feast 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/rembrandt-belshazzars-feast>. As 
Belshazzar, ancient King of Babylon, serves wine from vessels looted from the 
temple in Jerusalem, a heavenly hand appears and writes his doom on the wall. 
Rembrandt makes the golden words of God outshine the gold of the stolen 
treasures that have now become the tableware of the damned. Gold is both holy 
and unholy in this painting: a symbol of greed and a glimpse of the divine.

That same doubleness pervades Titian’s painting Danae 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danaë_(Titian,_Capodimonte)#/media/File%3ATizian_011.jpg>
, in which the god Jupiter comes to his lover in the shape of a shower of gold. 
As Danae lies naked on her bed, gold coins materialise in a golden mist. The 
gold is divine – it is the manifestation of an actual god – yet it is also 
profane cash. The model for Danaeis thought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/jul/02/titian-erotic-masterpiece-duke-of-wellington>
 to have been a famous Roman prostitute so the coins joke cynically about 
paying for sex. Titian reveals all the suggestiveness of gold – it can 
symbolise god, money and, as an adornment of the body, sex.

It is also often tragic. Hoards of gold in north European myth are guarded by 
dragons. The legendary heroBeowulf <https://www.bl.uk/collection-items/beowulf> 
was killed after he entered a dragon’s gold-stuffed lair. In two renowned 
modern versions of a dark age myth, Wagner’s Ring cycle and JRR Tolkien’s Lord 
of the Rings, gold rings cause no end of trouble.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwhy-gold-spells-heaven-and-hell-vanda-gallery-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96c17d626a9dd3cce93458d79efda7b84133bd0b%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Always%20believe%20in%20your%20soul%3A%20why%20gold%20can%20spell%20heaven%20or%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwhy-gold-spells-heaven-and-hell-vanda-gallery-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Always%20believe%20in%20your%20soul%3A%20why%20gold%20can%20spell%20heaven%20or%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwhy-gold-spells-heaven-and-hell-vanda-gallery-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96c17d626a9dd3cce93458d79efda7b84133bd0b%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
 Nigel Farage meets Donald Trump – backed by a wall of bling. Photograph: Nigel 
Farage/PA 
When the archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann discovered an extraordinary 
beaten-gold funeral mask 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mask_of_Agamemnon#/media/File%3AMaskOfAgamemnon.jpg>
 at Mycenae in 1875, he instantly decided it must belong to none other than 
King Agamemnon, who led the Greek attack on Troy only to be murdered in his own 
house on his return home. Surely the unfounded modern association of this mask 
with Agamemnon reflects a sense of gold as tragic: Agamemnon’s death is the 
theme of the Oresteia by Aeschylus, and Schliemann was the contemporary of 
Wagner and Nietzsche, whose book The Birth of Tragedy first appeared in 1872.

Gold can be erotic, heavenly, kingly – or hellish. If it has those meanings in 
art, what does it mean for Donald Trump? Is it just a crass image of wealth – 
pure bling – or does it also have something more grandiose about it? The 
world’s future may depend on what he sees in all that gold he likes to have 
around him. Hopefully it is just profane, because if he craves gold for its 
divine and monarchical qualities, look out. A man of gold is unlikely to bring 
about a golden age.
 