
Lizzie Deignan’s defence of her world road title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/lizzie-armitstead-cycling-world-champion-nicole-cooke>
 ended in a creditable fourth, just a few metres from a medal, but the 
Yorkshirewoman had the consolation of seeing her Boels–Dolmans team-mate Amalie 
Dideriksen take the rainbow jersey. Deignan was among the first to congratulate 
the 20-year-old Dane after they crossed the line in Doha.

Like Dideriksen and the bronze medallist, Lotta Lepistö of Finland, Deignan 
was left without team-mates in the final kilometre – although a strong Great 
Britain squad marshalled by Dani King had ridden perfectly until then – and had 
no option but to fight for the wheel of the race favourite, Kirsten Wild, whose 
six team-mates controlled the final kilometres to perfection.

“I really loved it, what a great team, they put it all on the line,” said 
Deignan “We worked well and going forward that’s something I feel very positive 
about. Looking forward to Norway [in 2017] for instance, we can go there in a 
group of women who can really pull together and that’s an exciting prospect.”

“I knew the Dutch girls would make the lead-out for Kirsten Wild, I wanted her 
wheel so badly, I fought hard to get on it,” said Dideriksen, who was the 
junior world champion in 2013 and 2014, and – like Deignan – had built her 
season around the Olympic Games in Rio, where she finished fifth in the omnium 
behind Laura Trott.

It was to prove the key battle of the 134.5-kilometre race. Starting the 
sprint in Wild’s slipstream enabled the Dane to time her effort to perfection, 
coming past Wild’s left in the final 25 metres to snatch victory by half a 
wheel as Lepistö made her own effort further to the left.

“I felt that it was early [to sprint] but I couldn’t leave it any longer,” 
said a disappointed Wild, who will have few better chances of winning the 
rainbow jersey. The winner of the bunch sprints that decidedthis season’s Tour 
de Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/kirsten-wild-wins-womens-tour-de-yorkshire-armitstead>
 andthe Ride London Classique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/kirsten-wild-wins-ridelondon-classique-clinical-surge>
, she had the support of the strongest team in the race, with the Dutch 
initially attempting attack after attack to split the field or at least make 
life tough in the heat, then eventually opting to control the race in the final 
stages.

Deignan had to scrap for every inch of road along with Lepistö and the 
fifth-placed Marta Bastianelli in the final 500 metres and was left with too 
much ground to make up in the final metres. In those circumstances, on a course 
that did not suit her, in a race that she had not prepared specifically for, 
fourth place was a more than respectable way to wave goodbye to a rainbow 
jersey and a turbulent season.

As the Dutch flung riders up the road one after the other – the evergreen 
Marianne Vos andAnna van der Breggen, the Olympic road race champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/lizzie-armitstrad-anna-van-der-breggen-road-race-olympics-crash-annemiek-van-vleuten>
, were particularly active – the other teams including Great Britain held a 
watching brief, with King, Eileen Roe and Hannah Barnes all prominent alongside 
Deignan, whose ability to hold position near the front without seeming to make 
an effort spoke volumes for her form and confidence.

King escaped briefly with Vos at 50km to go, but no other nations were willing 
to join the Dutch in attacking until, with just under three laps of the 15km 
circuit remaining, Amber Neben of the US took advantage of a brief lull.Having 
won the time trial title on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/amber-neben-gold-usa-doha-road-world-championships-time-trial>
, the 41-year-old had a chance of making it to the finish solo if she was given 
any space and it fell to the Dutch and Australians to keep her within reach, 
albeit without committing in full strength.

Neben’s advantage never topped a minute and she was swept up just after the 
bell, leaving what remained of the field – 60 riders – together for a final run 
through the plethora of roundabouts and dead turns of the Pearl Circuit. King 
was the first to break, putting in a searing attack out of the feed zone a 
kilometre after the finish line, briefly prompting a split of 10 riders before 
the field came back together.

King put in one final effort to move Deignan into pole position just behind 
the Dutch before the last tricky dead turn at three kilometres and it paid off. 
The British leader was perfectly placed until the final round of jostling and 
barging in the last 500 metres that left Dideriksen poised to pip Wild for the 
biggest title of her career.

Amalie Dideriksen wins women's world road race – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/15/cycling-world-championships-2016-womens-road-race-live>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Famalie-dideriksen-lizzie-deignan-world-road-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F410e7a26bd6f76d777d1c77859360c1418937ae5%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amalie%20Dideriksen%20wins%20women%E2%80%99s%20world%20road%20race%20with%20Lizzie%20Deignan%20fourth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Famalie-dideriksen-lizzie-deignan-world-road-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amalie%20Dideriksen%20wins%20women%E2%80%99s%20world%20road%20race%20with%20Lizzie%20Deignan%20fourth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Famalie-dideriksen-lizzie-deignan-world-road-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F410e7a26bd6f76d777d1c77859360c1418937ae5%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Elizabeth Deignan (second left) and her British team-mates recover after a 
race held in searing heat. Photograph: Bryn Lennon/Getty Images 
Lizzie Deignan urges world governing body to clarify rules on TUEs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/14/lizzie-deignan-urges-cycling-world-governing-body-to-clarify-rules-on-theraputic-use-exemptions> 