
Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> is stepping up its 
assault on the UK grocery market with the launch of a gadget that helps restock 
the kitchen cupboards with the scan of a barcode – or just a whisper.

Shoppers who use the online retailer’s new fresh food and groceries service, 
Amazon Fresh, are being offered the Dash gadget, which has been available in 
the US since 2014, free with their second order. Amazon Fresh is currently only 
available in some areas of London.

Products can be added to their Amazon shopping list by scanning a product 
barcode or saying the name of a product into the gadget’s microphone.

In the US, Amazon also offers the Dash Button 
<https://techspectacle.com/amazon-dash-button-review/>, a Wi-Fi enabled device 
that can be attached to a fridge or cupboard door and used to directly reorder 
a specific item such as washing powder, loo roll or nappies when they run out. 
The company would not comment on when and if the button, which was introduced 
in the US last year, might be launched in the UK.

The Dash services are a step towards the internet of things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/18/what-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank>
 – in which household appliances are increasingly linked to the internet and 
mobile phones so that they can be monitored and managed remotely.

It is also part of Amazon’s efforts to poach shoppers from the traditional 
supermarkets by making it as easy as possible for shoppers already signed up to 
its Prime subscription service to order groceries.

“We’re all used to trying to remember the contents of the fridge and kitchen 
cupboard and scribbling down reminders on pieces of paper,” said Ajay Kavan, 
vice-president of Amazon Fresh. “With Dash, at any given time, customers can 
keep track of products when they come to mind and scan to reorder groceries and 
household essentials as soon as they run out. At Amazon, we’re always looking 
to innovate based on feedback and Dash has been designed to continually learn 
as customers use it.”

Amazon’s Fresh service launched in the UK last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/amazon-starts-uk-fresh-food-delivery>
, offering 130,000 groceries to homes in London, including thousands of fresh 
produce, dairy and bakery items that the company had not previously sold in the 
UK. It is now available in 128 postcodes. The service emerged after Amazon 
agreed tosource fresh foods from Morrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/amazon-enters-fresh-food-market-with-morrisons-deal>
 andbegan selling frozen foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/29/amazon-one-hour-delivery-service-prime-now-food-grocery>
 through its Prime Now one-hour delivery service last year.

Last month, Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/05/amazon-robotics-competition-dutch-team-first-prize>
 said it wouldhire 1,000 more people than previously expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/06/amazon-hire-1000-extra-staff-one-hour-delivery-service-prime-now>
 in the UK this year as it rolls out Prime Now and extends its web services. 
The company will take on 3,500 more permanent staff as its fast-delivery 
service, launched a year ago, reaches more than a third of the UK population.

The traditional supermarkets are expected to have to up their game to fight 
back against Amazon’s assault. Tesco, the UK’s biggest online grocer, and
Sainsbury’s have both recently begun trialling same-day food deliveries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/21/sainsburys-hiring-staff-online-delivery-centre-east-london>
 in response to Amazon Fresh.

Sainsbury’s expects to finalise the takeover of Home Retail Group, the owner 
of Argos, in September, in a move it hopes will help it improve its online 
operations. Home Retail shareholders approved the deal this week.
 