
Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> has filed a patent for 
flying warehouses that could use a fleet of drones to make deliveries to 
customers.

A patent document filed in 2014 in the US describes giant airships as 
“airborne fulfilment centres” (AFCs) that could be stationed above metropolitan 
areas and used to store and quickly deliver items at times of high demand, 
using drones dispatched directly from the airship.

The technology and e-commerce giant is already testing drone deliveries in the 
UK, and made its first commercial delivery under the trialin Cambridgeshire 
this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/amazon-claims-first-successful-prime-air-drone-delivery>
.

The patent filing also suggests smaller aircraft and other unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAVs) could ferry workers to and from the ship as well as replenish 
stock.

Are drone deliveries a realistic prospect?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/29/are-drone-deliveries-a-realistic-prospect>
“The AFC may be an airship that remains at a high altitude (eg 45,000ft) and 
UAVs with ordered items may be deployed from the AFC to deliver ordered items 
to user-designated delivery locations,” the filing reads.

“As the UAVs descend, they can navigate horizontally toward a user-specified 
delivery location using little to no power, other than to stabilise the UAV 
and/or guide the direction of descent. Shuttles (smaller airships) may be used 
to replenish the AFC with inventory, UAVs, supplies, fuel, etc. Likewise, the 
shuttles may be utilised to transport workers to and from the AFC.”

Many firms experimenting with drone technology have had difficulty increasing 
the range of the craft, which can be restricted by the size and weight of the 
battery. Amazon’s UK drone trial is limited to items weighing 5lb or less that 
can be delivered within 30 minutes.

Amazon’s patent filing suggests the unfixed position of an airborne warehouse 
could be used to meet demand in different areas as needed, as well as reduce 
delivery times. The documents suggest that in some instances airships could be 
moved close to sporting arenas or festival sites and used to sell merchandise.

Amazon has not commented on the filing.
 