
Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> has opened a corner 
store where customers can pick up their groceries and just walk out without 
having to queue up and pay at the checkout.

The company said <https://www.amazon.com/b?node=16008589011&tag=bisafetynet-20>
 shoppers at its Amazon Go store will have the cost of their purchases 
automatically billed to their Amazon Prime account. Sensors will track 
customers as they go about the store and record items they pick up.

Amazon employees can already shop at the first store near the company’s 
headquarters in Seattle, which will be open to the public early next year. 
Leaked internal documents suggest Amazon could open 2,000 of the stores across 
the country.

Amazon Echo Dot review: as good as the Echo for one-third of the price
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/28/amazon-echo-dot-review> 
The internet retailer, which has grown into a $359bn (£282bn) company in the 
22 years since its founding, claimed the new service was “the world’s most 
advanced shopping technology”.

“With our Just Walk Out Shopping experience, simply use the Amazon Go app to 
enter the store, take the products you want, and go! No lines, no checkout. 
(No, seriously.)”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrmMk1Myrxc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrmMk1Myrxc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNrmMk1Myrxc&media=>
The Amazon Go store, which is 1,800 sq ft and sells most food staples, follows 
the Seattle-based company’s launch ofa physical bookshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/amazon-book-store-seattle> 
in its home town last year. Bookshops are also slated to open in San Diego, New 
York, Portland and Chicago.

The company, which has been offering its Fresh service in some densely 
populated parts of the US since 2007, has been expanding the grocery delivery 
service rapidly, recently adding new cities across the US. It is now available 
in Seattle, New York, Washington, Boston, northern New Jersey, Philadelphia, 
Connecticut, Baltimore and large parts of California.

In June it launched outside of the US for the first time, offering grocery 
delivery to homes in parts of north and east London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/amazon-starts-uk-fresh-food-delivery>
.

The British service is offered to Amazon Prime members in 69 postcodes for an 
additional £6.99 ($8.50) a month.

Amazon posted annual sales of $107bn last year, more than double the amount it 
generated just four years earlier. Its net income totalled $596m.
 