
Related: Indian court orders cinemas to play national anthem before films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/indian-court-orders-cinemas-to-play-national-anthem-before-films>

Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> has been forced to 
remove a doormat depicting the Indian flag from its Canadian store after 
India’s top diplomat threatened to expel all foreign employees of the online 
retailer if it did not withdraw the product.

Sushma Swaraj, the country’s external affairs minister, used Twitter to demand 
Amazon “tender [an] unconditional apology” and “withdraw all products insulting 
our national flag immediately”, after another user alerted to the listings.

Amazon’s Canadian store offered a range of doormats depicting the Indian flag 
as well as those of other countries, including the US and the UK. The Indian 
flag doormats, sold by a third party, were taken down by the site on Wednesday.

A spokesman for Amazon said: “The item is no longer for sale on the site.” 

Earlier, Swaraj had asked the Indian high commission in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> to “take this up with Amazon at the 
highest level”. She added: “If this is not done forthwith, we will not grant 
[an] Indian visa to any Amazon official. We will also rescind the visas issued 
earlier.”

The 64-year-old minister, who has nearly seven million followers on the social 
network, has become well-known for her “Twitter diplomacy”, regularly 
responding to problems and questions tweeted at her by other users.

In August 2015, she helped to organise the release 
<https://twitter.com/SushmaSwaraj/status/634974042315862016> of an Indian woman 
who was allegedly being illegally held in a Dubai hotel room, after the woman’s 
brother tweeted at Swaraj for help.

Earlier that year she organised – and tweeted live updates 
<https://twitter.com/SushmaSwaraj/status/569340926239252481> about – an 
operation to rescue a group of Indians being detained in Iraq, after footage of 
them circulated online.

Amazon is aggressively trying to expand its Indian business, more than 
doubling its revenue in 2015-16 but also suffering deep losses as it chases 
market share from a homegrown rival, Flipkart. It has invested more than $5bn in
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> since 2014.

Flipkart and Ola, an Indian ride-sharing service, called in December for the 
government toenforce protectionist measures 
<http://www.business-standard.com/article/companies/ola-flipkart-seek-market-protection-against-global-rivals-amazon-uber-116120701090_1.html>
 against Amazon and Uber.
 