
Amazon appears to be preparing to open checkout-free grocery stores in Britain 
after registering a UK trademark for itsAmazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Go format.

The online retailer opened its first bricks and mortar foodstore on 5 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/amazon-go-store-seattle-checkouts-account>
 near its headquarters in Seattle. Amazon employees can shop there and it will 
open to the public early next year.

Amazon Go store lets shoppers pick up goods and walk out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/amazon-go-store-seattle-checkouts-account>
Customers can walk out without queuing or paying at a checkout. Instead, 
sensors record the items they pick up and charge them to an Amazon Prime 
account.

Amazon has remained quiet about whether it plans to launch Amazon Go outside 
the US. It registered a UK trademark on 5 December, indicating it intends to 
bring the format to Britain.

Neil Campling, an analyst at Northern Trust Capital Markets, said: “Amazon 
want to disrupt and take out inefficiencies from retail whatever the format. 
We’ve seen Amazon try out pretty much every one of its ideas from the US in the 
UK and I wouldn’t be surprised if next year we see the launch of a very similar 
service.”

Campling said Amazon used the UK as its first non-US market for new formats 
because UK consumers have proved themselves open to new ideas such as online 
shopping and Britain has few trading restrictions to stop Amazon shaking up the 
market.

What is convenient for shoppers could be bad news for retail employees. The 
New York Post saidAmazon Go would “automate American workers out of existence” 
<http://nypost.com/2016/12/05/amazon-introduces-next-major-job-killer-to-face-americans/>
. A US analyst estimated Amazon’s technology might eventually wipe out three 
quarters of US grocery store jobs.

Before the launch of Amazon Go, the British Retail Consortium predicted almost 
a third of the UK’s3m shop jobs would disappear by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/uk-retail-sector-predicted-to-cut-900000-jobs>
 as companies use technology instead of people. If Amazon Go catches on in the 
UK, established retailers would probably be forced to match its convenience to 
keep their customers.

The prospect of rapid automation of the retail industry has added to unease 
about the use of technology to replace human workers.Capita, the outsourcing 
company that collects the BBC licence fee, said this week it would cut 2,000 
jobs and plough the cost savings into developing robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/capita-to-replace-staff-with-robots-to-save-money>
. The Bank of England’s chief economist Andy Haldane warned earlier this year 
that15m UK jobs could eventually be lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/robots-threaten-low-paid-jobs-says-bank-of-england-chief-economist>
 to robots.

The Guardian view on Amazon grocery stores: the cost of convenience | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/06/the-guardian-view-on-amazon-grocery-stores-the-cost-of-convenience>
Amazon has rejected reports that it intends to open more than 2,000 physical 
grocery stores in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/amazon-grocery-stores-food-drive-through-jeff-bezos>
, including shops as big as 40,000 sq ft – about the same size as an Asda 
store. Jeff Bezos, its chief executive, said in May more stores were on the way 
but the company said this week it hadno grand plan and was still testing the 
market 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/08/amazon-says-it-has-absolutely-no-plans-to-open-2000-stores.html>
.

Amazon has made it clear that it is targeting the UK retail market. In 
February, it announced it wouldsell fresh and frozen food to UK consumers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/amazon-enters-fresh-food-market-with-morrisons-deal>
 in a deal with Morrisons and in July it launchedAmazon Fresh to sell fresh 
food to selected postcodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/amazon-starts-uk-fresh-food-delivery>
. It is also developing a clothes range, after helping revolutionise the books, 
music, home entertainment and consumer electronics sectors over the past decade.

The Seattle Amazon Go store is 1,800 sq ft and sells food staples such as 
milk, bread and chocolate as well as ready meals. Its opening follows the 
launch ofa physical bookshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/amazon-book-store-seattle> 
in its home town in November 2015. Amazon Books at University Village inSeattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seattle> stocks 6,000 titles, with the 
selection based on reviews and sales data from Amazon.com. The price of books 
in the store is the same as on the website.

Further bookshops are now also planned for San Diego, New York, Portland and 
Chicago.


Amazon did not respond to a request for comment about registration of the UK 
trademark.
 