
American Apparel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> has 
closed all but one of its 13 UK stores with the loss of 150 jobs.

The Los Angeles-based fashion brand, known for hotpants and slinky leggings, 
put its UK business into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/american-apparel-uk-business-adminstration>
 last month just before the troubled parent company agreed a deal to be taken 
over by Canadian T-shirt maker Gildan Activewear.

Gildan is buying the worldwide rights to the American Apparel brand for $66m 
(£54m) and taking on its stocks, but does not want the group’s 230 global 
stores, just under half of which are in the US.

American Apparel in the US has also filed for bankruptcy and the retailer has 
begun winding up its businesses in Spain, Japan and Australia as part of the 
deal with Gildan, which is expected to be finalised early next year. The only 
Irish store closed a few weeks ago.

The hipster as fashion icon is under threat | Eva Wiseman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/22/hipster-as-fashion-icon-under-threat-american-apparel-urban-outfitters-eva-wiseman>
Jim Tucker and Richard Beard of KPMG, who are acting as joint administrators 
of the UK business, said 31 staff based at the last remaining UK store in 
Camden, north London, and the London head office would be retained in the short 
term.


“Over the last seven weeks, we have carried out our intention to trade all of 
the stores on a short-term basis in order to sell the stock and realise value 
for the creditors. The Camden store will remain open into January,” Tucker said.


American Apparel, which makes all its clothes in the US, has endured a 
difficult period since the departure of its controversial founder, Dov Charney, 
in 2014. Theparent company filed for Chapter 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-files-for-bankruptcy>
, the US version of administration, just over a year ago, and its chief 
executive, Paula Schneider, stepped down in September after herturnaround 
strategy failed to take off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/american-apparel-paula-schneiders-wild-ride-to-revive-the-brand>
.

Charney launched American Apparel while at university in 1989, combining 
fashionable clothing with ethical production based entirely in the US. The 
brand expanded to more than 20 countries and more than 200 stores, and became 
the biggest clothing manufacturer in America.

But the retailer attracted notoriety for racy advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/18/second-american-apparel-advert-banned-for-sexualisation>
, often featuring young female staff members, and for the exploits of Charney, 
who faced astring of increasingly lurid allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/american-apparel-granted-restraining-order-dov-charney>
 about his treatment of women.

Changing fashion trends, the financial crisis and increasing competition also 
meant young shoppers were less keen to pay £30 for one of the brand’s plain 
T-shirts.
 