 Hales Owen, says J. E. White, reporting to the Royal Commission on the 
Employment of Children and Young Persons the evidence collected by him, as 
assistant commissioner, on the metal manufactures of the Birmingham district - 
"Hales Owen is the only town on the direct road from Birmingham to Stourbridge.
"The principal employment of the place is the wrought-nail manufacture, 
carried on in small forges adjoining the homes of the greater part of the 
cottagers, and to a great extent by women and children.

"While I was in a cottage where I found a boy with a bare foot bandaged up, 
lamed by a burn, a sound of many voices singing swelled gradually near.

"The boy, limping on his stick to the door, cried, 'Oh, mother! there's the 
nailers coming.' And there passed by a crowd of several hundred men, women, and 
children.

"They were coming from the villages near Dudley to hold a meeting in Hales 
Owen, to see if they could get out the nailers who were working against them 
there, their strike having already lasted eleven weeks.

" 'It's heartbreaking work,' said the woman. Among the many children in the 
crowd were two little boys, apparently six years old or not much more, dragged 
along by the hand by a woman, probably their mother, footsore and lame from 
their march.

"A nailer at Hales Owen said to me, 'The parents carry them on into the night 
as long as their strength lasts when the work is wanted quick; it's no use 
beyond, but, as far as they can, they are partly obligated to work.

" 'I should not like my little boy there, now five, to begin before nine, and 
he shan't if I can help it, but if I am any ways obligated he must. He is but a 
little mossel [sic], and if I were to get that little creature to work I should 
have to get a scaffold for him to stand on to reach, and with that it would be 
like murder-work, as you may say.

" 'It don't agree with children at first, the work being always hot. In summer 
the little ones, being afore the fire all the time, sweat so till it runs down 
their faces like anything. Then the young ones often burn themselves. My boy 
got two wounds big as a crown piece.

" 'My son, now 14, has to work hard from six am to eight pm to make 8Â½ to 9d. 
It's many hours to be stiving up [stewing] in a hot shop'.

"The son can read. His sister, aged 17, who works as a nailer, can read but 
little."
 