
It’s a popular Scottish myth that the country’s entire music scene can be 
found in Glasgow, with the wider central belt offering occasional diversions 
during the Edinburgh festivals. In reality, fantastic acts can be found in the 
remotest corners, with village venues often attracting crowds as large as the 
cities, helping to create harmonious communities in far flung places.
Scotland musical tour locations 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/travel_scotland_musical_tour/giv-12515WL0EHcet0dN1/>
I know this, because as a music journalist I have written about many of them 
and met many more at the music industry events I organise. Moreover, as a 
member of theScottish Tourist Guides Association <https://stga.co.uk/>, I am 
used to plying visitors with recommendations for live music.

But in spite of this, I have long experienced niggling guilt over my failure 
to try being a music tourist in my own country, a feeling that grows each time 
I return from covering an exotic foreign festival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197182378a066316935c5912f837eec429b747fa%2F0_170_5111_3066%2F5111.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197182378a066316935c5912f837eec429b747fa%2F0_170_5111_3066%2F5111.jpg>
 Count the sheep … a familiar scene from a Scottish road trip 
After consulting photographer Jannica Honey <http://www.jannicahoney.com/>, we 
decide that the isle of Lewis should be the final destination of our road trip, 
that the route should bypass the cities and that we’ll be able to drive the 
route without resorting to satnav (we fail on that last one).

Along the way, we explore Johnny Cash’s Fife ancestry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/07/johnny-cash-scottish-roots>, 
stop at the statue to a multimillion-selling accordionist, visit the original 
home town of legendary AC/DC frontman Bon Scott, experience Dougie MacLean’s 
Dunkeld and meet the people who put Ullapool on the musical map.

Queensferry, Dunfermline, Falkland, Strathmiglo and Auchtermuchty

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F446f51e55ea6ef7247d70cc451cb7bfb4716bf79%2F0_319_4840_2904%2F4840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F446f51e55ea6ef7247d70cc451cb7bfb4716bf79%2F0_319_4840_2904%2F4840.jpg>
 The author and a young cyclist at Queensferry 
We begin our trip north of Edinburgh, looking out across the Firth of Forth 
from Queensferry, from where pilgrims used to cross to reach the holy sites of 
Dunfermline and St Andrew’s. Back in the 1980s when Simple Minds singer Jim 
Kerr and his then wife Chrissy Hynde lived here, they would have taken in the 
same view of the majestic rail bridge stretching over to theKingdom of Fife 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/destinations-maps/kingdom-fife/>.

We had originally planned to head towards St Andrews and the East Neuk of Fife 
area, which has become synonymous withKing Creosote 
<http://www.kingcreosote.com/>’s Fence Collective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/apr/19/folk> and provided a springboard 
for the likes of the Beta Band, KT Tunstall and James Yorkston. The Fence 
Collective,Will Hodgkinson wrote in the Guardian in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/apr/19/folk>, was “an ever-expanding 
group of local musicians that, with not much more than a CD burner and the back 
room of a seafront pub called the Ship Tavern, turned Anstruther village into 
one of the most unlikely creative hubs in Europe”. However, this special scene 
and its locations are amply covered in Vic Galloway’s bookSongs In The Key of 
Fife <http://www.vicgalloway.com/news/songs-in-the-key-of-fife/>, so we take 
the 20-minute drive to Dunfermline instead.

The town is the final resting place of Robert the Bruce and spawned Jethro 
Tull’s Ian Anderson, Big Country and one of Scotland’s most successful female 
artists, Barbara Dickson, who once topped the charts (I Know Him So Well, with 
Elaine Paige, 1985) for what seemed like half a year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6b8c6af88cf3abf2ade8251f940b86428fb6d29%2F0_167_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6b8c6af88cf3abf2ade8251f940b86428fb6d29%2F0_167_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 Wester Cash farm 
We have a late breakfast at the Fire Station <http://bit.ly/2au1IbR> arts 
centre, which is hosting an exhibition by another local hero, former Skids 
frontman Richard Jobson. His band played 14 shows at the formerKinema ballroom 
<http://www.kinemagigz.com/> (renamed Velocity, then closed down), across the 
road. The Clash’s filmRude Boy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sl9j49bvANs> 
includes footage of them performing Tommy Gun in the venue.

Slightly deflated by the demise of such an iconic establishment, we lift our 
spirits by putting on aJohnny Cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/07/johnny-cash-scottish-roots> 
compilation and drive for half an hour towards Strathmiglo, a quiet village 
whose churchyard he refers to in his autobiography, Cash, the Man In Black. 
Although there is no plaque, two amused women direct us to a street called Cash 
Feu, which leads on to Wester Cash Farm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77ff556527c4e29694b64e5b1d05a08955f01f3e%2F0_307_4790_2874%2F4790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77ff556527c4e29694b64e5b1d05a08955f01f3e%2F0_307_4790_2874%2F4790.jpg>
 Fire Station arts centre, Dunfermline 
After further investigation, we discover that the country legend traced his 
roots to the area after a chance meeting with the keeper of nearbyFalkland 
Palace <http://www.nts.org.uk/Property/Falkland-Palace-and-Garden/Opening-times>
, home to the world’s oldest tennis court still in use. Cash visited three 
times and in 1981 even recorded a TV Christmas special at the historic 
building. Today, the family connection with Scotland is maintained by Johnny’s 
daughter, Rosanne, who has worked with Scottish accordionist Phil Cunningham.

In nearby Auchtermuchty, we stop at the statue of Jimmy Shand 
<http://bit.ly/2ap0uMe>, an earlier master of the button box, who never moved 
away from Fife despite selling millions of records and composing over 300 
songs. The laird of Auchtermuchty was the accordion equivalent to an axe 
virtuoso, and his playing was so fast the Hohner company built him an 
instrument specially to suit his technique.

Broughty Ferry, Kirriemuir and Clova

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b62a3d3ba529d910f4988aa7fa0359498c8abe2%2F0_341_5111_3066%2F5111.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b62a3d3ba529d910f4988aa7fa0359498c8abe2%2F0_341_5111_3066%2F5111.jpg>
 Glen Cova 
After paying our respects to Shand, we cross the Firth of Tay. Our next 
destination isAssai Records <http://www.assai.co.uk/>, a new vinyl-only shop in 
Broughty Ferry, a seaside suburb of Dundee. I buy King Creosote’s soundtrack to
From Scotland With Love <http://www.fromscotlandwithlovethefilm.com/the-film/>, 
a moving assemblage of footage from the Scottish film archive, which includes 
scenes of families saying goodbye to loved ones departing for new lives 
overseas.

It is an appropriate theme for our next destination, Kirriemuir, a picturesque 
town of red sandstone, with a population of about 6,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc7147506b8be8ab28c0741badcd904141c6f9a2%2F0_306_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc7147506b8be8ab28c0741badcd904141c6f9a2%2F0_306_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 The author shopping at Assai Records, Broughty Ferry 
Future rock god Ronald Belford “Bon” Scott (who tragically died in south-east 
London in 1980 <http://ultimateclassicrock.com/bon-scott-death/> aged just 33), 
spent the first six years of his life in Kirriemuir, before his family 
emigrated to Australia, where 20 years later he met Glasgow-born brothers Angus 
and Malcolm Young. Many AC/DC fans are unaware of the singer’s origins and as 
we approach the recently unveiled, life-size bronze statue, I am already making 
a mental list of friends I want to bring here.

We have arranged to meet John Crawford, chairman of the annual Bonfest 
<http://bit.ly/2avxN2N>, which raises funds for the local DD8 
<http://dd8music.com/> youth music group, run by Graham Galloway. The two men 
were behind a crowdsourcing campaign that raised the money to commission the 
statue.

In the 1990s, many locals were not keen on the town’s association with a 
hard-drinking rock’n’roller, but since the launch of the tribute event 10 years 
ago, attitudes appear to have softened. Bon is now honoured with a plaque along 
with other Kirriemuir notables: Peter Pan creator JM Barrie, geologist Charles 
Lyell, mountaineer Sir Hugh Munro (who created the famous list of mountains 
over 3,000ft) and the Cameron traditional music dynasty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa712bbbc9d921d6df3ff6ac52ebc3a3b8f6aee56%2F0_73_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa712bbbc9d921d6df3ff6ac52ebc3a3b8f6aee56%2F0_73_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 The Bon Scott statue, with one of the band’s younger fans 
“It’s been a slow process,” says Galloway, who is cheered by the local 
minister’s favourable sermon – given to coincide with inauguration of the 
statue of the Highway To Hell composer.

Graham takes us on a tour of understated Bon locations, which are guaranteed 
to satisfy the AC/DC trainspotter.

The former Scott bakery is now occupied by an embroidery and garment printing 
shop, where a school photo of Bon shares window space with various articles of 
clothing including a packet of Sox Inna Box. Nearby, the Star Rock sweet shop, 
established in 1833, devotes a small section to a basket filled with AC/DC rock.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed86f0a7095eff684de8fb7c7bd861cead0c264d%2F0_127_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed86f0a7095eff684de8fb7c7bd861cead0c264d%2F0_127_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 A window display at the former Scott bakery 
Although the erstwhile family home is down a gated cul de sac, a modern 
housing development on the edge of town has been named Bon Scott Place. Anyone 
familiar with Scott’s lyrics cannot help being tickled by the thought of him 
living on this genteel estate.

Before we depart, Galloway reminds us that Kirriemuir also hosts a long-running
folk festival <http://bit.ly/2avxDZb>, and is home to Joe Aitken, singer of 
bothy ballads (farm labourer songs).

Having completed our AC/DC pilgrimage, we drive on empty single-track roads to 
theGlen Clova hotel <http://www.clova.com/> (doubles from £90 B&B) in the 
picturesque settlement of Clova, surrounded by the five Angus glens. It hosts 
an annualmusic and ale festival <http://www.clova.com/>, fortnightly trad 
sessions and does amazing fish and chips.

There is no mobile reception, the call box outside is broken and for the first 
time since I can remember, I use a hotel payphone to arrange our first 
appointment for the following day. I have just enough time to feel nostalgic … 
before my change runs out.

Dunkeld and Aviemore

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1618970250c434ec60433e1b16f8c668134326be%2F0_296_4852_2912%2F4852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1618970250c434ec60433e1b16f8c668134326be%2F0_296_4852_2912%2F4852.jpg>
 Dunkeld music mogul Dougie MacLean 
Next morning, we meet folk superstar Dougie MacLean 
<https://www.dougiemaclean.com/> and his wife/manager, Jenny, who have created 
a veritable cottage industry in the Dunkeld area. In the early 1980s, they set 
up a record label and publishing company in the hamlet of Butterstone, which 
was followed by a recording studio. They now also stream gigs from the school 
attended by both the musician and his father.

In 2005 the MacLeans launched the Perthshire Amber Festival 
<http://www.perthshireamber.com/>, which has seen Dougie perform in many of the 
area’s top attractions. These include theHermitage 
<http://www.nts.org.uk/Property/Hermitage/What-to-see/>, a beautiful woodland 
walk leading to the Black Linn waterfall, theEdradour Distillery 
<https://www.facebook.com/EdradourWhisky>, which sells a “Caledonia” malt, 
named after his most famous song, andDunkeld Cathedral 
<http://www.dunkeldcathedral.org.uk/>, which houses the gravestone of renowned 
18th-century fiddler, Niel Gow.

“I wanted to bring musical friends I have played with here and share a 
connection with the place where my songs come from,” says Dougie, who plans to 
launch a second festival next spring.

The MacLeans previously owned Dunkeld’s Taybank hotel 
<http://www.thetaybankdunkeld.com/#scotlands-musical-meeting-place>, 
establishing it as a music oasis where guests can take an instrument off the 
wall and join in a session. Later this year, its current owners, Lucy Davidson 
and Roddy Hand, are due to open an upstairs restaurant and second music room, 
and in summer the pub hosts occasional open air gigs in the beer garden next to 
the river.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9086e25130e95c034240fa2964914f116ce8505c%2F0_303_4773_2864%2F4773.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9086e25130e95c034240fa2964914f116ce8505c%2F0_303_4773_2864%2F4773.jpg>
 Kim Plimley and Owen Caldwell 
Seventy miles up the road in Aviemore, on the banks of the Spey, we find a 
similar musical outpost at theOld Bridge Inn <http://www.oldbridgeinn.co.uk/>, 
where Kim Plimley and Owen Caldwell cater for an extensive range of tastes. 
Recent times have seen Highlanders leaping around here to hip-hop bandStanley 
Odd <http://stanleyodd.com/> and skiers dancing to Chicago house during a 
snowstorm. This month, revellers will be setting off from here for what a BBC 
documentary once described as “the world’s weirdest music festival” – the
Strathspey Safari <http://www.insiderfestival.com/> mystery bus tour (from £40, 
20 August). In the daytime, the Old Bridge Inn manages to masquerade as a 
perfectly normal pub, though with good food and a quality playlist. It is no 
wonder Bob Dylan bought himself a house 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/dylan-buys-163-2m-house-in-highlands-1-678258> 
nearby.

Ullapool

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F691585a9c79d5240ade95992e8174ffa07c82b27%2F0_137_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F691585a9c79d5240ade95992e8174ffa07c82b27%2F0_137_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 Corrieshalloch Gorge, en route to Ullapool 
What most of these hotspots have in common is that they have been developed by 
couples, and in the early 1970s Robert and Jean Urquhart blazed a trail, 
putting Ullapool on the musical map with the Ceildih Place. When it opened, 
most of the road from Inverness to the west coast was still single track and 
had grass growing in the middle. It is a breathtaking drive there – a stop to 
walk across the suspension bridge atCorrieshalloch Gorge <http://bit.ly/2a6vDST>
 is a true highlight – and in the time since the road was widened, theCeildih 
Place <http://www.theceilidhplace.com/> (bunkhouse double rooms from £62 B&B, 
en suite doubles from £150 B&B) has evolved into a beautiful hotel, excellent 
restaurant, respected venue and well-stocked bookshop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5666cf92b5fa2d40adb615435086c6dfa3b8c4b%2F0_0_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5666cf92b5fa2d40adb615435086c6dfa3b8c4b%2F0_0_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 Young dancers strut their stuff in Ullapool 
“We had a sign: ‘sing for your supper’,” recalls Jean, “And Robert would say, 
‘if they’re crap, give them their tea early’.”

These days, musicians get a fee and Jean now leaves the running of the Ceilidh 
Place to her daughter and son-in-law. The town’s music scene is bolstered by the
Macphail Centre <http://www.macphailcentre.com/> and the nearby Arch Inn 
<http://www.thearchinn.co.uk/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa20dfed571c77313f34e15d08d098665495e3852%2F0_0_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa20dfed571c77313f34e15d08d098665495e3852%2F0_0_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 Robert Hicks 
Co-owned by Robert Hicks, the Arch Inn is a great music and dining prospect, 
which also offers accommodation (doubles from £75 B&B). A veteran of promoting 
tours in the Highlands and Islands, he launched theLoopallu Festival 
<http://www.loopallu.co.uk/> in 2005, attracting the likes of Franz Ferdinand, 
Paolo Nutini and Mumford & Sons to the village (this year it features Feeder 
and The Wonder Stuff, £85 adult weekend camping, 30 September-1 October).

“In the summer there will almost always be music on somewhere in the village,” 
says Robert, who also hosts sessions for theUllapool Guitar Festival 
<http://ullapoolguitarfestival.com/wp/>, adding that the ferry port ensures a 
steady stream of visitors year round.

Isle of Lewis – Stornoway and Uig 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc883d708cbd6d27ebdaf89d50f9da1ec0db2d5c6%2F0_305_4754_2852%2F4754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc883d708cbd6d27ebdaf89d50f9da1ec0db2d5c6%2F0_305_4754_2852%2F4754.jpg>
 Crossing to Stornoway 
The following morning, we are among the only passengers not carrying 
instruments as we embark on the 2½-hour crossing to Stornoway on the Isle of 
Lewis, where theHeb Celt <https://www.hebceltfest.com/> festival is in full 
swing.

As with any big event in a small place, the limited accommodation gets snapped 
up fast, so locals rent out rooms to fill the gaps (Visit Scotland office 
provides a list 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/destinations-maps/lewis-harris-stornoway/accommodation/>
, as well as information on regular hotels and B&Bs). The relatively modern
Cabarfeidh <http://www.cabarfeidh-hotel.co.uk/> offers four-star accommodation 
(doubles from £115 B&B).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F618b136fae958de978c67d9911f1cb8fe8111f45%2F1102_498_3921_2353%2F3921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F618b136fae958de978c67d9911f1cb8fe8111f45%2F1102_498_3921_2353%2F3921.jpg>
 Heb Celt festival 
After checking into our digs, we head to the festival site, which is 
sandwiched between the harbour and the imposing Lews Castle, built by a 
19th-century opium trader who used his ill-gotten gains to buy the whole island 
in 1844. The four-day event offers the perfect opportunity to get a snapshot of 
Scotland’s trad talent, and after the outdoor area closes, there are gigs late 
into the night at numerous locations. These include stunningAn Lanntair 
<http://lanntair.com/> arts centre, which has an impressive programme 
throughout the year, including DJs, touring acts and a local artist night 
hosted by 18-year-old Stornoway songwriter Eleanor Nicolson, along with Keith 
Morrison, whoseWee Studio <http://www.i-m.mx/weestudio/WeeStudio/home.html> has 
been instrumental in developing island musicians.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c1a7f4fe66dc0379e63b249d4dd096e37c9147%2F401_565_4622_2774%2F4622.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c1a7f4fe66dc0379e63b249d4dd096e37c9147%2F401_565_4622_2774%2F4622.jpg>
 Keith Morrison and Eleanor Nicolson 
Music can be found in a wide variety of places in Stornoway, with Eleanor and 
her friends regularly playing inMcNeill’s pub 
<https://www.facebook.com/mcneillsstornoway>, while the renowned Willie 
Campbell is a fixture at the Star Inn. Less likely locations include the
Woodland Centre <https://www.facebook.com/TheWoodlandsCafe/>, the Stornoway Sea 
Angling Club <http://stornowayseaanglingclub.webs.com/> (where Biffy Clyro once 
performed) and even the Stornoway Free Church.

When we explain our interest in Gaelic psalm singing, precentor Alasdair 
Macleod – whose job it is to sing the first line in the call and response – 
enlists fellow parishioners Elizabeth and Alistair, and treats us to an 
impromptu recital of this hauntingly beautiful genre. The congregation recently 
voted to maintain the practice of not using musical instruments during worship, 
which allows us to enjoy the music as it has been sung for centuries.

It is a far cry from our final gig on the island, at the Stornoway Golf Club 
<http://www.stornowaygolfclub.co.uk/>, a rather incongruous but strangely 
conducive setting to see local rock heroesBroken Ravens 
<https://www.facebook.com/thebrokenravens/>. They perform below a plaque 
listing past presidents of this sporting institution, to an audience which 
includes most of An Lanntair’s bar staff and a really hard-looking bloke 
wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with pandas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F268c55aca029388f965d4e77f65b1b274ada3983%2F461_257_4562_2738%2F4562.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F268c55aca029388f965d4e77f65b1b274ada3983%2F461_257_4562_2738%2F4562.jpg>
 Broken Ravens perform at Stornoway Golf Club 
The following day we arrange to meet Malky Maclean, who is best-described as 
cultural oracle and a font of knowledge relating to all things Gaelic and 
Hebridean. In the 1980s, he set upFèisean nan Gàidheal 
<http://www.feisean.org/en/> to support traditional music tuition across the 
region, enlisting the best players to pass on their knowledge. Nearly everyone 
we speak to mentions the role it has played in developing a new generations of 
artists, including Heb Celt highlightJulie Fowlis <http://www.juliefowlis.com/>
. And the numerousFèisean concerts 
<http://www.feisean.org/en/feisean-en/about-us/> hosted throughout the 
Highlands and islands during the year are well worth looking out for.

We follow Malky across a narrow road and after about 45 minutes arrive at the 
Callanish standing stones <http://callanishvisitorcentre.co.uk/> on the west 
coast of Lewis. Our guide points out that they form a Celtic cross, despite 
dating back to 3000BC, and cites the work undertaken by local 
archaeo-astronomer Margaret Curtis. He then interrupts his talk to point out 
one of 24 other stone circles on the island.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca7d9748465e3adfabe41d39c56a1dd2c7c54d75%2F0_49_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca7d9748465e3adfabe41d39c56a1dd2c7c54d75%2F0_49_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 The author (right) with Malky Maclean at the Callanish stones 
“Back in the 1980s, I was up here on a really cold day and suddenly I could 
hear music. It turned out to be Ultravox, making a video on the next hill.”

In the evening we head over to restaurant-with-rooms bolthole Auberge Carnish 
<http://www.aubergecarnish.co.uk/> (two courses £30.50, doubles £130 B&B), 
which overlooks the white sands ofUig 
<http://www.visitouterhebrides.co.uk/our-islands/isle-of-lewis/uig>, a truly 
glorious location when the sun is shining. The owner and chef, Richard 
Leparoux, cooks up the best food we have eaten on Lewis (highlights were the 
monkfish with scallops, and the venison).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf8bc0bbf1261fa1a6cc0425016d1a907bef3102%2F0_309_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20alt%20musical%20tour%20of%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Falternative-musical-tour-of-scotland-scotland-music-venues-stornoway-ullapool-aviemore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf8bc0bbf1261fa1a6cc0425016d1a907bef3102%2F0_309_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 The Sea Trek trip takes in caves around the Outer Hebrides 
Back at Malky’s house, we learn that in 2007 he produced and directed St Kilda 
– A European Opera 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/highlands_and_islands/6763371.stm>, but 
due to the bad weather there is no prospect of sailing to the island whose 
community asked to be evacuated in 1930. Instead, the next morning we board a 
two-hourSea Trek <http://bit.ly/2a9e4lV> excursion (wildlife boat trips from 
£38pp) closer to shore. It proves to be the perfect finale to our island visit, 
as well as a reminder that we have merely scratched the surface of this 
wonderful place.

• For places to stay in Scotland go to VisitScotland.com/accommodation 
<https://www.visitscotland.com/accommodation/>
 