
It has been two months since I was brutally attacked along with more than 30 
other individuals by armed soldiers at the Terrain compound in Juba, South 
Sudan. The incident resulted in the death of a dedicated and inspiring friend,
John Gatluak Manguet Nhial 
<http://www.internews.org/our-stories/project-updates/in-memory-john-gatluak-manguet-nhial>
, repeated sexual and physical assaults, and the lingering pain from the 
physical and psychological injuries we sustained that day.

The international community has made a loud and united call for this incident 
to be properly investigated and for the government ofSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> to prosecute the perpetrators 
and ensure justice for survivors. In August, Ban Ki Moon called for the 
government to “prosecute those involved in these unspeakable acts of violence”.

Secret aid worker: there is a new trend of sexual violence in South Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/20/secret-aid-worker-south-sudan-personal-attacks>
I have spent many years working on the other side of such reports, speaking to 
victims and perpetrators, and making similar calls. But as I find my role 
transformed, I can’t help but feel that this “justice” we ask for is as elusive 
as ever.

If the ongoing presidential investigation into the attack is thorough and 
soldiers are indeed found guilty of the crimes committed against us, there is a 
high chance they may be sentenced to death. Recently, two soldiers in Wau found 
guilty of committing murder and other crimes wereexecuted by firing squad 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article59721>.

I can only speak about my own reaction to the events that followed the attack 
against us. I know very well that not everyone will agree with what I am about 
to say: but after two months of healing, I am wondering what “justice” even 
looks like.

In the decade since the 2003 UN Baghdad bombing, aid worker casualties have 
tripled to more than 100 deaths per year 
<http://www.un.org/press/en/2014/sc11524.doc.htm>. This question of justice is 
not only asked by the survivors of the Terrain attacks, it is a question asked 
by humanitarians affected by violent war crimes all over the world.

Causing suffering in others does not alleviate my suffering

Yes, I am angry. I am angry because I feel that the UN failed to do anything 
to protect us or to rescue us after the attack. I am angry at a nation that has 
a large armed force but no funds to pay them – soldiers that in many cases 
joined this army as children, trained and initiated into a life of destruction, 
fear and anger. I am angry at those soldiers who during the event clearly 
coerced younger troops, some who could not have been more than 16, to rape 
foreigners while they watched and cheered. The lives of those young soldiers 
have also been changed forever.

Yes, I am angry. Yes, we need justice. But the death penalty does not give 
life to John Gatluak Manguet Nhial. Causing suffering in others does not 
alleviate my suffering. Instead, the death penalty only further erodes 
society’s respect for the sanctity of life. It builds scar tissue to coarsen 
our culture, diminish our humanity.

As a humanitarian, I moved to South Sudan to support a population that has 
endured war for generations. As humanitarians, we lived in South Sudan to use 
whatever skills we had to try and save lives. The thought of people being 
killed on my behalf makes me feel sick.

Sexual violence in the aid sector: what should NGOs be doing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/19/sexual-violence-aid-sector-ngo-action>
Are we as humanitarians left with the choice to either report crimes against 
us and participate in an unjust system, or simply not report these crimes at 
all?

It is too soon to say whether this investigation will be taken seriously by 
the government, by its army and their military court, or to say whether any 
investigation will result in the execution of perpetrators. But this discussion 
needs to happen before that call is made, before the trigger is pulled.

We need to work towards better implementation of international humanitarian 
law and accountability for those who violate it. But these efforts must work 
hand in hand with the need to continue work to strengthen judicial systems and 
encourage governments to stop the use of capital punishment immediately.

How can we call for justice when we know the consequences of that justice 
offend our moral code?

South Sudan has continued to use the death penalty despite well-documented 
weaknesses in the country’s legal system, which prevent it from ensuring the 
basic legal rights of people accused of crimes. How would we be sure the right 
people were being punished?

This week I will speak to investigators from South Sudan’s government who will 
play a role in deciding the fate of these soldiers. I will tell them my story 
in unflinching detail so that the full consequences of these violent actions 
can be understood. And I will call for justice – a justice that encompasses the 
dignity and respect survivors deserve as well as the dignity and respect for 
human life that we, as humanitarians, should demand.

We are reporting stories on this subject; you can contact us confidentially at 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with “Sexual violence against aid workers” in the 
subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.

 