
In five words

Spring, Summer, Oktoberfest, Autumn, Winter

Sound of the city

A beer garden in summertime: sitting together on benches under trees, 
laughing, having a beer and discussing the latest news. The sound is also is a 
synonym for BavarianGemuetlichkeit (cosiness), which is not a cliche but a way 
of life. This was recorded in a huge beer garden called Hofbräukeller in 
Haidhausen.

Smell of the city

In Westend there is the smell of beer, because of the the Augustiner brewery. 
During Oktoberfest the area around the Wiesn smells of candy floss and roasted 
almonds. And when you are passing theMüllersche Volksbad 
<https://www.swm.de/english/m-baeder/indoor-pools/volksbad.html> (the city’s 
art nouveau swimming pool, close to the river Isar) in winter, you can smell 
and feel the perfumed vapour of the sauna.

Best building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19b4338ca6867ca5b5cf6710f0bc0ba0c5ababf4%2F0_0_840_556%2F840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Munich%3A%20the%20land-locked%20city%20where%20you%20can%20go%20surfing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Munich%3A%20the%20land-locked%20city%20where%20you%20can%20go%20surfing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19b4338ca6867ca5b5cf6710f0bc0ba0c5ababf4%2F0_0_840_556%2F840.jpg>
 The sky’s the limit … the Olympic Stadium, Munich. Photograph: Monika Schreiner
Most people would probably say the Town Hall or the Frauenkirche (Cathedral 
Church of Our Lady), which is the official landmark of the city – you can even 
buy biscuit cutters of this church in souvenir shops. But I think it was the 
Olympic Games in the 1970s that really transformed this city.

The Olympic stadium was built on the Oberwiesenfeld, which lies outside the 
city centre in the Milbertshofen/Am Hart district. The architectGünter Behnisch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jul/19/gunter-behnisch-obituary>
, withFrei Otto 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/frei-otto-architect-best-known-for-the-tented-roofs-that-graced-the-1972-olympics-in-munich-10109264.html>
 called in as adviser, built it between 1969 and 1972, when there were hardly 
any computers and no special software for architects. Even now, it is still a 
very impressive structure, and continues to be used for special events like 
huge open-air concerts.

And the worst ...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf3e50e11a647c34af4cf45281645ce34f21e414%2F0_0_1280_960%2Fmaster%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Munich%3A%20the%20land-locked%20city%20where%20you%20can%20go%20surfing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Munich%3A%20the%20land-locked%20city%20where%20you%20can%20go%20surfing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf3e50e11a647c34af4cf45281645ce34f21e414%2F0_0_1280_960%2Fmaster%2F1280.jpg>
 One of the stops on Munich’s ugly tour. Photograph: Monika Screiner 
At the moment there’s an ongoing discussion in the media about ugly spaces in 
Munich – there’s even a Munich ugly tour, which is given byEugene Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/02/vienna-austria-ugly-walking-tour>
 in cooperation with Green City.

But one building regularly makes me upset: the Kaufhof building. During the 
70s, a nice historical building (Roman-Mayr-House) was torn down in order to 
erect this new department store – in an attempt to show how innovative they 
were back then. For me, it does not really fit in the square it calls home.

Homegrown talent
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8FcmcI6BvQQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8FcmcI6BvQQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8FcmcI6BvQQ&media=>
The Young Chinese Dogs are just one of Munich’s great bands. Founded in 2011, 
they play folkpop music and, like street musicians, they only use easily 
portable instruments. This video, for their song Sweet Little Lies, shows many 
aspects of Munich city life – the Olympic park, Oktoberfest and the river Isar. 
Once in a while they play concerts in the city.

What does Munich do better than anywhere else?

River surfing. Munich offers some of Europe’s best waves, and during the 
summer you can see surfers transporting their boards on bikes through the city 
to the number one surfing spot: the Eisbach wave in the English Garden. The 
water comes from the river Isar.

Street style

People like things casual here, but also very chic. Munich is said to be the 
most northern town of Italy – and that’s certainly true when it comes to 
fashion. Crazy sartorial experiments are seldom seen on these streets.

How green is your city?

The English garden 
<http://www.muenchen.de/int/en/sights/parks/english-garden.html> and the Isar 
are the green lungs of the city – but other, less famous parks include the 
Westpark, Buga Parc and Luitpold Parc. Riding your bike to work is becoming 
more common, but there are still a lot of people who love their cars. Overall, 
though, Munich is a clean city. Like everywhere in Germany, waste separation is 
important, and for a while now department stores have been charging for plastic 
bags.

Most under-rated location
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7594a3a2b79729fe8406dcb80d65d2560cf5db4c%2F0_0_840_560%2F840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Munich%3A%20the%20land-locked%20city%20where%20you%20can%20go%20surfing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Munich%3A%20the%20land-locked%20city%20where%20you%20can%20go%20surfing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7594a3a2b79729fe8406dcb80d65d2560cf5db4c%2F0_0_840_560%2F840.jpg>
 A temporary space that found a more permanent home … the Import Export. 
Photograph: Monika Schreiner 
I would say the Import Export <http://www.import-export.cc/>. It started as a 
temporary project of the Münchner Kammerspiele, which is a very well known 
theatre in Munich. They transformed a Turkish vegetable shop into a cultural 
space back in 2010, with the aim of bringing Turkish and German culture 
together. It was situated not far from the main station, an area where a lot of 
Turkish people go shopping. Lectures, concerts, workshops for kids and 
exhibitions all took place there.


In 2013 it moved to the Kreativquartier (creative quarter), an artist space 
close to the Olympic park, into a former locksmith shop. As the location itself 
is a little hidden, people really have to know about it to find it.

Moment in history

The wedding of the Crown Prince Ludwig and Princess Therese in October 1810: 
this was the momentthe world’s largest beer festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/sep/20/oktoberfest-the-worlds-largest-beer-festival-in-pictures>
 was born. A horse race was held on the meadow just outside the city, now 
called the Theresienwiese, in honour of the bride. It eventually turned into 
Oktoberfest, and people living here call the festival Wiesn (an abbreviation of 
Theresienwiese, where it still takes place every year).

Best Instagram

Marc is a newspaper journalist who has his camera with him at all times. I 
like his sideways view of the city.

Top insider’s tip

You might associate Munich with typical Bavarian dishes like Weisswürste or 
Schweinsbraten with Knödel – but you can also get really good coffee here. A 
very hip place, with its own roasting facility, is the coffee shop Man Versus 
Machine. Drinking filter coffee was not cool for a long time, but now there’s 
been a revival. Their filter coffee is prepared in three different ways: 
pour-over, syphon or aeropress. Try a Franzbrötchen (a cinnamon pastry) with 
your caffeine fix.

Best local artist
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3baf81a4f25a3b472350c14af20c80228c2db297%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Munich%3A%20the%20land-locked%20city%20where%20you%20can%20go%20surfing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Munich%3A%20the%20land-locked%20city%20where%20you%20can%20go%20surfing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Finsiders-guide-munich-germany-oktoberfest-beer-surfing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3baf81a4f25a3b472350c14af20c80228c2db297%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
 Blurred lines … the work of Gabi Blum. Photograph: Monika Schreiner 
I love the work of Gabi Blum <http://www.gabiblum.de/NEWS.html>. She is 
originally from Michelstadt/Odenwald, but attended the art academy here in 
Munich (Akademie der bildenden Künste München). One of her teachers wasSchorsch 
Kamerun 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hhPkZ14nTnQ&list=PLUXfh5ozDZ_uES-sJsfAB5hmHqsD-dc3b>
, a well-known German singer, author, director and club owner.

Blum is a performance artist who also uses video for her installations. She 
cites references from modern pop culture and creates works that blur the lines 
between actor and spectator.

Five to follow

Munich and the mountains 
<https://www.instagram.com/munichandthemountains/?hl=de>

Two in a row <http://twoinarow.com/>

Trikont <https://soundcloud.com/trikont>

Muenchen <https://www.instagram.com/muenchen/>

kulturIMBLOG <https://www.facebook.com/kulturIMBLOG/?ref=page_internal>

From me

Monika is a freelance photo editor, photographer and blogger in Munich. She 
writes about culture on herblog <http://www.isarblog.de/>; you can follow her 
on Instagramhere <https://www.instagram.com/isarblog/>, and Twitter here 
<https://twitter.com/isarblog>.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 