
In five words

“Last call and first chair”

(Last order at the bar, first lift up the mountain in the morning.)

Sound of the city

Innsbruck international airport is just 15 minutes from downtown, so you’ll 
most likely hear a lot of planes overhead. Tourists tend to turn their heads 
and point at the low-flying planes; locals are a little more accustomed to it.

A good place to spot the planes is from the 360 Grad Bar 
<http://www.360-grad.at/>. From here, you can also see the blinking lights on 
some rooftops leading towards the airport – an extended landing strip on the 
city’s roofs.

Best building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefaf76afcbae517aa56d67a545a29cb7d5cc373a%2F327_0_2999_1800%2F2999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefaf76afcbae517aa56d67a545a29cb7d5cc373a%2F327_0_2999_1800%2F2999.jpg>
 Still brewing … Adambräu still plays an important role in the city, now as an 
architecture museum 
Built as a brewery in the mid-1920s, the Adambräu still plays an important 
role in the city’s architecture, having been transformed into a museum and 
archive for architecture, called Architektur und Tirol.

Its clean lines and bold design are the work of Lois Welzenbacher, an Austrian 
pioneer in modern alpine architecture.

And the worst

Beautifully painted buildings are the landmarks of Innsbruck’s inner city 
centre. But once you reach the Triumphpforte, the city’s Triumphal Arch, 
<http://innsbruckvisitorsguide.com/poi/triumphpforte> pretty much every 
building is ugly and grey. The Hotel Hilton in particular would fail any sort 
of beauty contest – althoughthere are plans afoot 
<http://diepresse.com/home/diverse/immoapp/4948490/Hilton-Innsbruck-wird-Tirol-Haus>
 to turn this disgrace into something new.

Favourite venue
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99cb9b67fcc5b20c26018c7f247e5e83b9a1bbb6%2F0_23_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99cb9b67fcc5b20c26018c7f247e5e83b9a1bbb6%2F0_23_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Baking culture … Die Bäckerei 
Die Bäckerei <http://www.diebaeckerei.at/> is a platform for cultural and 
social exchange as well as a meeting point for events and workshops. Some are 
regular, such as monthly poetry slams, Sunday coffee meet-ups or free advice on 
how to repair your bike . It also has a co-working space and a photography 
laboratory.

The building itself used to be an industrial bakery, which is still reflected 
in the name, Die Bäckerei – Kulturbackstube (“Bakery for Arts and Culture”).

Homegrown talent
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0u6qguNyE8Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0u6qguNyE8Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0u6qguNyE8Y&media=>
The one artist you’ll most likely notice when visiting Innsbruck is HNRX 
<http://www.hnrx.at/>, a local graffitist known for his gigantic images of 
sliced sausages, bananas or mandarins.

He says his sausage images – part of his Save the Sausage campaign, which has 
run since 2012 – is a way to have a bit of fun: “I like to paint food and other 
stuff on the streets, to put them out of context,” he says. “It’s the way my 
stuff works in a system full of profound things.”

Street style
 Innsbruck street style. Photograph: City Catwalk 
<http://www.citycatwalk.at/blog/street-style-innsbruck-irina> 
How green is your city?

Most people jump on their bikes all year round: it’s simply the fastest way to 
get around. Even when there is snow, you’ll see students with skies or 
snowboards on their backs riding across town to catch the next ski shuttle. 
Recently, organic supermarkets and shops have proliferated, and residents are 
becoming more aware of recycling and reusing. TheFeld Verein 
<http://feld-verein.at/> is a club that takes groceries that would otherwise go 
to waste and offers workshops: for instance, on how to make your own milk 
products.

What is your city’s most underrated location?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed059eca10826b6d7e269b5b71597c00b2a26cdc%2F0_0_2240_1488%2F2240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed059eca10826b6d7e269b5b71597c00b2a26cdc%2F0_0_2240_1488%2F2240.jpg>
 In an English country garden (sort of) … Hofgarten. Photograph: TVB Innsbruck 
Nature and green spaces surround the city, but if you need a quick break, 
Hofgarten is just the place. Until a few years ago, visitors were not allowed 
to sit on the lawns, but that restriction has lifted and the park is a 
beautiful place to relax.

The gardens are 600 years old, and the latest remodelling, which took place 
around 150 years ago, transformed them into an English-style garden. In the 
middle there is an old pavilion with an oversized chess set, which is open for 
anyone to play.

Best Instagram account

Marika seems to always be up a mountain around Innsbruck – the mountains are a 
huge part of what makes Innsbruck home for many residents.


Current controversy

Parking. There are very limited spaces, each for a maximum of three hours. 
Residents can apply for two-year permits, but they don’t guarantee you a 
parking spot.

In the last few years, the parking zones have grown to include districts quite 
far from the city centre – but for many locals and visitors alike, this doesn’t 
make a lot of sense. Parking restrictions run until 9pm on weekdays, which 
hurts the restaurant trade.

The best option, then, remains to cycle. But there’s controversy there, too. 
Innsbruck does havecity bikes <http://www.stadtrad.ivb.at/>, a la Paris or 
London, but the rental fees are quite high compared with other cities.

Moment in history
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO7azYMJ2KkY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO7azYMJ2KkY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO7azYMJ2KkY&media=>
As a mountain city with a strong winter sports culture, the various Olympic 
games we’ve hosted have been our proudest moments.


Innsbruck hosted the Winter Olympics twice in 1964 and 1976, as well as the 
Youth Olympics in 2012 and the first ever Children’s Games in 2015. Although 
there was some controversy surrounding each Games, most locals remember each of 
them fondly as grand occasions for the city. The Olympics particularly 
announced Innsbruck, and the Tirol region in general, as a great skiing region 
– which had a great and continuing impact on winter tourism.

What Innsbruck does better than anywhere else
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F553e17b207836d10a13f19b88c72011978a2c2e7%2F0_0_5642_3385%2F5642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F553e17b207836d10a13f19b88c72011978a2c2e7%2F0_0_5642_3385%2F5642.jpg>
 Downhill biking in Muttereralm. Photograph: TVB Innsbruck 
We have good cultural events, which shouldn’t be underrated, but what we’re 
really outstanding at is sports.

Living among the mountains is a dream come true for sports enthusiasts – both 
summer and winter. Besides establishing itself as afreeride city 
<https://www.innsbruck.info/en/freeride-city.html>, Innsbruck is now – after 
years of discussions – welcoming all bikers. Only recently, Innsbruck announced 
that it will host theCrankworx bike festival <http://www.crankworx.com/>, the 
biggest gravity mountain bike festival in the world.

Many famous sportsmen are from Innsbruck and the surrounding areas: Hermann 
Buhl, the alpine pioneer; climbers David Lama and Anna Stöhr; ski jumpers 
Gregor Schlierenzauer and Toni Innauer; ski cross champion Karin Huttery and 
bike racer Franz Venier.

Top insider’s tip
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F732f29cdef94da44eca4fe3018de40cef42242cf%2F0_43_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F732f29cdef94da44eca4fe3018de40cef42242cf%2F0_43_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 If hiking seems a little energetic … glide your way over Innsbruck. 
Photograph: Simon Rainer 
You haven’t really seen Innsbruck until you’ve seen the city from above. There 
are several ways to do this: you could hike up the surrounding mountains, take 
the cable car – or, even better, let the wind power your ride with aflight in a 
glider <http://www.mountain-soaring.com/#soar-the-rocks>.

Five to follow?

Tiroler madl <http://tiroler-madl.at/>

Kitschick <http://kitschick.at/>

Who is Mocca <https://www.instagram.com/whoismocca/>

All about Mela <https://twitter.com/allaboutmela>

RTCT Records <https://soundcloud.com/rtct-records>

From me
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fa2b91e84bed661a626e0b31ffb02ccaa8bbc36%2F0_80_1227_736%2F1227.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Innsbruck%3A%20gliders%2C%20gardens%20and%20sausage%20street%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Finsider-guide-innsbruck-alpine-architecture-sausage-street-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fa2b91e84bed661a626e0b31ffb02ccaa8bbc36%2F0_80_1227_736%2F1227.jpg>
 Lea Hajner. Photograph: HeidrunHenke 
Lea Hajner <http://www.escape-town.com> is a travel journalist and blogger. Of 
all the places in the world, she feels most comfortable living among mountains. 
She’s the creator of the #onlyinibk hashtag on Instagram, pointing out unique 
things in Innsbruck; follow herhere <https://www.instagram.com/esctown/>.
 