
In five words

Healthy dose of Anatolian absurdism.

Sound of the city

The sound of knives used to prepare kokoreç is everywhere. Ankara’s signature 
street delight is traditionally made by wrapping lamb intestines around 
available offal such as heart, sweetbread and lungs. It’s seasoned with ginger, 
cumin, chilli and other spices and is roasted slowly over coals.

Around 10 years ago, there were talks of kokoreç being banned due to EU food 
regulations – in case Turkey eventually became an EU member. But kokoreç fans 
weren’t happy. Mirkelam, a pop singer, even composed asong dedicated to kokoreç 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ke0DL8BH2uk>. “No kokoreç, never without you … 
”

Everyone’s tuning into …

Radyo ODTÜ <http://www.radyoodtu.com.tr/> was initiated by a group of students 
at the Middle East Technical University (ODTÜ) in the mid-90s. It has quickly 
become an indispensable Ankara voice – like a friend who has eyes and ears 
everywhere, and is great at discovering the best gigs. It’s also known as a 
companion for students pulling all-nighters before their notoriously difficult 
final exams.

Although Radyo ODTÜ is now a private media company, it’s still affiliated with 
the radio society at the university, where students are trained to be 
broadcasters; it’s now one of the most popular radio stations inTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.

Best venue

Launched in 2010, CerModern <http://www.cermodern.org/> was the answer to the 
prayers of many art lovers in Ankara, who wanted to see world-class modern art 
exhibitions on a more regular basis. With a 4,500 sq metre exhibition hall, 
CerModern is currently Turkey’s largest modern art centre. It also hosts 
flamenco concerts, literature workshops and Iranian new wave cinema.

Who’s top of the playlist?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg4kDjP8z1Fo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg4kDjP8z1Fo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg4kDjP8z1Fo&media=>
Pilli Bebek <http://pillibebek.com.tr/> might have been around since 1993, but 
it’s only been in the last few years that their loyal fan-base has really 
grown, as the bandproduced the soundtrack 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NJbWLdOgft0> for the phenomenal TV series, 
Behzat Ç. An Ankara Detective Story 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behzat_%C3%87._Bir_Ankara_Polisiyesi>. 

Although Pilli Bebek’s music can broadly be defined as alternative Anatolian 
rock, their style is also influenced by barcarole, Ottoman classical music, 
heavy metal and Latin music.


Deeply romantic and possessing a bittersweet melancholy, their music captures 
the spirit ofAnkara <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/ankara> in a way no 
other band has managed. Listening to it is like enjoying the warmth of roasted 
chestnuts bought from a street seller on a cold winter’s night in the city.


Best local artist

Nuri Abaç is one of the most important artists to come from Ankara. Although 
he passed away in 2008, his paintings are still among the most sought-after in 
the city’s galleries.

He painted the street sellers, fishermen, pubs, kebab shops and tea gardens, 
blending the everyday with surreal elements of Anatolian folklore and mythology.


Abaç was also one of the pioneers of art appreciation in Ankara. When Abaç 
opened his first exhibition here in the 1960s, there were no art galleries so 
he had to exhibit in a hotel lobby. More than five decades later, Ankara is 
home to dozens of galleries and has a thriving local art scene.

What’s the look on the street?

In a city that has a varied climate with pronounced temperature differences 
between day and night, dressing appropriately is a fine art. A coat and good 
boots are key in winter, as the temperature regularly gets down to around -15C. 
In fact, unless it’s summer, it’s generally a good idea to have a coat on you 
at all times – while it can get quite warm during the days, the moment sun goes 
down Ankara can feel like a city in the polar circle. Hence people dress like 
onions, layering their clothes to avoid the chill.

Best cultural Instagram account

Ankara’nin Bug’lari <https://www.instagram.com/ankaraninbuglari/> literally 
means “Bugs of Ankara” in Turkish – this satirical account features the 
absurdities, or “bugs”, of the city’s urban design, from this dinosaur statue 
to Ankara’s “stairways to heaven 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/xZL7HYRUTA/?taken-by=ankaraninbuglari>” and many 
other urban epic-fails. It sprouted from a Facebook page of the same name.

Melih Gökçek, Ankara’s mayor since 1994, is responsible for many of these bugs 
– he always has a project on the go, earning him the nickname“a surrealist in 
Ankara” <http://onedio.com/haber/melih-gokcek-gorselleri-475551>.

What’s the big talking point?

Although it happened more than three months ago, the grief caused by the 
killing of 102 citizens at a peace rally on 10 October 2015 isn’t going 
anywhere – it was thedeadliest such attack in Turkish history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/10/turkey-suicide-bomb-killed-in-ankara>
.

This bombing robbed a piece of our soul forever. It was a rude awakening for 
many urban middle-class Turks like myself. Prior to the attacks, it didn’t 
really occur to us that we could be killed by the dozens, in our hometown and 
in broad daylight – we were conditioned to believe that it was always “someone 
else” who had to die. But now we know, and we’ll never unlearn it.

Comedy gold
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsP7FaydwcHY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsP7FaydwcHY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsP7FaydwcHY&media=>
Çinçin, one of Ankara’s most impoverished neighbourhoods, might not look like 
prime comedy material, but when the residents of a slum community have their 
houses demolished and are forced to move into tower blocks, sometimes black 
humour is the only way to deal with things.

YouTube series Yolunda A.Ş. features three friends from Çinçin navigating the 
changes in their communities. It became an instant hit.

After its success as a series, the Yolunda A.Ş. team launched a feature-length 
movie in May 2015 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LYmMYLGJj40>. In it the main 
characters are trying to save their community from mass property development 
schemes and exploitation. Both the series and the movie were produced in close 
collaboration with the Çinçin residents – many of the producers and actors are 
from the neighbourhood.

What does Ankara do better than anywhere else?

Our city is a fusion of Anatolian cultures. Since it became the capital in the 
1920s, the population has soared from 75,000 to over five million. Rapid 
developments, including the ongoing migration from rural areas, have fostered a 
uniquely Anatolian modernity. The city is modern without being snobby, and is 
unembarrassed of its provincial origins – many residents of Ankara, including 
this writer, still have a village somewhere and maintain ties with their rural 
roots.

You can see these roots in the culture: whilst there are lively rock, metal 
and trance music scenes, during weddings many people dance to “Ankara Havasi”, 
a style ofcentral Anatolian psychedelic folk music 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPLDKA8MPLc> with very absurd lyrics. The 
historic opera and ballet hall might be booked out for every single event, but 
there’s a very good chance those who appreciate Hamlet will also devour their 
kokoreç with bitter turnip juice after the show at a street stall.


Moment in history
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaUqW4Ll9rfs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaUqW4Ll9rfs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaUqW4Ll9rfs&media=>
There were few Turkish musicians who were as loved as Barış Manço – a rock 
legend and one of the pioneers of Anatolian rock. Blending the melodies of 
Anatolian folk music with 70s psychedelic sounds, and adding a dash of social 
critique, Barış Manço’s 1985 concert in Ankara is cherished.


Best street art
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F151845682&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F151845682>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F151845682&media=>
Dubbed as the “Banksy’s of Ankara”, KÜF Project <https://vimeo.com/kufproject> 
are a group of guerrilla artists who criticise the top-down urban development 
projects and their lack of aesthetics. Ankara’s mayor, Melih Gökçek, usually 
plays a central role in their art.


The project aims to add a dash of colour and social criticism to Ankara’s grey 
streets. The group describes its aim as “not polluting the streets which is the 
setting for actions but to colour it byrevealing the dormant energy 
<https://www.behance.net/kufproject)>”.

From me
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FiOQFTBa9A97&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FiOQFTBa9A97>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FiOQFTBa9A97&media=>
Didem Tali <http://www.readwritetravel.net> is a freelance journalist hailing 
from the Anatolian steps.

Five to follow

Ankara International Film Festival <https://www.facebook.com/ankarauff/>

Melih Gokcek <https://twitter.com/melihgokcekENG>

Ankara Kultur Sanat <https://twitter.com/AnkaraKultSanEt>

Sportif Lezbon <https://www.facebook.com/sportiflezbon/?fref=ts> 

Living in Ankara <http://livinginankara.tumblr.com/>
 