
In five words

Not only Mozart and Trapp.

Sound of the city

I would have to say the Salzburger Stier (the Bull of Salzburg in English), an 
ancient organ located inside thefortress of Hohensalzburg 
<http://www.salzburg.info/en/sights/fortress_palaces/hohensalzburg_fortress>. 
It plays a single chord three times a day and is loud enough to be heard 
throughout the old town. In the past, people said the sound reminded them of 
the crying of a bull, hence the name. The Stier used to be the local 
archbishop’s audible reminder of his power over the city, nowadays it mainly 
makes tourists wonder what the heck it was they just heard.

Best building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feff41e5be61472521b6b4cd64edab3bff929c045%2F0_79_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Salzburg%3A%20power%20plants%2C%20synth-pop%20and%20Cara%20Delevingne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Salzburg%3A%20power%20plants%2C%20synth-pop%20and%20Cara%20Delevingne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feff41e5be61472521b6b4cd64edab3bff929c045%2F0_79_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Super-charging the skyline … the Heizkraftwerk Mitte power plant. Photograph: 
Carolina Hubelnig 
That would be the Heizkraftwerk Mitte 
<https://www.salzburg-ag.at/herkunft/anlagen/heizkraftwerk-salzburg-mitte-2604/>
, a caloric power plant located just on the border of the historic city centre. 
Planned by internationally acclaimed architects Marie-Claude Bétrix und Eraldo 
Consolascio it caused widespread public protest when it was presented to the 
public in 2003, due to its very modern architecture – many people claimed it 
was an eyesore and a blemish on the city’s skyline.

It basically looks like a huge brick made of concrete with a massive chimney 
stretching over 70 metres into the sky, contrasting sharply with the medieval, 
baroque and turn of the century buildings nearby. What’s not to like? The new 
Heizkraftwerk and its premiseswould have been an award-winning project 
<http://www.baunetz.de/meldungen/Meldungen-Verleihung_der_-Architekturpreise_des_Landes_Salzburg-_vereitelt_11491.html>
, if it wasn’t for local politicians who interfered – a very poignant example 
of courage in urban planning turned sour.

Favourite venue of the moment
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd18f7956285abbed28be88a1484ab03f57276a87%2F0_43_1024_615%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Salzburg%3A%20power%20plants%2C%20synth-pop%20and%20Cara%20Delevingne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Salzburg%3A%20power%20plants%2C%20synth-pop%20and%20Cara%20Delevingne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd18f7956285abbed28be88a1484ab03f57276a87%2F0_43_1024_615%2F1024.jpg>
 Put on your dancing shoes (and a bowtie) … the Cirque de la nuit at Jazzit. 
Photograph: Cirque de la nuit 
Salzburg’s most popular jazz club, the Jazzit <http://www.jazzit.at/site/>, 
welcomes international jazz acts to the city. When you can’t afford a ticket to 
a show you can still have a beer in their bar or garden. Sometimes they open 
the stage doors and you can hear the live music playing from afar. The venue 
also hosts a regular electroswing party, the Cirque de la Nuit. Besides live 
electroswing bands from all over Europe, they often feature acts inspired by 
the 1920s, like an absinthe fairy, jugglers and dancers. Locals don fancy 
frocks, bowties and suspenders and dance the night away.

Homegrown talent
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ACrJr_pBxs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ACrJr_pBxs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ACrJr_pBxs&media=>
I’d suggest Please Madame <https://www.facebook.com/pleasemadame/>, a local 
synth-pop band. The four guys are fastly gaining popularity in Austria and 
Germany, naming bands like the Artic Monkeys and The Editors as their biggest 
influences. In Salzburg your best chance to see them live is at theRockhouse 
<http://www.rockhouse.at/>, a concert venue running support programmes for the 
city’s young music scene, with success: some of Austria and Germany’s most 
popular bands, like theMakemakes <https://www.facebook.com/themakemakes/> or 
Olympique <https://www.facebook.com/olympiqueofficial> (who are also from 
Salzburg) have been supported by the Rockhouse, or had their first major gig 
there.

Biggest controversy

During the recent refugee crisis, pretty much every refugee who travelled over 
the Balkan route to Germanyhad to pass through the main station in Salzburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/16/salzburg-authorities-say-refugee-pressure-may-shut-down-train-station>
. Tens of thousands of people passed through in a matter of just days – a huge 
challenge for a town of just 150,000 people, and a herculean task for the local 
city administration.

Most refugees had to stay in the city for a day or two before being allowed to 
resume their journey – housing and feeding all those people on short to no 
notice was no small feat. It was wonderful to behold the helpfulness of the 
local people who organisedprivate mass donations over social media 
<https://www.facebook.com/fluechtlingewillkommensalzburg/> whenever something 
was needed – be it food, sleeping bags, nappies or winter coats. At the same 
time theoutbreak of hate and xenophobia from other parts of the population was 
nearly unbearable, especially on social media 
<http://www.salzburg.com/nachrichten/dossier/fluechtlinge/sn/artikel/fluechtlinge-rotes-kreuz-aergert-sich-ueber-hass-postings-168429/>
 – a conflict that still simmers.

What’s the look on the street?

Most under-rated location

The area around the Glanspitz in the northern part of the city has recently 
been reshaped. It’s now a very nice landscape garden with a little wood and 
rivers, a football pitch, water gardens, fruit trees and picnic grounds. 
Sometimes the city administration organises public barbecue parties there. 
During the winter months there is a little hill for sledging – and few people 
know about it. It came into existence when an (architecturally interesting) 
hydroelectric power station was built there and the piece of land surrounding 
it had to be redesigned.

Best Instagram account

This is the Instagram account of Lisa Brandstötter who organises regular 
Instawalks. She has an amazing eye for the not-so-common shot of famous scenes 
in Salzburg.

Moment in history
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7JPzXWc7c-k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7JPzXWc7c-k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7JPzXWc7c-k&media=>
It might be recent history but, on 2 December 2014, Chanel held its annual 
Métiers d’Art show in Salzburg’s Leopoldskron palace – and everyone went 
completely crazy. The preparations for the show were handled as if they were an 
issue of national secrecy. Everyone wanted to spot some of the models – the 
likes of Cara Delevingne and Kendall Jenner were here.

The motto of the show was Salzburg-Paris, as it is said that the local 
traditional clothing inspired Coco Chanel in creating her iconic suits. The 
designs featured in the show were adorned with edelweiss, frills and bows. Some 
resembled lederhosen or dirndl dresses. 

Best local artist
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13771cc093e17522d618ee4617c4f03b43d7fefa%2F0_66_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Salzburg%3A%20power%20plants%2C%20synth-pop%20and%20Cara%20Delevingne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Salzburg%3A%20power%20plants%2C%20synth-pop%20and%20Cara%20Delevingne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Finsiders-guide-salzburg-power-plants-synth-pop-cara-delevingne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13771cc093e17522d618ee4617c4f03b43d7fefa%2F0_66_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Stencil street art … the work of Jana & JS. Photograph: Matthias Gruber 
Jana & JS, consisting of Jana Balluch and Jean-Sébastien Philippe, are an 
Austrian-French couple specialising in detailed stencil street art. Their work 
deals with themes such as the way architecture changes through time, or urban 
landscapes and their inhabitants. It often features portraits of people, fitted 
into existing architectural elements. They layer single images, mostly 
photographs they have taken, in different stages of transparency, to create 
pretty surreal effects.

The best known piece of work they did in Salzburg is located in the 
Steingasse, a narrow alley in the old town that used to be the city’s red light 
district. In it a young girl sits in front of a gigantic apartment block, 
contrasting individualism and anonymity – or at least that’s my interpretation.

Top insider’s tip

When in Salzburg, attending a performance of classical music is an absolute 
must. Yet tickets to the famous Salzburg Festival are pretty hard to come by, 
and pretty expensive as well. But there are two alternative options: during the 
summer months you can visit theSiemens Festspielnächte 
<https://www.siemens.at/festspielnaechte/>, a free open air cinema in the heart 
of the old town that exclusively shows performances from the Salzburg Festival. 
Just bring your picnic basket and enjoy!

During the rest of the year you can attend one of the many recitals by the 
students of the Mozarteum conservatory 
<https://www.moz.ac.at/de/events/index.php?g=62>. The Mozarteum is one of the 
most acclaimed conservatories of the world and most of the recitals are free to 
attend.

From me
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2Fi5OIdajqL2J&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2Fi5OIdajqL2J>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2Fi5OIdajqL2J&media=>
Originally an art historian, Carolina Hubelnig 
<http://www.facebook.com/guteguete> is now a professional lifestyle blogger 
<http://www.guteguete.at/> and co-owner of a digital media agency. She is a 
lifelong lover of cats.

Five to follow

Ginger in the basement <http://www.instagram.com/gingerinthebasement>

Fräulein Flora’s Favourite Hangouts <https://www.facebook.com/fraeuleinflora>

Stadt Salzburg <https://twitter.com/stadtdialog>

Eva Schatz <http://evaschatz.tumblr.com/>

Saltzburger Festspiele 
<http://www.salzburgerfestspiele.at/podcasts/saison/2015>
 