
Sometimes, when the sun is setting over a village called Aldona, and the 
evening bread is delivered on the backs of bicycles, you can convince yourself 
that Goa is all right. When Reginald or Tulsidas or Lata or Maria stand at the 
front gate speaking to that passerby at dusk, and the urak season starts 
slipping into the feni days, so all you smell on the road is the arch 
fermentation of cashew apples: yes, it’s OK.

But then you think about the beaches 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/goa/Colva-beach-turns-into-dumping-ground/articleshow/52457483.cms>
, the ones with theplastic bags in the water 
<http://www.navhindtimes.in/save-the-sea-from-plastics/>, which you mistook for 
jellyfish, and theshards of glass from the beer bottles 
<http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/broken-bottles-causing-menace-goa-coastal-village-wants-ban/articleshow/47354359.cms>
 carried into the waves, which now churn with sewage from the septic tanks. 
Those beaches; you can forget those beaches.

And the hills and roadsides, covered in garbage 
<http://www.videovolunteers.org/garbage-major-problem-goa/>, blossoming like 
wildflower. And the earth inland thatmining has stripped bare 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/columns/illegal-mining-playing-havoc-in-goa/story-yEN9xdivmbRVA9Ky1TU7GK.html>
 and turned rust-red, leaving peacocks dead from contaminated groundwater. The 
Mandovi river, too,full of floating casinos 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/goa/Destroying-Miramar-Goa-tourism-blunders-again/articleshow/46279240.cms>
 and effluent. You can forget these things. And you can remember Goa’s ghosts.

My husband and I moved to north Goa eight years ago, though I first visited 
with my family 30 years ago, when I was four; we drove down from Bombay in the 
car, my brother seeing his first nudist on the beach, his mind blown. This time 
we came so I could study yoga, and we realised there was no reason to leave. 
Goa was beautiful, laid-back yet exciting, a meeting place for the world. Sure, 
there were problems. But the beaches! The restaurants! The music, and the 
people!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31c9fe0f2a15fcb095ff5fffa6aa59fb04168802%2F0_226_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20idyll%20no%20more%3A%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20leaving%20Goa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20idyll%20no%20more%3A%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20leaving%20Goa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31c9fe0f2a15fcb095ff5fffa6aa59fb04168802%2F0_226_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Rubbish strewn on the beach in the fishing village of Badem, next to Vagator 
It was about four years ago when the doubts first crept in. We noticed how 
swimming in the sea would leave us with a sore throat or infect a cut. We could 
no longer pretendthe garbage piles on the Assagao 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/goa/Toxic-fumes-from-Assagao-blaze-continue-to-plague-locals/articleshow/29872653.cms>
, Siolim and Parra hills weren’t getting worse. We saw the trickle of new 
construction becoming a torrent. And, looking around, we realised many who had 
created Goa’s culture were now looking elsewhere:locals sought Portuguese 
passports 
<http://www.indiatimes.com/news/india/thousands-of-goans-are-giving-up-indian-citizenship-to-get-portugese-passports-and-a-new-life-248855.html>
; foreigners talked about Cambodia or weighed the merits of staying in Europe, 
saying the good days were over. On balance, it was still worth it. And our 
village of Assagao – we said – was special, hidden from the corrupted 
beach-belt; things would be fine.

The garbage is out of control, shellfish have been decimated by bacteria, 
turtle nesting grounds have been ruined

But things are not fine. The garbage is out of control, river shellfish have 
been decimated <http://goastreets.com/goas-dirty-water/> by coliform bacteria, 
turtle nesting grounds have been ruined. And the construction … it has 
exploded. We went away for work for six months, and when we returned six 
Portuguese villas in our village had been demolished. In their place were 
construction sites for luxury apartment complexes, the required sand dredged 
from the rivers, the necessary water drained from wells that ran dry in 
January. And it’s not just our village: Anjuna and Vagator are changing even 
faster, with new projects such as Rainforest Boulevard (complete with fake 
photo of Goa’s beaches in the brochure) and Goa Junction (“for those who choose 
to be among the privileged few [and] believe in a king-sized lavish & luxurious 
life”) rising up.

The most recent horror? The “eco-tourism” development of the ecologically 
sensitive Chapora river area 
<http://www.epaperoheraldo.in/Details.aspx?id=21171&boxid=151617168&uid&dat=6%2f11%2f2016>
 by means of “ferry terminals, a tourist village, museum, marinas, fisherman’s 
wharf, hotels, an underwater aquarium, sea world, a bird park, an adventure 
sports island, a tree-top hotel, hotel complex, an exhibition centre …”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c7c718690ba4f1e77b9417c32f3f8a88a7a6859%2F0_80_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20idyll%20no%20more%3A%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20leaving%20Goa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20idyll%20no%20more%3A%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20leaving%20Goa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c7c718690ba4f1e77b9417c32f3f8a88a7a6859%2F0_80_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 A scene from a rubbish-strewn area on the edge of Assagao 
With sadness, we have decided to leave, to look toward Europe or Latin 
America. I have canvassed the opinions of long-term foreign visitors who have 
also turned away. For Manu from Mexico, the filthy sea was the final straw, 
though there is also the unscrupulous local business people, “always wanting to 
take advantage or cheat you in some way”. Phil from England, who has been 
coming here for 25 years, said: “The joke I made this season was, we all used 
to say Goa was not the real India, but now REAL India has turned up.” And 
Marco, who has been driving his VW bus from Switzerland to India for years via 
Italy, Greece, Turkey, Iran and Pakistan wrote: “I think I’m not coming back. 
Too much pollution, traffic, crazy tourists, new buildings, corruption …”

The foreigners who have settled here, the ones who made the parties and the 
markets come alive, are going elsewhere

Foreign tourism has been falling 
<http://thewire.in/11526/european-tourist-numbers-to-goa-are-falling-and-thats-a-worry/>
 for the last few years. India News Network reported that the total number of 
foreign touristshas fallen 20% compared over the last two years 
<http://indianewsnetwork.in/over-8500-regular-british-tourists-to-goa-cancel-their-bookings-this-year/>
, while The Times of India said57,000 foreign tourists arrived between October 
and December 2015 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/goa/Foreign-tourist-arrivals-nosedive-still-further/articleshow/50617949.cms>
, compared with the 85,000 in the same period the previous year. Over 20,000 
Russians, the demographic Goa recently relied on, have cancelled trips. The 
collapsing rouble and problems in the eurozone are external factors that partly 
explain the disappearing foreign tourist, but Goa doesn’t help itself. In an 
IndyaWire.com social media survey,42% of Russians who had visited in the last 
four years said they wouldn’t be coming back 
<http://indyawire.com/42-per-cent-former-russian-tourists-to-goa-do-not-want-to-come-back-again-says-indyawire-com-russia-survey/>
: Goa was too expensive, too dirty, the taxi mafia too aggressive, women didn’t 
feel safe, the police were unco-operative.

Anecdotal evidence supports claims of increased harassment of women. A chef 
friend from Chandigarh, who worked late in a restaurant, had to switch from a 
scooter to a car because she was being stalked on her way home. An Italian 
woman here for 10 days stopped travelling alone after a man tried to force her 
off her bike at night. And a Californian friend who has lived in India for more 
than 30 years told me about a new bag snatching gang targeting single females 
travelling alone in the evenings. Little by little, the foreigners who have 
settled here, the ones who made the parties and the markets come alive, are 
going elsewhere.

But hey … good riddance? We don’t need you? Domestic tourism will pick up the 
shortfall – after all, it rose 35% between 2013 and 2014. Here’s the rub, 
though: aside from dramatically altering a place that, in the words of one 
friend, “has been geared toward foreigners for 40 years”, the bulk of this 
incoming demographic doesn’t bring much money to the local economy. They 
generally arrive by the jeep- or coach-load, stay in budget hotels or in their 
own vehicles, cook their own food if they can or eat all-inclusive, generate 
huge amounts of garbage and leave.

It’s a rush toward low-quality, pack-em-in resorts, at great environmental 
cost.

Revenues are falling. But the budget hotels and apartments built to cope with 
this boomare costing Goa big 
<http://www.heraldgoa.in/Goa/Panjim/Construction-of-residential-property-in-commercial-zones-a-loophole-in-ODP/102280.html>
. The coastal belt is becoming a concrete wilderness, the jammed roads are 
seeingmore fatal accidents 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/goa/Goa-records-14th-highest-rate-of-death-by-accident/articleshow/48891710.cms>
, the beaches are becoming filthier. Occasionally, they become sinister. In the 
popular Indian imagination, the liberal, laid-back Goa that accepted the 
hippies all those years ago is a den of sin, a land of sex, drugs and drink, 
where anything goes. And so it has become. When my husband went to photograph 
Calangute beach recently, a pimp approached him within five minutes, “You want 
to fuck nice girls?” he whispered, while the police sat a few feet away.

It’s a rush toward low-quality, pack-em-in resorts, at great environmental 
cost. Which is funny, as the Goa government has been talking about high-end 
tourism for years. It was always its plan: get rid of the hippies and bring in 
the high-rollers. That’s what the then chief minister Manohar Parrikar told me 
when I interviewed him in 2004. Well, they got rid of the hippies. And the 
high-end tourists? Surprise! They’re not coming. But they will, according to 
the government; they’ll come as soon as the Panaji to Reis Magos Ropeway is 
built. Acable car, costing £10m 
<http://www.heraldgoa.in/Goa/PanjimReis-Magos-ropeway-to-cost-%60100-cr-/99955.html>
, linking the capital city to a fort across the river: that’s the secret weapon 
to bring in the luxury crowd.

This is the government that green-lit sand mining in the rivers, and the 
recommencement of iron-ore mining inland 
<http://www.dnaindia.com/india/column-this-people-s-movement-is-posing-a-challenge-to-goa-s-mining-mafia-2195703>
. This is the government that thinks the way to fix things is to put Wi-Fi on 
the beaches, along with CCTV. It is not the first. In 2011, the Congress 
government proposed a marina and a “Disneyland style adventure park 
<https://in.news.yahoo.com/disney-style-theme-park-marina-ropeway-proposed-goa-112119168.html>
”, which would surely bring in the high-end tourists. Nothing came of those 
things.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c5b1fff4cdd6e63720f117a1c5893137288b9ed%2F0_352_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20idyll%20no%20more%3A%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20leaving%20Goa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20idyll%20no%20more%3A%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20leaving%20Goa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdeepti-kapoor-why-i-am-leaving-goa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c5b1fff4cdd6e63720f117a1c5893137288b9ed%2F0_352_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Note of hope … Felly Gomes and Beatriz Contreras Milla, founders of the NGO 
Live Happy, which raises awareness of the rubbish problem in the community 
This is what the government cannot understand: Goa has always had everything 
it needs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/31/holiday-guide-goa-best-restaurants-hotels-beaches>
: pristine beaches, charming villages, immaculate countryside, friendly people, 
a tolerant culture. It still has it, in places. The early mornings can be 
glorious, theinland areas around Quepem and Salcete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/18/goa-india-away-from-beach-inland>
 in south Goa hold fast to their sleepy, genteel charm andthe rugged coastline 
of Canacona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/mar/24/guide-to-goa-s-unspoilt-beaches>
, between the river Sal and Agonda beach, is still a bio-diverse wonderland.

What the government can't understand is that Goa has always had everything it 
needs

There is always hope. A new (albeit controversial) waste treatment plant 
<https://www.greenpeacex.in/petitions/goa-chief-minister-shift-the-goan-garbage-treatment-plant-protect-the-people-and-the-environment>
 is coming at Saligao, while Olaulim and Parra panchayats (councils) are doing 
great work in garbage management. Groups and individuals are striving for a 
better Goa: environmentalists Claude and Norma Alvares, the Goa-based NGOVideo 
Volunteers <http://www.videovolunteers.org/> and social activist Dr Oscar 
Rebello among them. Another, in Assagao, is Felly Gomes who, along with his 
wife Beatriz Contreras Milla, runs theLive Happy social activism NGO 
<https://www.facebook.com/wearelivehappy/>, raising garbage awareness in 
schools, temples and churches, recycling and composting villages’ waste, and 
running yoga and mediation classes with the funds raised. Ultimately, however, 
the authorities have to step in and help.

For now, a sense of sadness lingers. I talk to the husband and wife who run 
one of my local fish-curry-rice places. They tell me that “everything is 
corrupted; everything is gone”, and when considering the construction boom add 
that “in five years the village will be lost.”

We look to the agricultural land next door to their business and they both 
wonder if in 10 years even this will be sold. But what can they do? It’s a 
question you hear often. What can we do? The answer is unclear. What is certain 
is that the state is in a period of upheaval, and whatever the outcome, the Goa 
we once knew is gone.
 