
I live in the historical Beyoğlu District of Istanbul, the centre of my 
poly-centred megacity. In any given day, 2 million visitors pass within one 
kilometre of my home. Taksim Square and Gezi Park are approximately 700m from 
my front door. My office, from where I work on urbanism-related projects, is 
also within walking distance of my home.

Living and working in such a central area has a lot of merits, yet it also has 
its drawbacks. The major problem is the intense level of commercialisation and 
threat of forced eviction. The tourism industry and real estate developers are 
extremely interested in buying and converting residential buildings and local 
businesses into hotels or short-term rentals. For exactly this reason I was 
evicted from my previous house, which is not far from where I live now, two 
years ago – and I can see the encroachment of the tourism related spaces upon 
my existing neighbourhood.
 Huge construction trucks passing through residential streets in Istanbul. All 
photographs: Yasar Adanali 
Most of my neighbours are relatively poor internal and external migrants. They 
have been enjoying low rents and employment opportunities nearby for many 
years. However, the widening rent gap and gentrification process has put them 
under threat of eviction.


Istanbul is the city of transformation and contradiction. As an urbanist, I am 
trying to keep record and make sense of this transformation and am especially 
interested in its winners and losers. At the moment we live in a giant 
construction site, where skyscrapers, mega projects and urban renewal projects 
are taking place all around. There is a gold rush to real-estate development. 
Just to give an example, the founders of one of themost successful local IT 
firms <http://gittigidiyor.com/> sold their shares to eBay and joined the 
highly profitable real-estate development sector.


Istanbul is a city of contradictions in many respects. It is one of the oldest 
metropolises in the world (more than 8,000 years old), but only a fraction of 
its buildings remain from 100 years ago. Istanbul is number five on the list of 
world cities with the highest number of dollar billionaires, yet on the other 
hand it accommodates some of the poorest people in Turkey. It's a megacity with 
99% of its 15 million inhabitants living in an urbanised area, yet, it is still 
possible to find a ‘slow city’ lifestyle within the city’s boundaries.

What's the best building in your city?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405686392564%2F87ebab34-513f-4958-9c18-c0e61678605e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist's%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%27s%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405686392564%2F87ebab34-513f-4958-9c18-c0e61678605e-1020x612.jpeg>
 The unrestored Haydarpaşa railway station 
One of the most iconic buildings in Istanbul is Haydarpaşa railway station. It 
was built at the beginning of 20th century as the point of departure for the 
Istanbul–Baghdad railway line. With its beautiful architecture – and being 
located next to the sea so passengers can cross the Bosporus by ferry right on 
arrival to the city – the building is an indispensable part of Istanbul’s 
cityscape and imagery.

The government wants to privatise the building and the surrounding area for 
hotel and real estate development, despite urban social movements’ resistance. 
In 2010, a suspicious fire destroyed the roof of the heritage building. Many 
people believe the blaze was an act of sabotage.

And the worst?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405699292586%2F0019d2cc-bf9a-47e1-a646-f1de24ffa761-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist's%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%27s%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405699292586%2F0019d2cc-bf9a-47e1-a646-f1de24ffa761-1020x612.jpeg>
 Istanbul's worst building 
It is hard to choose just one worst building in Istanbul among many horrific 
ones. In a city where the principles of urban planning and building codes can 
be generously stretched by developers and authorities, in accordance with their 
appetite for profit, the sky is literally the limit in terms of committing 
‘crimes against the city’.

The Four Winds Project is probably one of the ‘worst’ buildings, if not the 
one, with its disproportionate height for its setting. The ultra high-income 
residential towers are constructed on publicly owned green space, right next to 
a city park. This project on steroids not only allows its ‘well-connected’ 
developer to make unjustifiable profit with its ridiculously lavish floor 
permit, but also steals the sunshine of the surrounding public park and 
apartments.

How clean is the city?

Even though the city’s air quality has improved significantly in recent years, 
it can still be very poor under certain weather conditions and at particular 
times of the year. Over 3 million vehicles, heavy marine traffic, and the use 
of polluting fuels are some of the factors behind this.


Most people, including myself, do not drink tap water, even though Istanbul’s 
water agency claims that it is safe. In terms of trash collection, 
municipalities do a fairly good job. Informal garbage collectors do an even 
better job of making sure that recyclable or sellable materials are being 
picked up and brought to one of the numerous collection centres, one of which 
is located right next to my apartment. Overall, the streets of Istanbul are 
clean, but its metro is spotless, to such an extent that we can compare it to 
the fabulous Moscow Metro.


What's the best way to get around? 

Well, if you have to use the motorway during rush hour, there is no good way 
to do it – just good luck! Given Istanbul's size, you cannot get away with 
travelling just by metro or by foot and extremely poor infrastructure, 
aggressive drivers and steep hills make cycling a tough choice too. If you 
happen to be living and working on the same ‘continent’ (remember Istanbul 
stretches over Europe and Asia), or at least if you are located somewhere 
accessible to ferries (Vapur in Turkish), then you are in a better situation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405686198132%2F4cddbda6-ba76-489c-81a6-f3ac4a47c0b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist's%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%27s%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405686198132%2F4cddbda6-ba76-489c-81a6-f3ac4a47c0b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The relaxing vapur - more than a mere mode of transport. 
For me the the picturesque Vapur is the best mode of urban transportation, not 
only in Istanbul, but in the whole world. Depending on the station, it can take 
between five to 20 minutes to cross the Bosporus. Yet, it is a gross 
underestimation to callVapur a mere mode of transport. Vapur is a culture, an 
urban therapy, a treat, and an elegant way to relax in the middle of this mad 
city.

What does your city sound like? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405685430213%2F6c1e28c9-ce8c-4fc0-b86d-e9db55d7e558-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist's%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%27s%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405685430213%2F6c1e28c9-ce8c-4fc0-b86d-e9db55d7e558-1020x612.jpeg>
 A mosque in Istanbul 
My house is right next to a mosque; hence my ‘biased’ answer would be the call 
to prayer. Considering the number of mosques in Istanbul, one can easily 
generalise my answer to the rest of the city. Seagulls are another significant 
and loud part of Istanbul’s soundscapes.


Best place for a conversation 

In the city centre, one of the best options for a good conversation would be a 
rooftop bar or café, some of which have amazing views. I would go for the bar 
on top of the Grand Hotel de Londres Istanbul, facing the Golden Horn and its 
dense urban fabric, especially at sunset.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405685648598%2Fe81fd5f1-03e1-4525-9e14-fdc81c11fa45-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist's%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%27s%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405685648598%2Fe81fd5f1-03e1-4525-9e14-fdc81c11fa45-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Historic mansions in the Princess Islands 
Another personal favorite is to take a long ferry ride to the Princess Islands 
(but definitely not at the weekend!) and stroll among the beautiful historical 
mansions and natural heritage sites to end up at the free public beach.


What one thing is indispensable for life in your city? 

That's a tough question, but the first thing that comes to my mind is AKBIL - 
‘the smart ticket’ for public transport. AKBIL comes in two forms: one as a key 
ring and the other as a card, identical to the size of a credit card. You top 
up your AKBIL at money machines or corner shops and use it for almost all sorts 
of public transport, except for shared minivans (Dolmus in Turkish), which are 
another indispensable thing for life in Istanbul.

How is Istanbul changing?

 Istanbul has changed radically over the last decade. Urban renewal projects 
target inhabitants ofgecekondu [slum neighbourhoods], and state and market-led 
gentrification processes force the poor to leave the city centre.

Gated communities, social housing and shopping malls segregate society 
according to people’s income levels, while speculation in the housing market 
rings alarm bells.

The shopping malls of which Istanbul now has the highest number in Europe 
endanger small local businesses, while central government is privatising 
heritage sites and public buildings for tourism projects.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405687152455%2F9bdc9afe-edaa-4b52-82cd-13cb0e7c1389-2060x917.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist's%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%27s%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405687152455%2F9bdc9afe-edaa-4b52-82cd-13cb0e7c1389-2060x917.jpeg>
 Mega projects in the northern part of the city threaten protected environments 
This process of privatisation also encloses urban commons (such as the failed 
attempt on Gezi Park); and mega projects such as ‘the world’s biggest airport’, 
‘Canal Istanbul’ and ‘New City Istanbul’ all threaten the ecology of the 
northern part of the city.

Are you optimistic about your city's future?

Given the grim picture of transformation summed up above, Istanbul has 
increasingly become a city of resistance. We have experienced one of the most 
exciting, hopeful and truly urban uprisings in the contemporary history of the 
world. The awareness and willingness of Istanbul's residents to do something 
for their city and their future has probably never been at such a level. Hence, 
yes, I am optimistic about the future of my city.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405685809049%2F232763b3-978e-4053-8cde-d6aca2276334-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20urbanist's%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20urbanist%27s%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20live%20in%20a%20giant%20construction%20site%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjul%2F21%2Furbanist-guide-istanbul-giant-construction-site%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F18%2F1405685809049%2F232763b3-978e-4053-8cde-d6aca2276334-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Resistance: setting Tarlabaşı renewal project's fences on fire. 
• Istanbul’s gentrification by force leaves locals feeling overwhelmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/02/istanbul-gentrification-force-locals-angry-luxury-hotels-turkey>
 