
1. Go to an occupied theatre

The Embros theatre <http://www.embros.gr/> in central Athens has been a 
“cultural open space” since 2012. Catch a show by theStray Bitches 
<http://adespoteskyles.blogspot.gr/?m=1> – a feminist theatre group who, when 
not on stage, can be found touring the streets, giving out anti-fascist 
propaganda.

Want to help Greece? Go there on holiday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/07/help-greece-go-on-holiday-cheap-beautiful>
2. Eat fish, surrounded by wild horses

Tarsanas, a beach restaurant in Lavrio 
<https://www.facebook.com/tarsanasfishrestaurant>, 60km south-east of Athens, 
takes Greek informality to new levels. Dimitris, who runs it, will serve you – 
if he likes you – barefoot. His horses sometimes wander between the tables. The 
crab comes with spicy sauce, in which it is compulsory to douse your chips, and 
the mussels are cooked in ouzo.

3. Take your own graffiti tour of Exarchia

Exarchia is the bohemian district sporadically under anarchist control which, 
despite the occasional tense moment, remains the beating heart of young Athens. 
The restaurants along Ippokratous are good and – for foreigners – cheap. Don’t 
take your camera unless you want to understand how unpopular the media is. On a 
really busy night there will be doorstep parties, dance events in the park on 
Strefi hill and, depending what happens in politics, the occasional whiff of 
tear gas.

4. Go to the Meet Market

The Meet Market is a two-day event 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Meet-Market/241235502675042> that involves 
new Greek designers and brands, including handmade jewellery and clothes. It 
happens once a month in different places around Athens, and usually has live 
music and street food.

5. Go back to the 1950s
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fgreek-solidarity-holiday-anarchist-theatre-wild-horses-paul-mason%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436287678105%2F9127dc7d-5fab-41b0-8246-cffaf18d3f6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anarchist%20theatre%20and%20wild%20horses%3A%20how%20to%20have%20a%20Greek%20solidarity%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fgreek-solidarity-holiday-anarchist-theatre-wild-horses-paul-mason%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anarchist%20theatre%20and%20wild%20horses%3A%20how%20to%20have%20a%20Greek%20solidarity%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fgreek-solidarity-holiday-anarchist-theatre-wild-horses-paul-mason%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436287678105%2F9127dc7d-5fab-41b0-8246-cffaf18d3f6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ikaria, Greece. Photograph: Eirini Vourloumis 
There is no island sleepier than Ikaria. Twelve hours by boat from Piraeas, in 
the eastern Aegean, the island’s culture has remained profoundly analogue. The 
residents don’t wear watches and live on Ikarian time, partying after midnight 
until 10am, while winemaking or doing their PhDs in what little daylight they 
actually are awake for. It is the Exarchia of the islands.

6. Feed migrants

There are numerous local initiatives in the big cities, with ad hoc groups 
springing up to help out the 60,000 people who have crossed from Turkey this 
year.Klimaka <http://www.klimaka.org.gr/>, an NGO in Gazi, Athens, feeds, 
clothes and provides medicine to homeless Greeks and recent migrants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fgreek-solidarity-holiday-anarchist-theatre-wild-horses-paul-mason%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436289378076%2F074028aa-3e56-4d78-8480-52ed78e3b40d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anarchist%20theatre%20and%20wild%20horses%3A%20how%20to%20have%20a%20Greek%20solidarity%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fgreek-solidarity-holiday-anarchist-theatre-wild-horses-paul-mason%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anarchist%20theatre%20and%20wild%20horses%3A%20how%20to%20have%20a%20Greek%20solidarity%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fgreek-solidarity-holiday-anarchist-theatre-wild-horses-paul-mason%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436289378076%2F074028aa-3e56-4d78-8480-52ed78e3b40d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A rescue operation in April off Rhodes, Greece, to rescue migrants in the 
Aegean Sea. Photograph: Xinhua/Landov/Barcroft Media 
7. Visit a British battlefield

In 1942, 12 British commandos parachuted into central Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> to sabotage the railway viaduct at 
Gorgopotamos, a strategic supply route for German troops fighting in north 
Africa. It was a spectacular success and marked the beginning of the Special 
Operations Executive’s [a British spy agency] collaboration with the communist 
resistance. The picturesque villages nearby include tiny Pyrsogianni, where 
there is a history museum commemorating the secret language of the peasants who 
lived there; the secret pathways they relied on provide some rugged hiking if 
you feel like reliving the yomp done by the men of Operation Harling.
 