
For Anthony Vaccarello, the solution to the problem of going forward at Saint 
Laurent came from going back. Tuesday evening in Paris marked the 
Belgian-Italian designer’s first show for the Parisian house, following its 
previous, incredibly successful, four-year reboot byHedi Slimane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/hedi-slimane>. 

Arriving at the venue – the half-finished HQ of the brand – invitees were 
greeted by a giant neon Yves Saint Laurent logo, originally designed in the 
early 1960s and conspicuously absent in the Slimane era. Against a 
couldn’t-have-asked-for-better sunset, it was a moment curated for Instagram. A 
cluster of editors were happily obliging – and suddenly an iconic idea ofSaint 
Laurent <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/saint-laurent> was resurrected in 
the most modern of contexts.

The same principle went through the collection that followed this stunt. The 
logo was the heel of stiletto shoes, earrings, and on the ankle of 10 denier 
tights. The designs also played on Saint Laurent’s original work, mostly from 
the 1980s. Black dominated, often in leather. There were nods to Le Smoking 
jackets, transparent chiffon blouses and party dresses worthy of Loulou de la 
Falaise at Le Sept, but nothing was explicit. Instead, after the show, 
Vacharello, after greeting guests including Amber Valetta and Jane Birkin, said 
he was inspired by “the idea of Saint Laurent”.

A press release sent out afterwards provided a little more detail. It 
referenced Saint Laurent muse, Paloma Picasso, who inspired the 1972 ‘Scandal’ 
collection, as well as the tuxedo, a sailor coat and a specific dress with 
exaggerated sleeves that Vacharello discovered in the archives. “Anthony 
Vaccarello has let himself get carried away by the images of the designer,” it 
read.

Vaccarello’s aesthetic shares a certain rock’n’roll sensibility with Slimane’s 
indie-influenced work. But at both his own brand and work with Versus, his 
designs are more brazenly sexy. The clothes in this show were almost 
exclusively not suitable for work, with short hemlines, bare breasts and 
asymmetrical necklines. It was an after-dark-only collection, but styling 
tricks stopped it from being a period piece.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanthony-vaccarello-brazenly-sexy-debut-yves-saint-laurent-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc7d8a8334aa911f8e0424b5789f3369c17f07c9%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Vaccarello%20makes%20a%20brazenly%20sexy%20debut%20at%20Saint%20Laurent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanthony-vaccarello-brazenly-sexy-debut-yves-saint-laurent-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Vaccarello%20makes%20a%20brazenly%20sexy%20debut%20at%20Saint%20Laurent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanthony-vaccarello-brazenly-sexy-debut-yves-saint-laurent-paris-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc7d8a8334aa911f8e0424b5789f3369c17f07c9%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Anthony Vaccarello appears at the end of his Saint Laurent show in Paris. 
Photograph: Gonzalo Fuentes/Reuters 
Models wore little makeup, their hair loose, with slouchy jeans. Some had 
either biker boots or brogues with socks, a sweetness that contrasted with 
leather basques and PVC macs. This collection could be seen as a logical next 
step to Slimane’s outgoing one. Shown in March, it was an ode to 1980s 
nightclubbing.

The new creative director would be foolish not to take heed of his 
predecessor. Slimane, in his four years in charge, was commercial dynamite for 
the brand. Revenues were £839m in 2015, up from £609m in 2014. Vaccarello was 
announced as Slimane’s replacement in April. In a statement announcing his 
appointment, Francesca Bellettini, president and CEO of Saint Laurent, 
commented that Vaccarello “impeccably balances elements of provocative 
femininity and sharp masculinity in his silhouettes”.

Slimane’s next move is unclear. He will be awarded around £10m by Saint 
Laurent’s parent company, Kering, following a dispute regarding his exit 
package from the brand. Rumours persist that the designer may be in line to 
replace Karl Lagerfeld at Chanel when the octogenarian designer decides to 
retire, or he may launch his own label.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanthony-vaccarello-brazenly-sexy-debut-yves-saint-laurent-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ed305ce274b94e35c731a6e00ce034b65c348bb%2F0_192_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Vaccarello%20makes%20a%20brazenly%20sexy%20debut%20at%20Saint%20Laurent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanthony-vaccarello-brazenly-sexy-debut-yves-saint-laurent-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Vaccarello%20makes%20a%20brazenly%20sexy%20debut%20at%20Saint%20Laurent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanthony-vaccarello-brazenly-sexy-debut-yves-saint-laurent-paris-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ed305ce274b94e35c731a6e00ce034b65c348bb%2F0_192_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Models wore little makeup, their hair loose, with slouchy jeans. Photograph: 
Thibault Camus/AP 
Other debuts this fashion week see women designers moving into positions more 
recently held by men. The relative unknown Bouchra Jarrar will show her first 
collection for Lanvin on Wednesday and Maria Grazia Chiuri – ex of Valentino – 
does the same at Christian Dior on Friday.

Chiuri is the first female designer to take up the Dior helm in the house’s 
nearly 60-year history. Her work at Valentino with creative partner Pierpaolo 
Piccioli since 2008 has gained fans for its modern, younger take on femininity. 
Chiuri’s Dior is set to be one of the most anticipated shows of the week.

Newer labels are gaining hype with an aesthetic that has more of a street edge 
to it. Tuesday had shows from Koché and Jacquemus – both brands led by a new 
generation of Paris designers, playing with sportswear and staples such as 
trenches in new ways.

This new mood for Paris is further emphasised with street labels from America 
– Rihanna’s Fenty Puma line and Virgil Abloh’s Off White – also on the Paris 
schedule, both with shows on Wednesday.
 