
For Egyptians, the risk of being snatched from the street and forcibly 
disappeared by the country’s security forces has never been greater.

In the first eight months of 2015, 1,250 
<http://www.dailynewsegypt.com/2015/08/31/1250-forced-disappearances-since-beginning-of-year-ngo/>
 people disappeared, according to a report by the Egyptian Commission for 
Rights and Freedoms (ECRF).

I'm in an Egyptian prison – being stripped and beaten is normal | Ibrahim 
Halawa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/prison-egypt-stripped-beaten-witness-torture-egypt>
In response, the organisation has created I Protect <http://ec-rf.org/app/>, 
an app that allows Android phone users to key in a code when they are being 
detained, which sends three text messages to contacts and an email containing 
the location of their arrest to the ECRF.

The group hopes the messages will aid a quick reaction during the first 24 
hours of an arrest, key to stopping people being transferred from a police 
station to a larger facility, making them harder to find.

Mohammed Lotfy, executive director of ECRF, said: “Being able to speak out 
about the arrest of an activist or protestor in the first hours contributes to 
the person’s transfer from police to prosecution during the legal time from of 
24 hours.

“This prevents their detention incommunicado, or worse their forced 
disappearance, and therefore reduces the risks of being subjected to torture or 
other ill treatment.”


Most affected are young people, especially students, in large Egyptian cities. 
Areport by Amnesty International in July 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/07/egypt-hundreds-disappeared-and-tortured-amid-wave-of-brutal-repression/>
 found that children as young as 14 years old “vanish without trace at the 
hands of the state”. The report called forced disappearances, where the victim 
vanishes into a large security facility and is denied contact with their family 
or legal representation, “a key instrument of state policy in Egypt”.

Hundreds of people are thought to be secretly held in the national security 
agency offices in Lazoghly Square, Cairo, inside the interior ministry building.

Local threats

This is not the first time Egyptians have created an app to counter state 
abuses. In 2013, asimilar 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/sheerafrenkel/getting-arrested-in-egypt-theres-an-app-for-that?utm_term=.axDPrAw4jP#.ywYdYB3a7d>
 programme was created to alert the user’s contacts that they were being 
arrested at a protest – although this proved dangerous for those who were found 
by police to have the app on their phones.

The developer of I Protect, who has asked to remain anonymous and has not been 
named as part of the project, explained that the app’s interface is designed to 
guard against this.

“After applying the settings, the app converts into a calculator – so opening 
the app just means you see the interface of a calculator,” he said. “Only the 
user can convert it from a calculator into the app by combining certain words 
and keys that they set themselves.”

State surveillance penetrates deep into the internet and phone lines in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, recently sparking a growth in the 
popularity of encrypted messenger apps such as Signal or Telegram. Yet the 
developer of I Protect says there is no need to encrypt the app as “we don’t 
save any data in a database, the data is shared between the user and ECRF only”.

I Protect is the latest in a series of warning apps tailored to unique local 
threats. India has recently seen thegrowth of apps designed for women 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/tech/slideshow/7-best-women-safety-apps/itslideshowviewall/51285625.cms>
, allowing them to alert contacts or the police if they feel they’re in danger 
from attack or sexual assault. After being car-jacked in Kuala Lumpur, a 
developer created an app calledWatch Over Me 
<http://technode.com/2014/05/11/watch-app-aims-keep-safe/>, which tracks a 
user’s car journey and sends an alert if they fail to check in at their 
destination.

Hundreds 'disappeared' by security forces in Egypt, says Amnesty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/13/hundreds-disappeared-security-forces-egypt-amnesty-report>
But an app like I Protect can only provide a temporary solution to the problem 
of forced disappearances, as the Egyptian state does not acknowledge the 
problem exists.

The interior minister, Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, said in March 
<http://www.dailynewsegypt.com/2016/03/06/minister-interior-claims-no-enforced-disappearances-egypt/>
 that forced disappearances do not occur in Egypt. He claimed reports of 
alleged forced disappearances were often taken directly to the Egyptian 
National Council for Human Rights (NCHR), or to international institutions, who 
he accused of being allied with the banned Muslim Brotherhood group, to scare 
citizens.

The head of the NCHR, which has repeatedly demanded answers from the 
government about forced disappearances, recently resigned over what he 
described as “a lack of cooperation” from the state.
 