
Ultra-rich philanthropists and their foundations have increasing influence on 
decision-making and are setting the global health and agriculture agenda in 
developing countries, according to amajor study 
<https://www.globalpolicy.org/images/pdfs/GPFEurope/Philanthropic_Power_online.pdf>
 (pdf).

Using their immense wealth and influence with political and scientific elites, 
organisations like the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Rockefeller 
Foundation and others are promoting solutions to global problems that may 
undermine the UN and other international organisations, says the report by the 
independentGlobal Policy Forum <https://www.globalpolicy.org/about-gpf-mm.html>
, which monitors the work of UN bodies and global policymaking.

With assets of more than $360bn (£250bn), the world’s 27 largest foundations 
give roughly $15bn annually to charitable causes. Nineteen of the 27 are 
American and many are now looking to extend their influence to poorer 
countries, say the report’s authors.

Foundation spending on global development has increased from $3bn a year in 
the early 2000s to $10bn today. By far the largest donor, say the authors, is 
theBill and Melinda Gates Foundation <http://www.gatesfoundation.org/>, which 
in 2012 gave $2.6bn. This compares with $1.2bn from the next nine largest US 
trusts.


In addition, 137 billionaires from 14 countries have now pledged to give 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/aug/04/us-billionaires-half-fortune-gates>
 tophilanthropic <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philanthropy> causes. They 
include the former mayor of New York City MichaelBloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.org/>, the US filmmaker George Lucas 
<http://www.edutopia.org/mission-vision> and the Facebook founder Mark 
Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/01/mark-zuckerberg-and-priscilla-chan-announce-new-baby-and-massive-charity-initiative>
.

“If these and more ultra-rich fulfil their pledges, many more billions of 
dollars will be made available for charitable purposes,” says the report, which 
was financed byMisereor <http://www.misereor.org/> and Brot für die Welt 
<http://www.brot-fuer-die-welt.de/en/bread-for-the-world.html>, two German 
church groups that work largely in Africa.

The study claims many foundations enable rich countries and their corporations 
to achieve their own ends in developing countries, from setting up 
public-private partnerships with pharmaceutical companies to promoting certain 
sorts of corporate farming and the use of biotechnology for health and 
agriculture.
The world's largest philanthropic foundations 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1p-3JLW5z4M5Ns7t9Y1aNmyuu2OlQcMpp3lGL6i5pmy0>
 The world’s largest philanthropic foundations 
The authors ask whether the foundations are now sidelining governments and 
shifting influencing the work of international bodies. “Through the sheer size 
of their grant-making, personal networking and active advocacy, large global 
foundations have played an increasingly active role in shaping the 
agenda-setting and funding priorities of international organisations and 
governments.

“So far there has been a fairly willing belief among governments and 
international organisations in the positive role of philanthropy.” But, say the 
authors, a thorough assessment is now necessary because the wealthy may be 
skewing the priorities of the poor.

“They should analyse the intended and unintended risks and side-effects of 
their activities, particularly the fragmentation of global governance, the 
weakening of representative democracy … the prevailing practice of applying 
business logic to the provision of public goods.”


The authors say foundations have used their influence well to get governments 
to tackle poverty. “Their advocacy for global causes puts pressure on 
governments, and sometimes the private sector, to become more actively engaged.”


But this raises concerns about how they and their corporate partners may be 
taking over from the UN and weakening public health systems in developing 
countries. “As the UN accelerates its engagement with the business and 
corporate sector, as well as philanthropic foundations, it lacks the rules and 
tools needed to ensure it does not lose sight of its original mission.

“Through their multiple channels of influence, the Rockefeller and Gates 
foundations have been very successful in promoting their market-based and 
bio-medical approaches towards global health challenges in the research and 
health policy community – and beyond.”


Their strategy includes placing people in international organisations, and 
gaining privileged access to scientific, business and political elites.

For example, when Bill Gates visited Berlin to campaign for the Gavi Alliance 
(the vaccine alliance of governments, NGOs and companies set up with Gates and 
Rockefeller money), he met the German chancellor and the foreign, finance, 
development and health ministers.

“The Gates foundation has successfully positioned itself in the centre of a … 
community that is promoting market-based, techno-fix solutions to the complex 
global problems of hunger and malnutrition,” say the authors.


Leonora Diller, spokeswoman for the Gates foundation said: “The problems 
affecting the world’s poorest are complex and we believe that solving them 
requires the close collaboration of governments, NGOs, academic institutions 
and for-profit businesses. Governments and international organisations provide 
the leadership and resources.

We believe that the role of philanthropy is to take risks where others can’t 
or won’t
Gates Foundation 
“The private sector has access to life-saving innovations and we believe that 
the role of philanthropy is to take risks where others can’t or won’t. Our 
investments are substantial, but just one piece of the puzzle.”

According to the report, the Gates foundation is now the second largest donor 
to the World Health Organisation after the US, as well as one of the world’s 
largest single investors in biotechnology for farming and pharmaceuticals. But 
while the billions of dollars for research is welcomed in rich countries, its 
massive power to shift the agenda is questioned elsewhere.


“The mushrooming of global partnerships, particularly in the health sector, 
has led to isolated and often poorly coordinated solutions. These initiatives 
have not only contributed to the institutional weakening of the UN ands its 
specialised agencies but have undermined national development strategies,” it 
says.

“Médecins Sans Frontières‎ <http://www.msf.org.uk/> (MSF) states that, while 
Gavi has helped to lower prices of new and underused vaccines for eligible 
countries, the cost to fully immunise a child was 68 times more expensive in 
2014 than it was in 2001.”

The report also questions why the Gates foundation invests heavily in 
companies like Monsanto and Bayer. “In addition to its grant-making activities, 
the Gates foundation has recently stepped up its support for the 
biotechnological industry directly.” In February, it took a $52m equity stake 
in CureVac, a German bio-pharmaceutical company.

“There is a revolving door between the Gates foundation and pharmaceutical 
corporations. Many of the foundation’s staff had held positions at 
pharmaceutical companies,” the report adds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fbill-gates-rockefeller-influence-agenda-poor-nations-big-pharma-gm-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0152948324c66cf0edfe8327f106eb334f7a8d04%2F0_0_2912_1941%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20Gates%20and%20Rockefeller%20using%20their%20influence%20to%20set%20agenda%20in%20poor%20states%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fbill-gates-rockefeller-influence-agenda-poor-nations-big-pharma-gm-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20Gates%20and%20Rockefeller%20using%20their%20influence%20to%20set%20agenda%20in%20poor%20states%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fbill-gates-rockefeller-influence-agenda-poor-nations-big-pharma-gm-hunger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0152948324c66cf0edfe8327f106eb334f7a8d04%2F0_0_2912_1941%2F2912.jpg>
 The Rockefeller Foundation president Judith Rodin (L) is seen with USAid’s 
Rajiv Shah at a food security forum in 2014. Photograph: Robb Hohmann/USAid 
The study says: “Both Gates and the Rockefeller Foundation regard 
technological innovation and close cooperation with the food and agricultural 
industries as key to overcoming hunger … In 2006 they together launched the
Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa <http://www.agra.org/> (Agra), based 
on the premise that hunger in Africa is mainly the result of a lack of 
technology and functioning markets. [This] changed the farming agenda in 
Africa,” say the authors.


Since then Gates has given more than $3bn to support 660 agricultural projects 
as well as several hundred million dollars for nutrition. “The vast majority of 
grants focus on Africa. However, more than 80% of the $669m to NGOs went to 
organisations based in the US and Europe, with only 4% going to Africa-based 
NGOs.”

The report claims Agra has been intervening directly in the formulation of 
African governments’ agricultural policies on issues like seeds and land. 
“Because of its focus on bio-technological farming methods, it has increasingly 
promotedGM <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gm> seeds. Critics claim 
that under the guise of eliminating hunger in Africa, it is a tool to open 
African markets to US agri-buiness,” says the report.

Bill Gates to appear on BBC’s Desert Island Discs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/15/bill-gates-to-appear-on-bbcs-desert-island-discs>
Achieng’ Otieno, a spokeswoman for the Rockefeller’s Africa office, said: “The 
agricultural research that the Rockefeller Foundation funded through the green 
revolution saved millions of lives. Today our focus is on making better use of 
the resources that go into food production, and in particular reducing both 
post-harvest losses and retail- and consumer-level food waste.

“These are the biggest food security issues of our day, and, yes, we want to 
influence decisions so that more food ends up on tables and in mouths and far 
less of it in landfills, particularly as we want to see this done in a way that 
benefits smallholder farmers.”

Diller said: “It’s important to point out that in all of our grant-making we 
are guided by the evidence and by the deep research and expertise of our 
partners and grantees … Ouropen access policy 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/How-We-Work/General-Information/Open-Access-Policy>
 reflect[s] our commitment to the open exchange of information across our work. 
We continue to try to do allwe can to be transparent and accountable 
<http://www.iatiregistry.org/publisher/bmgf> to our investments and our 
decision-making.”



 