
Name: Beards

Age: Varies widely, but it does take a few weeks for a new one to be born.

Appearance: Woolly jumper for the face.

Yeah beards, big deal. What about them? They’re over.

Over? How over? So over.

Wait a minute. People have been predicting the demise of the beard for years. 
Depending on who you ask we passed“peak beard” in the summer of 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jul/24/have-we-reached-peak-beard>, 
or inApril 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/apr/16/fashion-conscious-men-warned-we-may-have-reached-peak-beard>
, orlast April 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/life-and-style/fashion/to-beard-or-not-to-beard-that-is-the-question-1.2184854>
. And they’re still everywhere. Maybe, but the days of the fashionable hipster 
beard are numbered.

Says who? Dr Alun Withey, beard historian 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/life/fashion/article4562813.ece>.

Is that a typo? Do you mean “bearded historian”? Nope. He used to have a 
beard, but he got rid of it.

What on earth does a beard historian do? He launches a three-year research 
project called Do Beards Matter? Facial Hair, Health and Hygiene in Britain, 
circa 1700-1918.

OK. Why? So we can come to regard facial hair 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-devon-34150467> “not as some quirky 
irrelevance in history, but as a unique way of understanding the body, health, 
medicine and masculinity in the past”.

What happened to beards during that 218-year time frame? They came, they went, 
they came again, and they went again.

And now they’re going one more time? According to Withey 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/life/fashion/article4562813.ece>, the backlash 
against hipster beards has already begun in America, where clean-shaven young 
urban creatives – “yuccies”, if you will – are in the ascendant.

I’ve always thought beards were yucky. You’re not alone. In the mid 18th 
century almost everybody was beardless. New razor technology made shaving seem
civilised and enlightened 
<https://dralun.wordpress.com/2012/04/26/beards-moustaches-and-facial-hair-in-history/>
.

How did beards ever manage a comeback? The Victorians were reclaiming their 
masculinity. These days celebrity culture has a big effect. Dr Withey dates the 
beard’s high point to the 2013 Oscar ceremony, whenall the actors turned up 
hairy 
<http://www.esquire.com/style/advice/g1426/beards-oscars-2013-red-carpet-022513/>
.

I remember. You couldn’t tell Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> from Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradley-cooper>, or Jackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hugh-jackman> from Affleck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck>. Beard cycles are also driven by 
something called negative frequency-dependent sexual selection.

And that is what? That’s when women find you less attractive because you’ve 
got thesame facial hair arrangements as everybody else in the room 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-27023992>.

Do say: “It may be over, but the beard has left its mark on 21st-century 
fashion history; we were generation beard.”

Don’t say: “I’ve forgotten how to shave.”
 