
Flat-as-a-pancake Kate Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss> 
modelling lacy bras and see-through knickers? With such pictures, this month’s 
Vogue stands accused of provoking unknown numbers of young women into starving 
themselves to try to achieve extreme thinness. Is this prepubescent ideal of 
femininity acceptable as a role model? Are media images of always slim, often 
downright bony women to blame for our collective disgust with fatness? Do these 
fashion icons set us off on patterns of chaotic eating which kill a few and 
shadow the lives of countless others, including many models themselves?

 The ideal female shape expands and contracts. Breasts, in particular, come 
and go: big in the fifties, when women were housewives; small in the twenties, 
forties and sixties, decades of emancipation, thanks to suffrage, wartime 
employment and sexual liberation.

Breasts made a brief comeback in recent years with the bigger, older, more 
robust looking but still ultra-slim supermodels. “Maybe 20 per cent of models 
on the catwalk had breast implants – more in the US,” Lowri Turner, fashion 
editor of the Evening Standard, maintains. “If you ask them, ‘Are those yours?’ 
of course they’ll say yes. But you can tell they’re fake if they don’t wobble. 
One girl’s blouse fell wide open as she was modelling it; she had no idea she 
was exposing her breasts because implants meant she’d lost all sensitivity.” We 
watched in fascination as film and pop stars followed suit and had their 
breasts – and lips – artificially swollen.

Breasts have now disappeared altogether. Kate Moss – ironically, the star of a 
new semi-skimmed milk ad, praising its low-fat quality – has the body of an 
11-year-old. So will there be another surge in the epidemic of eating disorders 
afflicting women in the west?

Alexandra Shulman, editor of Vogue, thinks not. “No one said Twiggy made women 
anorexic.Anorexia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia> and bulimia 
have more to do with other factors than with the desire to be thin. It’s too 
easy to say that these unattainable role models are to blame. There will be 
problems for a woman seeing pictures of Kate Moss only if she’s already 
anorexic.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fanorexia-models-skinny-eating-disorders-archive-1993%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a5762e54993c955768da0bed24bd7509a04a10%2F0_96_2269_2508%2F2269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20fashion%20plates%20mean%20empty%20plates%3F%20Fashion%20archive%2C%2027%20May%201993&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fanorexia-models-skinny-eating-disorders-archive-1993%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20fashion%20plates%20mean%20empty%20plates%3F%20Fashion%20archive%2C%2027%20May%201993&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fanorexia-models-skinny-eating-disorders-archive-1993%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a5762e54993c955768da0bed24bd7509a04a10%2F0_96_2269_2508%2F2269.jpg>
 Kate Moss in 1993. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex/Shutterstock 
 New research to be published in the British Journal of Psychiatry appears to 
support Shulman’s point. Two groups of women – one consisting of anorexics and 
bulimics, the other “normal” women – were asked to estimate their own body size 
after looking at photographs of thin fashion models. The former group measured 
themselves as substantially bigger after they had looked at the photos; the 
“normal” women did not, except for those who admitted to chaotic eating and 
weight concern.

 Dr Glen Weller, psychologist at the University of Birmingham, says, “We have 
come to the conclusion that, while the use of thin models does not cause 
abnormal eating, it does cause greater body distortion in women who are already 
disturbed. And this group includes anyone already sensitive to the way they 
look, such as most adolescents and women who are pregnant. The effects can be 
seen in the way they overestimate body size, disparage their looks and 
generally have poor self-esteem.”

 It’s hard to be sure if eating disorders are mushrooming or if they are 
simply coming out of the closet. But few women escape the tyranny of thinness. 
Ninety per cent of women have been on a diet and up to 20 per cent of “normal” 
women binge once a month. Children as young as seven are already restricting 
food intake, vomiting, abusing laxatives and obsessively exercising to control 
their weight. We hate our fat and seek to control it in the way that we can’t 
control all our other anxieties about life, work and relationships.

 However much we frown on fatness, though – equating it with greed, laziness, 
stupidity, lack of self-respect – it is inseparable from fertility, that is, 
womanhood. Adolescent girls need at least 17 per cent of their body weight in 
fat before they start menstruating. Ovulation and menstruation stop when fat 
stores get depleted, as happens in athletes, dancers, models and any of us who 
over-exercise and/or over-slim.

 As well as infertility, the other major health hazard of not having periods 
because of extreme thinness is loss of bone density (osteoporosis), which 
causes painful broken bones, more common after the menopause.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fanorexia-models-skinny-eating-disorders-archive-1993%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49c8f3a6b260aa64be8a3556d2169afcdd539bcf%2F0_0_1299_1888%2F1299.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20fashion%20plates%20mean%20empty%20plates%3F%20Fashion%20archive%2C%2027%20May%201993&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fanorexia-models-skinny-eating-disorders-archive-1993%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20fashion%20plates%20mean%20empty%20plates%3F%20Fashion%20archive%2C%2027%20May%201993&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fanorexia-models-skinny-eating-disorders-archive-1993%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49c8f3a6b260aa64be8a3556d2169afcdd539bcf%2F0_0_1299_1888%2F1299.jpg>
 Models Kate Moss and Naomi Campbell at the British Designer of the Year 
Awards, October 1993. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex/Shutterstock 
 We crave the androgyny of thinness. Yet children weigh more today than they 
did 20 years ago (as much as 20 per cent more in deprived inner city areas) – 
hence girls are starting their periods earlier. What’s more, 47 per cent of 
women in the UK take a size 16 or above, according to Diet Breakers, an 
organisation that seeks to challenge the idea that women must be thin to be 
attractive.

 So the goal of a slim, long-legged, small-breasted body shape becomes ever 
more elusive and creates terrible conflict when it comes to our relationship 
with food. Drastic measures are required to scale down to the size 10s featured 
in fashion magazines – and couture outfits are usually featured in an eight.

 “I’ve never known a model actually throw up her lunch or faint from hunger, 
though I did once find a model’s bag full of crisps and chocolate. Some will 
admit they eat very little,” Lowri Turner says. “It’s unnatural for a six-foot 
woman to be size 10. She must have no fat on her at all. We’ve had to touch up 
photographs because some of the waifs have bones protruding from their chests 
and arms like twigs.”

 American research has shown that the size of Playboy centrefold models and 
Miss Americas has got smaller over the past 30 years. “We think it’s 
irresponsible to use models of such unattainable dimensions and would like to 
see a range of physical types,” Dr Glen Weller says. And, for once, there’s a 
sign of hope: five nude women (none of whom would get a job as a model) in the 
Simons Palmer ad for Nike trainers in the current issues of Elle, Marie Claire 
and Cosmopolitan (though not in Vogue). “It’s not the shape you are but the 
shape you’re in,” runs the copyline, dreamed up after talking to lots of women 
who feel their bodies can never match up.
 