
Argos delivery drivers have suspended plans for strike action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/argos-drivers-to-strike-before-christmas>
 after talks with the operator of the retailer’s main distribution centre.

The 35 drivers, who all drive lorries operating out of a warehouse in Burton 
upon Trent run by logistics firm Wincanton, are demanding an average of £700 in 
back holiday pay dating back as long as two years.

Unite <http://www.unitetheunion.org/>, the union which is representing the 
drivers, said it had reached an agreement with Wincanton on Wednesday morning 
and hammered out a deal which it could recommend to its members. They would 
then vote on whether to accept the deal.

Unite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite> regional officer Rick Coyle 
said: “While this ballot is being conducted, all proposed industrial action has 
been suspended and our members at the Argos national distribution centre in 
Staffordshire will be working normally.”

A spokesperson for Wincanton said: “We are equally pleased that our planned 
meeting today has produced an outcome which works for all parties. All 
industrial action has now been suspended pending a ballot on the terms of the 
agreement among Unite members, and at this important time of year, the Argos 
business will be unaffected.”

Meanwhile, the union representing Post Office workers has started three days 
of talks to avert strike action before Christmasat its 300 biggest branches.

Post Office workers voted to stage five days of strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/post-office-workers-to-stage-five-days-of-strikes-next-week>
 from 19 December in a long-running dispute over jobs and pensions. The
Communication Workers Union <http://www.cwu.org/>, which acts for about 4,000 
postal workers, has said it wants to avoid strike action if possible.

The Post Office said less than 3% of its outlets would be affected by the 
action. But the CWU said more than a fifth of parcels were handled by the 300 
crown post offices where its members work.

Royal Mail, which delivers parcels and letters and is privately owned after 
splitting from the Post Office several years ago, has said its operations would 
not be affected by the strike.
 