
Hundreds of chambermaids, doormen and cocktail waiters have been flown to Davos
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> to cater to every whim of world 
leaders, business executives and the super-rich who will descend next week on 
the Swiss Alps town for the annual World Economic Forum (WEF) celebration of 
capitalism.

While WEF guests, including Theresa May, Chinese leader Xi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/china-xi-jinping-world-economic-forum-davos-donald-trump>
 and South African president Jacob Zuma, will spend their nights in some of the 
world’s most luxurious hotel suites, the staff brought in to serve them will be 
sleeping up to five to a room in bunk beds.

The manager of the fanciest hotel in Davos – the Grandhotel Belvédère 
<https://www.steigenberger.com/en/hotels/all-hotels/switzerland/davos/steigenberger-grandhotel-belvedere>
 – said he had flown in 200 extra staff to work in shifts around the clock 
during the annual jamboree of the rich and powerful. “We normally have about 
100 employees, but this week we have 300 to help us out,” Thomas Kleber, 
general manager of the Belvédère, said.

Related: Robotics, Trump and Brexit turn up the heat amid the snow of Davos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/14/davos-issues-trump-capitalism-china-brexit>

Kleber said the extra staff have been flown in from partner hotels across the 
world to help out during the Belvédère’s busiest week of the year, but because 
the whole of Davos is packed out with forum visitors there isn’t much space to 
accommodate the additional workers.

“We have a staff house, but at this time of the year it is getting cosy,” he 
explained. “We do have some different places with four or five people in one 
room. We have set up high beds with one sleeping on top and one underneath.”

Despite the contrasting sleeping arrangements, a key theme of this year’s 
conference will be rising inequality, which the WEF has warned  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/inequality-world-economy-wef-brexit-donald-trump-world-economic-forum-risk-report>
is the biggest problem facing the world. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/inequality-world-economy-wef-brexit-donald-trump-world-economic-forum-risk-report>
The forum said the growing gap between rich and poor, which it said had helped 
trigger the UK’s Brexit vote and Donald Trump’s presidential victory, had led 
the west to “a tipping point and might now embark on a period of 
deglobalisation”.

The WEF has organised six sessions for Davos visitors to discuss inequality, 
including one entitled “Combating rising insecurity and inequality”, to be 
introduced by the WEF’s chief economist, Jennifer Blanke. Another session will 
explore rising inequality through a “visual exploration that reveals the causes 
and consequences of fragility in cities now and through time”.

The extra Belvédère staff include “specially recruited people just for mixing 
cocktails”, as well as baristas, cooks, waiters, doormen, chambermaids and 
receptionists.

The Belvédère is the focus of most Davos action, including top-level 
diplomatic meetings, the signing of billion-dollar business deals and, of 
course, the best parties. The WEF organisers have taken control of 85% of the 
hotel’s rooms to host world leaders, business people and celebrities, who this 
year include Grammy award-winner Shakira and Jamie Oliver.

Not even Kleber knows the identities of his guests due to security concerns, 
but he said in previous years that Bill Clinton, David Cameron, Ban Ki-moon and 
John Kerry stayed at the hotel. “There are always a lot of big famous people, 
big business bosses and state visitors,” he said.

The Belvédère will host more than 300 functions over five days, with the first 
executive coffee bar meetings starting at 6am and the last of the late-night 
parties not turning out until 3am. “We have all kinds of functions from 
breakfast meetings, politician lunches to nightcaps and cocktail receptions in 
every corner of the hotel. Every company and every single party has its own 
individual needs,” he said. “Ice sculptures are always part of it.”

Related: ILO warns of rise in social unrest and migration as inequality widens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/ilo-warns-of-rise-in-social-unrest-and-migration-as-inequality-widens>

Kleber declined to provide any details of what parties the hotel will be 
hosting this year, or how much the hotel charges for hosting events. Last year, 
a Silicon Valley tech company was reportedly charged £6,000 for a short meeting 
with the president of Estonia in a converted luggage room. The hotel has also 
previously flown in New England lobster, and provided special Mexican food for 
a company that was meeting a Mexican politician.

“I assume [the staff] get good tips,” Kleber said, but “most of them are not 
coming for the money – they are coming to be part of a once-in-a-year event … 
Of course it’s hard work, but it’s a lot of fun,” he added.

Theresa May will be the only G7 leader to attend this year’s summit, which 
clashes with Donald Trump’s inauguration as the 45th US president.

Downing Street refused to state which events or parties May plans to attend in 
her two-day Alpine sojourn. Last year,Cameron was photographed partying 
<http://shanghaiist.com/2016/01/22/jack_ma_davos_party.php> tie-less with Bono, 
Leonardo DiCaprio and Kevin Spacey, at a lavish party hosted by Jack Ma, the 
founder of internet group Alibaba and China’s richest man with a $34.5bn 
(£28.5bn) fortune. Tony Blair, who also attended the Ma party last year, is 
also a regular at the glitziest events.

Travelling to Davos and finding anywhere to stay next week is very expensive, 
but not nearly as costly as getting an all-access pass to the schmoozing. Basic 
membership of the WEF and an entry ticket costs 68,000 Swiss francs (£55,400), 
and that will only grant access to general sessions.

To get access to all areas, corporations must pay to become Strategic Partners 
<https://www.weforum.org/about/strategic-partners> of the WEF, costing 
SFr600,000, which allows a CEO to bring up to four colleagues, or flunkies, 
along with them. They must still pay SFr18,000 each for tickets. All Strategic 
Partners have been told that at least one of their invitees must be a woman.

Strategic Partners are given access to all private sessions, and a car and 
driver with a special sticker allowing door-to-door pickup. Just 100 companies 
are able to become Strategic Partners; among them this year are Barclays, BT, 
BP, Facebook, Google and HSBC. Companies have privately complained about the 
cost of the exclusive access, which helped the WEF bring in record revenue of 
SFr228m last year, according toits annual report 
<http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Annual_Report_2015-2016.pdf>. 

The most exclusive invite in town is to an uber-glamorous party thrown jointly 
by Russian billionaire Oleg Deripaska and British financier Nat Rothschild at 
the oligarch’s palatial chalet, a 15-minute chauffeur-driven car ride up the 
mountain from Davos. In previous years, Swiss police have reportedly been 
called to Deripaska’s home after complaints about the noise of his Cossack band.

Related: Are Americans more ready to accept inequality? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/economics-blog/2017/jan/11/are-americans-more-ready-to-accept-inequality-donald-trump>

A former assistant to economist Nouriel Roubini has described Deripaska’s 
parties as “endless streams of the finest champagne, vodka, and Russian caviar 
amidst dancing Cossacks and beautiful Russian models”. Sandra Navidi, who was 
Roubini’s director of research, recalled her trip to Deripaska’s party in her 
book Superhubs: How the Financial Elite and their Networks Rule our World.

Many of this year’s guests, who include outgoing US vice-president Joe Biden, 
China’s two richest men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/china-xi-jinping-world-economic-forum-davos-donald-trump>
, and London mayor Sadiq Khan, will travel on private jets to nearby airports 
before transferring by helicopter to escape the traffic on the approach to the 
picturesque town. So many jets are expected that the Swiss government has 
opened up Dübendorf military airfield, an 85-mile helicopter flight away, to 
accommodate them.

Adam Twidell, chief executive of private jet booking service PrivateFly, said 
there were 1,700 private jet flights in and out of nearby airports last year, 
and he expected about 10% more this year.

The increase in private jet flights – which each burn as much fuel in one hour 
as typical use of a car does in a year – comes as the WEF warns that climate 
change is the second most important global concern. In itsannual global risks 
report <https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-risks-report-2017> the WEF 
noted that environmental concerns were more prominent in the paper, drawn from 
700 experts, than ever before.

Twidell said a last-minute flight to Davos from London on a small private jet 
would cost about £7,860. “Clients we have booked so far include business 
leaders, heads of state and government individuals,” he said. “[But] it’s not 
just pure politicians and business people who are wanting to be seen at Davos. 
The parties there have become a place to be. Davos is now on ‘the circuit’ 
along with the Superbowl, the Champions League final and the Monaco Grand Prix.”

The rich and powerful at Davos

Christine Lagarde


The managing director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) is a firm 
fixture at the WEF, and will participate in at least three panels at this 
year’s conference including “Squeezed and Angry: How to fix the middle-class 
crisis”, and another on how to “challenge stereotypes and institutional inertia 
to achieve gender parity within our lifetimes”, as well as being keynote 
speaker on the wider challenges facing the economy this year.

Lagarde, formerly a French minister, was recently found guilty of negligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/christine-lagarde-damaged-but-able-to-limp-on-at-imf>
 in approving a massive payout of taxpayers’ money to controversial French 
businessman Bernard Tapie but avoided a jail sentence. The court decided she 
should not be punished and that the conviction would not constitute a criminal 
record. On Monday evening the IMF gave her its full support.

Theresa May

The UK prime minister will be at Davos for the first time this year. May is 
not listed to appear on any panels, and the No 10 press office declined to 
provide any details of May’s itinerary. David Cameron used his speech at Davos 
last year to reassure global business leaders that Britain would stay in the 
European Union. Cameron said he wanted to “confront this issue, I want to deal 
with it”. “My aim is absolutely clear: I want to secure the future of Britain 
in a reformed European Union,” he said.

Shakira

The Grammy award-winning Colombian singer-songwriter will be at Davos in her 
role as a global ambassador for Unicef. She follows in the footsteps of other 
celebrities, including Bono, Leonardo DiCaprio, and Will.i.am, who have spoken 
at Davos to promote their charitable interests. Shakira will be promoting her 
Pies Descalzos / Barefoot Foundation, which helps provide education to poor and 
vulnerable children.

Matt Damon

The Talented Mr Ripley and Good Will Hunting actor will be at Davos to talk 
about his continuing efforts to provide clean water to developing countries. 
Damon, who founded charityWater.org <http://water.org/>, will speak at a 
session hosted by CNBC. In 2014, Damon told Davos that having travelled in 
developing countries he “started to get a real appreciation for the magnitude 
of the water crisis”.

Xi Jinping

The Chinese president will lead an 80-strong delegation of business executives 
and billionaires to Davos. He is the first Chinese president to attend the WEF, 
and his visit is a statement of intent that China wants to assume a global 
leadership role as other world powers struggle with domestic tumult.

Joe Biden

The outgoing US vice-president will be at Davos, which runs until Friday – the 
same day as Donald Trump’s inauguration. Biden, who will travel toSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland> on Air Force 2, will “deliver 
remarks on the cancer moonshot and deliver an address on foreign policy”, the 
White House said.

Sheryl Sandberg

The chief operating officer of Facebook, who has amassed a $1.3bn fortune from 
the social network according to Forbes, will speak at a panel about how older 
world leaders can harness the optimism of youth. The panel also includes: Meg 
Whitman, CEO of Hewlett Packard; Last King of Scotland actor Forest Whitaker, 
and Juan Manuel Santos, the president of Colombia.

Sir Martin Sorrell

Britain’s best-paid boss – who collected £70.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/sorrell-salary-wpp-pay-sir-john-hood>
 from his advertising company WPP last year – will speak at a panel entitled 
“Size Matters: The Future of Big Business”. They will discuss how “fewer than 
10% of the world’s public companies account for 80% of all profits. What does 
operating at this scale mean for competition, collaboration and innovation?”

Eric Schmidt

The chairman of Google’s parent company Alphabet is a regular at Davos, 
although he is not lined up to speak at any panels this year. Schmidt, 61, is 
the world’s 36th richest man with a $11bn fortune, according to Forbes.

Jack Ma

The founder of Chinese internet group Alibaba is China’s richest man with a 
$34.5bn fortune, according to the Bloomberg billionaires index. Last year he 
hosted a lavish party attended by David Cameron, Bono, Leonardo DiCaprio and 
Kevin Spacey.

Jamie Oliver

The British celebrity chef-turned businessman will be interviewed by 
Huffington Post founder Arianna Huffington about “driving a healthy and 
sustainable food revolution”. Oliver, who is worth $400m according to the 
Sunday Times rich list, was recently forced toclose six of his Italian 
restaurants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/jamie-oliver-close-restaurants-brexit-jamies-italian-barbecoa>
 after tough trading and the “pressures and unknowns” following the Brexit vote.

Khalid al-Falih

Saudia Arabia’s energy minister will be in demand as a key voice on Opec after 
the oil-producing countries recently agreed to cut output sending oil prices 
soaring. Al-Falih, who is also chairman of state oil and gas giant Saudi 
Aramco, has been put in charge of leading Saudi Arabia Vision 2030 – the 
country’s plan to diversify away from oil dependency.
 