
Arron Banks is lost in Westminster. The 50-year-old insurance millionaire who 
is bankrolling the Grassroots Out (GO) campaign to leave the EU wants to join 
Nigel Farage for a lunchtime pint but can’t find the way out of his Millbank 
offices.

After several dead ends, he finally emerges through the building’s bin store, 
only to be defeated by the 500-metre walk to the Ukip leader’s watering hole. 
Irritated, he gives up and hails a cab; the Westminster bubble is not Banks’s 
favourite place.

Ukip-backed Brexit campaign employs EU migrants to rally support
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/ukip-backed-leave-eu-brexit-campaign-employs-eu-migrants-arron-banks>
The Bristol-based founder of GoSkippy and Southern Rock insurance is spending 
upwards of £3.5m of his estimated £200m fortune to try to persuade Britons to 
vote to leave theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. He is 
masterminding the campaign not from London but from his offices overlooking a 
Premier Inn next to junction 17 of the M5.

Being out in the shires suits his billing of the 23 June referendum as “the 
peasants’ revolt all over again”. Plus, it is closer to the two mansions he 
owns in south Gloucestershire, one bought from the Tubular Bells musician Mike 
Oldfield.

Until recently, Banks was a Tory donor, but after becoming “very disenchanted” 
with David Cameron in 2014, he switched and gave £1m to Ukip. He had initially 
been planning to give Farage £100,000, but when William Hague angered him by 
saying he didn’t know who Banks was, he added another zero.

The abrasive and outspoken executive is now escalating his revenge. He likens 
the Tory leadership to “a bunch of brainwashed Scientologists”, while Michael 
Gove, the leader of the rival Brexit campaign Vote Leave, is branded 
“disgraceful” and “toxic” afterbeing suspected in leaking the Queen’s views on 
Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/14/gove-resign-source-eurosceptic-queen-story-tom-watson-commons-sun>
.

Even Farage does not escape criticism. with Banks saying he would be the wrong 
man to front the leave campaign. Instead he suggests “someone like 
[Eurosceptic] Kate Hoey – she is seen as common sense Labour”. Such are the 
warped dimensions of politics today that the Ukip donor knows he needs 4.5m 
votes from the left to detach Britain from the EU.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d0e582d51853a0a4fbea49463092d01b118005%2F0_0_4291_2856%2F4291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arron%20Banks%3A%20the%20millionaire%20hoping%20to%20bankroll%20UK%20into%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arron%20Banks%3A%20the%20millionaire%20hoping%20to%20bankroll%20UK%20into%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d0e582d51853a0a4fbea49463092d01b118005%2F0_0_4291_2856%2F4291.jpg>
 Nigel Farage (left) with Arron Banks, millionaire backer of Ukip and the 
Leave.EU campaign, who has said Mr Farage would make an “appalling MP” 
Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
Banks is the driving force behind GO’s attempt to be designated by the 
Electoral Commission as the official leave campaign to contest the referendum. 
While familiar faces, such as Farage, David Davis, the former shadow home 
secretary, and George Galloway, the Respect party MP, havetaken the limelight 
at GO rallies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/14/gove-resign-source-eurosceptic-queen-story-tom-watson-commons-sun>
, Banks has been doing the heavy lifting back at his Bristol offices. His 
actuaries and accountants have been cleared out to make room for a campaign 
staff of 90 who are busy stuffing envelopes, pumping out pro-GO tweets, YouTube 
clips and Facebook posts, and devising rapid turnaround online propaganda. He 
also has a 60-strong call centre signing up supporters and donors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/ukip-backed-leave-eu-brexit-campaign-employs-eu-migrants-arron-banks>
, who now number 750,000.

Several of Banks’s most senior staff have been diverted to a quest that 
matters to him enormously. A poster on his office wall shows a vampiric Angela 
Merkel and Jean-Claude Juncker, the German chancellor and European commission 
president respectively, “sucking the life out of Great Britain”.

Banks spent the first part of his childhood in South Africa and returned to 
the UK to attend a “properly second-rate private school” in Berkshire before 
being expelled from a state sixth form college for “an accumulation of 
offences” and “high-spirited bad behaviour”.

He is coy about what he did, but admits: “I did take some lead off the roof, a 
bit of trading.”

Banks married young and was offered a junior job at Lloyd’s of London. By 27 
he was given a division of Norwich Union to run. He spent a year working for 
Berkshire Hathaway, the investment company of Warren Buffett, who is considered 
as one of the most successful investors of all time.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38680476efee9370948a806f4d648f9d28a73e2c%2F0_0_3500_2357%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arron%20Banks%3A%20the%20millionaire%20hoping%20to%20bankroll%20UK%20into%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arron%20Banks%3A%20the%20millionaire%20hoping%20to%20bankroll%20UK%20into%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38680476efee9370948a806f4d648f9d28a73e2c%2F0_0_3500_2357%2F3500.jpg>
 A worker answers a telephone in the office of Brexit group pressure group 
“Leave.eu” in London Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
Next, Banks set up his own insurance businesses, selling one privately and 
floating another on the stock exchange, which has made him extremely rich. He 
has two adult daughters and three younger children from his second marriage in 
2001.

Banks now travels to South Africa regularly where he has bought a cluster of 
diamond mines and has a home in Pretoria. He enjoys shooting while there – 9mm 
pistols and pump-action shotguns feature on his Facebook page. He says he feels 
little cultural affinity with continental Europeans.

“If I get up in the morning in South Africa their radio is like our radio – 
same with Australia,” he says. “I don’t feel an affinity towards French, 
Germans and Spaniards. I’d much rather deal with my own kith and kin.”

It is not a question of race but cultural ties, he says, and he thinks many 
voters feel the same but Westminster politicians are out of touch.

“Cameron has morphed into a blue version of Blair,” he says. “If you allow 
unlimited immigration it affects the poorest much more than the rich. Where I 
live in south Gloucestershire everyone is rich. You might see a charming 
Latvian waiter in the pub and think this is all fine. If you live in a poor 
area where people have flooded in, compressed your wages and caused real 
trouble, that’s where the pain is being felt.”

He acknowledges that to win in June “the Labour side is what we have to play 
for, the kind of Labour people who voted for Margaret Thatcher first time 
round”. So he attacks Tories who “lecture the poor on how to behave but don’t 
lecture the rich”. He would slap “nearly 100%” inheritance tax on assets of 
more than £5m.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6c717c83537a6c495dcffac1ef39b29896d4b67%2F0_0_4898_3265%2F4898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arron%20Banks%3A%20the%20millionaire%20hoping%20to%20bankroll%20UK%20into%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arron%20Banks%3A%20the%20millionaire%20hoping%20to%20bankroll%20UK%20into%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Farron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6c717c83537a6c495dcffac1ef39b29896d4b67%2F0_0_4898_3265%2F4898.jpg>
 Campaign bags placed on seats before the start of a Leave.EU campaign news 
conference in London Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
“I have more in common with Labour people than I do Conservatives at the 
moment, which is a very weird state of affairs. I have strong feelings about 
meritocracy as opposed to what Cameron represents, which is an elite clique. 
Isn’t it a dreadful thought that one old Etonian could be replaced by another?”

Banks’s associates come from a different world. He runs a private security 
business with a former South African police officer, and a close friend is 
Andrew Wigmore, a Belize diplomat who was a director of Southern Rock in 
Gibraltar.


Wigmore is running communications for GO and some of his attempts to drum up 
high-profile support could have run more smoothly. When the Guardian visited 
after one weekend earlier this month , the press office had to try to mollify 
Pixie Lott’s representatives after the Sunday Express ran a piece saying the 
pop singer was “rumoured” to be appearing at a campaign concert in May. The 
story came from GO, but Lott’s management said: “We have not been approached 
about this at all. Pixie will not be performing.”

Wigmore also had suggested to the Guardian that Derek Hatton, the former 
leader of Militant, was going to speak at an in Liverpool to rally support from 
the left. But Hatton told the Guardian: “I’m not headlining, I won’t even be 
there. I told them I would never share a platform with a Tory or Ukip.”

Until 14 April, GO’s main focus will be their 2,500-page proposal to become 
the official leave campaign, which will allow them to spend £7m and grant them 
TV adverts and a national mailshot. It will claim to be the only campaign with 
a major political party backing it – Ukip – but also has cross-party support, 
including from Labour Leave and Respect.

If Banks secures the designation, then the boy who once stole lead off the 
school roof will be granted a tilt at a far bigger heist: in his view, seizing 
Britain back from Brussels and making political history.
 