



In the gardens of a 19th-century Tuscan villa, a group of artists are mingling 
with visitors over glasses of prosecco as the sun sets. There’s a languid, 
dreamy feel about it all – like a scene fromBertolucci’s Stealing Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/feb/05/features.xanbrooks> – as we head 
to dine al fresco at communal tables overlooking the rolling countryside.

Situated on a hilltop in 500 hectares of woodland, olive groves and vineyards 
less than an hour from Pisa, the neo-Renaissance Villa Lena is an unusual 
hybrid of artist residency and boho hotel. From April until November, artists – 
from painters to filmmakers and poets – come to work in studios in the grounds, 
while guests can join workshops or just kick back and relax.

“We wanted to create a place where nature, culture and community combine,” 
says co-founder Lena Evstafieva. The Russian art consultant opened Villa Lena 
three years ago with her French-German husband Jérôme Hadey, a music producer, 
and Lionel Bensemoun, a Parisian nightclub entrepreneur. “It’s somewhere for 
people to have space and time away from everything.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc66359c4d66663cde79495fe620df13c514511f7%2F0_300_2400_3000%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arthouse%20in%20Tuscany%20for%20creative%20types&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arthouse%20in%20Tuscany%20for%20creative%20types&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc66359c4d66663cde79495fe620df13c514511f7%2F0_300_2400_3000%2F2400.jpg>
 Creative space: a painting donated to the villa by a previous guest. 
Photograph: Coke Bartrina 
Accommodation is scattered around the estate and designed to appeal to 
families, groups of friends or couples. There are 13 one- to three-bedroom 
apartments in two buildings, and a further two houses that can be rented whole 
or by the room. Our apartment, in what used to be the stables, has high, beamed 
ceilings, white walls and antique furnishings. It’s all simple, stylish and 
comfortable with artwork by previous residents dotted everywhere. There’s a 
main pool with bar, two further pools, games room, screening room, children’s 
playground and yoga deck with incredible views (the 8am class is a great way to 
start the day).

We gather on beanbags in the screening room for a talk by Shurooq Amin 
<http://www.shurooqamin.com/> – a painter and multi-media artist whose work 
challenges hypocrisy in Middle Eastern society (she has had exhibitions shut 
down at home and was the first Kuwaiti to sell at Christie’s). The studios are 
open for guests to wander around and we later meet British textile designer
Hazel Stark <http://hazelstark.tumblr.com/>, who is running a dyeing workshop 
the next day. A film director, lighting designer, jewellery maker and 
songwriter are among others staying in June and July (a new group of artists 
arrives every two months), and international and interdisciplinary 
collaborations often result. The art foundation is not for profit: in exchange 
for lodging the artists give a workshop or a talk for guests, and they must 
also leave behind a piece of work, whether that’s a song or a sculpture.

The creative vibe continues in the kitchen, with resident international chefs 
throwing their talent into the mix and giving cooking classes, too. Organic and 
local produce – often from the gardens or foraged nearby – is the mainstay of 
the daily changing set menu, complemented by organic wines and olive oil made 
on the estate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a1c45c0e6832a43644f8446bf46853a89391d07%2F0_0_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arthouse%20in%20Tuscany%20for%20creative%20types&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arthouse%20in%20Tuscany%20for%20creative%20types&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a1c45c0e6832a43644f8446bf46853a89391d07%2F0_0_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Creative vibe: a scene from a painting workshop. Photograph: Catherine 
Parsonage 
Plant and permaculture specialist Stéphane Meyer takes us foraging, and we 
haven’t gone far before we’re tasting poppy petals (pickling the buds makes a 
great alternative caper, apparently) and picking everything from wild rosemary 
to lime tree flowers for tea. Visit in the autumn for forest truffle hunting 
and menus designed around what you find.

Chef Margot Protzel from New York (formerly of Gramercy Tavern 
<http://www.gramercytavern.com/>, Maysville <http://www.maysvillenyc.com/> and 
Franny’s <http://frannysbrooklyn.com/>) heads up the kitchen during our stay, 
conjuring colourful, healthy feasts: cucumber gazpacho with wildflowers, 
ratatouille on toast, black rice with mushrooms and greens, strawberries and 
mascarpone. It’s all delicious – and dining at long tables with guests and 
creative types feels a bit like being at a wedding, albeit an arty one. A 
potentially pretentious bunch, yes, but the atmosphere is laidback and 
friendly, with a sense of community.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d485db642c10ee9ecf102dce587362f6f6adac0%2F188_2_2218_1331%2F2218.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arthouse%20in%20Tuscany%20for%20creative%20types&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arthouse%20in%20Tuscany%20for%20creative%20types&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Ftuscany-italy-creative-workshop-holiday-retret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d485db642c10ee9ecf102dce587362f6f6adac0%2F188_2_2218_1331%2F2218.jpg>
 Green thoughts: in the organic garden at the villa. Photograph: Ellie Tsatsou 
While it’s all very sociable – particularly in the height of summer with 
weekly pool parties, Sunday brunches and lots of family fun – it’s easy to 
escape and do your own thing. There is great hiking through untouched 
countryside – we follow a path through the forest up to the ruins of a fort 
with stunning views. There are mountain bikes to borrow and we cycle to the 
romantic, abandoned village of Toiano Vecchio. Today, just two people live 
there, in a single, proudly maintained house amid crumbling buildings and 
wildflowers – the only sign of life a muffled cough behind closed doors.

The ethereal voice of Canadian folk-psych singer Ora Cogan echoes around the 
room

Part of the beauty of Villa Lena is its isolation. Hilltop towns are seen in 
the distance, yet there’s nothing else for miles. It is deeply peaceful. For 
those with a car, it’s a great base for exploring countless Tuscan beauties, 
such as medieval San Gimignano and the walled town of Lucca.

But it would take a lot to lure anyone from the bubble of life at Vila Lena 
and its cast of colourful characters. On our last evening, we sit on the 
candlelit staircase for a hallway performance by Canadian folk-psych singerOra 
Cogan <http://www.oracogan.com/>. Her ethereal voice echoes around the room and 
afterwards people chat outside under the stars. That night, I sleep with the 
windows open, moonlight glinting on the wall, the sound of an owl breaking the 
silence.

 * A minimum one-week stay at Villa Lena  (villa-lena.it 
<http://www.villa-lena.it/>) in July or August costs from £100 per person per 
night, half-board in a one-bedroom apartment. Two nights minimum from April to 
June and September to November
 