
It is nearing midnight on a chilly and beautiful January night in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>. The hum of the hospital generator 
outside my window, overlaid with the sound of gunfire (sometimes celebratory, 
sometimes not), is something I have grown used to over the past three months.

My phone rings: it is the duty doctor calling for back-up after receiving 
multiple gunshot patients in theemergency room of Al Nasser general hospital in 
Al Dhale <http://www.msf.org/article/yemen-crisis-update-%E2%80%93-3-march-2016>
governorate.

My heart doesn’t race like it used to. From never seeing gunshot wounds back 
home in India, to now seeing them on a daily basis, I am learning a lot herein 
Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/04/4-nuns-16-killed-yemen-gunmen-storm-retirement-home>
. This night is busier than most.

Wars are being fought as in 'barbarian times', warns MSF chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/wars-are-being-fought-as-in-barbarian-times-warns-medecins-san-frontieres-chief>
One patient has had his left eye socket blown out by a bullet and is still 
talking coherently – it is like a scene from a movie. Another has a gunshot 
wound to the head and is being mechanically ventilated, while a third has 
multiple gunshots through his abdomen. Our medical team manages these patients 
calmly and efficiently. Later the staff joke with me about how, in the middle 
of last year, when the frontline was at their doorstep, this was daily life for 
them.

The resilience of people here is something I will always admire. Rabia, one of 
our cleaners, goes about her daily routine with a smile. Not for a second would 
you guess that she has lost all three of her sons in the war. Larger-than-life 
billboards of their handsome faces rise over the streets, along with the images 
of many others who have lost their lives.

War wounds aren’t the only medical needs we have to tackle. Yemen is grappling 
with a dual burden:malnutrition and vaccine-preventable diseases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/27/yemen-major-humanitarian-crisis-food-shortages-malnutrition-unicef>
 on the one hand, chronic conditions like heart disease and strokes on the 
other. Mental health issues are completely ignored. Due to thewar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/13/the-guardian-view-on-yemen-remember-the-forgotten-war>
 and uncontrolled inflation, healthcare is either unavailable or inaccessible 
to large parts of the population.

There are severe shortages of fuel, food, electricity and water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/yemen-devastation-nation-largely-ignored-uk-paradox-aid-arms-saudi-arabia>
, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fdoctors-yemen-war-wounds-medical-challenge-msf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff41139fa21a272e00369645f31ee5ac58197b48c%2F0_191_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20doctors%20in%20Yemen%2C%20war%20wounds%20are%20not%20our%20only%20medical%20challenge%20%7C%20%20Alan%20de%20Lima%20Pereira&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fdoctors-yemen-war-wounds-medical-challenge-msf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20doctors%20in%20Yemen%2C%20war%20wounds%20are%20not%20our%20only%20medical%20challenge%20%7C%20%20Alan%20de%20Lima%20Pereira&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fdoctors-yemen-war-wounds-medical-challenge-msf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff41139fa21a272e00369645f31ee5ac58197b48c%2F0_191_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Alan de Lima Pereira: ‘The moments of helplessness faced by a wartime doctor 
are many’ Photograph: Ikram N'gadi/MSF 
These are times when international humanitarian law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/28/impunity-conflict-cast-dark-shadow-over-aid-humanitarian-work-in-2015>
 is just another meaningless phrase. Theindiscriminate attacks on hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/10/three-msf-staff-among-dead-rocket-fired-hospital-yemen>
 and civilians – either targeted or conveniently labelled collateral damage – 
add an extra layer of complexity. It sometimes makes us question whether what 
we are doing here in Yemen is worth the risks we take. It is a question to 
which the answer is obvious from the outset; a question that we should never 
have been forced to ask ourselves, knowing how grave the humanitarian needs are.

The moments of helplessness faced by a wartime doctor are many. We know there 
will always be another flood of patients pouring into our hospital. This is yet 
another forgotten war where the most helpless and innocent are the most 
affected.

Then there are the little victories and small joys that make our so-called 
career choice seem worthwhile: sharing a meal with 200 men at the local 
sheikh’s house; working with an amazing team of Yemeni staff who poke fun at me 
and my attempts to learn Arabic; discussing the Bollywood movies that make men 
cry without fail.

Yemen: the devastation of a nation, largely ignored | Stephen Twigg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/yemen-devastation-nation-largely-ignored-uk-paradox-aid-arms-saudi-arabia>
I will never forget one little girl who came in with a severe chest infection 
and whose mother had all but given her up for dead. We used all our persuasive 
powers to convince the mother to let us continue treatment for a little while 
longer. A week later, the mother walked out of the hospital with her smiling, 
playful infant in her arms. Her sheepish grin was all the thanks we needed.

I now leave Yemen with a heavy heart. It has definitely been one of my most 
challenging experiences: dire needs for healthcare in the face of insecurity.

My hope and prayer is that this war will end soon. If that is asking too much, 
until then, may humanitarian assistance reach every person who needs it in this 
breathtaking country.

 * Alan de Lima Pereira spent three months working for Médecins Sans Frontières
 <http://www.msf.org/article/yemen-crisis-update-%E2%80%93-3-march-2016> in Al 
Dhale
 