
The social historian and educationist Asa Briggs, who has died aged 94, was 
one of the last survivors of a wartime generation who not only wrote 
groundbreaking works but helped to make history themselves. As he detailed in 
two late volumes of autobiography, Secret Days (2011) and Special Relationships 
(2012), written in his ninth decade, Briggs was one of the Oxbridge brains 
recruited in secrecy to work atBletchley Park 
<https://www.bletchleypark.org.uk/content/about/>, the Buckinghamshire country 
house devoted to cracking German wartime codes. Working in Bletchley’s Hut 6, 
Briggs, the youngest warrant officer in the British army – “It entitled me to 
wear a peaked cap and draw a captain’s pay” – worked alongsideAlan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing>, mathematician of genius and 
computer pioneer.

Turing was among the first of the great and the good with whom Briggs spent 
his long life rubbing shoulders. His friends and contacts reflected the broad 
span of his interests, from Winston Churchill, whoseHistory of the 
English-Speaking Peoples 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/A-History-English-Speaking-Peoples-Winston-Churchill/dp/1616082402>
 Briggs proofread as a young don, to Chairman Mao’s loyal lieutenant Zhou Enlai 
and J Robert Oppenheimer, father of the atom bomb. Friends and neighbours 
nearer Briggs’s Sussex home included former prime ministers Harold Macmillan and
James Callaghan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/mar/28/guardianobituaries.politics>, and 
fellow peerDenis Healey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/03/lord-healey>, whom Briggs 
thought would have made a better prime minister than any of them.

Best known for his trilogy on 19th-century social history, Victorian People 
(1954), Victorian Cities (1963) and Victorian Things (1988), Briggs also wrote 
a penetrating short essay on Chartism (1959) that has stood the test of time, 
plus studies of Karl Marx in London and a company history of Marks and Spencer. 
He was commissioned by theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to write 
a mammoth five-volume history of British broadcasting, which he started in 1961 
and completed in 1995. Though he thought it among his finest works, for many 
its accounts of bygone bureaucratic battles and reliance on internal memos 
render it a work of reference only.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3lEkYirFVLo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3lEkYirFVLo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3lEkYirFVLo&media=>
 Asa Briggs, the author of a five-volume history of British broadcasting, on 
pirate radio and the BBC’s response to it 
A key year for Briggs was 1961, as it saw the foundation of the institution 
with which he became most closely identified, theUniversity of Sussex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofsussex>. In at the 
university’s start as professor of history and dean of the school of social 
studies, Briggs served as vice-chancellor between 1967 and 1976. On his 
retirement he was ennobled as a life peer, Lord Briggs of Lewes, after the town 
that he had made his home. Briggs’s Sussex era encompassed the years of 
worldwide student revolt, in which the university played its part. Occasionally 
Briggs would debate vigorously with crowds of angry protesters on the campus.

Asa Briggs – he was always proud of his unusual Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> forename – was born in 
Keighley, near Bradford, the son of William, an engineer, and his wife Jane. 
Educated at Keighley grammar school, he went to Sidney Sussex College, 
Cambridge, at the age of 16, where a tutor told him: “You’re just a baby, 
Briggs, and there’s a war coming. But get your degree first and then join up.” 
He did better than that, and got two: a BA in history and a BSc in economics in 
1941, before he was 20.

By then, he had been spotted by a college contemporary, Howard Smith 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituary-sir-howard-smith-1346505.html>
, a mathematician with whom Briggs played chess, who was to become head of MI5 
in the 1970s. Smith recommended him toGordon Welchman 
<https://www.bletchleypark.org.uk/content/about/FilmandTV/welchman.rhtm>, 
another Cambridge mathematician, the head of Hut 6, responsible for breaking 
Germany’s army and Luftwaffe ciphers at Bletchley Park. Recruited by the 
Intelligence Corps, in 1942 Briggs found himself among the country’s brightest 
brains at Bletchley, where he was enchanted by the spirit of equality that 
prevailed, “except for Turing, whom we all deferred to because he was clearly a 
genius,” he told me in a 2011 interview.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHmqADGoQkXE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHmqADGoQkXE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHmqADGoQkXE&media=>
 Asa Briggs talking about his book Secret Days: Code-breaking at Bletchley Park 
At the war’s end, increasingly interested in urban and working-class history, 
Briggs lectured at the London School of Economics, attracting the attention of 
the socialist intellectuals RH Tawney, Harold Laski and GDH Cole. He refused an 
offer of a safe Labour seat in parliament, and was elected a fellow of 
Worcester College, Oxford, where he remained for a decade until 1955. One of 
his students there was the future media tycoon Rupert Murdoch, and in 1952 the 
pair wenton a camping tour of the middle East 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/jun/02/rupert-murdoch-road-trip-middle-east>
. Briggs would return to Worcester as the college’s provost on leaving Sussex 
in 1976, retiring in 1991. Never a Marxist like his fellow Oxford historians
Christopher Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/feb/26/guardianobituaries.obituaries> and
EP Thompson 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-e-p-thompson-1464255.html>, 
Briggs retained a sentimental attachment to old Labour ideals throughout his 
life.

One of Briggs’s rare failures was when an article on army slang was rejected 
by George Orwell, then literary editor of the leftwing weekly Tribune. “I 
thought it would appeal to him – clearly it didn’t,” recalled Briggs ruefully.

A year’s academic appointment at Princeton (1953-54) enabled him to study 
postwar America and to critique the views of Lewis Mumford on the development 
of cities, which Mumford regarded as essentially similar, while Briggs stressed 
their variety.

As a historian, Briggs’s hallmark was his breadth of interest and his grasp of 
the essential in the torrent of diverse material. In contrast to the aggressive 
capitalism of the US, for example, he observed that in spite of the Victorian 
boom: “England did not become a business society ... The failure was crucial to 
the subsequent development of English society and politics.”

In 1955, he married Susan Banwell and returned to his native county as 
professor of history at Leeds University. Always a staunch Yorkshireman, Briggs 
kept in close touch with his roots, and was a proud president of the Brontë 
Society. But when the call came from Sussex, Briggs did not hesitate. His 
involvement with the new university reflected an increasing interest in the 
extension of higher education, and he was one of those instrumental in 
persuading Harold Wilson’s Labour government to launch theOpen University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/openuniversity> in 1969. Nine years 
later Briggs became the OU’s chancellor, a post he held until his retirement in 
1991.

An indefatigable globetrotter, Briggs was an especially enthusiastic visitor 
to China in the 1960s, when the country was convulsed by Mao’s bloody and 
chaotic Cultural Revolution. Briggs, whose chief private hobby was collecting 
historic ceramics, built up a large collection of Maoist pottery, which he 
displayed in the windows of his Lewes home. When questioned about this 
iconography of one of the 20th-century’s worst mass murderers, he conceded that 
Mao had “probably” been a monster, but added: “We will be arguing about this to 
the end of time.”

In a sense, Briggs remained marooned in the optimistic period of his prime – 
the 40s to the 60s – a believer above all in what he called in one of his best 
booksThe Age of Improvement 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Age-Improvement-1783-1867-Edition/dp/0582369592> 
(1959). He remained steadfast in his commitment to the education and 
improvement of the masses, exemplified by his beloved Victorians, and the 
provincial class and region from which he sprang. From 1958 to 1967 he served 
as president of the Workers’ Educational Association.

His socialist sympathies notwithstanding, he joined the ranks of the 
Establishment, and moved in such exalted company with ease, glorying in the 
many honours (and the grand houses) that came with his academic posts. After 
leaving Oxford, he and his wife bought part ofTyninghame House 
<http://www.scottish-places.info/features/featurefirst282.html>, a 19th-century 
stately home in East Lothian. Not without personal vanity, he took a positively 
Pooterish joy in mingling with the powerful.

Letters: Lord Briggs obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/28/letters-lord-briggs-obituary>
A great committee man, and an enemy of narrow specialisation, he said that he 
leapt over the frontiers of academic disciplines with as much joy as he crossed 
national borders. If he had been born a century earlier, he would himself have 
been among the most energetic of the eminent Victorians that he celebrated. His 
book Loose Ends and Extras (2014) completed an autobiographical trilogy, and a 
collection of poetry is due to be published in April.

Briggs is survived by Susan, their two sons, two daughters and 14 
grandchildren.

• Asa Briggs, Lord Briggs of Lewes, historian, born 7 May 1921; died 15 March 
2016
 