
Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> has reported a near 6% fall 
in sales at established stores, confirming its position as the worst performing 
major UK supermarket.

Sales at the Walmart-owned chain’s established stores dropped by 5.8% in the 
three months to 30 September. That was an improvement on the previous quarter, 
when sales were down by 7.5%, but puts Asda well behind rivals Tesco and 
Morrisons, which recently reported underlying sales growth.

Last week, Sainsbury’s announced a 1% fall in underlying sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/sainsburys-prices-first-half-sales-fall>
 in the 28 weeks to 24 September.

Walmart <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart> said the UK was the 
only one of its 11 international markets not experiencing growth at stores open 
for more than a year, as the number of shoppers fell by 4.2% year on year. 
Operating income also dipped in the UK, with shoppers spending 1.6% less on 
average on each visit.

Walmart’s chief financial officer, Brett Biggs, said: “The key priority 
remains driving an improved customer experience and building sales momentum by 
simplifying the offer, improving product availability and making strategic 
investments in service and price.”

Asda is trying to fight off heavy competition from the rise of discounters 
Aldi and Lidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/apr/02/aldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets>
, which have stolen its once strong position as the UK’s cheapest grocer. Asda 
only operates large outlets and has been unable to tap into the rise of 
convenience stores, unlike Tesco and Sainsbury’s.

It has also suffered from a number of recent upsets, including a card reader 
glitch that led toangry queues of customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/asda-apologises-card-reader-glitch-sparks-checkout-queues>
 in stores last month and a BBC Watchdog investigation that criticised Asda for
dirty home delivery crates <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37847968>.

Patrick O’Brien, an analyst at consultancy Verdict Retail, said: “Asda’s 
positioning has plunged it into crisis. The discounters have undermined its low 
price stance, but it is unable to position its brand or customer experience as 
offering more than the discounters, in the way that its big four rivals have 
been able to do. The others never traded on being the cheapest, but Asda did, 
and now it isn’t.”

He said that unless Walmart chose to use its financial muscle “to take the 
price war to a new level”, Asda had to find a new way to attract shoppers.

Sean Clarke, who stepped in to replace Andy Clarke as chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
 of Asda in July, said shopper numbers had started rising again over the 
previous quarter.

“We have lowered thousands of prices, improved hundreds of own brand products 
and invested in more hours for colleagues on the shop floor, so it’s 
encouraging to see more customers shopping with us in stores and online,” he 
said.


Consumer body Which? had found Asda to have the lowest prices on branded 
groceries for the seventh month in a row, recognising continuing price cuts at 
the supermarket, Clarke said.

 