
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> and Asda have cut up to 
three pence a litre off fuel prices, bringing relief to drivers after several 
months of price hikes.


Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> was the first of the 
supermarkets to announce a price cut, with a national cap meaning motorists 
will be charged no more than 110.7 pence a litre (ppl) for unleaded and 112.7 
ppl for diesel at its 294 filling stations from Tuesday.

Tesco’s price cut at its 500 filling stations comes into effect from Monday 
afternoon.

Government figures show that average fuel prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/uk-inflation-rises-near-two-year-high-consumer-price-index>
 have reached their highest level since July last year, with motorists being 
charged 116.6 ppl for petrol and 119 ppl for diesel.

Prices have risen in recent months following a sharp fall in sterling’s value 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/19/the-post-brexit-pound-how-sterlings-fall-affects-the-uk-economy>
 in the wake of the EU referendum.

The RAC said that although the reduction in pump prices was “clearly good 
news”, it has come far too late, given that the wholesale price of fuel has 
been falling along with oil prices since the end of October.

Simon Williams, the motoring organisation’s fuel spokesman, said: “Retailers 
should have reduced their prices then rather than making one bigger 
headline-grabbing cut now.

“This will sadly undermine motorists’ trust in fuel retailers and it’s hard 
not to see it as them taking advantage of the current climate, which has led 
people to think that higher fuel prices are an inevitability simply because of 
the weaker pound and talk of the rising cost of goods.

“In fact there is still scope to reduce pump prices further.”

The AA’s president, Edmund King, said the price drop would “take some of the 
sting out of the high pump prices”.

He added, however, that “yo-yo oil prices mean that we may see costs reverse 
yet again.”

Tesco’s fuel director, Peter Cattell, said: “With the busy festive season just 
around the corner, we know many of our customers will be starting to prepare 
for the big day. So to provide a little extra help we’re cutting the cost of 
petrol and diesel by up to three pence per litre at all of our 500 filling 
stations.”

Asda’s senior director for petrol, Andy Peake, said: “Asda is once again 
leading the way in reducing the price at the pumps to help the millions of 
motorists across the UK.

“Our new national price cap … will be welcomed by the millions of drivers who 
have seen fuel prices rise since Brexit.”
 