
Amy review: Asif Kapadia’s Amy Winehouse film is a tragic masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/16/amy-review-asif-kapadias-amy-winehouse-film-is-a-tragic-masterpiece>
Talking to Asif Kapadia can feel like talking to an obsessive; someone so 
fascinated by one thing that they have not only consumed all they could about 
their subject, but sworn to preserve the truth about them, too. That subject is
Amy Winehouse <https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse>. That truth is 
the complicated conjunction of circumstance and agency that led the singer to 
die from alcohol intoxication at the age of 27.

“There’s a point in the process where you can start correcting your 
interviewees because you know the story now. I know it,” he says. “I know when 
someone’s telling me something true and when they’re making it up. I know when 
they’re putting themselves in her life. Or, I’ll start saying to people who say 
they met Amy: ‘I don’t think you really met Amy. The person you describe, 
that’s notAmy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy>, by that point she’d 
changed and I don’t know what you’re talking about.’”

A 43-year-old Londoner, Kapadia is the man behind Amy, a documentary that 
chronicles Winehouse’s tragic decline from bright-eyed prodigy to doomed 
tabloid obsession. Assembled from 100 interviews and incorporating 20 months of 
editing in a process that took three years in total, the film presents what 
feels like a true version of events. It is also incredibly moving.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA97-pQJD6Hw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA97-pQJD6Hw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA97-pQJD6Hw&media=>
The film has already been the subject of controversy, particularly with 
Winehouse’s father, Mitch, who told the film-makers they were “a disgrace” and 
believes the film is “trying to portray me in the worst possible light”. He 
also claims that interviews he gave for the film were edited, specifically 
those regarding what is now perceived as a turning point in Amy’s life – an 
attempt to send her to rehab in 2005 to deal with her drinking. The attempt 
failed and became the material for Amy’s biggest song. The film claims, like 
the song, that Amy didn’t go to rehab only on the say-so of her father. Mitch 
says he only thought Amy shouldn’t go to rehab “at that time”. He claims that 
those three words were edited from his interview.

“He says that quite a lot, I think,” sighs Kapadia, who doesn’t use Mitch’s 
name once during our interview. “I interviewed him twice. The first time he 
didn’t say ‘at the time’. But the story is in the present. The lyrics of her 
song don’t say ‘at the time’: ‘Daddy says I’m fine, at the time,’ it doesn’t 
say that. When Amy writes something down [in song] it’s based on a real 
experience. That whole incident happened exactly the way [it’s described in the 
song]. Everyone involved admits that’s exactly how it happened.”

Kapadia came to fame as the director of Senna, another study of a talented but 
tragic figure, the racing driver Ayrton Senna. The film used an innovative 
style Kapadia sometimes likes to call “true fiction”. Constructed almost 
entirely from archive footage, the story was told without any guiding 
voiceover, a weirdly unheard-of break with convention in the documentary 
format. Senna was also edited to feel like a drama, every moment put in service 
to the story. As it unfolded, the film grew from a chronicle of a sporting life 
into a study in ambition, bravery and – again – obsession. It went on to become 
a touchstone for other film-makers and a driver of the boom in cinematic 
documentary. For a while, conversations across the country began: ‘I’m not into 
motor racing but...”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435224749250%2F5fed2594-3afc-4602-aaef-a1c1a3ada4bd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asif%20Kapadia%20on%20Amy%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20drinking%2C%20the%20bulimia%2C%20the%20drugs%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20stopped%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asif%20Kapadia%20on%20Amy%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20drinking%2C%20the%20bulimia%2C%20the%20drugs%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20stopped%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435224749250%2F5fed2594-3afc-4602-aaef-a1c1a3ada4bd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Asif Kapadia. Photograph: David Levene 
The success of Senna led directly into Amy, thanks in part to Nick Shymansky, 
who had been having just that conversation with his girlfriend. It was the 
summer of 2011, it was raining, so the couple had ducked into a west London 
cinema. They loved the film they saw, despite not loving motor racing, and the 
format also inspired an idea in Shymansky. He had been Amy Winehouse’s first 
manager and was very much of the mind that someone should tell her story. Then, 
a few weeks later, Amy died.

By 2012, Kapadia had been approached by Universal, Winehouse’s label, and 
invited to make a “warts and all” documentary, with full access to her back 
catalogue. Getting people to open up about her life, however, was to prove a 
different challenge. “There was no go-to person who knew Amy’s story, that’s 
what I found very early on,” he says. “There’s no definitive book. She just 
seemed to have a lot of people in different compartments. That’s what I started 
to find with the people I spoke to. And no one liked each other, they were all 
arguing, there was a lot of tension around her, always.” The first door that 
opened was with Nick. “When I called him, he said it was too soon, to leave her 
alone, let her rest in peace. But he told me the story [about Senna]. He said: 
‘I’ll meet you, but I’m not interested.’”

The pair eventually met in a Soho editing suite. On the wall, Kapadia and his 
editor Chris King had assembled a collage that resembled something from CSI or 
Homeland; a massive, interlocking mural telling the story of Amy’s life as they 
knew it. It struck Nick as being more effort than anyone had previously made in 
understanding what had happened to her. And so he began to talk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435158365581%2Fd2d6ab2a-aec2-4149-8c55-2eb9ca46ae35-2060x1585.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asif%20Kapadia%20on%20Amy%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20drinking%2C%20the%20bulimia%2C%20the%20drugs%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20stopped%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asif%20Kapadia%20on%20Amy%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20drinking%2C%20the%20bulimia%2C%20the%20drugs%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20stopped%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435158365581%2Fd2d6ab2a-aec2-4149-8c55-2eb9ca46ae35-2060x1585.jpeg>
 Back in white: a young Winehouse plays at home. 
“I had no idea what this film was...” says Kapadia. “I had no thesis, I had no 
plan. I had the idea of doing a documentary but it’s all controlled, because I 
know what the beginning and the middle and the end is but if it changes I’m 
going to go with it and find a way to rewrite it. This was my research. But 
Nick just started to talk and talk. He spoke for five hours without thinking 
about it. He then said that wasn’t the half of it and we talked again. I 
probably recorded 15 hours but we would speak non-stop off the record and on 
email. No one had ever heard of this guy, but he had this huge story. Then he 
opened his laptop and said, ‘I’ve got these videos that I shot,’ and there’s 
all of the opening of the film.”

The first section of Amy shows her as a teenager. Someone at once both 
precocious and diffident, she is eager to please but also to subvert. 
Shymansky’s footage was shot on a Mini DV camera and usually involves him 
cajoling Amy into playing up. She doesn’t want to perform, she hides her face 
behind a pillow, she’s trying to sleep. But when she’s eventually persuaded to 
play, she looks down the camera and you feel the charisma burn its way right 
through you.

Amy Winehouse's manager Nick Shymansky: ‘She’d be so sweet and funny. But 
there were warning signs…’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/14/amy-winehouse-manager-nick-shymansky-interview>
As Amy’s story develops, so the audience watching her grows larger. From 
Shymansky talking one-to-one to the global audience that pored over YouTube 
footage of Amy’s final, chaotic concert in Belgrade, Serbia. Amy, says Kapadia, 
was born at the wrong time, caught on the cusp of an analogue and a digital 
world where notions of privacy were changing rapidly. “So there’s Nick talking 
to her and she’s looking straight into the camera. She’s talking to us, 
obviously, we become Nick. Then it goes on to TV cameras and we’re the 
audience. Then it gets darker and darker and it’s the paparazzi footage, and 
then there’s a point in St Lucia [in 2011] where she literally points at the 
camera and we’re caught out, we look away. I thought that was the most 
interesting thing, how the audience changed from Nick saying, ‘Go on give us a 
little flash it’s only us’ in the car to the paps going, ‘Come on, cheer up...’”

The idea of Amy as the object of our attention is central to the film. It’s 
difficult to watch without feeling in some way guilty, responsible in however 
small a way, for helping to push a vulnerable person into a spiral that 
ultimately claimed her life. Kapadia says many Londoners drifted in and out of 
Amy’s world, drinking in the boozy culture of Camden Town, assuming a vicarious 
glamour, then going home (this includes Kapadia himself: “I keep on expecting 
to pop up in the background”, he says).

Then there’s the journalists, like me, who spent the years of 2007-9 writing 
up every drunken fight she got involved in, every bizarre late-night trip to 
the newsagents. After watching Amy, the first thing I did was to Google my name 
and hers looking to see if I’d indulged in the mockery that is caught in the 
film; Graham Norton explaining to Jackie Chan in 2008, “Amy Winehouse, now 
she’s a mad person.” I found that I had not, that I was mocking the mockery. “A 
number of journalists have said that,” Kapadia smiles. “They say: ‘It’s fine, I 
was just commenting on everyone else.’ No one’s sure, and not just journalists. 
It’s interesting, isn’t it, because everyone did it. Everyone’s seen [the 
concert in] Serbia. How did we see Serbia? We looked it up, we shared it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435235416766%2Fe6569ee2-a007-4228-a947-fb42b3f780e8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asif%20Kapadia%20on%20Amy%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20drinking%2C%20the%20bulimia%2C%20the%20drugs%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20stopped%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asif%20Kapadia%20on%20Amy%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20drinking%2C%20the%20bulimia%2C%20the%20drugs%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20stopped%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435235416766%2Fe6569ee2-a007-4228-a947-fb42b3f780e8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The calm before the storm… a young Amy Winehouse. 
Amy is a film that makes you feel culpable, but it also stirs up waves of 
sympathy, of a desire to protect her and, also, an anger at those in her life 
who – you feel – could have done so much more to save her. This extends to 
pretty much everyone with whom she had a professional relationship (oh yes, and 
Blake Fielder-Civil). “It brought out the worst of a lot of people in her 
life,” says Kapadia. “If one looks carefully, there are lots of people who make 
lots of decisions or who were aware of one thing – whether it was the drinking, 
the bulimia, or the drugs – and nobody stopped it. That’s what the film is 
really about. It’s pretty heavy. You can’t quite imagine what it’s like when 
they’re in the film. To go through it all again, it’s really tough. There’s 
certain people who just can’t watch the second half.

“But the second half is where most of the audience come on board,” he 
continues. “It’s not just about her any more, it’s about us. It’s about the 
city, it’s about the media, it’s about everything, people who have taken this 
in, enjoying, laughing at her. There’s a line I get a lot now when a certain 
person keeps saying stuff about me: ‘Well, it’s all right, isn’t it? All 
publicity is good publicity.’ Well, I’m not sure it is...”

Amy is in cinemas from 3 July 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435235549034%2Fbfcfc298-438b-4f13-8a66-562ed0c48ffa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asif%20Kapadia%20on%20Amy%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20drinking%2C%20the%20bulimia%2C%20the%20drugs%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20stopped%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asif%20Kapadia%20on%20Amy%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20drinking%2C%20the%20bulimia%2C%20the%20drugs%20%E2%80%93%20nobody%20stopped%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435235549034%2Fbfcfc298-438b-4f13-8a66-562ed0c48ffa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Amy at 20. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
 * This article was amended on 27 June and 29 June 2015. An earlier version 
said Amy Winehouse’s final concert was in Sarajevo, Serbia; the location was 
Belgrade, Serbia. The article was also amended to correct a reference to Nick 
Shymansky’s “new wife”; the marriage took place after Amy Winehouse died.  