
Assassin's Creed: five things we learned from the first trailer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/may/12/assassins-creed-trailer-analysis-michael-fassbender>
The Curse of the Video Game Adaptation. It would make a good game itself: a 
questing role-player in which you control an idealistic film-maker trying to 
turn a popular shoot-’em-up into a movie. Challenges include purgatorial board 
meetings, battles for creative control, the coaxing of above-it-all actors, 
salvaging your terrible-looking special effects. And when you’ve amassed enough 
budget points, you face the fearsome final-level adversary: the two-headed 
Beast of Audience. If “pedantic gamer” doesn’t get you, “confused civilian who 
thinks it’s nonsense” will.

Many have tried to break the curse. None have been worthy. Last year saw fresh 
victims such as Warcraft and Angry Birds added to the pyre, joining Mortal 
Kombat, Prince Of Persia, Hitman, Doom and Street Fighter. But, flush with more 
cash than they know what to do with, the games companies continue to send their 
ill-prepared adaptations on to the merciless multiplex battlefield. Meanwhile, 
the curse is working in the other direction: infecting modern blockbusters to 
the extent that they’re starting to resemble CGI-heavy video games. Can no one 
restore balance to the cinema universe?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOWnOybPAhM4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOWnOybPAhM4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOWnOybPAhM4&media=>
Michael Fassbender: ‘I was a bit of a worrywart. I’ve tried to work on that’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/22/michael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that>
Now comes a new contender: Assassin’s Creed, spun off from Ubisoft’s 
huge-selling game series, with a top-notch cast and lavish budget, and telling 
a complex, action-packed film that darts between the near future and medieval 
Spain. In his valiant campaign, Australian director Justin Kurzel deployed a 
revolutionary strategy to attempt to break the curse: don’t make it look like a 
video game.

“We went very old school with it,” he explains. “We shot in real locations 
[Malta and southern Spain], we got the best parkour guys, slackliners, martial 
arts guys in the world to actually do all of it for real. We wanted to get 
exhausted and dirty with it.” Rather than 21st-century gameplay, the action 
feels like a classic swashbuckler, with a touch of Mad Max. There are sword 
fights, fist fights, horseback chases, rooftop chases, even the game’s 
signature move: the “leap of faith” – a 125ft-high dive off a building, with no 
ropes or cables. “The stunt guys hadn’t been in a film for so long where they 
were allowed to do stunts,” says Kurzel. These days, they’re usually in 
air-conditioned studios in front of a green screen.

It has been a dizzying ascent for Kurzel. Five years ago he turned heads and 
stomachs with his debut, Snowtown, the story of a real-life Australian serial 
killer that made Silence Of The Lambs look like The Sound Of Music. After that 
came a visceral Macbeth, led byMichael Fassbender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender> and Marion Cotillard, his 
two leads on Assassin’s Creed. In the short space of three films, the 
42-year-old finds himself at the wheel of a reportedly $200m juggernaut. “My 
career is so odd,” he admits.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmichael-fassbender-on-assassins-creed-genetic-memory-makes-a-lot-of-scientific-sense-to-me-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%20on%20Assassin's%20Creed%3A%20'Genetic%20memory%20makes%20a%20lot%20of%20scientific%20sense%20to%20me'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmichael-fassbender-on-assassins-creed-genetic-memory-makes-a-lot-of-scientific-sense-to-me-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%20on%20Assassin%27s%20Creed%3A%20%27Genetic%20memory%20makes%20a%20lot%20of%20scientific%20sense%20to%20me%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmichael-fassbender-on-assassins-creed-genetic-memory-makes-a-lot-of-scientific-sense-to-me-video-interview&media=>
Michael Fassbender on Assassin’s Creed: ‘Genetic memory makes a lot of 
scientific sense to me’ – video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/23/michael-fassbender-on-assassins-creed-genetic-memory-makes-a-lot-of-scientific-sense-to-me-video-interview>
Assassin's Creed review – Michael Fassbender game movie achieves 
transcendental boredom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/19/assassins-creed-film-review-michael-fassbender-videogame-marion-cotillard>
Fassbender was instrumental to Kurzel’s progress. The two first met for a beer 
around the time of Snowtown, almost like a blind date. They clearly hit it off. 
“I knew as soon as we sat down that he was someone I really wanted to work 
with,” Kurzel says. “We had 101 questions for each other, similar passions for 
performance and editing.” This sort of thing doesn’t usually happen in the 
movie world, he stresses.

A year later, Kurzel was offered Macbeth and, when he heard Fassbender was 
involved, he said yes. Fassbender was then recruited by Ubisoft for Assassin’s 
Creed, as lead actor and co-producer. He again approached Kurzel, who again 
agreed, despite his unfamiliarity with the source material. “The last video 
game I played was Double Dragon as a kid, in an arcade, trying to pick up a 
girl.” (The 1994 movie of Double Dragon, incidentally, is next-level atrocious).

Kurzel had his reservations. His career was on a pretty respectable 
trajectory, he had his own stories to tell, plus there was The Curse. But 
Fassbender made the movie sound less like Mario Brothers and more like Brazil 
or The Matrix.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fassassins-creed-movie-and-the-curse-of-the-videogame-adaptation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb078cc8080239e50567e255ecfc1860d40eedb21%2F0_311_4685_2812%2F4685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Assassin%E2%80%99s%20Creed%20director%20Justin%20Kurzel%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20went%20old%20school%20with%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fassassins-creed-movie-and-the-curse-of-the-videogame-adaptation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Assassin%E2%80%99s%20Creed%20director%20Justin%20Kurzel%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20went%20old%20school%20with%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fassassins-creed-movie-and-the-curse-of-the-videogame-adaptation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb078cc8080239e50567e255ecfc1860d40eedb21%2F0_311_4685_2812%2F4685.jpg>
 Marion Cotillard (left) as Sofia in Assassin’s Creed. Photograph: Allstar 
“I got hooked on it,” Kurzel says. “The way he started talking about it – in 
terms of genetic memory, the notion that we are informed by the experiences of 
our ancestors, whether violence is learned or innate, the nature of free will – 
was much deeper than I was expecting. The discussions we had on this film were 
so much broader and richer than the ones I had on Macbeth. Really!”

The premise of Assassin’s Creed, movie and game, is that human DNA is a sort 
of ancestral browsing history, through which it’s possible to access the 
experiences of your forebears in real time, almost like time travel. 
Fassbender’s character is descended from one of the original 15th-century 
Assassins, who fight for free will. Their enemies, the Templars, seek control 
and order. This secret battle has played out across history, hence the 
numerous, sequel-friendly editions of the game. So, in the movie’s 15th-century 
timeline, the Templars are leading the Spanish Inquisition. In its modern-day 
setting, they’re funding medical research to identify the gene for violence, 
and thus “cure” humanity. To this aim, they send Fassbender back into his 
ancestor’s consciousness in a Matrix-like contraption named the Animus, to 
locate some all-important artefact called the Apple Of Eden.

Of course it’s far-fetched, Kurzel admits. “You’re in an entertaining world 
and you’re dreaming big, but there’s a plausibility there I can get my head 
round.” Scientists claim to have identified “warrior” genes linked to human 
violence, for example, he says. He talks of deja vu, instinct, evolution, 
people being able to pick up a violin for the first time and play it fluently.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fassassins-creed-movie-and-the-curse-of-the-videogame-adaptation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d1c16e14419338da13ec4ac3bffa2af1eecb9ff%2F0_0_3819_2291%2F3819.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Assassin%E2%80%99s%20Creed%20director%20Justin%20Kurzel%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20went%20old%20school%20with%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fassassins-creed-movie-and-the-curse-of-the-videogame-adaptation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Assassin%E2%80%99s%20Creed%20director%20Justin%20Kurzel%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20went%20old%20school%20with%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fassassins-creed-movie-and-the-curse-of-the-videogame-adaptation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d1c16e14419338da13ec4ac3bffa2af1eecb9ff%2F0_0_3819_2291%2F3819.jpg>
 Assassin’s Creed director Justin Kurzel. Photograph: Dave J Hogan/Getty 
Macbeth director Justin Kurzel: ‘You’re getting close to evil’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/24/macbeth-director-justin-kurzel-australian-film-maker-snowtown>
Brutality and heredity seem to have been recurring themes in Kurzel’s work. 
“I’ve become quite self-conscious about the darkness of the films I’ve done,” 
he says.Snowtown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sJY6X8utM8A>’s psychopath was 
a father figure to his teen accomplice – a nature v nurture experiment, you 
could say. Macbeth deals with predestination, inheritance and tribal violence.


In person, though, there’s nothing sinister about Kurzel. He’s charming and 
thoughtful. He describes his childhood as “pretty fantastic” but admits, “I had 
a very fractured relationship with my father where I spent the whole time 
trying desperately to understand who the fuck he was.” He’d love to go back in 
his own Animus and find out.

Yet he’s wary of the possibilities presented in his film. Ideas of genetic 
“predisposition” can be used to malevolent means, he agrees, such as labelling 
people as potential criminals before they’ve committed a crime. “If suddenly we 
can see our future laid out in front of us then that becomes very bland and 
very dangerous. I love the opposite: I love the idea of having a closer 
connection with your past – to lead you towards some kind of destiny. I think 
the mystery of the future and the uncertainty of fate is what drives us as 
humans.”

Is it Kurzel’s destiny to break the video game curse? The answer lies not in 
his genes or his ancestors but how well he’s played the game. He’s got this 
far. Now it’s up to the two-headed Beast of Audience.

Assassin’s Creed is out on New Year’s Day



 