
She’s famous around the globe for her archaeological exploits, elegant 
acrobatics, and ability to take down a T rex at 20 paces. But who is the real 
Lara Croft? I have come to her sprawling manor home in rural Surrey to find out.

This is, after all, the British icon who has spent the last 20 years battling 
wolves, giant snakes and unsupportive vest tops. Now, as I watch Lara standing 
at the kitchen counter, wrestling with a small foil pod, one thing becomes 
clear: she is not a woman who can work a Nespresso machine. “Oh bollocks,” she 
says, in that familiar cut-glass accent, as coffee granules spray across the 
polished granite. She hurls the empty pod in the sink, whips out the pistols 
she keeps strapped to each thigh, and blasts the machine with both barrels. She 
then pops the guns neatly back in their holsters and turns, raising an eyebrow 
in her trademark style. “Tea?”

It’s hard to believe two decades have passed since she made her debut. The 
original Tomb Raider was a smash hit, selling more than 7.5m copies. It 
received widespread acclaim for its unique offering of atmospheric 
environments, intelligent puzzles, fluid controls and giant breasts. The star 
of the show was the game’s athletic and enigmatic main character – for whom 
fame came as something of a shock.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftomb-raider-lara-croft-20-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc68e1f87b35477ec3dfe4787d18f38e507954e20%2F0_165_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20home%20with%20Tomb%20Raider's%20Lara%20Croft%3A%20'There%20was%20probably%20too%20much%20murder'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftomb-raider-lara-croft-20-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20home%20with%20Tomb%20Raider%27s%20Lara%20Croft%3A%20%27There%20was%20probably%20too%20much%20murder%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftomb-raider-lara-croft-20-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc68e1f87b35477ec3dfe4787d18f38e507954e20%2F0_165_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Lara as she looked a decade ago. Photograph: HO/REUTERS 
“I’m quite a private person,” says Lara, sitting cross-legged on her rug, made 
from the skins of black panthers she slaughtered in her first adventure. “At 
the Swiss finishing school I went to, we were taught to be demure and reserved. 
That’s why I barely say anything in the first few games, apart from ‘No’ and 
‘Argh’.

“Then suddenly, there were paps outside my house. Teenage girls would turn up 
on my doorstep wearing turquoise vests stuffed with water balloons. I couldn’t 
even walk round Waitrose without someone asking me where to find the second 
rusty key in the tomb of Tihocan. It was very strange.”

Lara wasn’t just a popular video game character – she had become a cultural 
icon. If there was one moment that marked her transition into the mainstream 
consciousness, it was her appearance on thecover of hip magazine The Face 
<http://65.media.tumblr.com/dedf0275cc3e33b62692a9a9a38fd7fc/tumblr_ne3t55HpZY1rfy3d2o9_500.jpg>
 in June 1998.

“Yes, that felt like a big deal,” she says. “I mean, look at the other names 
on that cover – pioneering cultural trailblazers of the age like Gillian 
Anderson and Melinda Messenger. No mainstream magazine had even put a game 
character on the front before. I heard they could have had Natalie Imbruglia 
that month. It’s crazy.”

A raft of Tomb Raider sequels followed, taking Lara to locations as exotic as 
Tibet, Atlantis and Cornwall. Today, the spoils of these adventures are 
casually displayed around her tastefully decorated home. The Dagger of Xian 
resides on an Ikea Expedit, while the Amulet of Horus hangs in the downstairs 
toilet, and the Spear of Destiny is used to prop open the lounge door. Thor’s 
hammer, Mjolnir, lies abandoned next to a giant hole in the hallway. (“I was 
trying to fix a loose floorboard,” shrugs Lara.)

But while Croft Manor is littered with these physical reminders of Lara’s 
career highlights, there have been low points, too. When I bring up 2003 flop
Angel of Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2003/aug/02/comment.games>, a shadow 
crosses her face, and I nervously think back to the fate of that Nespresso 
machine.

“I know it was all the rage at the time, but I think introducing stealth was a 
mistake,” she says. “And the locations were too mundane. Players liked it when 
I was riding motorbikes and shooting tigers in the Bolivian jungle. They 
absolutely did not want to see me arguing with mutant Geordies in a disused 
tube station.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzqcJSMtonKI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzqcJSMtonKI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzqcJSMtonKI&media=>
Angel marked the first and only appearance of potential love interest Kurtis 
Trent. Lara is coy about the nature of their relationship – as she is about her 
romantic history in general.

“Kurtis meant well, but in the end I had to tell him it was never going to 
work,” says Lara. “He was always losing things – there were so many pockets on 
those bloody combat trousers, he couldn’t ever remember where he’d put his 
keys, or his wallet, or his ridiculous giant ninja star. It was really 
annoying.”

Trousers can’t have been the only factor in the failure of their relationship. 
So what was the real reason Lara rejected Kurtis? Did he struggle to live in 
the shadow of such a strong, powerful woman? Or was she reluctant to compromise 
her fierce attachment to a fully independent existence?

“It was his beard,” she says. “I mean, it was just rubbish, wasn’t it? Like a 
sort of pixie’s minge.” Fair enough.

Despite its failings, Angel didn’t mark the end of Lara’s career by any means. 
She made a triumphant return in 2006 withLegend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2006/feb/23/games.newmedia>, which was 
followed by the successfulUnderworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/nov/21/tomb-raider-underworld-lara-croft>
 and blockbuster remake Anniversary. But just like other trendsetting icons, 
such as Madonna or Peter Andre, Lara has always looked for ways to reinvent 
herself and stay relevant. So in 2013, the series got a reboot, with a game 
simply titledTomb Raider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/mar/01/tomb-raider-video-game-review>
.

This offering aimed to take the franchise in a sophisticated new direction, 
telling Lara’s origins story, explaining her motivations and revealing her more 
human, vulnerable side. It did this by having her violently murder loads of 
people within the first four minutes.

“I’m proud of that game. It was time for the series to mature, to move on,” 
she says. “But yes, there was probably a bit too much murder.”

Following the reboot, and 2016 follow-up Rise of the Tomb Raider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/11/rise-of-the-tomb-raider-review-lara-croft>
, a whole new generation is discovering Lara Croft. I envy them that thrill as 
I think back to the first time I encountered her, 20 years ago. I have yet to 
meet a female gamer of around my age (young 39) who does not remember the 
original series as a momentous and formative part of their gaming history, and 
even their personal development. It was as influential during my own journey 
from girl to woman as other cultural touchstones such as The Bell Jar, The 
Female Eunuch, andJoey from Blossom <https://youtu.be/UyE7pw3vKhE>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftomb-raider-lara-croft-20-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6890b05afcd00af958c76838ddff4ff37c5a66ec%2F86_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20home%20with%20Tomb%20Raider's%20Lara%20Croft%3A%20'There%20was%20probably%20too%20much%20murder'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftomb-raider-lara-croft-20-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20home%20with%20Tomb%20Raider%27s%20Lara%20Croft%3A%20%27There%20was%20probably%20too%20much%20murder%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftomb-raider-lara-croft-20-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6890b05afcd00af958c76838ddff4ff37c5a66ec%2F86_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Lara meeting a fan in Rise of the Tomb Raider Photograph: Handout 
However, as significant as Lara’s presence in games was (and remains), two 
decades on she is still the only truly iconic female character out there. 
During the same period we’ve seen the rise to fame ofSolid Snake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/07/metal-gear-solid-everything-you-need-to-know-about-entire-series>
,Master Chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/12/halo-master-chief-collection-review>
,Nathan Drake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/07/nathan-drake-uncharted-4-naughty-dog>
 and many more male heroes. So where are their female equivalents?

“They may not be receiving the recognition they deserve, but there are women 
doing great work out there,” says Lara. “Look at Ellie fromThe Last of Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/17/last-of-us-left-behind-review>
, or Faith fromMirror’s Edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/06/mirrors-edge-catalyst-review-ea-dice>
, or ... Ellie fromThe Last of Us. What about that one in Street Fighter with 
the spinning knickers kick? Yes, there is probably room for more.”

In the meantime, at least we have Ms Croft. And she’s never looked better, 
thanks to the latest title’s high definition graphics, incredibly realistic 
animations, and breasts of a size that could feasibly belong to an actual human 
in real life without making them topple over. But is she still the same Lara on 
the inside?

“I think so. Where’s he put the bloody milk?” she says, rummaging in the 
fridge. “Sorry - I locked the butler in the walk-in freezer again for a laugh. 
Never gets old.

“Anyway. Yes, I’m still motivated by the same things – the desire to explore, 
to discover, to pilfer rare artefacts that do weird stuff. If I get to do a bit 
of murder along the way, and perhaps evade a man with a dodgy foreign accent 
and a suspicious hat, so much the better.”

So where will Lara’s taste for adventure take her next? The mysterious deserts 
of Egypt? The icy wastelands of Antarctica? Some long-forgotten temple in the 
heart of the Cambodian jungle?

“I’m off to Argos,” she says. “I need a new Nespresso machine.”

 * Ellie Gibson can currently be seen on Dara O Briain’s Go 8 Bit 
<http://dave.uktv.co.uk/shows/dara-o-briains-go-8-bit/>, on Dave TV. She tours 
as one half of comedy actThe Scummy Mummies <http://www.scummymummies.com/>.  