
Poor Christmas sales of the computer games Alien Resurrection, Aladdin and the 
Emperor's New Groove as well as a delays in signing deals with publishing 
companies yesterday forced software developer ArgonautGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> to issue a profits warning for 
the year to July.

Company broker Beeson Gregory now expects the company to go into the red by 
£3m, against an earlier forecast of £800,000 pretax profits. More communication 
with the City about the unlikelihood of selling the new games might have 
alleviated the downside but yesterday the shares crashed to 24p yet ended off 
2p at 29p.

The recovery was boosted by Beeson's new forecast for the current year, to 
July 2002, when profits are expected to hit £4m, double original forecasts and 
buoyed by the imminent sale of three more games titles to large electronic 
publishing houses - for greater sums than originally expected.

Argonaut would typically receive £1.5 m for games such as Malice and Kung Fu 
Story; the three in the pipeline are likely to net £2.5m-3m apiece.

The company's shares were also bolstered by the appointment of former Virgin 
Interactive Entertainment director Joss Ellis, who will inject publishing and 
games development experience into the company which floated 19 months ago at 
90p and 16 months ago was worth 105p a share.

Argonaut has high hopes for the games version of blockbuster novel Harry 
Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, and some reckon that the 2002 estimates may 
be shy given the cult status of the books and imminent release of the movie.

Argonaut is financially solid, with some £15m in the bank. The company raised 
£18m as it took a public listing. It has an enterprise value of £10m and its 
price rating of three times earnings for 2002 is substantially below that of 
sector rival Eidos with a 17 times rating. A speculative buy.
 