
This week’s episode of Donald Glover’s auteur dramedy, Atlanta 
<http://www.fxnetworks.com/shows/atlanta/episodes>, saw his character Earn 
spend most of the show’s 25 minutes trying to catch a Nigerian club manager who 
kept using elaborate escape routes (including a rotating wall) to avoid paying 
an appearance fee to Paper Boi, Earn’s rapper client.

As well as the farcical cat-and-mouse chase, the episode also included a 
postmodern deconstruction of “the club”, with its arbitrary rules, VIP area 
etiquette and wristband color-coding system. Like most of Atlanta’s first 
season (it’s been renewed for a second), within a few minutes of sitting down 
to watch you become aware you’re entering a world that looks unlike anything 
else on TV.

Atlanta star Brian Tyree Henry: if Trump gets elected 'it's going to be Mad 
Max'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/atlanta-brian-tyree-henry-tv-fx-black-culture>
Atlanta is what television looks like when writers and creative teams are 
allowed to take risks. Kenya Barris has consistently managed to push things 
right up to the line onBlack-ish 
<https://twitter.com/black_ishABC?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, while making a fundamentally relatable sitcom for a broad base of American 
viewers. What Glover and Atlanta offer is different. Before the series aired 
Glover said he wasn’t thinking about getting renewed: if he only had 10 
episodes then so be it, this was going to be his uncompromising look at life. 
That’s what he’s delivered after years of development. There’s no real 
narrative structure in Atlanta. There’s the weapons charge hanging over Paper 
Boi – the rapper played by Brian Tyree Henry, whom Earn manages.


Before the club episode came BAN, a standalone episode which lampooned BET 
<http://www.bet.com/>, self-satisfied academics and the notion of transracialism
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/16/transracial-definition-destructive-rachel-dolezal-spokane-naacp>
. The week before that Vanessa, Earn’s on and off again girlfriend, had a whole 
episode dedicated to her where she went out for dinner with a friend, had her 
lifestyle and aspirations questioned, smoked weed then tried to beat a drug 
test the following day by strapping a condom filled with baby’s pee to her leg.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fatlanta-donald-glover-show-example-young-black-writers-creative-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa97b532359c83744e612b41b7b97e172f3cbaf7e%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Atlanta%3A%20Donald%20Glover's%20show%20is%20the%20smartest%20%E2%80%93%20and%20funniest%20%E2%80%93%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fatlanta-donald-glover-show-example-young-black-writers-creative-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Atlanta%3A%20Donald%20Glover%27s%20show%20is%20the%20smartest%20%E2%80%93%20and%20funniest%20%E2%80%93%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fatlanta-donald-glover-show-example-young-black-writers-creative-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa97b532359c83744e612b41b7b97e172f3cbaf7e%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 BAN: Alano Miller as Franklin Montague, Mary Kraft as Deborah Holt, Brian 
Tyree Henry as Alfred Miles. Photograph: FX Networks/Courtesy Everet/RE 
Race and its implications are omnipresent in the show before Glover brings 
certain aspects to the forefront. There was the N-word debacle in the first 
episode, in which Earn’s white friend casually dropped the N-bomb in his 
presence – then wouldn’t dare do it in front of other black people. The BEN 
episode included a scathing critique ofthe Rachel Dolezal case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/13/rachel-dolezal-i-wasnt-identifying-as-black-to-upset-people-i-was-being-me>
 in which a black teenager claimed to identify as a middle-aged white man 
called Harrison – then was unveiled as an anti-gay marriage transphobe.

Perhaps the smartest example of Atlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/atlanta> taking on race was the 
episode where Justin Bieber is depicted as a black teenager. He turns up at a 
charity basketball game, knocks over refreshments, gets into a fight and says 
he’s found religion while being embraced by fans and the media. When Paper Boi 
asks why this is accepted he’s told to play his part – that of the heel to 
Bieber’s babyface. Yes, it’s farcical but underneath the comedy there’s a harsh 
truth: a black entertainer who acted like Bieber would not have a career, and 
rappers are pigeonholed regardless of who they are. It’s subtle but pointed, 
knowing without being too self-satisfied, and uncomfortable viewing for some.

Moral judgments are few and far between. When Vanessa confesses to smoking 
weed after the baby pee plan blows up in her face, she gets fired – but not 
before her boss confesses that most of the faculty smokes weed. The shooting in 
the first episode is background noise rather than the story arc that drives the 
action. As with Seinfeld there’s no hugging and no learning, and no need to 
present the mistakes of young black people as fatal errors rather than simple 
rites of passage.

This approach has been rewarded: the show became the highest-rated premiere of 
any basic-cable primetime scripted debut in more than three years among the 
coveted 18-45 age bracket. For a show this experimental to pull in those kind 
of numbers, it’s clear there’s a desire to see work like this.

When you look at the directorial efforts of Ryan Coogler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/07/creed-director-ryan-coogler-marvel-black-panther>
 orIssa Rae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/11/issa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy>
 or the music ofDev Hynes <https://www.theguardian.com/music/dev-hynes>, Solange
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/30/solange-a-seat-at-the-table-a-stately-sprawling-celebration-of-black-identity>
,Young Thug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/08/young-thug-hits-bring-money-lil-wayne>
 andFrank Ocean  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean>there’s a 
thread that runs throughout: young people of color in the US creating work for 
and by them. Atlanta follows that tradition as another piece of pop culture 
that isn’t concerned with appealing to the mainstream. It’s happy to wait for 
the rest of the world to catch up.

 