
An attack on aid workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/south-sudan-aid-worker-rape-attack-united-nations-un>
 in South Sudan that left one person dead and in which NGO staff were assaulted 
and raped has broughtcalls for radical reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/23/enough-is-enough-its-time-to-protect-aid-workers>
, amid concerns that agencies are not doing enough to protect their staff.

Experts say the attack highlights far more widespread failings within the 
humanitarian industry, with some warning that not enough has been done to make 
humanitarian staff safe inSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> since the attack.

In early July, the South Sudan capital Juba was the scene of three days of 
heavy fighting between government forces loyal to Salva Kiir and supporters of 
Riek Machar, the former vice-president turned rebel leader. Aid workers and NGO 
staff living at a compound near the city were in “lock down” mode behind barbed 
wire fences and locked gates.

On 11 July between 80 and 100 soldiers shot their way into the compound. US 
contractor Jesse Bunch, who was shot and beaten in the attack, said the US 
embassy failed to let staff know how bad the violence was: “If somebody had 
told me how badly it was going on Wednesday [6 July] I would have been out of 
there.”


Several of the aid workers were raped, others were badly beaten, and some 
terrorised with mock executions. Local journalistJohn Gatluak was executed by 
the troops during the attack 
<http://internews.org/our-stories/project-updates/in-memory-john-gatluak-manguet-nhial>
, which lasted almost four hours.

An eye for an eye is the wrong response to attacks on humanitarians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/15/attack-terrain-south-sudan-to-attacks-on-humanitarians>
The UN peacekeeping force stationed less than a mile away failed to respond to 
desperate calls for help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/south-sudan-aid-worker-rape-attack-united-nations-un>
. Neither did embassies, including the US embassy. There has been significant 
discussion about this in the months since.

But individuals who knew Terrain - the compound where aid workers were living 
- say that the NGO escape plans had never relied on the UN coming to the rescue.

According to John (not his real name) a security expert who spoke to the 
Guardian on condition of anonymity, the plan was to seek shelter at the UN 
compound: “We had an exit strategy that you would go over the back fence and 
get to the UN by throwing blankets over the wire but ... during the attack 
there were troops everywhere.”

Now humanitarian experts say better communication and better risk management 
from the UN and from their own agencies and governments could have helped staff 
escape before the conflict escalated. They are concerned that not enough is 
being done to improve security even now.


Bunch, who was working as a private contractor for aid agency Management 
Systems International, says the US embassy failed to keep aid workers informed. 
“The problem is that the UN mandate is completely under resourced for what it 
is being asked to do,” he said. “It would have been nice if they had rescued us 
– but we didn’t really expect it.

There were systemic failures and also incredible naivety. It’s an information 
failure
Jesse Bunch 


 “There were systemic failures and also incredible naivety. It’s an 
information failure. At the UN and the US nobody has to warn the international 
community.


“The incredible naivety on the part of the humanitarian community is that they 
have this idea that because they are doing humanitarian work they will be safe, 
but that has been proven again and again not to be true.”

However, in response to claims that they had not shared critical information, 
a US State Department official told the Guardian that several messages had been 
passed to US citizens in South Sudan in the days leading up to the attack.

“The Department has no higher priority than the protection of US citizens 
overseas‎. On July 8th <https://southsudan.usembassy.gov/sm-07082016.html>, 
10th and 11th the United States issued emergency andsecurity messages for US 
citizens <https://southsudan.usembassy.gov/sm_071116.html> ... warning them of 
the deteriorating security situation in and around Juba. USAid ... was in 
frequent communication with its implementing partners on their status and 
location. Additionally [we] released a travel warning advising against travel 
to South Sudan and ... noted the ordered departure of non-emergency personnel 
from the Juba embassy.


“As we stated directly after the Terrain camp attack,‎ the United States 
condemns these horrific attacks and have consistently called for an end to 
attacks on civilians, UN peacekeepers, and humanitarian workers. We have 
pressed for the government to hold those responsible for this violence and 
other violence in early July that killed hundreds and displaced thousands.”

People had a false sense of protection ... The Terrain attack bust that myth
Anonymous aid worker 
 Bunch is worried that without significant changes to security, aid workers 
could be attacked again. “It’s two months after the attack and the security has 
not changed. That is a serious, serious thing. I’m in touch with people there, 
people are aware of these [security] problems but they are committed to what 
they do. They are naive and the organisations involved are naive. Anyone could 
carry out an attack.”

Another aid worker agreed that that despite the shock of the attack she had 
seen little change in the security measures of her organisation. Speaking to 
the Guardian anonymously, she said: “The Terrain attack, it had a huge 
reverberation. People had a false sense of protection ... The attack bust that 
myth. We have staff in Juba and that attack triggered a lot of internal 
discussion. It was seen as a watershed moment but as yet we haven’t changed the 
compound our staff are living in. I don’t believe we have taken any additional 
security steps.”

John, who was working in Juba earlier this year and knew the Terrain compound 
well, argues that security was taken very seriously by his own organisation but 
that plans could not withstand the increase in violence from armed groups.


“Hindsight is a wonderful thing. Security is never perfect and is always low 
down on the food chain in terms of financing and budgeting but [my 
organisation] had actually invested heavily in security. I was well paid, we 
had spent hundreds of thousands of dollars on hostile environment training and 
over $40,000 on physical measures. Terrain had CCTV, multiple gates. The safe 
room held for hours. Normally you would expect 15 to 20 minutes until the 
cavalry arrived.

How should the media report rape and sexual violence?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/19/how-should-the-media-report-and-sexual-violence>
“We know the army and police are involved in criminality but you don’t plan 
for 100 armed men coming into your compound. You are always working against 
probability, you can’t plan for every eventuality.”




Should NGOs consider pulling out? Bunch believes that “people should withdraw 
temporarily. Donors including the US should set minimal operating standards and 
we should negotiate with the South Sudan government that if [they] want aid to 
come in then we need heavy infrastructure.” But Deepmala Mahla, South Sudan 
country director at Mercy Corps, said she hoped that humanitarians would not 
consider leaving.

“I would be very worried and disheartened [if it was considered]. South Sudan 
is in need of assistance now more than ever. We are committed to South Sudanese 
men, women and children and for Mercy Corps South Sudan is a priority country, 
and our humanitarian spirit will be pained if essential aid is suspended or 
withdrawn for people in urgent need.”

But all are clear that the wider exposure to risk needs to be looked at 
carefully. “There is a widespread failure to protect staff,” saysAdam Childs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/may/05/staying-safe-humanitarian-work>
, an expert in NGO risk. “I ask people in the field ‘What is the basis for your 
safety if you don’t use guns?’ They say ‘Well, they don’t want to hurt us.’ 
[So] I ask how are you measuring that acceptance? Do you do any data collection 
on your basic security? The answer is no. But, do you count paperclips? Oh yes, 
they got that.”

The Terrain incident raises the issue of attacks on humanitarians. “It is 
imperative that humanitarian organisations are granted free, safe, and 
unhindered humanitarian access, to reach all people in need, wherever they are,”
said United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator Stephen O’Brien after the 
attack in South Sudan 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=54622#.WACjmTYrLAw>. 

Safety for aid workers has become an increasingly serious issue for the 
industry. Last year, in a landmark case a court found the Norwegian Refugee 
Council guilty of gross negligencein a case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/05/steve-dennis-court-case-waves-aid-industry>
 brought by one of its former staff members Steve Dennis. The indiscriminate 
targetting of humanitarians and medics in Syria and Yemen has also raised 
concerns.

We are continuing to report on the implications of the Terrain attack and aid 
worker safety in general; you can contact us confidentially at 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com with “Aid worker safety” in the subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 