
When Madiba Guillaume Olivier was a boy in the bustling city of Douala, 
Cameroon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cameroon>, he was the envy of all 
his friends. His father owned a video rental shop, and that gave him access not 
only to the latest movies, but also to video games; when a new title came in, 
he would rush around the neighbourhood and invite all his mates over to play. 
“I had the classic Final Fantasy 7 on PC, and I had a Nintendo, PS1, PS2 and 
Sega Mega Drive,” he lists over a Skype call. “I played a lot of Metal Gear 
Solid, Mass Effect and Sim City. I think my all time favourite was Total War 2 
... but I only had one controller so we all had to be very patient.”

There was one thing he noticed about the games he played, however: “There 
weren’t a lot that depicted African heroes”. He’s right of course. Search 
around and you’ll findElena <http://streetfighter.wikia.com/wiki/Elena>, a 
warrior princess from Street Fighter III, the ruthless Ugandan arms dealer
Drebin 893 <http://metalgear.wikia.com/wiki/Drebin_893> in Metal Gear Solid 4, 
the reincarnated warriorZasalamel <http://soulcalibur.wikia.com/wiki/Zasalamel> 
from Soul Calibur … it’s not a huge or varied roster. When Africa itself has 
been depicted in mainstream games (beyond the many safari and wildlife hunting 
sims), it is often through the lens of war and horror: Far Cry 2 depicted 
gangland battles in a Malaria ravaged wasteland, while Resident Evil 5 provoked 
controversy for seemingly portraying a colonialist view of the continent as a 
place of threatening savagery. None of these really explore African mythology, 
anime or music. “There are not a lot of African creators,” says Olivier. “It 
seems like creators focus on white heroes because they are white. They create 
heroes like them”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448566863797%2F0da2bc97-1e53-4736-bd41-a151cc70b46a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aurion%3A%20the%20mission%20to%20create%20African%20video-game%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aurion%3A%20the%20mission%20to%20create%20African%20video-game%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448566863797%2F0da2bc97-1e53-4736-bd41-a151cc70b46a-1020x612.jpeg>
 Aurion is a 2D scrolling adventure which fuses the brawler and role-playing 
genres Photograph: Kiro'o Games 
But Olivier wanted to changed that, he wanted to rewrite the possibilities of 
the games industry in Central Africa. In 2003, he and a group of friends who 
all studied software development together at the University of Yaoundé 1, got 
together to start making games. While working as website developers, they 
taught themselves game design, mostly by becoming active in the French online 
role playing game community,Oniro <http://www.rpg-maker.fr/>. In their spare 
time they started work on their dream project, Aurion: Legacy of the Kori-Odan, 
an epic role-playing adventure involving two young monarchs, hero Enzo 
Kori-Odan and his wife, Erine Evou, who find themselves usurped by his evil 
brother-in-law and must fight to reclaim their kindgom.

The game takes its basic story from African myth and tradition, but fuses it 
with science fiction. The world of world of Auriona exists 10,000 years in the 
future on a place far from Earth, where they speak an ancient ancestral 
language. In Madiba’s own words, the concept is simple: “We’re creating our own 
African fantasy.”

There were many power cuts while we were making the game ... We’ve had to 
become masters of hitting ctrl and s
Madiba Guillaume Olivier 
Madiba and his team are not the first African developers to represent the 
continent in their games. Nigerian studioMaliyo <https://www.maliyo.com/> 
specialises in casual smartphone titles with African themes, while Kenyan team
Leti Arts <http://letiarts.com/>, has titles like Africa’s Legends which adorn 
simple puzzlers with local myths and narratives. It’s mobile games, rather than 
console or computer titles that have really taken off here as phones are cheap, 
portable and ubiquitous: estimates suggest the continent has around 600m mobile 
subscribers. However, South Africa has a burgeoning PC-based indie scene, 
celebrated recently by aJohannesburg spin-off of Berlin’s AMAZE festival 
<http://www.amaze-johannesburg.co.za/> – this year it saw a modest hit in the 
form of pixel art shooterBroForce <http://www.freelives.net/broforce-game> by 
Cape Town-based studio Free Lives.

It is Aurion, though, that’s really captured the attention of the wider 
industry. In 2011, the team started work on the game fulltime, forming their 
studio, Kiro’o Games. In early February of this year, they put the game into 
Greenlight, the section of major PC games distribution site Steam where new 
titles look for votes to get into the main store. Within weeks it succeeded. 
Then in September the company launcheda crowd-funding campaign on Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/plugindigitallabel/aurion-legacy-of-the-kori-odan/>
, looking for €40,000 euros to continue development – it made almost €50,000. 
Now, the game looks set to be released across the globe next year.

Considering Aurion started as an amateur project with artwork bootlegged from 
other games, it is now an extraordinarily beautiful 2D adventure, combining 
combat, exploration and role-playing elements. In this respect, Aurion is a 
reflection of the games that Olivier grew up playing. The difference is that, 
these games have now been reinterpreted through an African gaze.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448557156460%2Fd1c7ddc9-f14f-4afa-ae2b-bcb5cc8bfd6f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aurion%3A%20the%20mission%20to%20create%20African%20video-game%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aurion%3A%20the%20mission%20to%20create%20African%20video-game%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448557156460%2Fd1c7ddc9-f14f-4afa-ae2b-bcb5cc8bfd6f-1020x612.jpeg>
 A sketch of the game’s feline fighting moves. Photograph: Kiro'o Games 
Although the fantasy world is tinged with Japanese details, the identity is 
distinctly African. The mesmerising visuals are bright and rich (Madiba 
employed local comic book artists and landscape painters), while the soundtrack 
is a mix of local Bikutsi – a traditional intense dance music genre developed 
by Yaoundé locals – and modern compositions. “The link with our ancestors is 
really present,” says Madiba. “We have a great sense of family inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, so that’s something we put in the 
game.”

The team also wanted include local tribal techniques in the fighting sequences 
– though that proved tricky. “Africa doesn’t have a history of recording its 
martial arts, like the Shaolin in China, or Bushido in Japan,” explains Madiba. 
“So we created our own feline move-set for the hero, based on our anime 
culture. We really wanted to bring an ‘instinct’ style to the moves.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448555765738%2Fdbf1860f-9609-4218-8a4c-b732ccb8f40e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aurion%3A%20the%20mission%20to%20create%20African%20video-game%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aurion%3A%20the%20mission%20to%20create%20African%20video-game%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faurion-kiroo-games-cameroon-african-kickstarter-video-game-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448555765738%2Fdbf1860f-9609-4218-8a4c-b732ccb8f40e-1020x612.jpeg>
 When the electricity supply cuts off, the work doesn’t finish; the team just 
heads outside for a brainstorming session. Photograph: Kiro'o Games 
Kiro’o Games <http://kiroogames.com/en/> is now a team of 20, working hard 
toward the game’s spring 2016 launch date. In a country where internet 
bandwidth is severely restricted and electricity supplies can be intermittent, 
they’ve had to overcame logistical difficulties alien to most Western studios. 
“There were a lot of power cuts while we were making the game, which is just a 
way of life here,” explains Madiba. “When I was younger, it was my African 
mother telling me to stop playing that resulted in many unfinished games. Now 
it’s the energy problems ... We’ve had to become masters of hitting ctrl and s.”


Due to these restrictions there’s a chance that, although the game is set for 
a release across European and US markets, a game celebrating Africa may not be 
playable by Africans. Madiba hopes this is not the case. “If there’s good 
recognition ,we will have money from across the continent,” he says. “Then we 
may attract partners interested in local distribution. We are the first people 
to do what we’re doing, so our aim is to make good games above anything else.”
 Arthur Zang explains the Cardio Pad - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2014/nov/27/cardio-pad-africa-cardiac-medicine-arthur-zang>
He’s right – for a culture with such a rich history of oral narratives, it’s 
strange to consider that Aurion is one of the first homegrown games to really 
explore it. The project represents an interesting part of Africa’s 
technological revolution, which for the most part is creating solutions to 
local problems. Other recent projects – likeGiftedMom 
<http://www.giftedmom.org/>, an increasingly popular local app that sends 
healthcare to pregnant women, or Cardio Pad, a touch-screen medical tablet that 
enables heart examinations such as the electrocardiogram (ECG) to be performed 
at remote locations – are more obvious in their social purpose. But Kiro’o, and 
the ascendent African game industry as a whole, is an important part of a 
blooming tech startup culture, driven by young people, and increasingly funded 
by angel investors, large corporations and government enterprise schemes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4d2bXaDJ1Rg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4d2bXaDJ1Rg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4d2bXaDJ1Rg&media=>
So could Enzo Kori-Odan be a hero in more ways than one, helping to herald a 
new dawn of African game development? There is staggering potential here, 
considering that Africa has the biggest youth population in the world, with 
approx 200 million people aged between 15 and 24.

Olivier certainly hopes to encourage a younger generation be part of the 
technological revolution, urging them to get inside the games they love. “My 
dream is to become publisher in Africa,” he says. “We want to see Africans 
playing games designed by Africans, and to create universal stories with 
universal wisdom. This is just the beginning.”
 