
Austin Reed is returning to the high street seven months after the tailoring 
specialist collapsed into administration with theloss of 1,000 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/31/austin-reed-to-cut-1000-jobs-after-administrators-fail-to-find-buyer>
.

The retail chain’s 120 stores closed in June, but new owner Edinburgh Woollen 
Mill is investing £100m in a relaunch.

Edinburgh Woollen Mill Group bought the brand when it only had a handful of 
concessions. It plans to open 50 Austin Reed stores by early 2018, including a 
London flagship. The brand’s website has relaunched and the first new stores 
are expected to open before the end of this year.

The Country Casuals and Viyella brands, which the group bought along with 
Austin Reed, will be relaunched in Edinburgh Woollen Mills stores early next 
year.

Austin Reed’s customers included Winston Churchill and Elizabeth Taylor in its 
glory days, but the retail chain struggled for several years beforegoing into 
administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/upmarket-tailor-austin-reed-to-go-into-administration>
 in April.

While the menswear market is growing faster than womenswear, Austin Reed has 
faced rising competition from Ted Baker, Reiss, Marks & Spencer and a revived 
Moss Bros.

The planned store openings were announced as Edinburgh Woollen Mill, which is 
privately owned by theCumbria-based entrepreneur Philip Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/feb/24/knight-comfy-cardy-rescue-peacocks>
, reported a 2.4% rise in sales to £576.3m in the year to 27 February. The 
group, which also owns fashion retailer Peacocks, homeware chain Ponden Mill 
and golfing brand ProQuip, said pre-tax profits before exceptional items 
increased by 2.4% to £90.9m. All of the group’s brands had achieved sales 
growth at established stores, it said.

The company said it planned to open a total of 200 stores by early 2018. In 
the past year, the groupopened 43 stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/03/edinburgh-woollen-mill-new-stores-profit-rise-jane-norman-peacocks-sales>
 in the UK and Ireland.

Steve Simpson, the group commercial director of Edinburgh Woollen Mill, said: 
“By focusing on quality and giving customers exceptional value for money and 
positive customer service, we have continued to grow despite increased 
competition.

“With the addition of Austin Reed, which we acquired earlier this year, as 
well as Country Casuals and Viyella, we aim to continue this organic growth, 
while always being ready to respond to other opportunities as they arise.”
 