
The Australian economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy>
 has completed 25 years without a recession after the national accounts showed 
that the economy grew 3.3% in the year to June.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, trumpeted the 
result and described it as “tribute to every Australian who has gone out there, 
gone to work, got a job, that is running or has started a business”.

But Wednesday’s figures showed that growth in the June quarter had halved to 
0.5% compared with the March quarter, and theAustralian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
said consumer and government spending were propping up other areas of the 
economy.

“Growth in the June quarter was driven by domestic final demand, which rose 
0.6%, supported by ongoing growth in household and public consumption,” the ABS 
said.


The economy may be growing but it sure doesn't feel that way to most of us | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/06/the-economy-may-be-growing-but-it-sure-doesnt-feel-that-way-to-most-of-us>
At a media conference in Canberra, Morrison said public final demand had been 
boosted by the government listing hepatitis C drugs on the pharmaceutical 
benefits scheme and the $180mprocurement of Chinook helicopters 
<http://australianaviation.com.au/2015/12/australia-set-to-acquire-three-more-ch-47f-chinooks/>
.

Final household consumption grew 0.2% in the June quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms.

Morrison said he was particularly concerned about the weakness of household 
consumption, describing the figure as “well below what we have seen for the 
last few quarters”.

“It tells us that we have to be very mindful of the sensitivity of the economy 
in the circumstances that exist globally,” he said.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, said Labor welcomed the 
headline result and the record 25 consecutive years of growth. But he said 
Australians would be “concerned” that the rate of growth had halved and the 
remainder was “largely the result of government spending”.

Economists noted that Australia’s 100 straight quarters of growth since the 
last recession ended in 1991 showed that it was closing in on the record 103 
consecutive quarters of growth recorded by the Netherlands.

With annual growth at a seasonally adjusted 3.3% in the June quarter, the 
economy was growing at its fastest in four years, said CommSec’s chief 
economist, Craig James.

“Annual growth has lifted to four-year highs. Australia has now notched up 100 
quarters without a recession,” he said. “The Netherlands holds the record for 
the longest expansion at 103 quarters. Over the next year Australia should pick 
up the gold medal for the longest economic expansion of a developed economy.

“Inflation stands at 1%. Interest rates stand at 1.5%. Unemployment stands at 
5.7%. The mining construction boom may be over, but it has been replaced by a 
housing construction boom. There is much to like and celebrate about 
Australia’s economy.”

The ABS said compensation of employees rose by a modest 0.5% in the June 
quarter to be 3.1% higher through the year. It followsslow growth in number of 
hours worked (0.7%) and the wage price index 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/aug/18/wages-growth-is-at-record-lows-unless-youre-a-commonwealth-bank-ceo>
 (2.1%).


Morrison said Australia needed incomes to grow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/scott-morrison-hits-out-at-taxed-nots-and-warns-of-recession-risk>
, not because of a wages explosion, but “off the basis of improved growth in 
the economy and improved productivity”.

“We want to see household incomes lift. We want to see company profits lift.”

Asked how the government could help boost incomes, Morrison nominated asset 
write-offs for small businesses, competition policy, tax cuts, startups and the 
innovation agenda.

“It is no one thing, it is a product of economic policy which is designed to 
try and get regulation off the back of business, to have more competitive tax 
regime to enable them to get ahead.”

What a turn-up for the books: a big spending, big taxing Liberal party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/what-a-turn-up-for-the-books-a-big-spending-big-taxing-liberal-party>
Other features of the accounts included flat investment, where continued 
reduction in engineering construction in the mining sector was offset by growth 
in public investment.


The ABS said international trade detracted from growth in the quarter owing to 
strong growth in imports and a slowing in the rate of growth in exports.
The terms of trade growth of 2.3% in seasonally adjusted terms was the first 
increase since December 2013, it said.

Asked how the figures would impact the budget, Morrison said he would update 
the projections in the middle of the financial year, but noted commodity prices 
were “very consistent with what [they were] at the time of the budget”.

Both revenue growth and expenditure cuts were contributing to the long-term 
aspiration to balance the budget, he said.

“The percentage of revenue as a share of the economy is projected to increase 
... at a greater rate than expenditure as a share of the economy is projected 
to fall.”


He said this showed revenue growth was contributing to budget repair but it 
was not doing so due to tax rises.

Morrison said the government could not control some factors contributing to 
revenue, such as the terms of trade, but could control its expenditure.

He warned that the ratings agencies were not convinced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/moodys-adds-to-standard-and-poors-warning-about-credit-rating-downgrade>
 “that this parliament is actually going to support expenditure restraint”.

The Australian dollar slipped slightly on the ABS announcement, falling to 
US76.56c from a morning high of US76.89c.
 