
Jobseekers are reporting high levels of bullying and safety concerns about job 
agency providers, according to a report that describes the jobseeker program as 
“deeply punitive” and in need of a complete overhaul.

The Australian Unemployment <https://www.theguardian.com/society/unemployment> 
Workers Union (AUWU) national advocacy hotline report, launched on Sunday, 
reveals numerous examples of dissatisfaction with the welfare services provided 
by private agencies on behalf of the federal government.

The report drew together a sample of 170 unemployed callers who contacted the 
advocacy hotline seeking advice about unemployment services.

Centrelink could be sued over 'privatisation' of job schemes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/centrelink-could-be-sued-over-privatisation-of-job-schemes>
The federal government has contracted private companies to deliver welfare 
services and provide job agency services. In some cases they haveerroneously 
penalised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/01/ill-or-injured-jobseekers-lose-welfare-if-they-cant-take-up-training-programs>
 applicants or cancelled welfare payments.

Of the callers surveyed by the AUWU, 52% raised concerns about job agency 
bullying, while 30% raised safety concerns about work for the dole programs.

The report said: “The AUWU is deeply concerned by the data gathered. The broad 
spectrum of issues poses serious questions regarding the quality of services 
being provided by job agencies.

“The data exposes not only the unscrupulous and punitive practises of job 
agencies, but also the failure of the Department of Employment to effectively 
regulate the industry and ensure that job agencies follow the relevant 
government deeds and guidelines.

“Alarmingly, there were little to no consequences for job agencies that failed 
to uphold the government’s rules.”

It included statements from jobseekers about the difficulties they have faced.

Blake Hourigan said that he was scared to attend work for the dole programs 
after a series of bad experiences with job placement providers. He said he had 
worked at a farm that involved building gardens, carpentry and brickwork; all 
areas he had no experience in.

“The health and safety rules or regulations were almost non-existent. It was a 
miracle that no one was seriously injured,” he said. “Although I do believe 
work for the dole or other activities to help get jobseekers ready for work is 
a great idea on paper, that was not the case in the experience I had during my 
time.”

“I would rather live on the streets than to be afraid everyday I go to work 
for the dole.”

The number of penalties imposed by job agencies on unemployed workers had 
increased by 50% in the past financial year, the report found, citing data from 
the Department of Employment.

Guardian Australia has previously reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/centrelink-could-be-sued-over-privatisation-of-job-schemes>
 that Centrelink could face legal action from jobseekers over penalties or 
abrupt suspensions of welfare payments imposed by private employment companies.

Australia does not have a welfare problem. We have a poverty problem | John 
Falzon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/australia-does-not-have-a-welfare-problem-we-have-a-poverty-problem>
The AUWU report calls for an investigation into the jobseeker program and 
warns of the risks of further deregulation.

“Given the dysfunctional and punitive nature of the employment services 
industry, the Coalition’s recent push to give job agencies unprecedented powers 
to penalise the unemployed is inappropriate and dangerous,” it said.

The department has been contacted for comment.
 