
Fremantle council’s move to hold citizenship ceremonies on its “culturally 
inclusive alternative” celebration to Australia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/fremantle-moves-australia-day-events-to-28-january>
 could be blocked by the federal government.

Ben Morton 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Senators_and_Members/Parliamentarian?MPID=265931>, the 
Liberal MP for Tangney, has called on the government to stop the council 
“politicising” the annual citizenship ceremony.

Alex Hawke 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Senators_and_Members/Parliamentarian?MPID=HWO>, the 
assistant minister for immigration, said he would write to the council on 
Friday to advise it that its ability to preside over citizenship ceremonies 
would be revoked if it was found to breach theAustralian Citizenship Ceremonies 
Code 
<https://www.border.gov.au/Citizenship/Documents/australian-citizenship-ceremonies-code.pdf>
.

Fremantle moves Australia Day events to 28 January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/fremantle-moves-australia-day-events-to-28-january>
But one Fremantle councillor, Dave Hume, told Guardian Australia that such an 
intervention would be “ludicrous” and “over the top”. Hume, the only councillor 
to vote against the change, said the council had decided only to stop funding 
fireworks onAustralia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day>.

He said the federal government now appeared to be attempting to distract the 
public from “their great big cock-up of everything else”.

“I think it’s over the top and I think it’s actually sad that something that 
was designed to actually be an inclusive event has proven to be so divisive,” 
Hume said. “I think if everyone stood back and took a deep breath, they would 
realise that things weren’t actually going to collapse and the roof wasn’t 
going to cave in.”

The council had planned to hold celebrations on 28 January, the new “One Day” 
celebration intended by the city of Fremantle as a “culturally inclusive 
alternative” for Australia Day.


 But Hawke said citizenship ceremonies should be “non-commercial, apolitical, 
bipartisan and secular” and he would also ask the council to restore the 
ceremony to 26 January.

“The government takes a very dim view of Fremantle council’s decision to 
cancel their Australia Day events on political grounds,” he said. “If Fremantle 
council is found to be in breach of the code, I have the power to revoke 
Fremantle council’s ability to preside over citizenship ceremonies, under the
Australian Citizenship Act 2007 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/aca2007254/>.”
 The letter in full from the Liberal MP, Ben Morton, to the assistant minister 
for immigration, Alex Hawke. 
Morton had expressed concern that new Australian citizens would be denied the 
“honour and privilege” of having their citizenship ceremony held on Australia 
Day. “Freo council needs to pull its head in, and focus on picking up the 
rubbish, fixing potholes and providing value to ratepayers,” he said.

“This is political correctness gone mad, I encourage anyone who wants to wear 
their Aussie flag shorts, green and gold caps and their thongs to head down to 
Freo on Australia Day and celebrate our national day. Just because the council 
doesn’t want to, doesn’t mean we can’t.

“Having your citizenship conferred to you on Australia Day is very special. 
The actions of Freo council will deny that very special occasion to our new 
citizens – it’s a disgrace.”


The city of Fremantle issued a statement late on Friday saying it had not yet 
received any letter from the federal government but believed its plans were 
fully compliant with citizenship laws.

The council had previously contacted the immigration department and was told 
there was no requirement to hold citizenship ceremonies on 26 January. “Many 
councils throughout Australia do not hold citizenship ceremonies on 26 January, 
or any other official events on that day,” the statement said.

When he announced the celebration on 25 November, Brad Pettitt, the mayor of 
Fremantle , said One Day acknowledged the fact that Australia Day “wasn’t a day 
of celebration for everybody”.


He said the council had heard “loud and clear” opposition to Australia Day 
from local Aboriginal communities.

Erik Jensen, the editor of the Saturday Paper, called for the rest of the 
country to follow suit 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/article/2016/11/25/freemantle-sparks-other-states-consider-changing-date-australia-day>
with a campaign to #ChangeTheDate.
 