
Beds are Burning is arguably the most resonantly subversive artistic gesture 
ever made by Australians. Released by the country’s biggest rock group just 
months before Australia marked, on 26 January 1988,the 200th anniversary of the 
first fleet’s arrival in Sydney 
<http://www.australiaday.org.au/australia-day/history/1988-the-bicentenary/>, 
it ensured that the dominant soundtrack of our bicentennial year would be a 
song which reminded that the country we were celebrating was founded on pillage 
and genocide.

 Beds are Burning is a brisk dispatch from geographical and moral places that 
Australians generally prefer not to visit – the immense emptiness of our 
outback, and the grim post-1788 history of Australia’s Indigenous people.

Diesel and Dust 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/classicalbum/cam-03-01/5136068>, 
the album from which Beds are Burning was drawn, was the result of Midnight 
Oil’s 1986Blackfella-Whitefella tour 
<http://www.niblock.com.au/products/strict-rules> of Indigenous communities 
with the mostly AboriginalWarumpi Band 
<http://www.neilmurray.com.au/wb_history.html> and Gondwanaland  
<http://www.ambientmusicguide.com/pages/G/gondwanaland.php>– the latter one of 
the few groups to have deployed the didgeridoo as a lead instrument.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DejorQVy3m8E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DejorQVy3m8E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DejorQVy3m8E&media=>
 Though Midnight Oil had never been politically reticent, they’d hitherto been 
more concerned with big-picture angst – environmental anguish, andthe nuclear 
paranoia which was the style at the time 
<http://www.midnightoil.com/music/red-sails-sunset>. They returned from the 
desert more determined to act locally than think globally. Diesel and Dust was 
a powerful, pleading rattle of the national conscience, and Beds are Burning 
essentially the album’s executive summary, suggesting to non-Indigenous 
Australia that the country “Belongs to them/Let’s give it back.” (Even allowing 
for the exigencies of clarity in protest song, this reference to fellow 
citizens as “them” is the only dud note it strikes).

Ironically, Diesel and Dust, by far Midnight Oil’s most specifically 
Australian album, became their biggest global hit; Beds are Burning did notably 
well in countries which had also acquired their territory at gunpoint, charting 
high in the United States, Canada and South Africa.

 Beds are Burning is a simple but deceptively clever piece of writing. In the 
couplet “The time has come/To say fair’s fair,” it pulls two powerful local 
triggers, evoking both the“It’s time” slogan  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9jykIqQxEOw>that ushered in the 1972 Labor 
government ofGough Whitlam, which made some overdue progress on Indigenous 
issues <http://www.whitlam.org/gough_whitlam/achievements/indigenous>, and the 
treasured Australian notion of the “fair go” 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/australians-value-a-fair-go-highest/2006/11/11/1162661949374.html>
. Its evocation of the outback, while as sparse and dry as the land itself, is 
also deft, juxtaposing the Anglo name of Kintore East with the Indigenous one 
of Yuendumu – and knowing that both will sound, to most of Midnight Oil’s 
fellow coast-hugging Australians, at once cosily familiar and utterly alien.

 Crucially, the music underpinning the bleak sentiment of Beds are Burning is 
anything but mournful. The song announces itself with a three-note trumpet 
fanfare (a thesis remains to be written about the fondness for brass of 
Australian post-punk groups – see also the Saints,Hunters and Collectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/25/hunters-and-collectors-throw-your-arms-around-me>
). It rests on a chugging bassline which builds to an instantly irresistible 
and unforgettable chorus which, as all great protest songs do, invites you 
either to agree with its premise, or satisfactorily explain to yourself why you 
don’t. Beds are Burning was an anthem written to drown out the anthem we were 
scheduled to be singing all the following year.

 For all that Diesel and Dust became the unofficial musical accompaniment to 
the bicentennial, it would take another 13 years for Beds are Burning to 
complete its triumph. At the closing ceremony of Sydney’s Olympic Games in 2000,
Midnight Oil played the song dressed in black outfits emblazoned in white with 
the word “sorry” 
<http://www.migrationheritage.nsw.gov.au/exhibition/objectsthroughtime/olympics/>
. I can’t have been alone in feeling weird that a performance of a song about 
Australia’s greatest shame inspired, in that context, a flicker of pride.
 