
Blue sea sparkled on the other side of the wetlands. The empty dirt path 
stretched towards it, through wild mallow flowers and nodding daisies. To the 
right, there was a small, empty beach, with a few rowing boats pulled up on the 
sand. Far to the left, a flock of flamingos were feeding at a bend in the 
lagoon. There was no one else around; no sounds except the wind and waves, and 
the faint gabble of the birds among the flowers.

It was hard to believe this was the Algarve – renowned for beach resorts and 
golf courses – but we came across nature reserves, like this one atRia de Alvor 
<http://www.algarvewildlife.com/reserves-riadealvor.php>, wherever we went.
Algarve map Sophie Cooke 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/travel_algarve/giv-12515gGhF5CnrQSzc/>
The drive west from Faro airport was easy and we sped along the fast 
toll-road. The route skirted the hilly interior, passing close to walled towns 
like Silves. We stopped off here, and walked up the lanes to the red, 
sprawling, Arab-built Castelo de Silves, before carrying on towards our 
destination: a small village north of Lagos, called Odiaxere, just a few 
kilometres from Ria de Alvor.

The old farm of Quinta da Alfarrobeira 
<https://www.facebook.com/Quinta-Alfarrobeira-Sustainable-Rural-Retreat-385758568163920/>
 (doubles from €45, self-catering,responsibletravel.com 
<http://www.responsibletravel.com/accommodation/406/algarve-holiday-accommodation>
) belongs to Dutch couple Inge Keizer and Theo Bakker. The quinta, whose name 
means “estate of the carob tree”, lies a mile outside the village, on top of a 
sandy hill. The new, brightly painted cottages are clustered among gardens full 
of herbs and lemon trees, with the odd chicken wandering around, and were 
designed by Theo himself. We got out of the car, and everything was tranquil. 
The landscape sprawled out below us in a wash of red earth and green fields. 
Birds flitted in and out of the olive trees and shadows drowsed around the 
swimming pool beneath the ancient carob tree.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4ae8ed36b655d7840436664213b7631cdae0171%2F0_130_1993_1196%2F1993.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there's%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there%27s%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4ae8ed36b655d7840436664213b7631cdae0171%2F0_130_1993_1196%2F1993.jpg>
 Quinta da Alfarrobeira 
We spent a happy week chilling in our three-storey cottage. We chopped veg 
from the market on our solid limestone counters, cooked local produce on the 
big range and ate at the candle-lit table or on the terrace. On a night-time 
walk, a barn owl glided low over our heads. By day, we walked across the 
estate, passing cattle, up to the brow of the hill above the sea.

Quinta da Alfarrobeira also made a good base for exploring. Starting at Cape 
St Vincent, we drove north through theCape St Vincent natural park 
<http://www.algarvewildlife.com/reserves-vincent.php>, which stretches all the 
way up the west coast of the Algarve. The route passed through quiet villages, 
likeVila do Bispo <http://www.viladobispouncovered.com/>, with its yellow and 
white houses, before the flower meadows gave way to deep valleys and pine 
trees. The village of Aljezur offersdonkey trekking 
<http://donkey-trekking-algarve.blogspot.co.uk/p/short-tours-1h30-to-1day.html>
, a good way to hike with small children: we stopped for lunch here. At 
Odeceixe, a little-visited bay in the northern Algarve, we explored a river 
inlet, walking between the sand spits and reams of purple and white African 
daisies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3d371a9a3044a776d998402dc3c06f879f6b2b9%2F50_0_5195_3119%2F5195.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there's%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there%27s%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3d371a9a3044a776d998402dc3c06f879f6b2b9%2F50_0_5195_3119%2F5195.jpg>
 Cape Saint Vincent. Photograph: Getty Images 
Back at Ria de Alvor, there’s a fantastic bird sanctuary just down the road 
called Cruzinha. Visiting theRocha Centre 
<http://www.arocha.org/en/a-rocha-portugal/> on a Thursday, it’s free weekly 
open day, we listened to a talk in English and had tea and cake in the garden. 
We watched the volunteers ringing and measuring goldfinches and warblers – a 
fascinating way to see wild birds very close up – then saw them fly off. The 
centre has beenfighting to stop the birds’ habitats from being developed 
<http://www.arocha.pt/news/2009/03/good-news-for-the-ria-de-alvor-portugal>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F349d6f18196fcde803ca87c15cdc97ef3ba87265%2F379_581_4936_2962%2F4936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there's%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there%27s%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F349d6f18196fcde803ca87c15cdc97ef3ba87265%2F379_581_4936_2962%2F4936.jpg>
 Silves, with its red castle. Photograph: Alamy 
For eating out, Churrasqueira Amores (Estrada Nacional 125, +351 282 798 417, 
no website), on Odiaxere’s main street, was by far the best place we tried. We 
feasted on piri-piri chicken – the best in the Algarve according to other 
diners – and plates of salad, for under a tenner each.

For our second week, we drove back east. We wanted to spend time in the Serra 
do Caldeirao, a range of small mountains (up to 589 metres) that create the 
Algarve’s natural border to the north. This terrain is only a half-hour drive 
from golf resorts such as those around Almancil, but seems to belong on another 
planet: wild, almost devoid of people (young families have all gone to the 
coast to work), with just a few old folk doing things in the old ways and 
welcoming visitors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70acb58fcd1687eff972c0b6b2da0f7128c74b3a%2F0_77_5436_3262%2F5436.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there's%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there%27s%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70acb58fcd1687eff972c0b6b2da0f7128c74b3a%2F0_77_5436_3262%2F5436.jpg>
 Church Igreja Matriz, Vila do Bispo, Sagres natural park. Photograph: Alamy 
Our first foray was a full-day honey tour organised by Portugal4U 
<http://www.portugal4u.pt/> (€60pp, including honey tasting, lunch and mountain 
trip). Diana, our guide, took us to meet a bee-keeper, Don Chumbhino, on the 
outskirts of Almancil. He showed us around his hive-making workshop and the 
outbuilding where his lovely raw honey is stored. We tasted varieties from the 
vats – heady orange blossom, rich carob, lavender, and thyme – and drank 
several shots ofmelosa, a honey-infused medronho, the local liquor made from 
the fruit of the strawberry tree. We stopped for lunch atFlor do Arneiro 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Flor-Do-Arneiro/1455520954683919> (Sitio 
Arneiro 260, +351 289 815 287) in Arneiro near Faro, a fine restaurant serving
cataplana (a dish of cuttlefish, clams and onions), where Don Chumbhino gave us 
some recipes for the dishes we were eating. Afterwards he drove us into the 
mountains, taking us along vertiginous dirt roads in his 4x4, to the places 
where he kept his hives. He and Diana (acting as his translator) told us about 
the plants we could see, their traditional uses, and how the cork oak trees 
were carefully harvested to keep them strong. We spotted buzzards, drank beer 
and herbal tea and snacked on chorizo, bread, and cake at the O Fortes cafe in 
the tiny mountain village of Parises near São Brás de Alportel. The cafe’s a 
lovely place run by two sisters, with cats dozing on the old armchairs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde82ba950b7e4c8ec258048526ceb8727fb2b45%2F0_0_4952_2972%2F4952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there's%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there%27s%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde82ba950b7e4c8ec258048526ceb8727fb2b45%2F0_0_4952_2972%2F4952.jpg>
 The Serra do Caldeirao mountains. Photograph: Alamy 
At Fonte da Benemola <http://www.algarvewildlife.com/walksc-benemola.php>, a 
natural spring, we walked (€55 for 1-3 people plus €8pp for picnic, guided trip 
withProActiveTur <http://www.proactivetur.pt/en/index.php>) along the side of 
the river to its source among the rocks, a 4km round-trip. Families of wild 
turtles sunbathed on the banks, among great thickets of bamboo filled with 
nightingales.

Our guesthouse, for this portion of the trip, was in Salir. Casa de Mae 
<http://www.casadamae.com/uk/index.html> (doubles from €60 B&B), has a pool 
with great hillside views and was spotlessly clean. Conveniently, it is not far 
from theVia Algarviana 
<http://www.viaalgarviana.org/index.php/the-track/?lang=en>, allowing us to 
leave the car and hike the stretch to Alte (16km), passing shuttered houses 
smothered in creepers in old, abandoned villages. Olive groves baked in the 
morning sun and the scent of orange blossom would suddenly take me unawares. 
The track twisted up and across a plateau of rock roses filled with birds. This 
is the landscape of thebarrocal, quite different to the serra. You can take a 
taxi back to Salir (about €15), orbook ahead to stay at different places along 
the Via Algarviana 
<http://www.viaalgarviana.org/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2015/06/VA-Guia-de-Campo.pdf>
, whichtraverses the Algarve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/11/portugal-algarve-way-walking-holiday>
. More adventurous types can take their time and tackle the whole path on foot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e8b2e7f78978199c3ef34bff83358c28fe095d8%2F0_252_5426_3257%2F5426.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there's%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there%27s%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e8b2e7f78978199c3ef34bff83358c28fe095d8%2F0_252_5426_3257%2F5426.jpg>
 Odeceixe. Photograph: Alamy 
We finished our trip with four days by the Ria Formosa wetlands 
<http://www.formosamar.com/en/ria-formosa#.V2EoDjYrJdA> at a chic new 
guesthouse,Casa Modesta <http://www.casamodesta.pt/en/place/> (doubles from 
€180 B&B). Lisbon architect Vânia Fernandes and her brother Carlos have 
redesigned their grandparents’ old fishing cottage as a contemporary place to 
stay. It uses elements of local architecture to create semi-private sun porches 
outside the ground floor rooms, and is the prototype of Casa Cha or “simple 
house”: Vânia’s philosophy of design.

We used this beautiful place to stay as a base for exploring the area, where 
fishing has thrived alongside abundant birdlife. In the port ofOlhão 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/may/09/algarve-portugal-relaxation-beach-holiday>
, we had espressos andpasteis in Cafe do Mercado (Avenida 5 de Outubro), in the 
tiny old market. We loved wandering around the fish market, a huge building 
echoing with the sound of a thousand purchases. We bought presents at the shops 
across the road – quality wool, cork and leather items – and had drinks at an 
upturned barrel outside a bar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcefc9e7f05adcc761430c7a4fde6b20fb5444730%2F637_48_3784_2270%2F3784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there's%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there%27s%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcefc9e7f05adcc761430c7a4fde6b20fb5444730%2F637_48_3784_2270%2F3784.jpg>
 Casa Modesta. Photograph: Joao Carmo Simoes 
A 237km-cycle route, Ecovia 
<http://www.everytrail.com/guide/ecovia-litoral-do-algarve>, runs along the 
coast of the whole of the Algarve from Vila Real de Santo António on the 
Spanish border to Cabo São Vicente, passing close by Casa Modesta. Carlos 
arranged cycle hire for us, so we could ride out on part of it across the salt 
flats to the village of Fuseta, 19km east of Faro. An onshore breeze cooled my 
face as we pedalled our bikes between banks of yellow flowers and sun-slabbed 
reflections of the wide blue sky.

Fuseta has shacks for somewhat pricey drinks and snacks by the quayside. We 
caught a ferry to a deserted island,Barreta 
<http://www.algarve-tourist.com/Faro/Ilha-Barreta-Island-Deserta-Deserted-Algarve.html>
, our bags full of lunch packed by Vânia. The Ria Formosa natural park has 
several islands, all of which were once bases for local fishermen. They’d store 
nets and sleep in huts there. The local authorities are in the process of 
clearing the fishing huts from the islands, with the result that these new, 
“deserted islands” as they call them, are a bit strange and dull. For the real 
experience, go to islands like Armona and Culatra, where fishing is still 
active (ferry timetable from Olhão atolhao.web.pt 
<http://www.olhao.web.pt/horariobarcos.htm>. Passeios Ria Formosa 
<http://www.passeios-ria-formosa.com/en/> operates tours from €12.50pp).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0facf148bbaeb9cf5830beb533ff4e64c6425e3c%2F0_330_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there's%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Authentic%20Algarve%3A%20there%27s%20more%20to%20the%20costa%20than%20golf%20and%20resorts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Falgarve-portugal-natural-mountains-beach-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0facf148bbaeb9cf5830beb533ff4e64c6425e3c%2F0_330_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
 Ria Formosa nature reserve. Photograph: Alamy 
Some evicted fishermen from the islands have had to resort to sleeping rough 
on the mainland. It is tragic that a vision of environmental tourism for the 
Ria Formosa has not found a way of including them, given the history of human 
unity with nature here.

As Carlos told us: “This is a place where you feel part of the landscape, 
because it is always moving. It is where the sea and the land are changing 
place.”

It’s a magical part of the world. A large part of its magic comes from the 
relationship that the fishermen have with it: it doesn’t (yet) feel artificial, 
but rather somewhere that people and nature have been able to get along, 
neither one having the upper hand.
• The trip and accommodation was provided by VisitAlgarve 
<http://www.visitalgarve.pt/?idioma=uk>, with the exception of Quinta da 
Alfarrobeira, provided byResponsible Travel Algarve 
<http://www.responsibletravel.com/accommodation/406/algarve-holiday-accommodation>
. Car rental was provided byAutoRent <http://www.autorent.pt/> 


Sophie Cooke is a novelist and poet. Her filmpoem Byland 
<http://www.naturalscotlandfilms.org.uk/byland.html> was commissioned for the 
Year of Natural Scotland
 