
Opec’s annual tour of the horizon, a publication called World Oil Outlook 
<http://www.opec.org/opec_web/en/publications/340.htm>, is not about 
predictions, says the group’s secretary general Abdalla Salem el-Badri in the 
introduction to this year’s edition. This is just as well since last year’s 
failed to inform us that the price of oil was about to halve.

The arrival of sub-$40-a-barrel oil has caused more than a few members of the 
cartel to splutter about the need to cut production to force prices higher. So 
far, Saudi Arabia isn’t listening.

The strategy is to keep pumping, apparently in the hope of forcing the US 
shale industry – whose impact Opec underestimated as late as 2011 – to curb 
production.

Non-Saudi members may therefore be alarmed that even the organisation’s own 
economists don’t exactly envisage US shale producers being forced to their 
knees.

Shell's slick take on BG merger cannot hide a poor deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/dec/22/shell-slick-bg-group-merger-cannot-hide-poor-deal>
On one hand, they note that production growth for so-called tight crude in the 
US and Canada has started to slow with cuts in investment. On the other, they 
say “the most prolific zones within some plays can break even at levels below 
2015 prices”.

Indeed, the projections show North American tight oil volumes increasing from 
4.4m barrels a day at present to 5.2m barrels in 2020. From a Saudi 
perspective, that forecast could be taken as yet another reason to keep pumping 
to protect Opec’s share of the market.

One of these years, lower levels of investment, which always follow lower 
prices, could produce a spike in prices and the report, rightly, warns of the 
danger. It suggests $10tn (£6.7tn) of investment will be needed between now and 
2040 and that the “right signals” – meaning higher prices – will be required.

But a spike in 2016? That is hard to imagine while Opec’s members squabble 
before the Saudis get their way.

Don’t hate the Game, hate the players
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fawash-with-oil-as-saudis-aim-to-take-the-fight-to-the-frackers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677b1f28a83efe53490749725710c9c053921b81%2F0_90_3452_2072%2F3452.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Awash%20with%20oil%20as%20Saudis%20aim%20to%20take%20the%20fight%20to%20the%20frackers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fawash-with-oil-as-saudis-aim-to-take-the-fight-to-the-frackers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Awash%20with%20oil%20as%20Saudis%20aim%20to%20take%20the%20fight%20to%20the%20frackers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fawash-with-oil-as-saudis-aim-to-take-the-fight-to-the-frackers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677b1f28a83efe53490749725710c9c053921b81%2F0_90_3452_2072%2F3452.jpg>
 A Sony PlayStation in use. But too few people have bought new consoles this 
year. Photograph: Thomas Peter/Reuters 
Selling video games is a cyclical business, and nobody pretends otherwise. 
It’s just that this pre-Christmas period was meant to be an up moment for the 
likes ofGame Digital <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gamegroup>.

Early-adopting punters bought their new-generation Xboxes and PlayStations 
last Christmas. Others were supposed to join the console party this year, 
creating a bumper season for sales of actual games, which carry higher profit 
margins for retailers.

In fact, says Game, trading conditions in the UK for games have been 
“challenging” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/23/game-shares-fall-40-percent-after-profit-warning-xbox-one-ps4>
 – shopkeepers’ code for dreadful. Gamers aren’t buying the new games at the 
expected rapid rate and sales of old content, designed for the last generation 
of consoles, fell 57% in the past five months.

Game shares fall 40% after profit warning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/23/game-shares-fall-40-percent-after-profit-warning-xbox-one-ps4>
“The extent of the impact of this switchover has only become apparent in 
December,” says chief executive Martyn Gibbs mournfully.

Why has it happened? On that score, Game seems clueless. It just served up its 
bad news cold – top-line profits in the first half of the financial year will 
be about £30m versus £43m a year ago.

At that level, the dividend looks destined for some Call of Duty-style 
violence as it won’t be covered by earnings. In the circumstances, a 38% fall 
in the share price was the correct response.

Game fell into administration in 2012, was rescued by hedge fund Elliott 
Advisors (which still owns 44%) and returned to the stock market in June 2014. 
In both Christmases since then, it has warned on trading.

Cash on the balance sheet offers more protection than in 2012 but, given 
Game’s recent run, the stock is no bargain even at one-third off the float 
price.

Clothes stores catch a cold in mild weather
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fawash-with-oil-as-saudis-aim-to-take-the-fight-to-the-frackers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77cae96195ece81f5f167c81206cceba137d0129%2F0_129_3700_2219%2F3700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Awash%20with%20oil%20as%20Saudis%20aim%20to%20take%20the%20fight%20to%20the%20frackers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fawash-with-oil-as-saudis-aim-to-take-the-fight-to-the-frackers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Awash%20with%20oil%20as%20Saudis%20aim%20to%20take%20the%20fight%20to%20the%20frackers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fawash-with-oil-as-saudis-aim-to-take-the-fight-to-the-frackers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77cae96195ece81f5f167c81206cceba137d0129%2F0_129_3700_2219%2F3700.jpg>
 A Next shop in central London. The group’s share price has fallen 10% this 
month. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
Trading conditions are also tough for clothing retailers because mild weather 
makes it hard to shift coats and jumpers, or so everybody assumes.

But surely one can rely on Next <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next>, 
the sector’s best performer for the past decade.

High street Christmas shopping figures make grim reading for retailers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/23/high-street-christmas-shopping-figures-make-grim-reading-for-retailers>
Well, the shares have fallen 10% since the start of this month and, at £72.20, 
an unexpected sight is coming into view: the point at which the firm’s chief 
executive, Lord Wolfson, deems it worthwhile to use surplus cash to buy back 
shares.

Wolfson is admirably strict on buybacks, requiring an 8% return. At last count 
in October, the limit was £69.62, so hasn’t been reached yet. Even so, some 
people thought it never would be again.

A new cap will be set with the post-Christmas trading update and, for the 
first time in more than a year, may even have practical application.

Alternatively, if Wolfson lowers the limit, more than the weather will have 
changed for Next.
 