
At the upmarket Cloudnine hospital in Gurgaon, the latest accessory among 
parents is a temperature-taking bracelet for newborns.

The bracelets, made by Bangalore-based startup Bempu <http://www.bempu.com/>, 
constantly monitor a baby’s temperature and sound an alert if it goes too high 
or too low. Doctors use the bracelets while babies are in neonatal intensive 
care or prescribe them for babies being discharged.

“New mothers are very worried about whether their babies are too warm or too 
cold,” says Dr Sanjay Wazir, director of the neonatal intensive care unit at 
the hospital. “[The bracelets] are better than a thermometer because they are 
continuously monitoring the baby’s temperature.”

In India, 8 million prematurely-born underweight babies 
<http://data.unicef.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/low_birthweight_from_EY_107.pdf>
 every year are at high risk of developing hypothermia, where body temperatures 
fall below 36.5C, which contributes to fatal conditions such asasphyxia, sepsis 
and pneumonia <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3606398/>. India 
has thehighest number of infant deaths caused by premature birth 
<http://data.unicef.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/low_birthweight_from_EY_107.pdf>
, most of which could be prevented. Maintaining a newborn’s body temperature is 
critical to its survival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbaby-bracelet-save-newborns-india-hypothermia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cba72672724fd062c3333dd2ce703cdda91a030%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baby%20bracelet%20aims%20to%20save%20newborns%20in%20India%20from%20hypothermia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbaby-bracelet-save-newborns-india-hypothermia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baby%20bracelet%20aims%20to%20save%20newborns%20in%20India%20from%20hypothermia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fbaby-bracelet-save-newborns-india-hypothermia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cba72672724fd062c3333dd2ce703cdda91a030%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
 Baby in Gudalur wearing a Bempu bracelet. Photograph: Bempu 
Bempu is currently running a pilot scheme in the desert state of Rajasthan, 
funded by health foundationWISH <http://www.wishfoundationindia.org/>, which 
aims to make its bracelets a staple free handout for all babies discharged 
early from government hospitals.

The chaos of government hospitals can lead to oversights when monitoring 
newborns’ temperatures, says Gini Morgan, head of public health at Bempu, which 
has benefitted from grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, USAid, 
UK Aid and other agencies.

“The beds are always filled, the entire family is in the waiting room every 
day, there are often three babies in one incubator, where there should be only 
one. There’s a lack of staff, the nurses are overworked, running around with 
competing priorities. In all that, its hard to manage all these high-risk 
babies.”

Many hospitals discharge babies early to free up cots, or because parents need 
to return to remote villages and cannot afford to wait for long periods at the 
hospital. “Parents travel to district hospitals and they need to get back 
home,” Morgan explains. “Every day that they’re away from work, they’re missing 
a pay check.”

Once home, parents are less likely to notice symptoms of hypothermia or have 
adequate information about how to keep babies warm. Half the world’s newborn 
babiesdie at home <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3606398/>, 
almost all of those who die are in developing countries. Hypothermia is one of 
the leading contributors to these deaths. Fortunately Bempu bracelets are 
powered by a battery that runs for a month, the critical period for newborns.
 Bempu bracelets are powered by a battery that runs for a month, the critical 
period for newborns. Photograph: Bempu 
“It’s not the same as using a thermometer because the device is constantly 
monitoring the baby’s temperature. Say you take the baby’s temperature now, it 
can fall after 30 minutes, and you may not notice,” says Dr Wazir, who hopes a 
crowdfunding campaign will help supply Bempu bracelets to underprivileged 
mothers at his Premature Babies Foundation, ahead of the winter months, when 
the risk of hypothermia rises.


But the bracelets alone are not enough, says Dr Vishnu Bhat from the 
Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research in 
Pondicherry, who conducted an independent study of their accuracy, the results 
of which are yet to be published. “We found that the nurses were taking 
temperatures more accurately than the Bempu bracelets. But the bracelets were 
good, we found they gave an accurate temperature reading between 85-90% of the 
time,” he said.

“The bracelets would be useful to mothers who live far from the hospital, the 
alarm system provides a warning to the mother that the baby is unwell. It would 
also be good in postnatal wards where nurses are in short supply. But of 
course, the temperature is not the only issue, mothers need to be trained, they 
need to be told what to do if the temperature is too low or too high,” he said.
 