
Ngun Bil Sung has been helping women give birth for 32 years, ever since she 
had a dream in which she was called by God to deliver babies.

Although she has no formal training, the 67-year-old from Chin State, an 
isolated, mountainous and devoutly Christian region ofMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>, estimates she has safely delivered 
1,500 babies, including her own.

But now she believes villagers in what is considered to be the poorest region 
of the country <http://www.unicef.org/myanmar/overview_25055.html> need access 
to family planning advice and contraception. “For families here to survive, 
both the mother and the father need to work on the farm. But if they keep 
having babies constantly, women can’t work at all, and it’s very difficult for 
the family to provide.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flost-girls-of-myanmar-chin-state-women-migrate-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20lost%20girls%20of%20Myanmar%3A%20'If%20I%20work%20hard%2C%20my%20family%20will%20survive'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flost-girls-of-myanmar-chin-state-women-migrate-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20lost%20girls%20of%20Myanmar%3A%20%27If%20I%20work%20hard%2C%20my%20family%20will%20survive%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flost-girls-of-myanmar-chin-state-women-migrate-video&media=>
The lost girls of Myanmar: ‘If I work hard, my family will survive’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/jun/06/lost-girls-of-myanmar-chin-state-women-migrate-video>
 Ngun Bil Sung says that a third of the women she sees in the nine villages 
she visits are not leaving enough space between births. Many women are old or 
very young, making their pregnancies higher risk; and she’s witnessed the 
consequences of some desperate and dangerous illegal abortions.

About 40% of women <http://www.familyplanning2020.org/entities/82> in Myanmar 
use contraception, but in Chin State the figure is closer to3% 
<http://www.unicef.org/myanmar/5_Chin_State_Local_Social_Plan_Vol_I_English.pdf>
. Meanwhile, Myanmar has the second highestmaternal mortality rate 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.MMRT> in south-east Asia, with 87% 
of those deaths occurring in rural areas 
<http://www.unric.org/en/latest-un-buzz/28957-maternal-mortality-remains-a-threat-to-myanmar-mums>
. Unsafe abortion is the third leading cause of maternal death.Abortion is 
illegal in Myanmar 
<http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/abortion/profiles.htm>, except 
to save a woman’s life.

Women in Chin State 
<http://www.themimu.info/sites/themimu.info/files/documents/Census_Chin_Report_Eng_2015.pdf>
 have more babies than elsewhere in Myanmar, and evidence suggests they 
struggle to support them: children in the state have the lowest health and 
nutritional levels in the country. The region also has thelowest rate in the 
country 
<http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/epidemiology/profiles/maternal/mmr.pdf>
 of births attended by a trained attendant and of births in a health facility, 
at under 40% and under 5% respectively.

But improving access to family planning services is an uphill battle. Many 
people believe using contraception defies God’s wishes and promotes 
promiscuity. The logistics of reaching people are also tough. Roads are 
frequently little more than dirt paths, just wide enough for a motorcycle to 
navigate, and many of those were washed away last summer duringsevere flooding 
and landslides <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/25/burma-floods>. 
There is almost no mobile phone reception outside the towns, and a myriad of 
languages are spoken in the region, the local dialect changing from one 
hillside to the next.

“To be able to serve the Chin community, it’s clearly more expensive per head 
per visit [than elsewhere],” says DrSid Naing 
<https://mariestopes.org/about-us/people/sid-naing>, country director of Marie 
Stopes International Myanmar, 
<https://mariestopes.org/where-in-the-world#myanmar> which opened seven 
branches in Chin as part of an expansion into three remote regions in 2014.
 Marie Stopes family planning team in Chin state, Myanmar. Photograph: 
Courtesy of Marie Stopes 
Between September 2014 and March 2016, Marie Stopes has seen 13,725 people in 
the state.

Nun Thiam, a 28-year-old government midwife working in a local village, 
regularly encounters women who say they don’t want to have more children, but 
their husbands won’t let them use contraception.

“Women keep having babies so they can’t work any more,” she says. “It becomes 
their duty to look after the children, while the husbands go to the farm and 
become the sole provider of the family, so they are stuck in an inferior role. 
As they keep having babies their role gets lower and lower, to the point where 
they have to listen to everything their husband says.”

Dr Henri Za Lal Lian, the MSI centre manager in Falam township, which is 
encouraging more men to attend education sessions, says: “The husbands are 
still the key players in their household, so male involvement is critical.”





Sex before marriage is also a taboo in Chin State. Unmarried people who are 
sexually active are often too afraid to buy contraceptives in pharmacies, where 
other people might see them. MSI staff will discreetly deliver condoms and 
emergency contraception to people in Falam who phone and ask for supplies or 
advice.

Myanmar can flourish by sowing seeds of agricultural prosperity | Deirdre May 
Culley and Martha Baxter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/myanmar-can-flourish-by-sowing-seeds-of-agricultural-prosperity>
Sex education is not taught in Myanmar schools, so many people have little 
knowledge of the options available and no concept of safe sex.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, in particular, are often just 
told by their parents to stay away from men once they reach puberty.

“It’s important for young women like me to have knowledge before they become 
sexually active, so that they can protect themselves,” says Helen Leng Zun Rem, 
a 26-year-old staff member at MSI in Falam, who says some of her peers have 
become pregnant unintentionally. “The things I have learned in my job will 
really help me in the future.”

But things are slowly improving.

Za Lal Lian has been working with religious leaders to challenge attitudes to 
family planning and says the organisation’s relationship with the church has 
improved since the branch first opened. He says the number of clients visiting 
the Falam office and attending outreach sessions in villages has risen 
significantly since some pastors began letting Marie Stopes use their churches 
for reproductive health education sessions, and some have actively encouraged 
people to access services.


Improved coordination with government health workers has enabled him to 
develop a schedule that focuses on Falam in the rainy season and further afield 
when it is drier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frural-myanmar-desperate-need-family-planning-services-access-contraception%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2c23859dc1b5c8658b444212e2d3792e79955f8%2F0_336_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baby%20blues%3A%20rural%20Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20desperate%20need%20for%20family%20planning%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frural-myanmar-desperate-need-family-planning-services-access-contraception%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baby%20blues%3A%20rural%20Myanmar%E2%80%99s%20desperate%20need%20for%20family%20planning%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frural-myanmar-desperate-need-family-planning-services-access-contraception%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2c23859dc1b5c8658b444212e2d3792e79955f8%2F0_336_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
 There is a lack of health and family planning awareness among people living in 
remote villages in Chin. Photograph: Dave Stamboulis/Alamy 
 But funding for family planning services is a problem. 

MSI’s offices in Chin are supported by the 3MDG fund <http://www.3mdg.org/>, a 
pooled multi-donor fund managed by the UN, but funding will end in December. 
Naing hopes the government will be able to step in. It has vowed to prioritise 
healthcare, including introducing a roadmap touniversal health coverage by 2030 
<http://www.dvb.no/news/nld-lays-out-plan-to-introduce-universal-healthcare-by-2030/61872?platform=hootsuite>
.

But, he says, “our health sector is in transition. We are not sure for the 
moment which way the country is going.”

 Za Lal Lian adds: “While I have much respect for government health workers … 
[the public sector is] still very much understaffed. If we stop being here it 
will be a terrible loss for the villagers.”
 