
The string of terror attacks in Europe and further afield since last summer 
has sent reverberations through the travel industry, butThomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup>, arguably Britain’s best 
known tour operator, has felt the effects more than most.

Its chief executive, Peter Fankhauser, has warned the industry is suffering 
the worst disruption in his 30-year career.

The company’s shares lost almost a fifth of their value this month when it 
revealed falling bookings as passengers steered clear of trouble spots.

That warning coincided with the disappearance of an EgyptAir flight on its way 
from Paris to Cairo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/no-theory-ruled-out-as-hollande-confirms-crash-of-egyptair-flight-ms804>
, renewing concerns that consumers would be reluctant to travel. The plane was 
later found to have crashed into the sea, killing all 66 people on board, 
though the cause has not yet been established.

Thomas Cook’s previous trading update, in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/22/travel-tourism-holidays-shares-sink-tourism-europe>
, came on the same day terrorists attacked Brussels airport. It followed the 
murder of 130 people in Paris in November,the killing of 38 holidaymakers in 
Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/tunisia-tourist-hotel-reportedly-attacked>
 in June and the Octoberbombing of a Russian plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/egypt-plane-crash-bomb-jet-russia-security-service>
 flying from Egypt that killed 224 people.

The first three months of this year have seen a series of attacks in Turkey, 
which 2.5 million Britons visit each year. Thomas Cook’s second-biggest market 
is Turkey, but visitor numbers tumbled 28% in April – the biggest fall in 17 
years.

To add to the pressure on holiday companies, the UK economy has been slowing, 
consumer confidence is shaky and wage growth weak, while next month’s 
referendum on EU membership has helped push down the value of the pound against 
the euro and the dollar.

Ryanair and easyJet <https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet>, Europe’s 
biggest carriers, were forced to cut prices after the Paris attacks and both 
have said seats will be cheaper than last year over the holiday season. Ryanair 
boss Michael O’Leary spoke of a price war, characteristically declaring his 
company would be the inevitable winner because of its size and aggressive 
pricing.

Yet despite all the doom-laden talk, total UK bookings for package holidays 
this summer are up 6% from a year ago, according to GfK, which compiles a 
weekly survey of agents and operators.

Britons’ commitment to their annual break survived the Great Recession and it 
appears to remain a top priority. Early bookings for winter and next summer are 
up 22% and 18% respectively.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ftravel-industry-terror-fears-return-roots-costas-spain-portugal-package-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80b523f7108d789cdd8ae8aba87d6c3692d39ff4%2F0_334_1925_2406%2F1925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20the%20Costas%3A%20terror%20fear%20sees%20travel%20industry%20return%20to%20its%20roots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ftravel-industry-terror-fears-return-roots-costas-spain-portugal-package-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20the%20Costas%3A%20terror%20fear%20sees%20travel%20industry%20return%20to%20its%20roots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ftravel-industry-terror-fears-return-roots-costas-spain-portugal-package-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80b523f7108d789cdd8ae8aba87d6c3692d39ff4%2F0_334_1925_2406%2F1925.jpg>
 The Costa Encantada hotel in Lloret de Mar, on the Costa Brava. Photograph: 
Cate Gillon/Getty Images 
Acting on Foreign Office advice, tour operators are not flying to Tunisia or 
the Egyptian resort of Sharm el-Sheikh, which has been reduced to little more 
than a ghost town, helping send overall bookings to the country down by almost 
two thirds. The government advises people to be wary when travelling to Turkey, 
where bookings are down by a third.

There has been a surge away from these perceived danger spots to the 
familiarity of the western Mediterranean, which Britons first started jetting 
to in the late 1960s.

Bookings for Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> are up 27% this 
year, with Portugal up 30% and Italy up 12% over last year. Greece is coming 
out of the doldrums: business is up 4% following a huge rise last year. Thomas 
Cook has moved the bookings of 1.2 million customers who had arranged holidays 
in Tunisia, Turkey and Egypt to these countries and to long-haul destinations 
such as Mexico, the US and Cuba.

There has been a corresponding effect on prices in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Last month it cost about £170 
less per person to book two weeks in Turkey compared with last year, but the 
equivalent trip to Portugal is £94 more expensive and rising.

David Hope, GfK’s business group director, says: “Prices are going up and up 
and up.” But he says this is only healthy for tour operators if they can 
provide enough rooms to meet demand.

“It’s looking quite healthy at the moment but the concern is that if the likes 
of Spain and Portugal become booked up, will they have stock left that people 
want to buy?” he says. “What is left will be lower-grade property they can get 
in Spain or hotels in Turkey – and do people want to go there?”

Thomas Cook’s rival, Tui, which owns Thomson, has fared better because it is 
bigger in Spain and relies less on Turkey. It has also gone upmarket by 
operating its own boutique-style hotels – a model Thomas Cook is trying to copy.

Wyn Ellis, an analyst at the City broker Numis, says: “That seems to be a more 
resilient part of the market, partly because it tends to book earlier. At the 
commodity end of the market, people will book a lot later because they think 
they can get bargains.”

The industry turmoil has also hit the budget airlines. Dame Carolyn McCall, 
easyJet’s chief executive, said she was forced to slash prices following the 
Paris attacks in November.

Both Ryanair and easyJet have reported demand returning to normal but prices 
are likely to stay low.Ryanair <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair> 
predicted its fares would be down 7% over the next 10 months.

Robin Byde, an analyst at broker Cantor Fitzgerald, says: “The thing to 
remember with easyJet and Ryanair is that between them they have more than 20% 
of European short-haul traffic. They are price-makers as well as price-takers, 
so you have to take it with a pinch of salt when they talk about pressures 
driving down prices.”

The biggest influence on air fares is the cost of fuel, which has more than 
halved in the past two years. Because big airlines buy their fuel up to two 
years in advance, they have only recently felt the benefit of the falling oil 
price and have plenty of scope to cut fares.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ftravel-industry-terror-fears-return-roots-costas-spain-portugal-package-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe39beb94e711b659e9fb4d02d30ab189c2e2db53%2F0_170_3744_2245%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20the%20Costas%3A%20terror%20fear%20sees%20travel%20industry%20return%20to%20its%20roots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ftravel-industry-terror-fears-return-roots-costas-spain-portugal-package-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20the%20Costas%3A%20terror%20fear%20sees%20travel%20industry%20return%20to%20its%20roots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ftravel-industry-terror-fears-return-roots-costas-spain-portugal-package-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe39beb94e711b659e9fb4d02d30ab189c2e2db53%2F0_170_3744_2245%2F3744.jpg>
 Carolyn McCall, chief executive of easyJet. Photograph: Micha Theiner/City 
AM/Rex 
That is handy for them because smaller airlines, which can’t buy fuel as far 
in advance, have cut prices and laid on extra flights to sell more seats. 
EasyJet and Ryanair both plan to increase capacity, and the result is that 
European short-haul capacity is up about 8% this year.

“EasyJet and Ryanair, as big operators in the market, are trying to squeeze 
out smaller operators so they offer discounts and attractive fares and hope 
that the competition fails,” Byde says.

The received wisdom in the industry is that travelling is now so much a part 
of everyday life that demand will always bounce back after shocks. McCall 
reiterated that comforting message when the airline announced its results. 
“Demand always comes back,” she said. “We’ve seen that with both the tragic 
events that have happened [last] year and we’ve seen that in the past. If you 
are a consumer, it’s a very, very good time to fly.”
 