
La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
, the musical romance starring Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone, continues its 
seemingly unstoppable quickstep towards next month’s Oscars by taking 11 
nominations at the Baftas. The film, which won arecord-breaking seven Golden 
Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-moonlight-meryl-streep>
 in Los Angeles on Sunday evening, is in the running in almost every category 
bar those open only to Brits.

Baftas 2017: full list of nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/10/baftas-2017-film-full-list-of-nominations>
But its competition this time round is less predictable, with two until now 
underloved contenders, time-shuffle sci-fiArrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/arrival-review-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-science-fiction>
 and crime thrillerNocturnal Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/02/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-returns-with-wildly-gripping-revenge-tale>
, also performing healthily. Those films took nine nominations apiece, while 
Kenneth Lonergan’s grief dramaManchester By the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
, which took best actor for Casey Affleck on Sunday, trails with six.

I, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
, Ken Loach’s searing tale of an unwell carpenter battling the benefits system, 
leads the British pack with five nominations – the same number as Harry Potter 
spin-off Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/13/fantastic-beasts-review-jk-rowling-eddie-redmayne-harry-potter>
, Mel Gibson’s war storyHacksaw Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/hacksaw-ridge-review-mel-gibson-finds-a-conscience-in-gruesome-war-story>
 and adoption weepieLion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/lion-review-dev-patel-and-nicole-kidman-hunt-oscars-in-moving-adoption-drama>
.

Barry Jenkins’s Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
, however – perceived as the major rival to La La Land at the Academy Awards – 
took just four, as did Stephen Frears’s comedy about a deluded singer,Florence 
Foster Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/florence-foster-jenkins-review-meryl-streep-hugh-grant-stephen-frears>
, which also scored nods for stars Meryl Streep and Hugh Grant, as well as 
costume design and hair.

But there was disappointment for Andrea Arnold’s American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold>
, which took just one nomination for outstanding British film, where its 
eclectic competitors includeDenial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/denial-review-rachel-weisz-holocaust-david-irving-toronto-film-festival>
, the story of the trial involving Holocaust denier David Irving, Fantastic 
Beasts and Where to Find Them, I, Daniel Blake, Tehran-set horrorUnder the 
Shadow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/terror-in-tehran-babak-anvari-under-the-shadow>
 and sight-loss docu-dramaNotes on Blindness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/notes-blindness-review-film-audio-diaries-theologian-john-hull-blind>
. That film scored a remarkable three nods, also being named in the best 
documentary and outstanding debut fields.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnotes-on-blindness-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notes%20on%20Blindness%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20a%20documentary%20about%20losing%20sight%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnotes-on-blindness-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notes%20on%20Blindness%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20a%20documentary%20about%20losing%20sight%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnotes-on-blindness-trailer-video&media=>
Notes on Blindness: watch the trailer for a documentary about losing sight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/13/notes-on-blindness-trailer-video>
And there was further upset for Martin Scorsese, as his religious epic Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
 was again snubbed. Following a complete lack of nominations from the Globes, 
it also failed to pick up a single nod from the UK-based voters. Clint 
Eastwood’s plane crash dramaSully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/sully-review-pious-hagiopic-that-even-tom-hanks-cant-save>
 followed suit.

The Baftas diverge strikingly from the Globes in other categories, however. 
While Paul Verhoeven’s acclaimed rape revenge comedyElle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/elle-review-paul-verhoevens-brazen-revenge-comedy-is-a-dangerous-delight>
 was the surprise winner of the foreign language award on Sunday – and its 
star, Isabelle Huppert, an even more unlikely best actress victor – neither 
film nor actress are nominated at the Baftas, as it doesn’t open in the UK 
until March. By contrast, last year’s best foreign language Oscar winner, Son 
of Saul, is up for this year’s Baftas.

Huppert’s absence in the best actress category means space is found for The 
Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/the-girl-on-the-train-review-emily-blunt-paula-hawkins>
’s Emily Blunt among the best actress nominees, who also include Natalie 
Portman forJackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
, Meryl Streep for Florence Foster Jenkins, Emma Stone for La La Land and Amy 
Adams for Arrival.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Felle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elle%20trailer%3A%20Isabelle%20Huppert%20stars%20in%20Paul%20Verhoeven's%20noir%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Felle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elle%20trailer%3A%20Isabelle%20Huppert%20stars%20in%20Paul%20Verhoeven%27s%20noir%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Felle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video&media=>
Elle trailer: Isabelle Huppert stars in Paul Verhoeven’s noir thriller – 
exclusive video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/16/elle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video>
That film was in the running for just two Golden Globes – for Adams and for 
its score. At theBaftas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/baftas> it added 
seven more to those, including best director, best film, best adapted 
screenplay and best cinematography, as well as a slew of technical nods, such 
as best sound and best visual effects.

Meanwhile, Tom Ford’s Nocturnal Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nocturnal-animals>, which was an unexpected 
victor in the supporting actor category on Sunday for Aaron Taylor-Johnson, is 
also nominated eight further times, including best actor for Jake Gyllenhaal.

Bafta voters even lavished a little affection on box office monster Rogue One: 
A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
, which is up for make up & hair and visual effects. Marvel blockbusterDoctor 
Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/24/doctor-strange-review-benedict-cumberbatch-marvel-eyepoppingly-freaky-extravaganza>
 is also in the running for those two awards, as well as a third, for 
production design.

The nominees for the rising star award, which is voted for by the public, were 
announced last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/05/bafta-rising-star-award-tom-holland-ruth-negga-lucas-hedges-laia-costa>
. They includeLoving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/loving-review-civil-rights-tale-marries-heartfelt-drama-with-too-much-restraint>
 star Ruth Negga and the new Spider-Man, Tom Holland.


The remainder of the awards are voted for by some 6,500 members – a number 
equivalent to the Oscars membership (the Golden Globes, meanwhile, are voted 
for by 93 members).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Famy-adams-arrival-jeremy-renner-alien-communication-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Adams%3A%20'Having%20a%20child%20helps%20you%20understand%20communication'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Famy-adams-arrival-jeremy-renner-alien-communication-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Adams%3A%20%27Having%20a%20child%20helps%20you%20understand%20communication%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Famy-adams-arrival-jeremy-renner-alien-communication-video-interview&media=>
Amy Adams: ‘Having a child helps you understand communication’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/09/amy-adams-arrival-jeremy-renner-alien-communication-video-interview>
Why British Baftas frontrunner I, Daniel Blake may betray its own cause | 
David Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2017/jan/10/why-baftas-frontrunner-ken-loach-i-daniel-blake-may-betray-its-own-cause>
Last year, Bafta sought to address a perceived diversity imbalance both by 
widening <https://www.bafta.org/about/membership/new-members-in-2016> its pool 
of members (after considering the results of a survey on their backgrounds) and 
introducingnew rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/14/bafta-changes-rules-to-increase-diversity-in-awards-and-membership>
 that mean British film and outstanding debut nominees must show they have 
boosted opportunities for ethnic minority and socially disadvantaged 
film-makers. These edicts will not come into effect until 2019.

Last year’s best film Bafta went to The Revenant, which was pipped to the post 
at the Oscars by Spotlight. The outstanding British film award went to Brooklyn.

Sophie Turner and Dominic Cooper read out the nominations; this year’s prizes 
will be unveiled at a ceremony hosted by Stephen Fry in London on 12 February. 
The Oscars take place a fortnight later, on 26 February.
 