
There are, perhaps, more important prizes on the games industry calendar. The 
annual Game Awards held each December in LA draw a huge online audience and can 
add considerably to a game’s sales figures. But the Baftas have a status and 
romance that nothing else in this medium can really match.

After the ceremony, then, the big winners were understandably ecstatic. The 
big theme of this year’s event was the domination of independent games.
Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/13/everybodys-gone-to-rapture-review-beautiful-patience>
 by The Chinese Room,Rocket League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/24/rocket-league-review-psyonix>
 by Psyonix andHer Story  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/25/her-story-review-narrative-video-game>
by Sam Barlow, were all low-budget projects that beat major releases such as 
Witcher 3, Destiny: The Taken King and Fifa 16. It was a night of leftfield 
success – as a Bafta night probably should be.

For Dan Pinchbeck and Jess Curry, founders of the Chinese Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/oct/15/horror-amnesia-a-machine-for-pigs-chinese-room>
, the success of Rapture was a genuine surprise. “We were nominated for five 
Baftas withDear Esther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/06/dear-esther-original-walking-simulator-playstation-4-xbox-one>
 and we didn’t win any,” says Curry. “We were genuinely expecting not to come 
away with anything tonight and were OK with that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fbafta-game-awards-reactions-chinese-room-psyonix-sam-barlow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F607908f1f2692c79648092a96d2cee04f3bdcdaf%2F0_16_2844_1707%2F2844.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bafta%20Game%20Awards%20reactions%3A%20'it%20was%20a%20good%20night%20for%20women%20in%20games'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fbafta-game-awards-reactions-chinese-room-psyonix-sam-barlow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bafta%20Game%20Awards%20reactions%3A%20%27it%20was%20a%20good%20night%20for%20women%20in%20games%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fbafta-game-awards-reactions-chinese-room-psyonix-sam-barlow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F607908f1f2692c79648092a96d2cee04f3bdcdaf%2F0_16_2844_1707%2F2844.jpg>
 Everybody’s Gone To The Rapture. Photograph: PR 
They weren’t surprised, though, that all three of their awards – Music, Audio 
Achievement and Performance (won by actor Merle Dandridge for her role as Kate 
in the game) – were effectively for sound. “I think having a composer and a 
writer at the head of The Chinese Room, stories and music are always going to 
be at the forefront of what we do,” says Curry. “Music is integral to the 
process.”

Pinchbeck continues: “I don’t know of any other studios that create concept 
music as well as concept art. Everybody at our studio responds to that. Our 
environment artist Alex Grahame, who’s an amazing artist, is always saying to 
Jess, ‘Can you write me a piece of music that I can, like, concept art to?’ 
That’s why the audio is so good: it’s central to what we do.”

For Barlow, who worked in mainstream development for a decade before going 
solo and creating Her Story, the most important of his three awards was Mobile 
& Handheld. “Mobile gaming has a bad rap, but it was the thing that made me go 
indie,” he says. “I looked at studios likeSimogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/08/simogo-year-walk-iphone-ipad-sales>
 and other mobile developers, and, like, there’s often two or three people 
involved, and they make something incredibly awesome.

“I reached a point where I was feeling jealous of them. I was like, ‘You’re 
making these cool games, and there’s just two of you in a room!’ If there 
weren’t people doing crazy experiments on the App Store, if there weren’t 
people like Simogo, then I wouldn’t have felt like I could go out there and 
find an audience.”

Barlow was surprised though, that Viva Seifert, the actor from Her Story, did 
not make it into the nominees shortlist for Best Performer. “She has won all 
the other performance awards, or been nominated,” he says. “When I first 
pitched Viva on doing this with me, I was like, ‘You can get a Bafta for video 
games now. They won one for Thomas Was Alone. That was someone being a 
rectangle.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fbafta-game-awards-reactions-chinese-room-psyonix-sam-barlow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a43850c60ca5f2e6795ab1c0a5fdb0277cd57fa%2F0_0_2437_3046%2F2437.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bafta%20Game%20Awards%20reactions%3A%20'it%20was%20a%20good%20night%20for%20women%20in%20games'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fbafta-game-awards-reactions-chinese-room-psyonix-sam-barlow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bafta%20Game%20Awards%20reactions%3A%20%27it%20was%20a%20good%20night%20for%20women%20in%20games%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fbafta-game-awards-reactions-chinese-room-psyonix-sam-barlow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a43850c60ca5f2e6795ab1c0a5fdb0277cd57fa%2F0_0_2437_3046%2F2437.jpg>
 Sam Barlow with the Awards for Debut Game, Game Innovation and Mobile + 
Handheld for Her Story. Photograph: Matt Crossick/PA 
Dave Hagewood from Psyonix was fairly confident Rocket League would win in the 
Sports category – even though it was up against titans likeFifa 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/22/fifa-16-review-women-football-ea>
 andForza Motorsports 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/14/forza-motorsport-6-review-microsoft-xbox-one>
. “I think people were just excited to see something very different, and we had 
that – that’s a huge advantage,” he says. “We kind of occupy this middle ground 
between indie and AAA. We weren’t sure if we were going to get credit from one 
or the other. But I feel like in the end we actually got credit from both.”


As for shocks on the night: “I’m very surprised The Witcher 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/13/witcher-3-wild-hunt-review-xbox-ps4-pc>
 didn’t get anything,” says Pinchbeck. “Genuinely really, really surprised.” A 
lot of the online viewers, watching the Twitch stream of the event, agreed, 
particularly in the Best Game category where the game fell to genre rival 
Fallout 4.

It’s worth remembering though that the way the voting process is set up at 
Bafta makes these kind of shocks possible. Each award is judged by a completely 
separate panel of developers and journalists, who have no idea what’s happening 
on any other category. They play the long list of nominations in their field, 
then meet up for several hours to discuss the merits of every title. Then, 
through a process of elimination, a shortlist emerges, from which each member 
of the panel then votes for their favourite entry. No one else on the panel 
sees these votes, so no one actually knows what game will win until the night. 
It’s through this rigorously maintained process that surprise results can pop 
up – there’s no way to create a “balanced” awards night with a few indie hits 
and some big blockbuster victories, because the panels are discreet and sworn 
to secrecy.

The interesting thing is, the process will often end up with a list of winners 
that seem somewhat idiosyncratic compared to other ceremonies. They can also 
highlight fractures and talking points in the games community.

“It’s been a really really good night for women in games,” says Pinchbeck. 
“With the eSports category, having a woman go up on stage and accept the award 
when in the videos proceeding that, there wasn’t a single woman onscreen. We 
we’re going, ‘No actually, women are at the centre of this industry, and it’s 
about time we recognised it.’”

“Different people bring different perspectives,” continues Curry. “I think 
it’s still so narrow within the industry a lot of the time; the same thing gets 
made because it’s the same voices. I just really want to keep pushing diversity 
and pushing new voices within the industry.”
 