
Super Sunday is a familiar concept in football, but it could also be applied 
to fashion this weekend.Paris fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/paris-fashion-week> boasted two 
agenda-setting shows to define a season – Balenciaga and Céline.

Vetements show is cathedral of raw energy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/03/vetements-show-is-cathedral-of-raw-energy>
First up was Balenciaga on Sunday and the debut collection from its new 
artistic director, Demna Gvasalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/07/balenciaga-demna-gvasalia-new-creative-director>
. The Georgian-born designer is fashion’s current cult figure, as the lead 
designer of Vetements, the label making waves with disrupted streetwear – 
hoodies with overlong sleeves, shirts cut back to front. The question here was 
how a design sensibility that saw sweatshirts with the slogan “You fuck’n 
asshole” at theVetements show on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/03/vetements-show-is-cathedral-of-raw-energy>
 would transfer to an almost 100-year-old house that once clothed socialites 
and heiresses in ladylike elegance.

The answer came in a square room covered with white acoustic insulation, like 
that in a recording studio, in the basement of an anonymous white building. The 
expectant audience includedGucci designer Alessandro Michele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/jan/21/-sp-gucci-names-accessories-chief-alessandro-michele-as-creative-director>
 and modelStella Tennant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/22/stella-tennant-on-her-new-pringle-of-scotland-campaign>
.

The first outfit was a checked skirt suit with exaggerated hips and shoulders 
up around the model’s neck. This was a very Gvasalia nod to Cristóbal 
Balenciaga’s signature midcentury sculptural shapes – making them slightly 
weird but still recognisable. It wasn’t remotely retro.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa12f381eb4c299efdaab94d7d7fcb45494e1b0bb%2F0_38_2717_4036%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balenciaga%20and%20C%C3%A9line%20catwalk%20shows%20impress%20at%20Paris%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balenciaga%20and%20C%C3%A9line%20catwalk%20shows%20impress%20at%20Paris%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa12f381eb4c299efdaab94d7d7fcb45494e1b0bb%2F0_38_2717_4036%2F2717.jpg>
 Demna Gvasalia’s debut Balenciaga collection at Paris fashion week. 
Photograph: Giovanni Giannoni/WWD/Rex 
This was followed by cagoule-style jackets with Balenciaga written on the back 
of the hood, and oversize striped shoppers – both surefire hits with the social 
media generation. Models wore knee-length cord skirts, ski pants and over the 
knee PVC boots. Oversize bad-taste jumpers and floral patchwork dresses worn 
with candy-striped tights recalled more recent Balenciaga history, and the 
collections ofNicolas Ghesquière 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/07/louis-vuitton-nicolas-ghesquiere-digital-punk-paris-fashion-week-catwalk>
.

While the designs here were sometimes wilfully twisted – a trench with extra 
padding around the hips, or an off-the-shoulder coat – they all had some basis 
in the reality of what women wear now. There was an everydayness that felt 
modern. It was this factor that made for such a blisteringly desirable debut 
collection.

In an interview with Women’s Wear Daily 
<http://wwd.com/fashion-news/fashion-features/demna-gvasalia-balenciage-vetements-10279574/>
 earlier this year, Gvasalia said he has a “very product-oriented approach 
creatively”, industry speak for a designer who makes clothes rather than 
concepts. Backstage, the designer reiterated this idea, saying he wanted to 
make “relatable garments”. He was keen to emphasise the Balenciaga heritage. “I 
used his way of looking at things 360 degrees,” he said. “It is important to 
know the past in order to build the future.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb1940b5d80e00ccffb862932a2bc95c2340cdd5%2F0_99_2928_4381%2F2928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balenciaga%20and%20C%C3%A9line%20catwalk%20shows%20impress%20at%20Paris%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balenciaga%20and%20C%C3%A9line%20catwalk%20shows%20impress%20at%20Paris%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb1940b5d80e00ccffb862932a2bc95c2340cdd5%2F0_99_2928_4381%2F2928.jpg>
 Demna Gvasalia’s debut Balenciaga collection at Paris fashion week. 
Photograph: Giovanni Giannoni/WWD/Rex 
CEO Isabelle Guichot called Gvasalia “someone capable of reshuffling the 
cards” when he was appointed in October. This collection confirmed she was 
right.

If Gvasalia was a tough act to follow, Céline was always going to pull the 
crowds. It is a brand that has had the fashion industry in raptures sincePhoebe 
Philo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/mar/31/phoebe-philo-celine-interview-vogue-festival-alexandra-shulman>
 became creative director in 2008. This collection had elements familiar to her 
significant fanbase – there were tunics over wide bootleg trousers, oversize 
sweaters, tied trench coats and bags clutched in models’ hands. There was a 
functionality that chimed with Gvasalia’s – with a muted colour palette, flat 
shoes and party dresses with pockets worn over polo necks and leggings, 
eveningwear for those who feel the cold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdb3e1d5dc39840c6629a176123afb72c4f95e25%2F0_118_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balenciaga%20and%20C%C3%A9line%20catwalk%20shows%20impress%20at%20Paris%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balenciaga%20and%20C%C3%A9line%20catwalk%20shows%20impress%20at%20Paris%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fbalenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdb3e1d5dc39840c6629a176123afb72c4f95e25%2F0_118_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Phoebe Philo’s creations for Céline at Paris fashion week. Photograph: 
Christophe Petit Tesson/EPA 
If that sounds straightforward, Philo is frequently less than crystal clear in 
her explanation of a collection. “It’s about possibilities,” she said, adding 
that there is “always a tactile process [when designing], but this time it 
showed more”. Wearing a dress over wide-legged white trousers, what she said 
may have been somewhat opaque but she did embody the simple chicness of her 
brand.

This is the first Céline show since rumours about the potential exit of Philo 
were quashed in February. A memo signed by Philo and Céline CEO Marco Gobbetti 
was leaked to the media, and states that the designer and brand were “more 
motivated than ever to their partnership”. This was a relief for the front row, 
who are more often than not clad in Philo’s clothes. Next season, Gvasalia’s
Balenciaga <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga> designs will no 
doubt be spotted there too.
 