
On my first day in Dubrovnik, the stunning walled city on the southern 
Dalmatian coast, I sat down at an outdoor café on theStradun 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stradun_(street)>, the main limestone-clad 
pedestrian street in the old town, and ordered a beer. It hit the spot, the 
crisp pilsner washing away the memories of a long flight. But then I got the 
bill: £5. This wouldn’t have been outrageous if I’d been in, say, Oslo, but 
here in Croatia, it seemed particularly expensive.

The great Eastern European road trip, part one: island hopping in Croatia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/08/great-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum>
As I contemplated how I’d be able to eat and drink my way through the town, my 
usual travel proclivity, I had an idea: a Dubrovnik friend had told me about a 
few very local places within the walls of the old town – bars that most 
tourists either don’t know about or do not dare enter. I was going to find 
them, not just in the name of affordable libations but also to imbibe among the
gospari – literally “nobles” – the word for the denizens of Dubrovnik.

Not that there’s anything wrong with going to the tourist hotspots. Lively 
Troubadour (Buniceva Poljana 2, 385 20 323 476), right next to the cathedral, 
is a fun place for live music. Buža (Crijeviceva ulica 9, 385 98 361 934), the 
outdoor bar with a stunning ocean view right on the cliffs, is an essential 
place for any first-time visitor. I’d been to those spots many years ago. This 
time I wanted to try something different.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbar-tour-dubrovnik-croatia-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7a4bb36686ebaee4cf7d76b2c6aa96603347558%2F0_0_4752_2850%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bar%20tour%20bravery%3A%20catching%20Dubrovnik%E2%80%99s%20local%20spirit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbar-tour-dubrovnik-croatia-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bar%20tour%20bravery%3A%20catching%20Dubrovnik%E2%80%99s%20local%20spirit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbar-tour-dubrovnik-croatia-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7a4bb36686ebaee4cf7d76b2c6aa96603347558%2F0_0_4752_2850%2F4752.jpg>
 Night on the tiles: roofs of Dubrovnik’s old town. Photograph: Alamy 
I had my work cut out. Twenty years ago, there were about 5,000 gospari living 
within the walls of the old town. Today, there are just 1,500, most of whom now 
rent out their apartments on Airbnb while living on the periphery of town.

The foodie traveller … finds the best seafood in Croatia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/29/konoba-dionis-seafood-restaurant-croatia-sveti-klement-island>
So I put word out with a few friends who live here. The first person to 
respond was Zrinka, who works for Adriatic Luxury Hotels, a small chain of 
upscale hotels in and around the city. I loved the irony of a lifelong 
Dubrovnik resident who also works in the luxury travel business telling me 
about the local spots where tourists don’t go. “On Stradun, a few streets after
Sponza Palace <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sponza_Palace>, take a left and 
you should find Libertina” (Zlatarska Ulica 3, +385 203 21 526).

A few strides later I was there, standing in front of Luci, the ancient owner 
of the place. “Dobar vecer,” I said (good evening). Instead of responding, he 
walked out of the diminutive bar to clean up an outdoor table. Maybe they don’t 
serve my type – ahem, tourists – here. Just then, another text from Zrinka came 
in: “If that fails, go back to Stradun and walk until you see a sign for the 
restaurant Barba. Go up the alleyway until you find a bar with no sign on it. 
It’s where all the local people hang out.”

It wasn’t easy to find, but eventually, I made it to Primo (Bosikoviceva 3, 
+385 20 321 075). And I even got a beer this time. At 15 kuna (£1.50), 
practically a steal. Unlike all the tourist-packed bars 30ft away on Stradun, 
Primo was empty save for a couple of guys who seemed so intoxicated I was 
wondering which one would fall off their bar stool first. This was the bargain: 
exchanging overpriced beer next to fellow tourists for libations priced for 
locals and a (very) quiet atmosphere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbar-tour-dubrovnik-croatia-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f864f0ac28735b0c5a5694273ac33df25da29a4%2F0_0_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bar%20tour%20bravery%3A%20catching%20Dubrovnik%E2%80%99s%20local%20spirit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbar-tour-dubrovnik-croatia-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bar%20tour%20bravery%3A%20catching%20Dubrovnik%E2%80%99s%20local%20spirit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbar-tour-dubrovnik-croatia-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f864f0ac28735b0c5a5694273ac33df25da29a4%2F0_0_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
 Sea walls: a view of the harbour. Photograph: Alamy 
The next day I went back to Libertina. The owner was there and this time it 
only took him five minutes to acknowledge me. I nursed a beer among a few guys 
arguing over Hajduk and Dinamo, the football teams from Split and Zagreb 
respectively, an age-old rivalry that will never die down. Like Primo, the 
place felt a bit too sedate for my liking.

Top 10 budget beach hotels, villas and campsites in Croatia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/03/top-10-budget-beach-hotels-campsites-croatia>
After asking a few more people about where they go in the old town, a name 
began to pop up again and again:Fontana 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Caffe-Bar-Fontana/105772036206680> (Izmedju 
Polaca 5). Located smack in the centre, it exploded with energy: locals chatted 
gregariously and the bartender, a man in his mid-20s, was accepting 
arm-wrestling challenges among regulars, as plumes of cigarette smoke wafted 
heavenward. I ordered half a litre of Laško, a good brew from Slovenia, for 20 
kuna (£2) and snuggled up to the bar.

In my quest I wasn’t necessarily looking for an “authentic” experience, that 
holy grail of travel. We often travel to see how another culture interprets 
daily life. At least I do. And while I could have easily ventured beyond the 
walls to find such a place, I was particularly intrigued about the challenges 
the locals face, the compromise they might have agreed to between their 
quotidian lives in the old town and the promise of making money in the tourism 
industry.

A tour-guide friend, Aljoša Lecic, gave me a bit of local perspective when we 
met up for coffee one day. “Every bar that opens up in the old town has 
intentions to be different, to be a place for locals,” he said. “Then the 
reality sets in and the owners realise they have to give in to tourism.”

The places I visited, Fontana, Primo, even Libertina, were staunch in their 
loyalty to locals and eschewed the temptation to make a lot of money, as their 
Irish-pub neighbours were doing.

The next night I sidled up to the bar at Libertina. There was Luci, the grumpy 
owner. When he saw me, he smiled, poured me a glass of beer, and said, “Here 
you go, gospar,” greeting me as a local. I was far from that, but it was 
certainly a start.

Essentials

A double room at the Hotel Excelsior costs from £140 in high season and £75 in 
low season per night (alh.hr <http://www.adriaticluxuryhotels.com/>). Places to 
drink include Libertina Zlatarska ulica 3 (+385 203 21 526), Primo, 
Bosikoviceva 3 (+385 20 321 075) and Fontana, Izmedju Polaca 5
 