
What constitutes good – or bad – taste? That is the central question posed at 
the Barbican’s new exhibition, The Vulgar: Fashion Redefined.

Taking in 500 years of fashion, and featuring over 40 designers, it brings 
together garments that were, and are, considered “vulgar”, but the connotations 
are not necessarily negative. Co-curator Judith Clark said: “It’s meant to 
celebrate, not to humiliate.”

The Barbican laid bare: inside London’s most famous Brutalist housing estate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/10/barbican-housing-photography-design-architecture>
Clark’s fellow curator is psychoanalyst Adam Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/09/adam-phillips-interview-the-vulgar-fashion-redefined>
, and the exhibition aims to unpick the concept of vulgarity in a cerebral way. 
“We were thinking about the word ‘vulgar’ and the language around it, 
specifically how violent, divisive and awful it is,” said Clark, adding that 
they have “attempted to be more celebratory of the word, and not allow it to be 
a pejorative”.

The exhibition presents modern-day outfits from designers such as Alessandro 
Michele (Gucci) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/21/gucci-milan-fashion-week-frenzied-like-an-explosion-inside-a-fairytale>
,Mary Katrantzou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/feb/12/prints-fashion-designer-mary-katrantzou>
 andGareth Pugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/06/gareth-pugh-london-return-show>
 juxtaposed with outfits from the Renaissance, French revolution and the 1920s, 
to show the line of influence, commonalities with fabrication and style, and to 
highlight the cyclical nature of fashion.

The duo has spread the exhibition over 11 rooms, themed around different 
concepts of vulgarity, as defined by Philips. These include the Pop Art-centric 
“Too Popular” section, which features Andy Warhol’s Souper Dress alongside 
sweet wrapper-themed dresses from Jeremy Scott’s Moschino collection. There is 
also the “Exaggerated Bodies” room, which features Malcolm McLaren and Vivienne 
Westwood’s “tits” T-shirt and Maison Margiela’s duo of wig shoulder pads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66255c75ec3351da654028084f65c84ecb33c72b%2F0_0_2362_3296%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbican%20exhibition%20delves%20into%20'vulgar'%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbican%20exhibition%20delves%20into%20%27vulgar%27%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66255c75ec3351da654028084f65c84ecb33c72b%2F0_0_2362_3296%2F2362.jpg>
 Jeremy Scott for Moschino, featuring in the exhibition. Photograph: Moschino 
Then there’s the “Common” room which includes Rihanna’s 9-to-5 boots 
<http://www.elle.com/fashion/news/a35961/rihanna-manolo-boots-real-women/> 
which she designed in collaboration with Manolo Blahnik. “Common isn’t a 
pejorative term here, it just means usual. And our usual material is denim,” 
said Clark. Still, class is deeply felt throughout the 11 rooms – but most 
literally in the “Ruling In and Ruling Out” room, which includes etiquette 
guides from the 16th century and beyond.

“The concept of vulgarity is always about defending class boundaries,” 
explained Clark. “That’s why we included the etiquette books. They take the 
idea of what’s vulgar, and what’s not, to ridiculous levels.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12baa73acbaafd9c3699d79b1bc0a8cefa0ddc3c%2F43_230_3301_1981%2F3301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbican%20exhibition%20delves%20into%20'vulgar'%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbican%20exhibition%20delves%20into%20%27vulgar%27%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12baa73acbaafd9c3699d79b1bc0a8cefa0ddc3c%2F43_230_3301_1981%2F3301.jpg>
 A 1700s fan. Photograph: The Fan Museum 
Alongside this, there are items that have divided the taste-makers, including 
theKimye issue of American Vogue 
<http://www.glamourmagazine.co.uk/news/fashion/2014/03/21/kim-kardashian-kanye-west-vogue-april-cover-photos>
, the Tom Ford editorial for Vogue Paris featuring a sexualised child model, and
David LaChapelle 
<http://davidlachapelle.com/series/amanda-lepore-addicted-to-diamonds/>’s 
portrait of a woman snorting a line of diamonds as if they were cocaine. These 
artefacts help contemporise the exhibition, linking it to today’s fashion 
climate, where designers have embraced the concept of “ugly” as an aesthetic 
choice, consciously moving away from notions of classical beauty. Just think of
Christopher Kane’s use of Crocs 
<http://observer.com/2016/09/christopher-kane-is-trying-to-make-crocs-a-thing/> 
at his London fashion week show; purposefully ugly hair and makeup on the 
catwalk (Preen, Vetements); and oversized silhouettes, nicknamed “lampshading”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc735f6d20c9e10d7d7fbc7fe9340c79ae3be9c84%2F0_17_2247_3491%2F2247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbican%20exhibition%20delves%20into%20'vulgar'%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbican%20exhibition%20delves%20into%20%27vulgar%27%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbarbican-exhibition-delves-into-vulgar-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc735f6d20c9e10d7d7fbc7fe9340c79ae3be9c84%2F0_17_2247_3491%2F2247.jpg>
 Karl Lagerfeld’s designs feature in the exhibition. Photograph: Chanel 
“There is lots of irony on the catwalk these days,” said Clark. “I think a lot 
of contemporary designers use humour and referencing in a knowing way. We have 
featured designers who can twist and turn with the idea of taste and playing 
with the rules of etiquette.”

With recent fashion talking points such as Moschino paper dolls, Balenciaga’s 
lawn chair-print dresses and Dolce & Gabbana’s food-themed collection, the idea 
of the vulgar is constantly being twisted and questioned. “Hopefully, this 
exhibition will provoke a bit of thought about what the limits of taste are,” 
said Clark.

The Vulgar, Fashion Redefined 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/artgallery/event-detail.asp?ID=18736> is at 
Barbican, London, from 13 October 2016 to 5 February 2017.
 