
Modernisme, Catalonia’s stunning take on art nouveau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/29/10-best-art-nouveau-cities-europe-prague-budapest-glasgow>
, is as important to the Barcelona brand as Barça striker Lionel Messi. The 
work of Antoni Gaudí in particular defines much of the city centre but few 
locals, let alone the tourists queueing to get into world-famous sights such as 
Palau Güell and Park Güell, know their dark secret: many were built with money 
made from the slave trade.

Nations are adept at swerving uncomfortable episodes in their history and 
Spain is no exception – the civil war’s legacy, for example, was not confronted 
for decades after Franco’s death. But times are changing: money has been spent 
on finding mass war graves, and Spain and Catalonia’s role in slavery is 
getting more attention. Barcelona hasa radical new mayor, Ada Colau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/13/ada-colau-barcelona-spain-mayor-targets-tourists>
, who made her name as a social activist, and the city council is supporting a 
new walking tour of places with a slave history.

“Es una memoria incómoda – an uncomfortable memory,” said historian Oriol 
López. “It’s not taught in schools here and it’s still not something some those 
in authority want to look at.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbarcelona-slave-trade-history-new-walking-tour-catalonia-spain-ramblas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e6570f3bfb55e2cb856244a298a070886ba575a%2F0_231_3775_2265%2F3775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20slave%20trade%20history%20revealed%20on%20new%20walking%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbarcelona-slave-trade-history-new-walking-tour-catalonia-spain-ramblas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20slave%20trade%20history%20revealed%20on%20new%20walking%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbarcelona-slave-trade-history-new-walking-tour-catalonia-spain-ramblas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e6570f3bfb55e2cb856244a298a070886ba575a%2F0_231_3775_2265%2F3775.jpg>
 Las Ramblas features on the tour, which begins near Plaça de Catalunya and 
ends at the city’s harbourside. Photograph: Alamy 
López works at the Barcelona-based European Observatory of Memories 
<http://europeanmemories.net/>, which created the tour with the University of 
Barcelona and theKnowing History Association <http://coneixerhistoria.cat/en/>.

The slave trade boomed in the 19th century. Many people left Spain and 
Catalonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/catalonia> as paupers and returned 
years later from colonies like Cuba as millionaires, but the city’s elite 
sneered and nicknamed themlos indianos. They spent big on mansions and married 
into respectable bourgeois Catalan families suffering from cashflow problems.

My tour started near Plaça de Catalunya at the statue of Joan Güell and ended 
near the harbour at the statue of Antonio López – industrialist, banker, 
philanthropist and Catalonia’s most notorious slave trader. Güell made his 
fortune in Cuba. “We don’t know if Güell was anegrero (a slave-trader),” said 
Oriol. “We have records for López, but other families of indianos were ashamed 
of their slavery past and erased the evidence.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbarcelona-slave-trade-history-new-walking-tour-catalonia-spain-ramblas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab2f5c6ac078de37a812ddd409ea08a381df56d9%2F0_0_2373_2965%2F2373.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20slave%20trade%20history%20revealed%20on%20new%20walking%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbarcelona-slave-trade-history-new-walking-tour-catalonia-spain-ramblas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20slave%20trade%20history%20revealed%20on%20new%20walking%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbarcelona-slave-trade-history-new-walking-tour-catalonia-spain-ramblas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab2f5c6ac078de37a812ddd409ea08a381df56d9%2F0_0_2373_2965%2F2373.jpg>
 The walking tour’s stop at the Antonio López statue. Photograph: Jeanne Drouet 
Güell’s son, Eusebi, married López’s daughter and became one of the richest 
men inSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>. He met Gaudí and so 
began a relationship that created some of the finest examples of modernisme.

Oriol led me down through Plaça de Catalunya, where the first demonstrations 
calling for the abolition of slavery were held in the 1870s, to the Ramblas and 
into the Barri Gòtic, including Plaça Sant Jaume and Plaça de Rei, tourist 
favourites, to explain how slavery has played a big part in Barcelona history 
through the ages. It’s estimated that 10% of the city’s population in medieval 
times were slaves.

Finally, we reached the harbourside. The famous seafood restaurant 7 Portes is 
on the ground floor of an impressive block built by an indiano called Josep 
Xifré and decorated with sculptures referencing his lucrative time in the 
Americas.


Nearby is Plaça d’Antonio López – they named a square after him – and his 
statue. The pedestal was daubed with red paint that dripped like blood down the 
steps next to the words “Africa free”.


The statue was, like Güell’s, ripped down in the civil war but rebuilt on 
Franco’s orders. There are regular campaigns to have the square renamed and the 
statue removed but for the moment protesters have to make do with occasional 
demos here, a bit of paint throwing – and now this tour.

• Book the tour with Memòria BCN <http://memoriabcn.cat/rutes-guiades.php>. It 
costs €15pp with a minimum of five people and can be run in English



 