
The first world war has never been a major subject for video games, perhaps 
because the endless weeks of trench-digging and letter-writing followed by a 
vault over the top and a brief, futile sprint into a “game over” screen doesn’t 
play to the medium’s conventional strengths. For years the second world war was 
the preferred theatre for the game director. That conflict’s variety has 
allowed players to partake in skirmishes in pretty French villages inBrothers 
in Arms, to storm Normandy beaches in Medal of Honor: Allied Assault and to 
draw a bead on Hitler’s testicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2012/may/02/sniper-v2-elite-game-review>
 inSniper V2 Elite.

With its centenary, however, attention has turned to the first world war. 
2014’sValiant Hearts: The Great War was a cartoonish yet sombre game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/20/valiant-hearts-the-great-war-review>
 that, much like Sebastian Faulks’sBirdsong, examines the pressures exerted by 
wartime circumstance and misfortune on the human heart. This month’s 
Battlefield 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/25/battlefield-1-review-ea-dice-shooter>
takes a more visceral approach, placing you in the boots of a number of 
soldiers across a range of French, Italian and Mesopotamian historical arenas. 
While there’s a brief story,Battlefield’s long-term offering is in its vast, 
disorienting multiplayer battles, where up to 64 players assume the roles of 
infantrymen, horse riders, tank drivers and biplane pilots, and trade shots 
while usingwar pigeons <http://www.rpra.org/pigeon-history/pigeons-in-war/> to 
call down artillery strikes on one another. Some may baulk at the appropriation 
of one of the world’s deadliest conflicts as set dressing for a sort of 
Scout-like wide game, but its no more morally questionable than a film director 
using war to mawkish ends.

Games are defined by systems of rules, but they are contextualised and 
elevated by their theme

Swedish developer Dice <http://www.dice.se/> has been aware of the need to 
treat the subject matter, especially in the context of a brash shoot ’em up, 
with the care of an educator. In September, the game’s senior producer,
Aleksander Grøndal <http://www.dice.se/people/aleksander-grondal/>, told Vice: 
“This was a pivotal moment in western history, and if we can encourage people 
to read up on it, then that’s a win in itself.” This prudence was undermined 
last week by a series of tone-deaf promotional tweets issued from the social 
media account of EA, the game’s multinational publisher. One showed an 
infantryman from the game blazing a rival with a flamethrower alongside the 
regretful caption: “When you’re too hot for the club,#justWWIthings” 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/justWWIthings?src=hash>. Another used a 
Spielberg-esque shot of a soldier in a billowing cape standing in front of an 
exploding Zeppelin, with the words: “When your squad is looking on point”.

Some droll Twitter users took up the hashtag, applying it to more historically 
appropriate phrases as a way of highlighting the insensitivity of the approach. 
(“tfw ur dying imperial dreams necessitate the needless slaughter of millions”
wrote oneGuardian correspondent 
<https://twitter.com/alexhern/status/793105040416313345?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>). 
The ensuing outcry drew an official apology from EA, which stated that the 
tweets “did not treat the World War I era with the respect and sensitivity that 
we have strived to maintain with the game and our communications”.

Games are defined by systems of rules, but they are contextualised and 
elevated by their theme. War is the predominant metaphor in sport, with “sides” 
led by the “captains”. It’s the theme used by chess, that bloodiest of all 
tabletop pursuits.Battlefield 1 is not much different from team sports such as 
football – likewise a rambling battle in which attackers and defenders ebb and 
flow up and down the pitch in a clash of will and power. The problem, perhaps, 
is with the specificity of the theme. If rugby, with its frantic dashes for a 
few metres of territory, were played in khaki uniform and the ball was shaped 
like a bomb, the sport might not have thrived as it has done. AsFifa’s ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/02/england-players-to-defy-fifa-ruling-and-wear-poppies-in-armistice-day-match>
 on England and Scotland players wearing poppies when their teams meet on 
Armistice Day demonstrates, there is a kind of moral impunity in abstraction.
 