
Dotted along the narrow path that skirts the edge of Beatrice Alvitsa’s house 
in Shimanyiro, a green Kenyan valley near the border with Uganda, are dozens of 
millet plants, each protected by a carefully assembled fence made of sticks. 
“These keep the chickens and other animals out,” she says, bending down to mend 
a break in one of the fences.

Sustainable development goals: changing the world in 17 steps – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
Having received training in farming techniques and secured regular access to 
quality seeds and fertiliser, Alvitsa now produces enough food on her acre and 
a half of land to feed her family. She pays school fees for her seven children 
by selling surplus food and saves money in a mobile bank account.

As the world prepares to transition from the millennium development goals 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/> (MDGs) to the sustainable development goals
 <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300> – which aim to end poverty 
and hunger, achieve food security, improve nutrition and promote sustainable 
development – some experts say farmers like Alvitsa exemplify the path to 
meeting these targets.

Millennium development goal 1: 15 achievements on poverty and hunger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/19/mdg1-millennium-development-goal-poverty-hunger-achievements>
Smallholder farmers provide up to 80% of Asia and sub-Saharan Africa’s food, 
where the vast majority of the world’s poor people live,according to the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
<http://www.ifad.org/climate/resources/smallholders_report.pdf>(pdf).

The most recent hunger statistics 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCEQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.un.org%2Fmillenniumgoals%2F2014%2520MDG%2520report%2FMDG%25202014%2520English%2520web.pdf&ei=4iTKVLK0N8n6UtzsgdgM&usg=AFQjCNFWBl0a7BjpW5UnSnK0xEZBNHZssQ&sig2=cmU3hnIK4v9WixbYZV2bbA&bvm=bv.84607526,d.d24>
 (pdf) suggest that 14% of the world do not have sufficient access to food, 
making it unlikely that the MDG to bring hunger rates down to 12.5% by the end 
of this year will be met. In its 2014 progress report, the UN said immediate 
action was needed to reduce hunger, lamenting that progress had slowed since 
2005.

At a time when the world’s population is soaring – the UN has projected it 
could reach 9.6 billion <http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=45165> by 
2050 <http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=45165> – a debate has 
emerged about how best to support farmers between advocates of large-scale 
agricultural projects and those who prefer more targeted, small-scale efforts. 
Global food production must double by 2050 to feed the world,the World Food 
Programme says 
<https://www.wfp.org/content/world-must-double-food-production-2050-fao-chief>.

“The most important way to create long-term food security is to recognise and 
include food sovereignty in national, regional and international policies that 
influence food systems,” says Nyoni Ndabezinhle, press officer at Via 
Campesina, an advocacy group for small-scale farmers. “We need our national 
governments to carry out comprehensive agrarian reforms, giving land to the 
peasants.”

In order to thrive, farmers in the developing world need access to seed, 
fertiliser, microcredit and microinsurance, as well as rights to land and union 
representation, according toSir Gordon Conway 
<http://www.imperial.ac.uk/people/g.conway>, director of Agriculture for Impact 
<http://www.imperial.ac.uk/a-z-research/agriculture-for-impact/>.


“You need links to markets through warehousing in particular. You need fair, 
efficient and transparent markets and you need value chains where entrepreneurs 
can become engaged, and you need links into local and regional markets in 
Africa and international markets; you need the right kind of investment.”

Others say commercial agricultural schemes like the G8’s New Alliance for Food 
Security and Nutrition initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/new-alliance-for-food-security-and-nutrition>
 will complement gains made on local levels, linking smallholders with 
international markets. The New Alliance says it will lift 50 million people out 
of poverty by 2022.

The African Development Bank <http://www.afdb.org/en/> (AfDB), which 
contributes funding to the New Alliance, says large-scale agricultural 
investment will help to scale up development gains made over the past 25 years. 
“Foreign private investment in Africa’s agricultural sector has significant 
potential to complement public resources,” says Chiji Ojukwu, director of the 
AfDB’s agriculture and agro-industry department.

“Large-scale investment in African agriculture and agribusiness, whether 
foreign, domestic, private, government-backed, or a combination of these, could 
pay a vital role in providing urgently needed financing, technology and 
markets, thereby assisting to ensure food security, contributing to poverty 
reduction and propelling agriculture-driven growth, with significant 
implications for achieving more inclusive growth.”

New Alliance projects, which require governments to change laws and policies 
to favour businesses, have been rolled out in 10 sub-Saharan countries. Critics 
have expressed alarm at the lack of effective monitoring and accountability 
mechanisms, andhave condemned the scheme as a new wave of colonialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/feb/18/g8-new-alliance-condemned-new-colonialism>
.
Land grabs interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/feb/land-grabs/index.html> 
Nearly 35m hectares (82m acres) of land in 66 countries has been leased by 
foreign investors to produce food crops since 2006,according to Grain 
<http://www.grain.org/article/entries/4479-grain-releases-data-set-with-over-400-global-land-grabs>
, an environmental watchdog. Large-scale agricultural production will benefit 
private-sector firms rather than poor people, Grain says, noting that financial 
companies and sovereign wealth funds are responsible for about a third of the 
deals.

The World Bank estimates that as much as 200m hectares of land in the 
developing world has been leased to agricultural investors over the past 10 
years.



“Large-scale commercial agriculture can indeed play a significant role in 
feeding the world’s poorest, but food availability alone will not translate to 
reduced poverty, hunger and undernutrition,” says Shenggen Fan, director 
general of theInternational Food Policy Research Institute 
<http://www.ifpri.org/>.

Food security <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/food-security> 
is not simply about producing enough to feed every person, says Jomo Kwame 
Sundaram, assistant director general of the Food and Agriculture Organisation’s 
department of economic and social development. Ensuring adequate supply comes 
down to four key factors: food availability, access, stability and utilisation, 
he says. “The question of access is probably the most fundamental of the four 
dimensions of food security. We talk about the availability of food, the 
stability of food supplies and then access.”

Kenya's small-scale farmers borrow seeds to grow potential | Mark Anderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/19/kenya-farmers-seeds-finance-fertiliser-food-income-mdgs>
The developing world is home to more than 900 million obese adults, nearly 30% 
more than the 557 million chronically overweight adults in wealthy countries, 
according tothe Overseas Development Institute <http://www.odi.org/future-diets>
.

Writing in the Guardian, Hilal Elver 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Food/Pages/HilalElver.aspx>, the UN’s special 
rapporteur on the right to food, says: “Transnational corporations can be part 
of the problem, tending to undermine the livelihood of locals, displacing them 
from their home and land, interfering with their access to natural resources, 
and causing environmental destruction.”



“The task is huge, but the tools are there. The challenge is mainly a matter 
of fashioning political will strong enough to overcome entrenched interests in 
maintaining food insecurity.”
 