
Shy, directionless squeezing is not the way to bountiful buckets of milk. 
That’s what occurs to me, high in the sweet and fertile heartland ofCrete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/23/crete-greek-island-holiday-guide>
, as I try to get to grips with the ancient art of goat-milking. Retaining a 
purchase on the teat while avoiding being nipped or kicked demands a lot of 
concentration. But eventually, the liquid comes spurting out, hitting the tin 
bucket with a loud ping.

I’m at Agreco, a stone-by-stone replica of a 17th-century farm in Adele, a 
village in the hills above touristy Rethymno, on Crete’s north coast. It has a 
dairy, a watermill, an olive press, beehives and 11,500 vines – and visitors 
are invited to come and play farmer for the day.

Crete’s economy once relied on fertile plains and mountains. Now these areas 
attract those looking for a dose of country living; agritourism is on the rise, 
with farm stays and hands-on rural experiences popping up all over the island.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441966562889%2F71390003-8411-494c-b3c3-3935f046ac0d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Be%20a%20farmer%20for%20a%20day%20in%20Crete&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Be%20a%20farmer%20for%20a%20day%20in%20Crete&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441966562889%2F71390003-8411-494c-b3c3-3935f046ac0d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Emily shearing sheep, which was ‘faintly terrifying’ 
Open to members of the public for day visits, farm tours and dinner, Agreco 
was created in 2002 by Nikos Daskalantonakis, founder of the Grecotel hotel 
chain, as a tourist attraction and to encourage local farmers to use organic 
methods to grow produce for the area’s hotels.

Depending on the season, wannabe farmhands can tread grapes in an old stone 
vat, harvest wheat, help make olive oil, bake bread in a wood-burning oven and 
pick vine leaves for dolmades. Down below, on the main drag of Rethymno town, 
tourists mill, postcards gather dust and the sea laps the sand. Up here, where 
I’m “working”, tiny Byzantine monasteries cling to the mountains, thyme and 
mint sway in the breeze and birds twitter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4d0046bd443da3cec5476f5432906afbb8c6a9b%2F0_28_718_431%2F718.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Be%20a%20farmer%20for%20a%20day%20in%20Crete&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Be%20a%20farmer%20for%20a%20day%20in%20Crete&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4d0046bd443da3cec5476f5432906afbb8c6a9b%2F0_28_718_431%2F718.jpg>
 Agreco is a replica of 17th-century farm 
I meet Alexis, the strapping farmer in charge, who learned his trade from his 
grandparents at the age of 10. Now, his own two-and-a-half year old son, 
Stefanos, gads about the farm laughing at goats, peering into the cobwebby 
olive press. “He’s learning everything I know,” Alexis says, as he steadies a 
sheep for me to shear.

I take the shears to the animal and its organs are almost visible through thin 
and wrinkly skin. It’s faintly terrifying, but with a snip-snip, fluffy clods 
of wool land on the ground.

The Association of British Travel Agents reports that tourism to Greece – 
specifically its islands – is up 2% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/07/help-greece-go-on-holiday-cheap-beautiful>
since last year, though Crete’s robust farming sector means it doesn’t rely on 
tourism as much as some other islands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441966338258%2Fab643aba-2d7d-4996-aac4-d9681cd0319c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Be%20a%20farmer%20for%20a%20day%20in%20Crete&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Be%20a%20farmer%20for%20a%20day%20in%20Crete&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffarm-working-holiday-crete-greece-eco-tourism-organic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441966338258%2Fab643aba-2d7d-4996-aac4-d9681cd0319c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Treading grapes 
At Agreco, everything is organic: duck droppings are used as fertiliser and 
old feta cheese tins reused for growing herbs. It’s the kind of place where one 
feels meditative, separate from everyday life. In one afternoon I watch goats’ 
milk turn to cheese with the addition of hot water and lemon; bite into wild 
artichokes fresh from the ground, knead bread at the watermill and learn how to 
shear a sheep. We then sit down for a 30-dish meal in which everything from the 
boiled eggs and chicken to the plump tomatoes, honey and wine was produced just 
metres away.

Rural, sustainable Crete is flourishing, proving that tourism and the simple 
life can live side-by-side.

• The trip was provided by Agreco (caramel.grecotel.com 
<http://caramel.grecotel.com/fine-dining/agreco-farm.html>). Its Farmer for the 
Day <http://www.agreco.gr/farm-activities.html> costs €52 adults, €26 kids, 
under 6s free, every Wednesday May-Oct. A Sunday hands-on experience – shearing 
sheep and goats, harvesting wheat or olives, treading grapes, and making raki 
and olive oil costs from €45pp. A 50-minute farm tour followed by a Cretan 
feast at the taverna, is €45pp. Flights were provided byAegean Airlines 
<http://en.aegeanair.com>, which flies to Heraklion from Gatwick from £192 
return. Doubles at Caramel from €225 B&B, and at Creta Palace from €191 B&B

More of Crete’s quiet corners
 Spili, western Crete. Photograph: Alamy 
Spili, west

Traditional village where three churches have impressive frescoes and icons, 
and great walking and cycling in the country around. Heracles hotel has doubles 
from €40 a night (heracles-hotel.eu <http://www.heracles-hotel.eu/>).

Kato Zakros, east


Village with pebbled beach, tavernas and a hike to the Gorge of the Dead, with 
Minoan cave tombs. Studios from €60 a night at Stella’s Traditional Apartments (
stelapts.com <http://www.stelapts.com/>).

Milia, west

Tiny 17th-century mountain cottages now an eco-friendly agritourismo, with 
candle-lit rooms and hammocks. Doubles from €77 a night (milia.gr 
<http://www.milia.gr/EN/>).

Aspros Potamos, south

Ancient settlement where 10 flat-roofed houses are built into the hillside. No 
electricity, no Wi-Fi, just candles and oil-lamps, from €45 a night (
asprospotamos.gr <http://www.asprospotamos.gr/>).
 