
I am sent hundreds of eye palettes each year and, after the initial gasp as I 
flip open the compact and admire the sheer prettiness within, I am mostly 
identifying which of the component colours I would never wear in a million 
years. And this is the inherent flaw in an otherwise delightful plan – one can 
only fit four shades, max, on to one’s eyelids at any given time (a neutral 
base tone, a darker tone to lay in the eye crease, one darker still for lining 
the eyes and adding smoke, and perhaps a shimmery shadow for the centre lower 
lid or brow bone to attract light – and that’s, let’s face it, for when one has 
the requisite time, occasion and inclination). All of these must be wearable 
and useful so as not to represent false economy.

Fulfilling this brief entirely is Chanel’s Multi Effect Quadra Eyeshadow 
<http://www.boots.com/en/CHANEL-LES-4-OMBRES-Multi-Effect-Quadra-Eyeshadow_1459359??&cm_mmc=bmm-_-google-_-PLAs-_-Boots%20Shopping%20-%20Category%20-%20Luxury%20Beauty&gclid=CL32qPD43NACFa277QodboMF1A>
 in Tissé Essentiel (£40). Released this summer but now seemingly here for the 
long haul, this is, I think, the perfect palette. Comprising a soft ivory, 
taupe, intense mushroom and a deep, rich brown (all in a satin finish), it’s 
ostensibly yet another collection of bland nudes. But in practice one can just 
as easily create a sexy, smoky party look as a simple daytime wash of colour. I 
wore no other eyeshadow for a series of evening events across the UK (at one 
point I realised I’d left it in a hotel room and rushed straight out to buy 
another), and even if you’ve previously found Chanel’s baked shadows lacking in 
pigment and colour payoff, as I have, I would urge you, too, to revisit this 
newer formula. The mousy taupe gives a defined 1960s-style socket line, but 
blends silkily and seamlessly to avoid harsh edges.

Related: Beauty: the best new mascaras | Sali Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/13/beauty-best-new-mascaras-sali-hughes>

I personally don’t think it can be improved upon, but if you prefer a more 
matte finish, try Kevyn Aucoin’s beautifulthe Essential Eye Shadow Palette 
<http://www.spacenk.com/uk/en_GB/brands/k/kevyn-aucoin/the-essential-eye-shadow-palette-%233-MUS300022973.html>
 (£46). It’s similarly versatile minus the glimmer and, while expensive, pretty 
much trend-proof.

If your taste is for cooler shades – greys, heathers and the like – then 
Charlotte Tilbury’s four-colourluxury palette the Uptown Girl 
<http://www.charlottetilbury.com/uk/luxury-palette-the-uptown-girl.html> (£38) 
is ideal. No one sells better curated eyeshadows, in my view. Every shade earns 
its place in the slimline compact (mercifully without stupid applicators) and 
the free online tutorials (by Tilbury herself) give clear instructions on how 
to maximise their already superior usefulness.
 