
Does everyone start a health retreat this way, I wonder, downing a large glass 
of wine, eating a Bounty and whizzing off work emails as I sit waiting for my 
delayed plane at Gatwick. Three days later I am doing a sun salutation, feeling 
the rays on my skin and looking over a vast, near-empty beach filling the 
horizon.

My first attempt at surfing is like trying to stand up in a washing machine

It is my first visit to Jersey – for a yoga and surfing weekend. I have a 
vague sense of it being sunny, small and populated by tax-averse businessmen 
and the odd suave detective, all pootling around in luxury cars. A bit of 
research suggests it might be nirvana for hard Brexit Tories. “Fiercely 
independent, yet deeply loyal to the Crown” (according toJersey Heritage 
<https://www.jerseyheritage.org/uk>), it’s not part of the EU, there’s no NHS 
and the only way a non-Jersey resident can buy property or work freely is by 
proving they earn over £625,000 a year. There is a phalanx of private aircraft 
parked beside the runway when we land.

It is, however, wildly beautiful. Drift Retreat 
<https://www.jersey.com/drift-retreat> is housed in a converted 19th-century 
Martello tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/dec/20/martello-tower-conversion>
 by St Ouen’s Bay. The tower perches, squat and rotund, on the shoreline 
between the five-mile beach and a nature reserve. Inside, there are granite 
walls, tasteful furnishings and a vast vaulted brick ceiling. The view from the 
roof is spectacular: wide-open horizon, windswept gorse and seaweed-strewn 
sand. This, the Atlantic-facing stretch of coast, is the island’s only surfing 
beach.
 The round house: the ancient Martello tower where the Drift Retreat is based. 
Drift was set up by Jersey native and keen surfer Rebecca Coley, who, after a 
decade slugging it out as a filmmaker in London, wanted to come home and 
reconnect with the sea. Noticing that “wellness” – that ubiquitous tourism 
trend – had been slow to come to Jersey, she and two friends (surfing and yoga 
instructor Natalie Fox and nutrition expert Gemma Bartlett) launched the 
island’s first residential retreat.

The idea is that, over three days, you do at least one surfing or 
paddle-boarding session and one yoga class every day, go offline, and eat only 
organic, veggie wholefoods – “a detox without realising it”. Yoga and surfing 
are, Fox explains, symbiotically linked – the positions you hold are often the 
same and, done properly, you have the same “mindful” focus for both. (Lots of 
pro-surfers go on to teach yoga when the retire.)

I am nervous that Fox might be a ‘studio yoga’ dervish - the sort that has 
multiplied lately in boutique urban gyms, teaching a sped-up ‘power’ version of 
yoga over super-loud house tunes.
 Lights out: the dorm room within the tower. 
Happily, she turns out to be a kind of pick-and-mix yogi (and an excellent 
instructor). On the first night, we (there are four other, 20- and 30-something 
women here, pretty much all in retreat from some hideously stressful job) do 
yoga nidra – meditation, essentially. On the second day, yin yoga (holding 
challenging stretches for long periods) and, on the third, overlooking the 
beach, vinyasa (poses in a flowing sequence). I finish on a yoga high – the 
calm elation that comes from giving your spinal nervous system a thorough 
workout.

I’m on far less certain ground with the surfing sessions. On the first morning 
we wake up in our circular dorm room (there’s a definite girls’ boarding school 
air to this weekend: bunkbeds, hearty sport, communal teeth-brushing) to 
howling winds and ocean spray hitting the tower’s walls. But once the tide is 
out and turning, we force on our wetsuits and carry our boards the 50 metres to 
the beach. After cowering under a brief hailstorm, while Fox runs through basic 
instructions, we enter the foaming surf, which is surprisingly warm (because – 
duh – it’s been heating up all summer). It’s like trying to surf in a washing 
machine.
 Hold that pose: doing yoga on paddle boards. 
The following day is another story. The sun is glorious. There are other 
surfers dotted along the waves carving and wheeling, like silhouetted birds on 
the swell. I progress from riding the board on my belly to – whoop – a wobbly 
kneel! It’s a totally different way of engaging with the sea: swimming in the 
ocean, waves are to be avoided, jumped under or over; surfing, you read the 
potential, size up the energy of each curving crest. I am terrible at it, but I 
completely see how thrilling and addictive it can be.

On paper, the food part of the weekend seemed a bit of a gamble, but it turns 
out that a natural, almost all-raw diet can be moreish and unpredictable. While 
we’re off exercising, Bartlett (who runs a health streetfood van and catering 
business) performs culinary alchemy, turning vegetables, fruits, pulses, nuts, 
seeds and leaves, plus the odd bit of cheese, into sculpted portions of roasted 
sweet potato salad, or dehydrated vegetable crackers (that are delicious), or 
to-die-for millionaire’s shortbread that contains neither sugar nor biscuit.
 Tuck in: communal dining. Food is natural and almost all raw, but 
unexpectedly moreish. 
Despite a vague, nagging headache on day one (sugar or caffeine withdrawal? I 
can’t decide), I am full after each meal and have tons of energy. This would be 
the perfect, most nourishing way to eat, always, if only one could spend every 
waking minute sourcing and preparing food.

The days are busy (I would have welcomed some time to just do nothing). We 
even squeeze in an afternoon’s hunting with local forager Kazz. Luxuriantly 
dreadlocked, he is the type of guy you’d want around when the apocalypse comes. 
He offers us slimy samples of the seaweed he sells to Michelin-starred 
restaurants in Jersey and London. Then he cooks us buttered limpets on the 
beach.

I go home feeling enjoyably exhausted, mentally tranquil (despite failing 
miserably at the digital part of the detox – I manage just one night, my phone 
silently summoning me from a drawer downstairs) and inspired to make simple 
changes to my family’s eating habits. And, if I close my eyes, I can still see 
that empty beach.

Essentials

The holiday was provided by Drift Retreat, St Ouen, Jersey (driftretreat.co.uk 
<http://driftretreat.co.uk>). The next retreat is May 2017. Prices from £400 
for a three-night weekend. Flights courtesy of Visit Jersey (jersey.com 
<http://jersey.com/>); prices start at £80 return from Gatwick. Rebecca Coley’s 
surf documentaryPoint of Change <https://vimeo.com/161168638> will be released 
in 2017.

 