
It all started some 20 years ago, when I found myself at the house party of a 
celebrity model I didn’t know, who was midway through an advertising campaign 
for a brand of shampoo and conditioner she insisted she couldn’t live without. 
My natural cynicism, combined with (at that stage) a couple of years’ working 
in and around the beauty industry, meant I assumed she’d never been near the 
two-quid shampoo outside a film studio; so a wee break also became a 
fact-finding mission. Working on the assumption that anything really personal, 
such as prescription medication, would have been stowed safely away, I peered 
into her cabinet and spotted several half-empty bottles of those very same hair 
products – as well as a dirt-cheap supermarket face cream. I’ve liked her ever 
since.


I have been fascinated by bathroom cabinets for as long as I can remember, and 
so the idea for my In The Bathroom With… series on YouTube, in which I 
interview women I admire while sitting on their loo-lid, rifling through their 
toiletries, came very easily. I’d noticed over the years that the most open and 
juicy conversations on any night out take place in the ladies’ room, where 
people feel safe and off-guard. There’s something so intimate about the 
bathroom environment, not only because of what we do in there, but also because 
the combination of medical and cosmetic makes it such an intriguing and 
revealing place.

Nowadays, I’m aware that my job makes my own (very large) bathroom cabinet the 
subject of some scrutiny, too, and this is one reason I keep it in relatively 
good order. Everything is filed into plastic Muji bins Dymo-labelled by 
category (serums, night creams, nail stuff and so on) and Ikea baskets for 
small, fiddly things such as razor blades and cotton buds (see opening page). 
Skincare products I’m interested in testing, and that have passed an initial 
play at the kitchen table, make it upstairs and into the appropriate bin (I 
keep makeup and perfume in separate places: the steam plays havoc). Every eight 
weeks or so, I do a stocktake and re-edit the bathroom cabinet according to 
what’s impressed me and what hasn’t. It sounds complicated, but the 
organisation makes my life a great deal simpler; it’s satisfying in the same 
way a record collector might enjoy sorting her vinyl.

Work isn’t the only consideration, of course. My bathroom serves a family of 
four, so essential supplies such as heavy-duty sunblock, nit combs, huge family 
packs of loo paper, dog shampoo and my partner’s beloved talcum powder (kept 
despite my hatred of it) are just as important as the posh creams that help pay 
the mortgage. I like that, in its own way, our bathroom cabinet reflects the 
evolution of my family: the baby wipes and Calpol are now gone, the sticking 
plasters are no longer covered in Mr Men, the fruity toothpaste has been 
upgraded to Colgate. Some things remain by luck or default: scales I pretend 
don’t exist, the muscle-relaxing bath foam for after a run I’ll never take, a 
rubber duck I can’t bear formally to retire.

But I’m comforted by their presence, their homely clutter. When I see those 
hotel-style, minimalist bathrooms, with small empty cupboards, my heart sinks. 
And I wonder what their owner is hiding.

Lianne La Havas <http://www.liannelahavas.com/> Singer/songwriter

I love doing my makeup. I like to spend time on it, and don’t like being 
rushed. Eyeliner is the most beautifying thing – to give you the shape of cats’ 
eyes. When I was a child, I used to do a lot of drawing, and for some reason I 
loved drawing eyes. When I was old enough to be allowed to wear makeup, the 
first thing I wanted was eyes like the ones I drew. I’ve been trying to perfect 
them, applying eyeliner as evenly as possible, since I was 13 or 14.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cfcef97a084878bec71562649aee6004aa1976d%2F477_390_3647_2189%2F3647.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cfcef97a084878bec71562649aee6004aa1976d%2F477_390_3647_2189%2F3647.jpg>
 Lianne La Havas. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Guardian 
What’s on my table

Bobbi Brown Long-Wear Gel Eyeliner 
<http://www.bobbibrown.co.uk/product/2328/7785/Makeup/Eyes/Eyeliner/Long-Wear-Gel-Eyeliner>
For everyday, I put on moisturiser and just liner, sometimes even without 
mascara: if the liner’s perfect, you can get away with not very much else on 
the face. My favourite is my Bobbi Brown gel eyeliner pot, and I use the 
applicator from one of my liquid liners (Sleek’s Dip It, which I got from 
Superdrug).

Skimdo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TvTd7HJcFgk> curl cream I’ve got very 
curly, kinky hair. I love to wear it naturally, with all the mad curls, but 
it’s hard to keep on top of the maintenance without having to wet it every day. 
A friend with exactly the same hair texture has invented a product called 
Skimdo: you put it on wet hair, divide into sections, and coil each little bit 
with your finger. This creates shiny, uniform ringlets that last for a week, 
bouncy and moisturised and tangle-free. If you concentrate, fingercoiling takes 
about an hour, but saves so much time in the long run.

Givenchy Dahlia Noir 
<http://www.theperfumeshop.com/Givenchy/Dahlia-Noir/Eau-de-parfum-for-her/p/20500EDPJU>
This has been my perfume for a few years now. Someone gave it to me as a 
present and I felt I’d finally found my fragrance. It’s an important thing, for 
a woman to find her fragrance. It’s fresh, not too sweet and not too strong. 
Now my friends all know my smell.

Lancôme Grandiose Mascara 
<http://www.lancome.co.uk/_en/_gb/make-up/eyes/mascara/grandiose-16210z.aspx?> 
The brush has an angled “swan neck”, and I wondered what that might do. It 
turns out that it makes it easy to apply without getting it on your eyelids or 
in the corners, without blobbing, basically. And the mascara makes your lashes 
really curl upwards, all juicy and fat. Afterwards, I separate my eyelashes 
with aBoots No7 Lash and Brow Brush Pro 
<http://www.boots.com/en/No7-Lash-Brow-Brush-Pro_1273633/>. It’s amazing. I use 
the brow-grooming brush on it, too.

Embryolisse Lait-Crème Concentré 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Embryolisse-Lait-Creme-Concentre-Nourishing-Moisturiser-30ml_1621851/>
I use this cream morning and night. A makeup artist used it on me once and gave 
me the rest of the tube. It has the perfect balance of richness and lightness. 
At night I also use Kiehl’s Midnight Recovery eye cream. I don’t know if it 
actually works, but I guess it’s peace of mind. It feels as if I’m doing 
something nice for my under-eyes. The more moisture, the better, I suppose, and 
Kiehl’s stuff has a lovely, sophisticated smell: deep and earthy and floral.

Mac Film Noir lipstick 
<http://www.maccosmetics.co.uk/product/shaded/168/310/Lipstick/index.tmpl> I 
either like dark, really intense lipstick or completely nude, except for my 
Burt’s Bees chapstick. Film Noir is a 1920s-esque chocolatey-brown colour. I 
also like Antique Velvet, which is similar but a bit more matte.

Nars The Multiple in Orgasm 
<http://narscosmetics.co.uk/en_GB/orgasm-the-multiple/0607845015178.html> It’s 
got a bit of a funny name, but this is an amazing blusher that’s also a 
highlighter. The colour is a pearlescent rosy pink, with lots of lovely shiny 
bits in there. It’s perfect.

Lianne La Havas is headlining LeeFest Presents: The Neverland 
<http://www.leefest.org/home/> on 28-30 July.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54dbeaf1acaf5e177cea866b37d457accb692284%2F76_122_1724_1218%2F1724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54dbeaf1acaf5e177cea866b37d457accb692284%2F76_122_1724_1218%2F1724.jpg>
 Alexandra Shulman’s dressing table. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Guardian 
Alexandra Shulman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman> 
Editor-in-chief,Vogue <http://www.vogue.co.uk> (dressing table pictured above)


I haven’t got any makeup on today. Sometimes I go on what you’d call a makeup 
craze, but I’ve never been one of those women who won’t go outside unless 
they’re made up. I’ve never understood that. As far as I can tell, it’s a 
generational thing: I’m amazed by how much foundation teenagers put on their 
face today. I think I first wore foundation in my 30s.

I grew up in the days of Biba <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biba>, so I wore 
a lot of dark plum lipstick and black nail polish. Now, if I wear makeup, it’s 
base and eyeliner. I’ve never really worn mascara, because I have very long 
eyelashes, so I just look like I’ve got two tarantulas on my face. That said, 
if I had my life again, I would wear more.

This is how my makeup table looks on a day-to-day basis. I don’t really store 
things away. That’s a photo of me shot byJane Bown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jane-bown> after I became editor of 
Vogue, and this is a chest of drawers fromGraham & Green 
<http://www.grahamandgreen.co.uk>. It’s beautiful, but I really need to get a 
proper dressing table. I should also add that it’s usually a lot messier than 
this.

What’s on my table

Floris Stephanotis Bath Essence 
<http://www.florislondon.com/en_gbp/stephanotis-bath-essence> This is my 
favourite bath product – I often dab it on as perfume. It’s one of those things 
that people had by the bath when I was growing up. Floris keep discontinuing 
their best old scents to launch new ones, so I’m on a one-woman mission to save 
it.

Bobbi Brown <http://www.bobbibrown.co.uk/> foundations (various) I use a lot 
of bases – a BB cream, an advanced serum. Basically, whenever I get my makeup 
done professionally, they always use one of those, and it’s brilliant for 
someone who doesn’t wear a lot of makeup. I vary how I apply it. Sometimes I 
just use a serum with a moisturiser and some foundation, and mix it all up 
together.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb9cc6d90f353e79ab4aee41d7e5b808513be1b%2F123_174_1181_709%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb9cc6d90f353e79ab4aee41d7e5b808513be1b%2F123_174_1181_709%2F1181.jpg>
 Alexandra Shulman. Photograph: Roger Askew/REX Shutterstock 
Dr Hauschka Rose Day Cream 
<https://www.dr.hauschka.com/en_GB/products/rose-day-cream/> I’m a huge fan of 
Dr Hauschka: it works fantastically and I also just love the smell of it. I put 
it on in the morning, but it’s oddly strong and thick, so you have to massage 
it in.

Ainsworths Recovery Remedy 
<http://www.ainsworths.com/index.php?node=eShopItem&_item=bfrec> I carry this 
stuff everywhere. Whenever I’m worried about something in the day, I take it. 
If I wake up at night worrying, I put some drops in water and it usually sends 
me back to sleep.

Miss Dior <http://www.boots.com/en/Dior/Ladies-Fragrances/Miss-Dior/> My 
favourite scent. You know how some smells just suit your body? Well, this is 
mine. People come up to me at parties and tell me I smell nice. It was my 
luxury onDesert Island Discs <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b02x5j67>.

Lipsticks/stains, Chantecaille and Armani I’m a strong believer in the power 
of buying a lipstick. You go into a shop, you pick one out and you think your 
life will be better for having it. I don’t know if it’s that powerful, but I do 
like lipstick. That said, I tend to wear stains – Chantecaille, and my new 
favourite is the Armani one.

Interview by Morwenna Ferrier
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F096ca8d82c6f723e5dbedd3cccef3bc9decf4591%2F39_355_7142_4285%2F7142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F096ca8d82c6f723e5dbedd3cccef3bc9decf4591%2F39_355_7142_4285%2F7142.jpg>
 Patrick Grant’s cabinet. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Guardian 
Patrick Grant, creative director, Norton & Sons tailors 
<http://www.nortonandsons.co.uk>, Savile Row

I’m fairly low on the maintenance stakes. I can get into black tie in 10, 
maybe 15 minutes – it’s such a well-oiled routine. I do, however, enjoy the 
ritual of getting dressed up. It feels really special: tying my tie, putting my 
cummerbund and cufflinks on, making sure my hair’s brushed, shoes polished and 
everything’s neat and tidy. I like that Beau Brummell idea that if you’re 
properly dressed, you should be completely unremarkable. The same applies to 
grooming: it’s about careful understatement, making sure everything is as neat 
and orderly as it can possibly be, and nothing jars.

What’s on my shelves

Mr Natty’s Famous Beard Elixir 
<http://www.mrnatty.com/shop/famous-beard-elixir> My grooming regime largely 
revolves around the beard. I give it a weekly trim with a Phillips beard 
trimmer. Depending on the time of year, I trim to different degrees: in winter, 
it’s left a little longer, to keep my face warm; I ride a bicycle, so it makes 
a massive difference. It also feels more appropriate in winter, because you’re 
wearing heavier, woollier clothes, so you’re much bulkier all over. I usually 
have a trim of the tache before I go out, and once or twice a week I’ll use a 
beard oil.

Sisley Sisleyum Anti- Age Global Revitalizer For Men 
<http://www.sisley-paris.com/en-GB/sisleyum-for-men-normal-3473311550101.html> 
I’ve used this since my mid-30s. It’s light, matte and totally invisible. 
Because I cycle a lot, I sweat a bit, and some creams make your face 
additionally sweaty, which this doesn’t; it also has a good herbal man 
fragrance. I put it on three or four times a week, especially if I’ve had a lot 
to drink – it’s a great hangover skin-reviver.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cf14a7810cec8b87f581b0985bf1463213a3b0d%2F105_91_1865_1120%2F1865.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cf14a7810cec8b87f581b0985bf1463213a3b0d%2F105_91_1865_1120%2F1865.jpg>
 Patrick Grant. Photograph: Richard Young/REX/Shutterstock 
Aveda Men Pure-Formance Pomade 
<http://www.aveda.co.uk/product/5310/17115/Hair-Care/Men/Aveda-Men-Pure-Formance-Pomade/index.tmpl>
I don’t use much product in my hair, partly because I wear a cycle helmet a lot 
of the time. Shampoo-wise, it’s whatever’s on special offer at Boots or 
Sainsbury’s. I very occasionally use this pomade as a light tamer if my hair is 
sticking out oddly, or if I’ve just washed it and it’s a bit fluffy.

Bleu de Chanel 
<http://www.chanel.com/en_US/fragrance-beauty/bleu-de-chanel-136323> As part of 
being properly dressed, I would always wear a fragrance. I have quite a few, 
and it’s very mood-dependent. I have a bottle of Bleu de Chanel at home and one 
in the studio, because I get dressed all over the place. I also wear Issey 
Miyake’s L’Eau d’Issey, Eau Sauvage by Dior andPenhaligon’s Blenheim Bouquet 
<http://www.penhaligons.com/blenheim-bouquet-eau-de-toilette/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70d507df2634b071eb0a629c4617fae731bb45d0%2F21_13_2455_1616%2F2455.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70d507df2634b071eb0a629c4617fae731bb45d0%2F21_13_2455_1616%2F2455.jpg>
 Charlotte Olympia Dellal’s dressing table. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the 
Guardian 
Charlotte Olympia Dellal 
<http://uk.charlotteolympia.com/products/all-shoes/?gclid=CO2Kjr2Up8sCFQQGwwodCkUO4Q>
 Shoe and bag designer

My 1940s-inspired look is more down to beauty than clothes. That era is very 
much about hair and makeup, and my set hair and red lipstick make me feel like 
me. My grandmother wore red lipstick and had a little mirror for reapplying. 
Even if I’m by myself, I’ll still put on lipstick. When you’re tired or not in 
the mood, it looks like you’ve made an effort.

I keep the rest of my face natural and fresh, so I look more modern than 
throwback. Instead of loads of makeup, I use beauty products that are about 
looking after my skin, such asDr Sebagh Eye Primer Lift 
<http://www.drsebagh.com/eye-primer-lift>.

I don’t wear foundation – just some Yves Saint Laurent Touche Éclat 
<http://www.yslbeauty.co.uk/touche-eclat>, blusher occasionally and sometimes 
mascara for evening.

My dressing table is built into my dressing room. If I have time, I sit at it 
and make a ritual out of preparing to go out. It’s more fun swanning around in 
a dressing gown and having my hair pinned up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddf9f7c94d5957787eabed510698bd2e311f87b0%2F554_95_1035_621%2F1035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddf9f7c94d5957787eabed510698bd2e311f87b0%2F554_95_1035_621%2F1035.jpg>
 Charlotte Olympia Dellal. Photograph: David M Benett/Getty Images 
What’s on my table

Mama Mio The Tummy Rub Oil 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/mama-mio-the-tummy-rub-oil-120ml/p857238> I used this 
before I had babies, during pregnancy and still now that my youngest is almost 
two. It’s not just for pregnancy. I love the smell and consistency.

Wella <http://www.wella.com/professional/en-UK/home> Setting Lotion You put 
this in your hair when it’s wet. I have a guy who sets it for me, 1940s style, 
with a pink hairnet under a dryer, then brushes it out, backcombs and sculpts 
it. It looks high-maintenance, but the hair stays set for a few days: you wake 
up and put on lipstick, and that’s it.

Roger & Gallet Gingembre Eau de Toilette 
<http://www.roger-gallet.co.uk/Ginger/Eau-Fraiche/Eau-Fraiche-100ml-p974.aspx> 
I’m not one to use perfume much, but when I do, I like a fresh fragrance rather 
than something overpowering, or floral (I get hay fever). My mother used this, 
so the smell reminds me of her.

Mac Ruby Woo red lipstick 
<http://www.maccosmetics.co.uk/product/shaded/168/310/Lipstick/index.tmpl> This 
is my go-to lipstick: it has a matt finish, lasts a long time and it’s the 
perfect red. I’ve worn it when blond, brunette and redhead. It’s the kind of 
thing I buy in bulk and keep one in my car, one in my house, one in my office.

Elemis Marine Cream 
<http://www.elemis.com/skincare/pro-collagen-anti-wrinkle/pro-collagen-marine-cream>
This is rich and indulgent. I use it when I have to travel for work, because it 
wakes up my skin. I’ve put a silver lid on it with my name engraved in it. I 
love that kind of Hollywood glamour.

Sisley Black Rose Precious Face Oil 
<http://www.sisley-paris.com/en-GB/black-rose-precious-face-oil-3473311320001.html>
I use a few drops after cleansing. I love the smell. Coming out of a hot shower 
and using this sets you up for a good night’s sleep.

Bioderma Sensibio H20 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Bioderma-Sensibio-H2O-250ml_1734022/> I always take 
off my makeup and cleanse my skin. This takes off dirt you didn’t even know you 
had. Makeup artists always have it. You can put it on cotton wool, but I use a 
heart-shapedKonjac sponge <http://www.konjacspongecompany.com>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43a9762ec048a43e08efca4a2677f57d41513dbe%2F176_416_6209_3728%2F6209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43a9762ec048a43e08efca4a2677f57d41513dbe%2F176_416_6209_3728%2F6209.jpg>
 Lulu Kennedy’s dressing table. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Guardian 
Lulu Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/jul/08/lulu-kennedy-fashion-east-interview>
 Director ofFashion East <http://www.fashioneast.co.uk> and editor-at-large at 
Love magazine <http://www.thelovemagazine.co.uk> 

If I’ve got time before going out, I’ll have a relaxing bath with a glass of 
wine andJo Malone orange blossom bath oil 
<http://www.jomalone.co.uk/product/3567/9742/Most-Loved/Orange-Blossom-Bath-Oil>
, which smells gorgeous. I might also do aDecléor Phytopeel 
<http://www.decleor.co.uk/face/phytopeel-exfoliating-cream> face mask, which is 
deep-cleansing. Afterwards, before my skin dries, I spray on Carita Loves 
Courrèges, which is an oil you can use on your skin or hair, and which also 
smells gorgeous.

I used to be strictly soap and water, and didn’t even moisturise. I’ve got 
mixed-heritage olive skin, and it’s quite tough. But my friends who work in 
beauty and fashion were horrified and said: you have to start using 
moisturiser, you’re over 40, blah blah blah. It does feel like a nice treat for 
myself – being a mum. Half the time I use things simply because they smell 
gorgeous. I’m just not very neurotic about wrinkles, because I think, what can 
you really do? Some of these products do work, but others are more sensory. I’m 
not expecting a bath oil to change my skin.

What’s on my table

Nanoblur 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Indeed-Labs-nanoblur-instant-skin-finisher_1235311/> 
If I’m going to be photographed, I use this. It’s a finishing cream with no 
pigment in it. When you put it on, you kind of look airbrushed, and it’s very 
matt, so you’re not a big, shiny mess.

Topshop <http://www.topshop.com/> glitter pots I’ve got these in loads of 
different colours (my daughter’s always playing with them), which I use on my 
eyes. You can’t wear much other makeup, because it looks too trashy; but if you 
have just glitter and mascara, it’s an instant fun party look, along with 
chunky accessories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F620e68e7d4fd64710dd6e25cff73137b347e721b%2F384_124_1830_1098%2F1830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F620e68e7d4fd64710dd6e25cff73137b347e721b%2F384_124_1830_1098%2F1830.jpg>
 Lulu Kennedy. Photograph: Dave M Benett/Getty Images 
Bumble and bumble Thickening Hairspray 
<http://www.bumbleandbumble.co.uk/product/74/224/Products/Styling/Structure/thickening-hairspray/index.tmpl>
My hair is curly and quite fine, and after I wash it, it is too shiny and limp. 
This hairspray gives it some texture without leaving a residue. I use it on my 
roots, then give them a little backcomb.

Mac cosmetics <http://www.maccosmetics.co.uk/> Mac products really work for 
me: the bronzer isn’t glittery, the eyebrow pencil is a brilliant match for my 
hair andZoom Lash 
<http://www.maccosmetics.co.uk/product/shaded/152/832/Products/Eyes/Mascara/Zoom-Lash/index.tmpl>
 mascara is cloggy, how I like it: it gives you big, thick lashes. I don’t use 
foundation unless I’ve got a big party or shoot, then I use the medium coverage 
one:Mineralize Moisture Foundation Broad Spectrum SPF15 
<http://www.maccosmetics.com/product/13847/24923/Products/Makeup/Face/Foundation/Mineralize-Moisture-SPF-15-Foundation>
.

Nuxe Rêve de Miel Lip Balm 
<https://uk.nuxe.com/reve-de-miel/reve-de-miel-ultra-nourishing-lip-balm-hydrating-lip-balm-nourishes-repairs-and-protects-jar-15ml>
I rarely wear lip colour. This lip balm is the best – it’s the only thing that 
keeps my lips good during winter.

L’Erbolario <http://www.erbolario.co.uk/> perfumes I’m obsessed with scent and 
put it on about 10 times a day. I discovered this Italian brand, and my two 
favourites are Narciso Sublime, for summer, and Ambraliquida, which is my 
current one. I also use Essence by Marc Jacobs and Florissa by Floris, which 
has a powdery, old-world smell, a bit like Chanel No 5. Sometimes, I put a few 
drops of it in the bath.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6d2e92c68ae1d3529aa5d8ea1fd49eea31131ce%2F78_180_5621_4528%2F5621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6d2e92c68ae1d3529aa5d8ea1fd49eea31131ce%2F78_180_5621_4528%2F5621.jpg>
 Sharmadean Reid’s beauty cabinet. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Guardian 
Sharmadean Reid, founder of nail salon, Wah London

I always play music while I’m getting dressed. It’s an essential part of 
getting ready. Right now, that’d be anything byFrankie Knuckles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frankie-knuckles>. I love having a bath or 
shower beforeand after going out, even if I get home at 3am. Before I 
moisturise, I pencil in my eyebrows withSmashbox <http://www.smashbox.co.uk/> 
Brow Tech; after I’ve put on moisturiser, I’ll brush my teeth while it soaks 
in, because makeup doesn’t work on top of fresh moisturiser.

I’ll do a bit of base with my Bobbi Brown foundation stick. I usually keep 
makeup as minimal as possible, because I want to look like myself.

What’s in my cabinet

Aesop Geranium Leaf Body Balm 
<http://www.aesop.com/uk/body-care/geranium-leaf-body-balm-2.html> After my 
bath, I smear my whole body in either shea butter (I buy cheap tubs of it from 
the African hairdressers), Liha body oil or this body balm. I bloody love the 
smell of it and people constantly comment on it if I wear it. I mix it with 
almond oil and keep it in the gold bottle in my cupboard. This is quite a 
Jamaican thing to do, because you need way more intense moisturising if you’re 
black. Most Jamaicans I know will mix olive oil and lotion together in their 
own little pot and shake it up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa72f28ac8a8b1c33efa92c819f27cd92c477cef%2F681_502_1459_875%2F1459.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20closed%20doors%3A%20fashion%20insiders%20reveal%20their%20beauty%20cabinets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fbehind-closed-doors-fashion-insiders-beauty-cabinets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa72f28ac8a8b1c33efa92c819f27cd92c477cef%2F681_502_1459_875%2F1459.jpg>
 Sharmadean Reid. Photograph: David M Benett/Getty Images 
Neal’s Yard White Tea Facial Mist 
<http://www.nealsyardremedies.com/skincare/organic-facial-skincare/facial-toners/0352.html>
I hate looking like I’ve got foundation on, and if I’ve put some on for a night 
out, I’ll sometimes go too heavy. So I’ll spray this facial mist over it, to 
soften its appearance.

Peter Thomas Roth, Rose Stem Cell Bio-Repair Gel Mask 
<http://www.sephora.com/rose-stem-cell-bio-repair-gel-mask-P386377> This is a 
face-changer. If I sleep in it, the next day my pores look tight and refined. I 
love it. Night-time is when everything does its work.

Combs When I wash my hair, I comb through with conditioner to help it 
penetrate. I’ve never done my hair myself. I go to a hairdresser every week; 
I’ve been with her for eight years. When I wear my hair straight, I use 
Moroccan oil on it, which is the only thing that doesn’t make it look greasy. 
If I leave it natural, my aunt makes her own afro hair products calledNice To 
Be Natural <http://nicetobenatural.co.uk/>; her Nurture Me leave-in conditioner 
has changed my life.

Le Labo <https://lelabofragrances.com/us_en/creations.html> Pure 28 perfume I 
like that it smells manly and musky. Pure 28 was a limited edition that I 
bought once, then it sold out. When they reissued it, I bought two more bottles 
and now spray only twice instead of four times, so it’ll last.

Echinaforce <http://www.avogel.co.uk/herbal-remedies/echinacea-echinaforce/> 
This is key, because when you start getting ill, that’s when you start looking 
terrible. I take a lot of vitamins, too.

Wah London Each Peach Pear nail polish 
<http://wah-london.com/shop/each-peach-pear> I never wear pinks for a night out 
– it’s either dramatic colours or glitter. I’ll use red or this plum-coloured 
purple called Each Peach Pear.

 * This article was amended on 14 March 2016 to give Charlotte Olympia 
Dellal’s full name. Charlotte Olympia is the name of the brand.  