
It’s often been said that hell is the absence of other people, and for most of 
my life I’ve generally agreed. For more than 30 years now, I’ve basically been 
a human relay baton, happily passed from a big family (childhood) to friends 
and flatmates (teens and early 20s), before finally moving in with my boyfriend 
in my mid-20s. I’m like a tapeworm, or oral herpes: something that needs human 
warmth in order to survive.

Though I sometimes fantasise about living alone, that fantasy doesn’t last 
long – I don’t take good care of myself without supervision. When my boyfriend 
travels for work and there’s no one else in the house to keep watch on me, I 
stay on my computer until after dark, avoid basically all housework and forget 
to eat. When I finally do remember to eat, it’s usually something gross: beans 
straight out of a can, or two-minute noodles with frozen peas added “for 
health”. A pile of dirty laundry builds and builds, until it starts to ferment 
with an odour I can only describe as intense “dude”. At the very least, living 
with other people keeps my own living standards up. I’m better behaved when I’m 
motivated by a deep fear of someone else’s judgment.

Pass marriage equality or there's a gay florist strike around the corner | 
Benjamin Law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/01/were-tired-of-fighting-for-marriage-equality-lets-just-do-it-and-move-on>
But surely this can’t be healthy. At my age, is it so impossible for me to 
exist as a solitary human being, independent of others? Am I truly that 
incapable of havingmy Walden moment?

A few years back I got a chance to test-drive my solo living skills when an 
opportunity came up for me to live inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> for several months and do research 
for a book I was writing. I jumped at it. There were some obvious reasons to 
go: my parents are Cantonese Chinese, and though I’d visited Hong Kong a lot, 
I’d never stepped foot on the motherland.

Obviously the work – researching how young LGBT people connected online, in a 
country where the experience of being both gay and online was very different to 
mine – was going to be interesting. But it also represented a good opportunity 
to test whether I could handle being in a new place by myself, completely apart 
from anyone I knew; to find the person I was when I was alone, in a city of 21 
million. I spent a couple of months learning the basics of spoken Mandarin – 
“Hello”, “How are you?” “Where is the toilet?” and the one I’d use the most, 
“Yes-I-am-Chinese-but-my-parents-are-from-Hong-Kong-and-I-was-born-in-Australia-so-this-is-why-I-look-like-you-but-speak-Mandarin-like-I-have-brain-damage” 
– then applied for my visa and flew over.

I’d like to point out that my entire life has been a series of idiotic close 
calls and near misses

Things started falling apart the moment I boarded the plane. Usually I’m great 
with flights. I’m a compact guy and don’t need much space. And though I think 
I’m relatively proportional, I’ve had to hem up every pair of pants I’ve ever 
owned, like some stump-legged freak. Moral of the story is I don’t really need 
leg room and economy’s fine. Throw me your worst conditions and I’ll usually 
sleep right through it. However, Air China doesn’t have the best reputation. On 
Skytrax it has a rating of 2.5 stars – any lower and Casa would probably need 
to ground it or set the entire fleet on fire – and sample reviews include 
phrases like “strange buns and limited drink choice”, “horrible airline”, 
“rubbish experience”, and “you are taken back to the 1960s”.

And though I’m impervious to bright lights and bad turbulence, loud sounds and 
low-level engine growls, what I can’t block out is smell. On this particular 
Air China flight, the portly Chinese man next to me smelt like a pungent mix of 
cigarette smoke, ginseng and damp clothes, and spent every few minutes noisily 
clearing out the phlegm from both orifices into his sick bag before scratching 
his pubes. Though it wasn’t as bad as my friend’s Air China experience, where 
his neighbour somehow boarded with a plastic bag of cooked prawns and proceeded 
to peel and eat them, my flight didn’t make for a great experience either. It 
was a red-eye; the noises continued, the smell was unabating, and I didn’t get 
much sleep.

When I hit the ground at 6am, Beijing was already muggy. It felt like walking 
into a Turkish steam room that had been erected over a tar pit. Disorientated, 
sweating and sleep-deprived, I hailed a taxi, passed the driver my address in 
simplified Mandarin, got inside and involuntarily fell asleep. When the driver 
stopped and woke me up, I felt half-drugged and wrung out like an old rag, and 
had no idea where I was. It was in this state of delirium that I hauled my 
suitcase out of the boot and dragged it towards my assigned apartment on 
campus. As soon as I slammed the door and the cab sped off, I realised I’d left 
my smartphone – and, with it, my Mandarin dictionary, city guide, currency 
converter and maps – on the back seat.

At this point, I’d like to point out that my entire life has been a series of 
idiotic close calls and near misses. As a toddler, I once crept into the back 
of a stranger’s car for no other reason than that it was red, like my mum’s, 
and if it wasn’t for my mother’s sharp eye, a stranger would have left Kawana 
Shoppingworld with a random Asian child in their back seat who had no way of 
telling them who they were or how to get them home. Who knows what would have 
happened to me. Even now, outings with my family or friends often end with 
someone saying, “Ben, you left your wallet on the bench,” or, “Ben, you dropped 
your keys on the floor,” or, “Ben, you literally left $50 on the table, what 
the fuck is wrong with you?”

A love letter to Canberra, I could have had no better muse | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/dec/23/a-love-letter-to-canberra-i-couldve-had-no-better-muse>
No such luck this time. When I called the cab company and explained my plight 
in halting Mandarin and urgent sign language, reminiscent of Jodie Foster 
coming out of the woods in Nell, they confirmed that another passenger had 
already stolen my phone. I’d been flying solo for less than a day and I’d 
already royally fucked up. What followed over the next four hours was a comedy 
of errors: my apartment key not working, getting a replacement key, the new key 
not working, the door’s batteries (WHAT ABOMINATION OF A DOOR REQUIRES 
BATTERIES?) turning out to be flat, and then finally getting inside and 
discovering that the internet wasn’t working. Half a day had passed, and I 
still hadn’t been able to get a new phone or file a report at the police 
station.

By 2pm, Beijing was 41C – one of the hottest days ever recorded in the 
capital. Desperately wanting to leave my residential enclave, alone, sweating 
profusely and without a map, I wandered aimlessly, trying to escape the 
unexpectedly vast campus so that I could reach the office of the professor in 
charge of my research program, which for reasons unclear to me was located 
halfway across the city. Barely halfway into Day One, and our first interaction 
would involve her taking me to the police station. I’d become “that” 
international visitor.

Finally, I found some corrugated iron with a piece of A4 paper stuck to it. 
“FRONT”, it said in English, with an arrow pointing right. When I walked 400 
metres towards the right, there was another sign. “FRONT”, it said. This time, 
the arrow pointed left. At that point, I think I felt my soul physically leave 
my body.

Beijing, from what I understand, is a city. It isn’t a sentient life form, 
capable of hostility and feelings of ill will towards people. But on that first 
day, it felt like Beijing hated me. On the verge of heatstroke, with my face 
melting in the sun, and trapped in some Kafkaesque mess of poor urban planning 
and personal stupidity, I felt as though Beijing and I were having a 
conversation.

“Hey, Beijing!” I was saying. “I’m a guest, all by myself, and I’ve only been 
here for a few hours. Give me a break!”

In the capital city of the world’s most populous nation, I’d never felt so 
alone in all my life

There was silence, before Beijing seemed to speak back. “Get the fuck out of 
me.”

By the time I finally escaped the campus and stumbled on to a subway, I wanted 
to weep. And I probably would have wept if it weren’t for the fact that my 
sweat glands had already discharged my body’s entire supply of saline.

I desperately wanted to call my boyfriend, a family member, a friend – someone 
– to tell me everything was going to be OK.Oh wait, I have no phone. Well, 
maybe I can get on to my computer, hop online, and Skype my family inst –I 
remembered my internet wasn’t working. The grim irony wasn’t lost on me. In the 
capital city of the world’s most populous nation, I’d never felt so alone in 
all my life. And as pathetic as it sounded after being away from home for less 
than 24 hours, I missed my friends and family.

But the great thing about being overseas on your own is that you quickly 
become friends with people, even if you share the most tenuous links. Youhave 
to. Jen was the girlfriend of a guy whose brother I used to work with. We’d met 
before, but, other than that, barely knew each other. She heard I was in town 
and got hold of me when I was finally online.

“Forget about everything and come over now,” she said. That night, she 
introduced me to 10 other people. After one of them explained to me that 
smartphones in China couldn’t access Wi-Fi, he pulled some strings, ordered one 
from Hong Kong instead and delivered it to me the next day on a bicycle. Those 
friends introduced me to their friends, and other people back home wrote even 
more introductory emails. By my fourth week, it felt as though the entire city 
was looking out for me. I felt at home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbeijing-isnt-a-sentient-life-form-but-on-my-first-day-there-i-believed-it-hated-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F645c17addeb26621b49395d79263c28eb14f28ab%2F0_0_1785_2774%2F1785.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beijing%20isn't%20a%20sentient%20life%20form.%20But%20on%20my%20first%20day%20there%2C%20I%20believed%20it%20hated%20me%20%7C%20Benjamin%20Law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbeijing-isnt-a-sentient-life-form-but-on-my-first-day-there-i-believed-it-hated-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beijing%20isn%27t%20a%20sentient%20life%20form.%20But%20on%20my%20first%20day%20there%2C%20I%20believed%20it%20hated%20me%20%7C%20Benjamin%20Law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fbeijing-isnt-a-sentient-life-form-but-on-my-first-day-there-i-believed-it-hated-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F645c17addeb26621b49395d79263c28eb14f28ab%2F0_0_1785_2774%2F1785.jpg>
After that, I became smitten with living solo in Beijing. Sure it’s brash: 
people smash their way past each other on the subway, spit right next to you on 
the footpath and won’t help you out if your Mandarin is shithouse. On bad days, 
the streets smelled like dead possum, and I longed for home and everyone who 
was back there. But on good nights, I’d ride my bike down the city streets by 
myself, past old men with their watermelon carts and college students finishing 
class. And I’d think to myself: with more than a billion people, any one of 
these people could be a new friend. Hell, I’m in China, after all. For all I 
know, they might even be family.

• This is an extract from Best Australian Comedy Writing 2015 
<http://affirmpress.com.au/publishing/best-australian-comedy-writing-2/?portfolioCats=13>
 (Affirm Press) available now, $29.99

 