
Berlin is well known for being stylish and full of history. But what many 
visitors aren’t aware of is that it’s also rather “wet”, threaded with winding 
rivers and looping canals, surrounded by crystal-clear lakes that areideal for 
wild swimming <http://www.slowtravelberlin.com/wild-swimming-in-berlin/>, and 
dotted withSommerbäder (large outdoor pools) and Strandbäder (lake beaches), 
both municipal and private. This aqueous landscape comes in handy when summer 
temperatures rise towards 30C and people wake early to bag a spot at a local 
lake or lido. But even during the depths of a Berlin winter it’s not unusual to 
see locals enjoying a dip.

Berlin city guide: what to see plus the best bars, restaurants and hotels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/03/-sp-berlin-city-guide-bars-restaurants-hotels>
Some Germans are fond of nudity, so you may well spot a few bare bottoms – or 
more – especially at the more secluded lakes, and certainly in the many 
designated FKK (Freikörperkultur) areas. This is all part of the fun when you 
consider that swimming across Berlin can be as beguiling a way of exploring it 
as walking – or cycling.

Weißer See
 All photographs Paul Sullivan, except where stated 
I begin my mission to swim a clockwise “east-west” circle around the city with 
a visit to my favourite local lake, the Weißer See. It’s a sunny morning as I 
cycle from my home in Prenzlauer Berg through the neighbouring district of 
Weißensee, a quiet district that a century ago was known as the Hollywood of 
Berlin (Expressionist classics such as Dr Caligari’s Cabinet were filmed here). 
Twenty minutes later I arrive at the lake, which is somewhat hidden between a 
roaring main road and a residential area.

Berlin: readers’ travel tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/03/berlin-readers-travel-tips> 
Though it usually teems with couples, families and groups of teenagers with 
music systems and crates of beer on warm summer nights, at 9am on a weekday 
it’s almost deserted. Morning light filters gently through the surrounding 
trees, playing off the lake’s surface. Finding a grassy spot along the lake’s 
edge, I lock up my bike, spread out my blanket and carefully walk through the 
murky shallows. The Germans have a wonderful word for how the water feels: 
arschkalt (literally “arse-cold”), but a few gasp-filled strokes and things 
warm up quickly. Aside from the occasional curious swan, fish or dragonfly I’m 
alone for the duration of my 40-minute dip. Afterwards I warm up with a coffee 
and croissant on the wooden terrace ofMilchhäuschen 
<http://www.milchhaeuschen-berlin.de/>, a historic GDR-era cafe and restaurant 
right on the lake.
• Admission €5. Strandbad Weisensee, Berliner Allee 155, +49 30 925 3241, 
binbaden.com <http://www.binbaden.com/>. Open daily 9am-midnight
Directions: M4 tram to Buschallee

Haubentaucher

The next day is overcast – perfect conditions to visit Friedrichshain’s 
Haubentaucher (the German word for great crested grebe). The pool is the newest 
in town and the latest opening within theRAW Gelände 
<https://www.berlin.de/kultur-und-tickets/tipps/kunst/institutionen/3848472-2227531-raw-gelaende.html>
, a vast and quintessentially Berlin complex whose semi-dilapidated and heavily 
graffitied buildings host clubs and bars, a street food market (Sundays), a 
climbing wall that was once a second world war bunker and a skate hall. Since 
opening in May 2015 the place has become a stylish spot, but it’s much calmer 
on a moody weekday afternoon. There is no queue at the club-like wooden doors 
and just a few families are making use of the swanky and sizable (28m x 10m) 
pool. Even the designer sun-loungers around the pool’s edge, normally draped 
with prone “morning after” bodies, are half-empty. “We’re still waiting for 
someone to sponsor us to heat the pool so we can open in winter,” says 
co-founder Daniel Lente, who gives me a tour of the area, which includes a 
cocktail bar, Soul Food kiosk, beer garden and large concert and club space. 
The water temperature is much more approachable than yesterday’s lake though, 
and I spend a happy couple of hours alternating between leisurely laps, reading 
my book and sipping fresh fruit juice from the bar.
• Admission €5. Revaler Straße 99, 10245 Berlin, +49 30 2977 6670, 
haubentaucher.berlin <http://haubentaucher.berlin/>. Open Sun-Fri 10am-1am, Sat 
10am-4am.
Directions: S-Bahn to Warschauer Strasse plus 5-minute walk

Grosser Müggelsee

Before I start exploring Berlin’s watery west, there’s one more east-side lake 
to try: the mighty Müggelsee, which at 4.5km long and 2.5km wide is officially 
the city’s largest. A warm summery breeze keeps me cool as I cycle the 20km 
along the river Spree, passing the looming power stations, techno clubs and 
industrial ruins of Treptow. The lake’s tree- and reed-lined edges, punctuated 
with small but semi-secluded sandy areas, are ideal for sunbathing, fishing and 
swimming, and the gentle gradient out towards the deep centre makes the 
shallows good for families and non-swimmers. Needing some refreshment after the 
two-hour bike ride, I find a spot and spend an hour swimming in the cold but 
clear water, taking breaks to watch the yachts and motorboats in the middle 
distance. Feeling peckish, I ride to the lake’s official and slightly gaudy 
Strandbad, which is free to get in and has several snack stalls. It’s 
surprisingly busy with bronzed youths playing volleyball and kids splashing 
around, but the grassy areas are quiet enough to enjoy a spontaneous picnic and 
a bit of sun worship before heading home through the pleasant fishing town of 
Friedrichshagen.
Travel tip If you’re with the kids – or just a fan of urban planning – the 
Waterworks Museum at Friedrichshagen 
<http://www.visitberlin.de/en/spot/museum-im-alten-wasserwerk-waterworks-museum>
 has a fascinating exhibition set in a 19th-century machine hall.
• Free admission. Strandbad Müggelsee, Fürstenwalder Damm 838, 12589 Berlin, 
+49 30 648 7777,am-mueggelsee.de <http://www.am-mueggelsee.de/>. Open daily 
9am-to sunset
Directions: S3 to Rahnsdorf plus a 15-minute walk

Sommerbad Kreuzberg (Prinzenbad)

If there can be such a thing as a cult swimming pool, it’s Kreuzberg’s 
Sommerbad. Known more commonly as Prinzenbad because of its proximity to U-Bahn 
Prinzenstrasse, it has appeared in books (Sven Regener’s 2001 slacker classic 
Herr Lehmann) and films: the opening scenes of the 2003 screen adaption of Herr 
Lehmann and Bettina Blümner’s 2007 documentaryPool Of Princesses 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0949502/?ref_=nm_flmg_dr_6>. Its popularity rests 
on its easy accessibility and uniquely local demographic, with which I am 
immediately confronted: a flesh-coloured blaze of teenage Turks, heavily 
bearded style-conscious types and older folk all battling for space in the 
venue’s two 50-metre pools. I retreat to a patch of green and listen to the 
colourful blur of accents and languages. I grab a few laps but it’s still a bit 
hectic so I decide to give up and come back when it’s quieter. “When is a 
calmer time to come?” I ask the middle-aged German lady on the way out. She 
shoots me a pitiful look that has no doubt been practised on many tourists: 
“7.01am.”
• Admission €5.50. Prinzenstrasse 113-119, 10969 Berlin, +49 30 616 1080, 
berlinerbaeder.de <http://www.berlinerbaeder.de/baeder/sommerbad-kreuzberg/>. 
Open daily 7am-8pm
Directions: U1 Prinzenstrasse, bus 140, 248

Strandbad Wannsee

Not wanting to be caught out again, I catch the S-Bahn at 7.30am to get to the 
Strandbad Wannsee early. Not only is this the city’s best-known and most 
historic lido, it’s also Europe’s largest, with a 1,275 metre expanse of sandy 
beach and impressive 1920s “New Objectivity” architecture that houses a 
promenade of pizza, beer and ice-cream stalls. Though often disregarded by 
locals as being overcrowded and “touristy”, it’s merely “busy” at this time of 
the morning, with plenty of space to spread out near the water and enjoy 
repeated dips. In between, I watch a parade of Berliner life: women 
chain-smoking in the pool’s trademark wicker chairs, fully clothed men sipping 
a morning beer in the 26C heat, kids jumping off the diving pier and screaming 
down the large waterslide. By 11am it’s getting more packed and I’m feeling 
hungry; time to head somewhere quieter.
Travel tip The wooded edges of Wannsee lake are lined with historic villas, 
includingpainter Max Liebermann’s summer home 
<http://www.liebermann-villa.de/start.html> and the House Of The Wannsee 
Conference <http://www.ghwk.de/>, where the Final Solution was planned; both 
are now museums.
• Admission €5.50. Wannseebadweg 25, 14129 Wannsee, +49 30 803 5450, 
100-jahre-strandbad-wannsee.de <http://www.100-jahre-strandbad-wannsee.de/>. 
Opening times vary,see website for details 
<http://www.100-jahre-strandbad-wannsee.de/Strandbad-Oeffnungszeiten.htm>
Directions: S1 to Wannsee plus a (clearly signposted) 10-minute walk 

Schlachtensee

It takes 30 minutes to walk from Strandbad Wannsee to the Schlachtensee. Not 
only are the snacks at its beer garden and terrace restaurant (Fischerhütte am 
Schlachtensee) superior, but the elegant, kidney-shaped lake is refreshingly 
calm and there are far fewer people around than at other pools. Following the 
wooden boardwalk around the lake, I grab a grassy spot and – trying my best to 
forget thenews reports about giant catfish 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/zeitgeist/bathers-beware-giant-catfish-terrorizes-swimmers-at-berlin-lake-a-557636.html>
 – I make the most of the silky water before catching the nearby S-Bahn home.
• Free admission. Am Schlachtensee, Steglitz-Zehlendorf, no telephone 
Fischerhütte am Schlachtensee website <http://www.fischerhuette-berlin.de/>
Directions: S1 to Schlachtensee

Sommerbad Olympiastadion

If you like your swims to come with a splash of history, you can’t go wrong 
here. It’s part of the imposing grey limestone stadium expanded by the Nazis 
for the 1936 Olympic Games, and it’s difficult not to be awed by the scale and 
aura of the place; just as it’s hard not to imagine the crowds cheering the 
diving, swimming and water polo competitors from the viewing benches that still 
line the sides of the 50 x 20 metre pool. The murky past and concrete aesthetic 
quickly dissolve into a sunny, crystal blue present, however, as I watch 
athletic pros showing off their impressive butterfly technique in the main pool 
and listen to the hubbub of families and teenagers in the two adjacent kids’ 
pools. There are no sunloungers or umbrellas but everyone seems content to just 
lay their towel down at the edge of the pool or read in the shade of the 
surrounding alcoves.
Travel tip A visit to the main stadium 
<http://www.olympiastadion-berlin.de/en/stadium-visitor-centre/viewing-and-guided-tours.html>
 requires a separate ticket (adult €7, child €4) but is worthwhile given the 
size and history of the place. If you really want to nerd out, the site runs 
60-75 minute guided tours that include underground areas normally inaccessible 
to the public.
• Admission €5.50. Olympischer Platz 3, 14053 Berlin. +49 30 6663 1152, 
berlinerbaeder.de 
<http://www.berlinerbaeder.de/baeder/sommerbad-olympiastadion/>. Open daily 
7am-8pm
Directions: U2 or S5 to Olympiastadion (U-Bahn is slightly closer)

Strandbad Plötzensee

For my final swim I cycle to Wedding’s Strandbad Plötzensee – one of the first 
Berlin lidos I ever visited and still one of my favourites. Despite being close 
to the centre (just 30 minutes from Alexanderplatz) and offering a 740-metre 
beach, dapper cafe-restaurant serving ice-cream, decent German and Med-inspired 
food and even cocktails (plus DJs on weekend evenings), the place is often 
relatively quiet during the week. Today – a Thursday afternoon – there are a 
handful of young couples and families on the beach, and a few kids paddling 
safely within the confines of the lake’s floating depth markers. Even better, 
the water is at the most comfortable temperature so far. Floating on my back 
while listening to the surrounding chatter – occasionally broken by the distant 
hum of planes at nearby Tegel airport – makes me feel far away from big city 
life.
Travel tip the poignant and fascinating Plötzensee Memorial 
<http://www.gedenkstaette-ploetzensee.de/index_e.html> to the victims of 
National Socialism is a 20-minute walk away.
• Admission €5. Nordhaven 26, 13351 Wedding, +49 30 8964 4787, 
strandbad-ploetzensee.de <http://www.strandbad-ploetzensee.de/>. Open daily 
9am-7pm
Directions: S-Bahn to Westhafen or Beusselstrasse plus a 20-minute walk

Paul Sullivan is the editor of Slow Travel Berlin 
<http://www.slowtravelberlin.com/>
 