
Berlin built a lot of suburbs in the inter-war years. Take the U-Bahn to the 
south-eastern outskirts, get out at Parchimer Allee, and the first thing you’ll 
notice is that Mock Tudor villas are nowhere to be seen. Instead, the view is 
of rows of flat-roofed, low-rise apartment buildings, outlined in dramatic 
colour schemes – blue, red, white, yellow, with large balconies and the doors 
and windows emphasised with contrasting colours. They’re all submerged in 
dense, and public, greenery, rather than placed behind paved-over front gardens.

Walk for a few yards along a long red block of flats and you come to two 
flanking community buildings, asymmetrical and angular, and a large flight of 
steps leads you down to a sweeping, horseshoe-shaped crescent with a pond at 
its centre, as dramatic in its way as anything in Bath. This is the 
Berlin-Britz Housing Estate, better known after that central crescent as the 
Hufeisensiedlung, or “Horseshoe Estate”, and both aesthetically and 
politically, this suburb is a very long way from Ruislip or Edgbaston.

When you walk along the long red block to that horseshoe, however, you can see 
opposite some rather different housing – this time with much more muted 
colours, white with a little sky-blue to the doorways, Biedemeier-style 
details, dormer windows, shutters and big, deep pitched roofs. This is because 
Berlin-Britz is one of those few places where a political and architectural 
dispute were played out in a very direct way – with modernism and 
traditionalism literally pitted against each other. This was already 
controversial, though, as the largest scale modernist housing project that had 
happened anywhere at that date – housing not the rarefied clientele of Le 
Corbusier’s then-celebrated modernist villas, but a population of working class 
Berliners.

The estate is one of those few places where a political and architectural 
dispute were played out in a very direct way
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fberlin-hufeisensiedlung-horseshoe-estate-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428920108409%2F14b474de-9407-48c9-94b2-d1c55d724687-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin's%20flat-roofed%20Hufeisensiedlung%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fberlin-hufeisensiedlung-horseshoe-estate-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%27s%20flat-roofed%20Hufeisensiedlung%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fberlin-hufeisensiedlung-horseshoe-estate-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428920108409%2F14b474de-9407-48c9-94b2-d1c55d724687-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The view from the centre of Bruno Taut and Martin Wagner’s Hufeisensiedlung. 
Photograph: Iain Masterton/Incamerastock/Corbis 
The Horseshoe Estate housed 3,000 members of GEHAG, a building society set up 
in 1924 by Germany’s trade unions, with the assistance of the Social Democratic 
party, and headed by party member, architect and planner Martin Wagner. They 
selected as their architect Bruno Taut, a committed socialist and utopian 
architect, obsessed with the chromatic properties of applied colour and tinted 
glass. Low budgets meant there wasn’t much of the latter, so Taut concentrated 
his energies on outlining these simple, ordered, brick-built modernist flats in 
increasingly wild and dramatic colours. They were then let or sold to members 
of the GEHAG, usually trade unionists, usually skilled workers.

The estate opposite was built by DEWEGO, another building society, this one 
set up by white-collar unions; their architects, Engelmann and Fangmeyer, 
favoured something a lot more traditional. This happened when the German press 
– not just architectural – was caught up in the “flat roof debate”. For the 
German right, flat roofs were un-German – Mediterranean, Arabic, most likely 
Jewish; the pitched roof was German, indigenous. For the Nazis, this was a 
matter of racial characteristics, where the pitched roofed house had a German 
“face”, and the physiognomy of modernism was “degenerate”. The attacks weren’t 
all one-sided – Taut and the GEHAG also had contempt towards the folkish 
fantasies of their opponents, and that long block that divides the two estates 
was nicknamed the “Red Front”.

Here, then, is an opposition that would be influential, if not always 
accurate, in the way modern architecture was perceived – in short, socialist, 
modernist and working class v conservative, traditional and middle class – and 
one that had real political consequences. In 1933, the new Nazi government 
immediately dismissed Wagner from his job as planner of Berlin; Taut fled to 
the USSR, and from there to Turkey.

In this debate, and in this housing estate, the purists and the bigots were 
the traditionalists, not the modernists

However, on the ground, the differences between the two estates are not so 
obvious. Stylistic detail aside, both are a distinctive central European 
version of the garden city idea, with flats instead of houses, and lush 
communal areas surrounding them rather than private front gardens. The 
differences are not in what the buildingsdo (both were social housing, in 
flats, in the suburbs), but what their formsays about the city, about 
modernity. While the DEWEGO estate is just a series of pretty, slightly cutesy 
blocks of flats, the Horseshoe Estate, as suburban as it undoubtedly was, was 
also a statement of confidence in the future, and in social possibility, with 
each part of it closely related to the other, around those verdant communal 
spaces.

Taut and Wagner’s estates – this is merely the largest of five major projects 
of the late 1920s - were granted Unesco World Heritage Site status in 2006, and 
most have been well restored. However, they have few real heirs; by the 
mid-1930s, modernism had developed into an almost classical, white-walled 
abstraction that left little room for Bruno Taut’s experiments in colour.

The grand London 'semi' that spawned a housing revolution – a history of 
cities in 50 buildings, day 8
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/01/the-grand-london-semi-that-spawned-a-housing-revolution-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-8>
The Horseshoe Estate was not modernism as a style, but as a new way of life – 
a vision of humanised technology, tamed nature, and a modern, confident, 
social, communal approach to the city. And right at the heart of it, just past 
the horseshoe, is a diamond-shaped green – with, around it, two pitched-roofed 
terraces.

For the other side in the flat roof debate, roof shape was a matter of life 
and death, a marker of racial purity. But for Taut and Wagner, as these 
terraces indicate, it was something they were happy to experiment with 
according to site and preference. In this debate, and in this housing estate, 
the purists and the bigots were the traditionalists, not the modernists.

• Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 