
When the Victoria Bar <http://www.victoriabar.de/> opened on Potsdamer Strasse 
in 2001, it added a note of sophistication to the otherwise grotty west Berlin 
street at a time when you could (quite likely) count the number of serious 
cocktail bars in the city on one hand. Since then the cocktail scene in Berlin 
has taken off, caught up in the growing desire for craft drinks, slow food and 
an obsession with provenance.

Berlin city guide: what to see plus the best bars, restaurants and hotels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/03/-sp-berlin-city-guide-bars-restaurants-hotels>
In that sense, the founders of the Victoria Bar – Stefan Weber, Kerstin Ehmer 
and Beate Hindermann – were ahead of their time. The classic bar, stylishly 
fitted with wood-panelled walls covered in framed prints and contemporary art, 
quickly made a name for itself when it established the School of Sophisticated 
Drinking in 2003. The now-legendary Sunday afternoon lecture series is the 
place where the team educate pupils on the social, cultural and political 
history of drinks, while mixing impeccable cocktails to illustrate their 
stories.

The School of Sophisticated Drinking may be in German (though non-speakers are 
still welcome to come and enjoy the set menu of drinks), but the bar has just 
published an English-language edition of its book, by the same name. It’s a 
history of spirits and cocktails laced with social context and curious 
anecdotes based on the original lectures – so you can educate yourself while 
sampling the comprehensive list of drinks to sample.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fvictoria-bar-cocktail-bar-berlin-potsdamer-strasse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa68d408e34bed6193f8521ba95ba1a2a566f289%2F0_0_1700_1019%2F1700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin%E2%80%99s%20classy%20cocktail%20pioneer%3A%20raise%20a%20glass%20to%20the%20Victoria%20Bar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fvictoria-bar-cocktail-bar-berlin-potsdamer-strasse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%E2%80%99s%20classy%20cocktail%20pioneer%3A%20raise%20a%20glass%20to%20the%20Victoria%20Bar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fvictoria-bar-cocktail-bar-berlin-potsdamer-strasse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa68d408e34bed6193f8521ba95ba1a2a566f289%2F0_0_1700_1019%2F1700.jpg>
10 of the best ways to enjoy Berlin … on a budget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/18/10-of-the-best-ways-to-enjoy-berlin-on-a-budget>
“We wanted to introduce people to the old, forgotten classics,” Stefan tells 
me as I work my way through the drinks list used for the school’s lecture on 
whiskey. I start with a Rattlesnake – the original whiskey sour, with a 
delicate foam top that dissipates in your mouth as soon as you sip – before 
moving onto a Brooklyn, which mixes Rye whiskey with orange bitters and 
Maraschino cherry liqueur.

Two drinks in and I’m already feeling the effects. Those who complete a class 
at the school, however, will need to hammer home five or six to complete the 
lesson. Stefan assures me that although not everyone finishes all their drinks, 
everyone leaves standing. I toast that with a Bizzy Izzy Hiball (don’t ask me 
what’s in it) and decide to call it a night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fvictoria-bar-cocktail-bar-berlin-potsdamer-strasse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1039b8a2d4020444d01642f61f6beb0da0a10e5%2F0_0_1700_1020%2F1700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin%E2%80%99s%20classy%20cocktail%20pioneer%3A%20raise%20a%20glass%20to%20the%20Victoria%20Bar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fvictoria-bar-cocktail-bar-berlin-potsdamer-strasse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%E2%80%99s%20classy%20cocktail%20pioneer%3A%20raise%20a%20glass%20to%20the%20Victoria%20Bar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fvictoria-bar-cocktail-bar-berlin-potsdamer-strasse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1039b8a2d4020444d01642f61f6beb0da0a10e5%2F0_0_1700_1020%2F1700.jpg>
“Normally people who have something in their brain, who like to think … they 
drink,” Kerstin says when I ask about the historical association with heavy 
drinking and intellectualism. If anywhere stands as proof that a hangover is a 
consequence of thinking too much, then it’s the Victoria Bar.

 * The School of Sophisticated Drinking 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-School-Sophisticated-Drinking-Intoxicating/dp/1771641193>
 by Kerstin Ehmer and Beate Hinderman (Greystone Books, £12.99) is out now. 
Victoria Bar,Potsdamer Strasse 102, Berlin, 10785, +49. 30.2575 9977, 
victoriabar.de <http://www.victoriabar.de/>
 