
Cory Bernardi <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cory-bernardi> has 
accused Tony Abbott of acting out of self-interest after the former prime 
minister urged “rebellious” conservative colleagues not to leave the Liberal 
party.

The former prime minister wrote in the Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/new-centreofright-party-will-only-hold-back-conservative-politics/news-story/eaea15f97e2f4d46835e82267bc92401>
 on Friday that Coalition MPs unhappy with the government’s direction should 
“stay and fight” in the party, saying it was better to “fix it, not to leave 
it”.

He said it would be a “catastrophic mistake” for MPs to abandon the party and 
so deliver the opposition “at least two terms” in government.

Abbott’s comments come after the chief Nationals whip, George Christensen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-christensen>, issued a 
threat last weekto leave the Coalition “tent” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/christensen-threatens-to-leave-coalition-amid-fears-bernardi-may-form-own-party>
 if the Turnbull government was not more loyal to its voters, amid growing 
concern that Liberal senator Bernardi is preparing to split as well.

“We don’t owe the party slavish obedience but we certainly owe it respect and 
loyalty,” Abbott wrote. “If we think the party is headed in the wrong direction 
or is making a big mistake, our duty is to try to fix it, not to leave it.

A conservatives split from the Liberals would free the party to be truly 
liberal | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/a-conservatives-split-from-the-liberals-would-free-the-party-to-be-truly-liberal>
“Few people would have more reason than I do to be disgruntled with the 
federal parliamentary Liberal Party. Yet I want to make it crystal clear: any 
abandonment of the party would be a catastrophic mistake.”

Bernardi, who has repeatedly talked about the need to create a new 
conservative force inAustralian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics>, outside of 
the Coalition, has fired back at Abbott.

Bernardi wrote on Twitter on Friday: “While most on break only person talking 
up division in Lib Party this past week is@TonyAbbottMHR 
<https://twitter.com/TonyAbbottMHR>. Always back the horse named self-interest.”

Abbott said he has received “literally thousands” of letters, cards and emails 
of support since he lost the prime ministership last year, and “at least a 
third” asked him to consider starting a new political party.

“Time and time again, I replied that, for all its faults and failings, the 
Liberal National coalition is our country’s best hope of sensible centre-right 
government and that it’s much easier to repair an existing party than to form a 
new one,” he wrote.

He said any Liberal supporter who thinks the party should be punished for 
“behaving dishonourably and for emulating Labor’s political execution of an 
elected prime minister” needs to realise they would be “punishing our country” 
if they supported a breakaway conservative party, because it would help to 
elect a Labor government.

“Right now, a combination of unhappiness with what the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> has done to itself 
and excitement about the Trump insurgency in the United States is driving 
interest in a new political alignment here,” Abbott wrote.

“It’s entirely possible that an ­explicitly conservative party, ­denouncing the
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> as 
­unprincipled opportunists, could win a Senate seat in every state.

“[But] the bottom line, should rebellious Liberals form a new conservative 
party, is that decent, well-meaning people will set back the cause they 
supposedly support, possibly for a generation.”

Any new party would simply leach preferences away from the Coalition and 
deliver power to Labor, as One Nation had almost done in 1998, he said.
 