
It is a stone-cold fact about the modern world that where there are emotional 
buttons to be pressed, there is a lucrative business opportunity. The festive 
season, for instance, is now officially ushered in by afight to the death 
between retailers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/19/jingles-bells-its-the-twelve-ads-of-christmas>
 over who can make the general public cry the most with their Christmas ad.

So it says something about how tightly wound we are about women’s bodies and 
fitness that even campaigns for running leggings are conceived with that 
I’ve-got-something-in-my-eye feeling in mind.A commercial for the activewear 
label Under Armour <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZY0cdXr_1MA>, entitled I 
Will What I Want, shows American ballerinaMisty Copeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/30/misty-copeland-success-ballet-right-direction>
 in a dance studio and on stage, soundtracked by the rejection letters she 
received at the beginning of her career; it has clocked up 10m views on 
YouTube. The AdidasAll In For #mygirls campaign <http://mygirls.adidas.co.uk>, 
theNike Better for It <http://www.nike.com/us/en_us/c/women/better-for-it> 
spots and Always’ award-winning#LikeAGirl campaign 
<http://always.com/en-us/about-us/our-epic-battle-like-a-girl> have all hit the 
same emotional sweetspot of physical health and female empowerment. Fourth-wave 
feminism is on a workout high, while still uneasy about how much female 
self-esteem is bound up with our bodies.

Enter stage left: Beyoncé. Now, when Queen Bey engages with an issue, it 
becomes a talking point. When she lit up the word “feminist” as the backdrop 
for herperformance at the 2014 MTV awards <https://vimeo.com/104880980>, she 
brought the debate about what feminism means – and what it looks like – back 
into the mainstream. When she droppedher Formation video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K4zwV9YDnxU> the night before her half-time 
performance at this year’s Superbowl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qp2cBXvuDf8>, she put the Black Lives Matter 
movement <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> at 
the centre of American popular culture. (Gloria Steinem described Formation as
“profound, unifying and healing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/19/gloria-steinem-this-much-i-know-autobiography-my-life-on-the-road>
. Former New York City mayorRudolph Giuliani slammed Beyoncé’s performance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4wDEbW1budc> as “outrageous” for a slot that 
is “talking to middle America”. The point is, nobody talked about anything else 
for three days.)

Beyoncé is launching Ivy Park, a fashion sportswear line produced in 
partnership withTopshop <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/topshop> boss 
Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>. It is a label 
that capitalises on two opportunities. First, the explosion inathleisure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/15/work-out-leggings-fashion-trophy-fitness-wear-it-item-not-at-gym>
. (This week, Selfridges openedthe Body Studio 
<http://www.selfridges.com/GB/en/content/article/body-studio>, 37,000 sq ft of 
lingerie, loungewear, sleepwear and activewear, making it the London store’s 
largest department.) And second, the power Beyoncé wields over 21st-century 
womanhood. To grasp the ambitious scope of customers Ivy Park aims to reach, 
look no further than the eclectic span of UK stockists: Topshop, Selfridges, 
Net-a-Porter and JD Sports.

The photographs of Beyoncé wearing Ivy Park, seen here for the first time, are 
strikingly different in tone from the fitness photos that flood Instagram. 
There are no serene yoga bunnies with their eyes closed: instead, we have 
Beyoncé on a basketball hoop, held aloft like a queen, gazing out from under a 
hoodie. Instead of poses designed to flatter ethereal, reed-slender limbs, 
Beyoncé holds herself horizontal in gymnast’s hoops, in a way that emphasises 
the strength of her thighs. The air of stillness, of moodiness, is closer to a
Rocky <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0075148/> boxing gym than the perky, Jane 
Fonda heritage <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_UabUNrjSE4> of women’s fitness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69d779d80e3d21ebd2020420ccffbabecb572434%2F0_297_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20stamps%20her%20unmistakable%20brand%20on%20sportswear%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20stamps%20her%20unmistakable%20brand%20on%20sportswear%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69d779d80e3d21ebd2020420ccffbabecb572434%2F0_297_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Beyonce’s in an Ivy Park hooded top. Photograph: PR 
Beyoncé has made discipline, hard work and a fierce attitude central to what 
she stands for: in her lyrics, her videos, in hertrademark on-stage stance 
<http://snicka.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2008/10/beyonce-stance.jpg> (legs 
planted apart, microphone clenched in one hand). In a launch video for Ivy 
Park, she works out with battle ropes, a heavy piece of modish-for-2016 gym 
equipment that is as exhausting as it sounds. In a voiceover, she talks about 
early-morning running – about not wanting to get out of bed, but doing it 
anyway. Where 20th-century schoolboys hadthe poem Invictus 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/182194> (“I am the master of my fate/I am 
the captain of my soul”), the 21st-century woman hasBeyoncé’s Flawless 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IyuUWOnS9BY>.

There is also a lot of fashion in the Ivy Park message. The hoop portrait is 
surely a nod toHelmut Newton’s portrait of Daryl Hannah 
<http://www.newyorkpilates.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/11363929_1474066736227449_964280014_n.jpg>
, taken for Vanity Fair in 1984. In that shot, Hannah is suspended from metal 
rings, with the urban landscape of Los Angeles as her backdrop; it’s a 
reference to her role as a mermaid inSplash 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0088161/>, and as a goddess in Hollywood. She 
wears a leotard, and her hair hangs in blond, beachy waves – details that are 
echoed in Beyoncé’s photo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F904dbe1fb21dc98e9d3d517fdfaea39f97f091c5%2F0_0_1500_972%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20stamps%20her%20unmistakable%20brand%20on%20sportswear%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20stamps%20her%20unmistakable%20brand%20on%20sportswear%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F904dbe1fb21dc98e9d3d517fdfaea39f97f091c5%2F0_0_1500_972%2F1500.jpg>
 The hoop portrait is a nod to Helmut Newton’s portrait of Daryl Hannah for 
Vanity Fair in 1984. 
The link is important because, while much of the new range is straightforward 
– running leggings, sweatshirts, mesh T-shirts – Ivy Park also aims to deliver 
high-end fashion at mass-market price. Beyoncé worked on the label with 
longtime collaboratorKaren Langley <http://www.karenlangley.com>, a British 
stylist who has created several video and performance looks for her. As a 
former Dazed & Confused fashion director, Langley’s moodboard looked beyond 
generic ponytailed blondes. “This is performance-quality sportswear, but it is 
important that it looks like fashion,” Langley tells me. Beyoncé, she says, has 
been involved in every detail of the design, and “is our most dedicated tester. 
She really cares about whether it works.”

Ivy is Beyoncé’s daughter’s middle name; Park a reference to Parkwood 
Entertainment, the name of her management company. Of course, it’s also a 
reference to outdoor space. Where most aspirational ad campaigns are shot in 
envy-inducing settings – think natural light streaming through high windows on 
to perfectly aligned bamboo mats – Ivy Park roots itself in an ordinary-looking 
public park with a gym and a basketball hoop. It is urban and aesthetically 
pleasing in a classic, gritty kind of way. “Beyoncé operates at several 
different levels,” Langley explains. “You have the Beyhive – the fans – who 
feel a very personal connection with her. But you also have an intellectual 
conversation going on about what she’s doing in our culture. You have a whole 
lot of people who wouldn’t necessarily identify as fans, but who are interested 
in her on that level.”

Beyoncé herself, I’m sorry to say, was not available to talk to the Guardian. 
She rarely talks to journalists, securingthe cover of last September’s American 
Vogue 
<http://media4.popsugar-assets.com/files/2015/08/13/603/n/1922398/a2f3958e3243a843_September_cvrnoupcCNopTr.xxxlarge/i/Beyonce-Vogue-Cover-September-2015.jpg>
 without giving an interview – an almost unprecedented power move. For the 
launch of Ivy Park, she has given one interview, which will run in 45 
international issues of Elle. However, she did give me one quote: “True beauty 
is in the health of our minds, hearts and bodies. I know that when I feel 
physically strong, I am mentally strong, and I wanted to create a brand that 
made other women feel the same way.” Beyoncé keeps us at arm’s length while 
talking apparently from the heart.

This element of mystery is essential because, like all great brands, Beyoncé 
is ultimately selling us what money can’t buy. LikeJimmy Choo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/jimmy-choo> or Coca-Cola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cocacola>, she says something about how 
we want to live, who we want to be – particularly compelling in the athleisure 
marketplace, where we buy material items (yoga mats, vests) as a substitute for 
the emotional attributes we really want (inner peace, physical pride). The 
Beyoncé brand is a fusion of empowerment and enjoyment.

Her power comes from the fact that other women enjoy her beauty unlike that of 
other women. Her physical shape – with that gravity-defying bottom and tiny 
waist – may be as unattainable as that ofGisele Bündchen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/15/gisele-bundchen-model-retires-brazil>
, yet it is less alienating. While most supermodels and movie stars fall into a 
narrow parameters of beauty and glamour, Beyoncé looks like no one else. And by 
looking individual, she gives other women permission to do the same.

“Beyoncé’s body is iconic – you can recognise her just from her silhouette,” 
says Langley (who, for the record, surfs and does yoga,CrossFit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/06/crossfit-weightlifting-strong-is-beautiful>
 and trapeze, the last of which “I do specifically for the challenge – to go 
out and scare myself”). “She’s amazing to dress because she’s not a clothes 
horse. She gives clothes life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b8e97a199d34c8e2da88d67bd9f461d54ab57df%2F0_119_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20stamps%20her%20unmistakable%20brand%20on%20sportswear%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20stamps%20her%20unmistakable%20brand%20on%20sportswear%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbeyonce-stamps-her-unmistakable-brand-on-sportswear-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b8e97a199d34c8e2da88d67bd9f461d54ab57df%2F0_119_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Beyonce on roller skates in a shoot for her new collection. Photograph: PR 
It’s no accident that these images were photographed in black-and-white. “We 
wanted to establish ourselves as iconic from the get-go; the black-and-white 
imagery is a nice signifier of that,” Langley says. “It makes it feel like 
we’re not fresh out of the tin.” It also invites viewers to look for a deeper 
message – it feels more classic, and less disposable than colour. After all, 
everything is a metaphor when it comes to images of women working out. Running 
stands for freedom, sweat for effort, abs for achievement. The “park”Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> discusses in that launch video is 
both a physical place and an internal one: a place to draw on when you need to 
dig deep. (“When I had to give birth, I went to my park,” she says.)

When Beyoncé talks about fitness, she barely mentions the way she looks. In 
images such as these, she shows us her body; what she sells, meanwhile, is that 
canny, beautiful mind.
 