
The liquidators of BHS are conducting a detailed investigation into property 
transactions that took place during the regimes ofSir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> and Dominic Chappell, 
including whether the directors of the retailer breached their duties.

Insolvency practitioners have a legal duty to review the conduct of the 
directors of a collapsed company, but the scope and depth of theBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> investigation is rare.

FRP Advisory is undertaking a “massive exercise in data collation”, according 
to one source close to the winding up of BHS.

BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> collapsed into administration 
last April, leading to the loss of 11,000 jobs and leaving a £571m pension 
deficit. A parliamentary investigation into the failure of the department store 
chain concluded that it had been systematically plundered under the ownership 
of Green and Chappell.

Green owned BHS for 15 years until he sold it to Chappell, a former bankrupt, 
for £1. During his ownership,the Green family and other shareholders collected 
at least £580m from BHS in dividends, rental payments and interest on loans. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/sir-philip-green-bhs-mps-pension-schemes>
 Chappell’s company,Retail Acquisitions, received payments of up to £25m from 
BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-owner-retail-acquisitions-25m-administration>
 despite owning the department store chain for just 13 months until it 
collapsed.

The parliamentary committee that investigated BHS questioned Green and 
Chappell about a series of property deals. Green was criticised over the sale 
by Arcadia, his retail business, of BHS’s shop in Ealing, west London, to a 
company run by his stepson less than a week before BHS was sold to Chappell.

How attempts to save BHS, and 11,000 jobs, were doomed by chaos and mistrust
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/31/bhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell>
Brett Palos, who also appeared before MPs during their inquiry, bought the 
store for £6.9m through his company Thackeray Estates, then sold it for a £3m 
profit three months later.Chappell also sold BHS’s main warehouse in 
Atherstone, Warwickshire, for £15m to a company that has one of his friends, 
Mahmood Ismailjee, as a director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/10/bhs-collapse-owner-sold-main-distribution-centre-to-pay-off-loan>
.

Green told MPs he was not involved the Ealing transaction and that the company 
had valued the property before selling it. Chappell has insisted he acted 
properly as a director throughout his tenure at BHS.

Under corporate law, directors have a duty not to sell assets at an undervalue 
if a business is at risk of collapse. If a director is found to have breached 
this duty, he is at risk of being disqualified by the Insolvency Service. 
Liquidators can apply to the court to reverse a transaction at an undervalue if 
it occurred within two years of the insolvency.


A spokesman for FRP said: “We will be continuing our process of making 
recoveries through liquidation on behalf of all creditors and continuing with 
our statutory duties.”

However, the firm revealed more details about its work in a progress report 
sent to creditors of BHS at the end of November, just before the retailer moved 
from administration.

FRP said: “The concurrent administrators [FRP] have commenced their enquiries 
into a number of historic matters of concern and key transactions, including 
those raised by the parliamentary enquiry into the company’s failure, and they 
are working with their legal advisers, Jones Day, to determine appropriate 
avenues of further investigation.

“It would not be appropriate to comment in detail on the nature and level of 
the concurrent administrators’ investigations at this juncture. However, within 
the parameters of the court order, these have included a review of the possible 
claims and challenges available to an insolvency office holder pursuant to the 
Companies Act 2006 and Insolvency Act 1986, including those relating to 
antecedent transactions and wrongful trading.”

FRP was brought in to be the joint administrator to BHS with Duff & Phelps – 
then the sole liquidator – by the Pension Protection fund, the biggest creditor.

Green, who spent Christmas and new year in Florida, remains in talks with the 
Pensions Regulator about a settlement for the BHS pension scheme. He has until 
March to reach a deal before the regulator moves to the next stage of itslegal 
proceedings against him. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>

Chappell said the period since BHS collapsed had been “extremely difficult” 
and that Retail Acquisitions did “everything we possibly could” to save the 
retailer.

“Everybody has been under very close scrutiny,” he said. “We have complied 
with every regulatory body, of which there is five we have been dealing with. 
We have been open and frank with them right the way through and living up to 
our fiduciary care as directors of a business that has failed.

“As it has been stated, we took huge amounts of legal advice right the way 
through, from the start to the finish of BHS. We complied with every single 
thing that we needed to do as directors and at no stage did we trade immorally.”
 