
Migrant workers in Malaysia in the supply chain of goods for global 
electronics brands Samsung and Panasonicclaim they are being duped, underpaid 
and exploited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/21/samsung-panasonic-accused-over-supply-chain-labour-abuses-malaysia>
. The two companies have launched investigations intothe allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/21/malaysia-workers-speak-of-their-despair-samsung-only-knows-how-to-take>
, uncovered as part of a Guardian series on claims over conditions in Malaysia. 
In a separate report,workers at McDonald’s say they were victims of labour 
exploitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/28/workers-for-mcdonalds-malaysia-claim-labour-exploitation>
. The workers allege they were subjected to months – and in some cases years – 
of exploitation by a labour supply company contracted by McDonald’s to provide 
workers to its restaurants in Kuala Lumpur. McDonald’s says it has now ended 
its contract with the company.

Friday marked the start of the UN’s 16 days of activism against gender-based 
violence – the campaign ends on Human Rights Day, 10 December. Photographer 
Bhargavi Joshi’s powerful series of images represent the violence and 
injustices that confront women worldwide, and how thatabuse is whitewashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/nov/28/whitewashing-abuse-women-in-pictures-bhargavi-joshi>
. And on International Women Human Rights Defenders’ Day on Tuesday, four 
campaigners from Honduras, Nepal, China and Egypttell us their stories of 
persecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/nov/29/international-women-human-rights-defenders-day-video-activists>
. Will you be taking part in the 16-day campaign? Tell us about it – we’d like 
you toshare your stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/25/how-will-you-mark-16-days-of-activism-against-gender-abuse-share-your-stories>
.

Elsewhere on the site

Southern Africa cries for help as El Niño and climate change savage maize 
harvest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/27/southern-africa-climate-change-drought-crop-failure>

UK government faces calls to shelter Yazidi refugees persecuted by Isis  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/26/uk-government-calls-shelter-yazidi-refugees-persecuted-isis>

Madagascar drought: 330,000 people ‘one step from famine’, UN warns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/25/madagascar-drought-330000-one-step-from-famine-un-food-and-agriculture-organisation>

India accused of muzzling NGOs by blocking foreign funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/24/india-modi-government-accused-muzzling-ngos-by-blocking-foreign-funding>

West Africa to target human and animal health together to fight Ebola and Zika 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/17/west-africa-to-target-human-and-animal-health-together-to-fight-ebola-and-zika>

UK government led public to believe aid to India had ended, watchdog says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/16/uk-government-led-public-to-believe-aid-india-ended-watchdog-says-department-international-development-dfid>

Morocco lights the way for Africa on renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/17/cop22-host-morocco-lights-way-africa-renewable-energy-2020>

One in five people in cities worldwide live in areas with no safe toilet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/18/one-in-five-city-dwellers-worldwide-no-safe-toilet-world-toilet-day>

UK accused of lack of transparency over rise in aid funding to private sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>



In depth
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbig-firms-accused-over-labour-abuses-and-highlighting-gender-violence-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58b8843db5cb78a8185185ef7fe9f605c52c208a%2F0_3_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20firms%20accused%20over%20labour%20abuses%3B%20and%20highlighting%20gender%20violence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbig-firms-accused-over-labour-abuses-and-highlighting-gender-violence-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20firms%20accused%20over%20labour%20abuses%3B%20and%20highlighting%20gender%20violence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbig-firms-accused-over-labour-abuses-and-highlighting-gender-violence-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58b8843db5cb78a8185185ef7fe9f605c52c208a%2F0_3_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
‘I was so scared … I was tortured’: Indian women lift the lid on married life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/25/scared-tortured-indian-women-lift-lid-married-life>

‘We are in shock’: historic Bolivia drought hammers homes and crops  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/25/bolivia-drought-water-rationing-crops>

Free speech becomes a talking point in Sierra Leone as WhatsApp storm rages  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/24/free-speech-talking-point-sierra-leone-whatsapp-storm-rages>

‘Ours are the hands and faces of slavery’: the exploitation of migrants in 
Sicily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/24/hands-faces-slavery-exploitation-sicily-migrant-community>

‘It’s a crime to be young and pretty’: girls flee predatory Central America 
gangs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/23/central-america-gangs-migrants-sexual-exploitation-prostitution>

Clouds of filth envelop Asian cities: ‘you can’t escape’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/cloud-filth-envelope-asian-cities-urban-smog-air-pollution-india-china>

Amid devastation of Hurricane Matthew, Haitians urged to go to the polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/18/amid-devastation-of-hurricane-matthew-haitians-urged-polls-presidential-elections>

Opinion

Mukhisa Kituyi: Don’t let shifts in trading policies throw poor countries off 
balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/23/dont-let-shifts-trading-policies-throw-poor-countries-off-balance-tackle-inequality>

Ruth Bergan and Natalie Sharples: How UK trade policies could help heal global 
healthcare inequalities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/how-uk-trade-policies-could-help-heal-global-healthcare-inequalities>

Tanya Cox, Jussi Kanner and Evert-Jan Brouwer: Dear European leaders, your new 
plan for ending inequality will not work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/21/dear-european-leaders-your-new-plan-for-ending-inequality-global-goals>



Multimedia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbig-firms-accused-over-labour-abuses-and-highlighting-gender-violence-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25397b6d357db4c63ba086f1c7fc696b03f98180%2F0_97_2409_1445%2F2409.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20firms%20accused%20over%20labour%20abuses%3B%20and%20highlighting%20gender%20violence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbig-firms-accused-over-labour-abuses-and-highlighting-gender-violence-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20firms%20accused%20over%20labour%20abuses%3B%20and%20highlighting%20gender%20violence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbig-firms-accused-over-labour-abuses-and-highlighting-gender-violence-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25397b6d357db4c63ba086f1c7fc696b03f98180%2F0_97_2409_1445%2F2409.jpg>
 Photograph: Ariana Cubillos/AP 
How Cuba came of age on early childhood development – podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/nov/16/cuba-early-childhood-development-havana-podcast>

Western Sahara: the last colony in Africa – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/nov/24/western-saharan-refugee-women-use-film-in-liberation-struggle-video>

What you said

On the opinion piece by Mukhisa Kituyi, okidog said: 

Developing countries need economic development in order to be able to trade 
and tackle unemployment and inequality. Otherwise ‘openness to trade’ just 
means importing everything from China and other Asian exporters (heavily 
protected during critical periods of their development).

Highlight from the blogosphere

For Humanosphere, Joanne Lu reports on improving data to tackle violence 
against women in the Asia-Pacific region 
<http://www.humanosphere.org/human-rights/2016/11/using-better-data-fight-violence-women-asia-pacific/>
.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. On Twitter, follow 
@gdndevelopment <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – 
@LizFordGuardian <https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @BenQuinn75 
<https://twitter.com/BenQuinn75> and @karenmcveigh1 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%40karenmcveigh1&src=typd> – and join Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 