
Key Bill Shorten ally Kimberley Kitching will replace retiring Labor 
powerbrokerStephen Conroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/stephen-conroy> in the Senate but 
the development has caused internal consternation within the Victorian ALP.

Several senior figures over the past few days have attempted to warn the 
federal Labor leader off backing Kitching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bill-shorten-and-richard-marles-backing-rival-candidates-for-senate-vacancy>
 – a lawyer, who is married to Andrew Landeryou, formerly a combative political 
blogger.

But several sources have confirmed to Guardian Australia that Shorten dug in 
behind her candidacy, which was only unveiled publicly on Thursday.

Bureau of Statistics says economic reports could be axed without extra funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bureau-of-statistics-says-economic-reports-could-be-axed-without-extra-funding>
One senior Labor figure told Guardian Australia on Thursday evening: “This is 
Bill’s first big mistake, and this one is a six-year mistake.”

Conroy’s abrupt departure from politics in mid-September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/16/stephen-conroy-resigns-from-the-senate>
 triggered a vacuum in the Victorian right faction.

Infighting about his replacement in the Senate has been thundering behind the 
scenes for days as various sub-factional groupings within the Victorian right 
have faced off over the the nominations.

Richard Marles, a close ally of Shorten’s, and a figure the Victorian right 
was hoping would move into Conroy’s institutional role as factional fixer, was 
backing lawyer Diana Taylor for Conroy’s spot.

Kitching prevailed in part because the National Union of Workers bloc refused 
to participate in Thursday night’s proceedings.

Colleagues say Shorten’s defiance in the face of advice from close colleagues 
is partly personal, Kitching is a long-time friend of the opposition leader, 
and partly a power play, because she can deliver numbers from the Health 
Services Union.

But colleagues are predicting her arrival on the federal scene will cause 
disruption both in Victoria and in the federal Labor caucus in Canberra.

Some are even questioning whether this development will upset a longstanding 
stability pact between the left and right factions in Victoria.

The trade union royal commission in 2014 made adverse findings about Kitching 
and referred her for possible prosecution.

In its interim report 
<https://www.tradeunionroyalcommission.gov.au/reports/Documents/InterimReportVol2.pdf>
 commissioner Dyson Heydon concluded that, in early 2013, when Kitching was HSU 
No 1 branch general manager, she sat the right-of-entry tests “on behalf of one 
or more of” seven officials, including secretary Diana Asmar.

Heydon recommended 
<https://www.tradeunionroyalcommission.gov.au/reports/Documents/InterimReportVol1.pdf>
 the commonwealth director of public prosecutions consider prosecuting Asmar 
and five others for making false statements about the tests, and Kitching for 
aiding and abetting those contraventions.
 