
The acting career of Billy Chapin, who has died aged 72, ended 57 years ago, 
though his memorable performance inThe Night of the Hunter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e5AKK_om1VU> (1955) has become an indelible 
part of film history. Charles Laughton’s only film as director is an eerily 
beautiful parable of good and evil, its bold visual style derived from the 
rural dramas of DW Griffith, German Expressionism and American folk art.

Most of Chapin’s previous roles, where he displayed a gravitas, contrary to 
the label “cute” often affixed to child stars, persuaded Laughton to cast him 
in The Night of the Hunter. As Laughton toldDavis Grubb 
<https://www.wvwc.edu/library/wv_authors/davis_grubb.html>, the author of the 
original novel, “What I want is a flexible child, and the boy is exactly that … 
he has innate ability to understand the construction of a scene, its impact and 
its importance.”

The plot focuses on a psychopathic woman-hating preacher (Robert Mitchum), who 
marries and murders a widow, Willa Harper (Shelley Winters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jan/16/guardianobituaries.obituaries>), 
in order to find out where a huge sum of money has been hidden. Only her 
children, the fair-haired, 12-year-old John (Chapin) and his younger sister, 
Pearl (Sally Jane Bruce), know of its whereabouts. Chapin is immediately 
suspicious of Mitchum, seeing through his pretence of doing the Lord’s work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De5AKK_om1VU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De5AKK_om1VU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De5AKK_om1VU&media=>
 The Night of the Hunter, 1955, in which Billy Chapin played John Harper 
The brave young lad stands up to Mitchum, before escaping by river with his 
sister, whom he protects and reassures. As they are pursued through a nocturnal 
landscape by Mitchum, Chapin says rhetorically: “Don’t he ever sleep?” Later, 
having found refuge with an older woman (Lillian Gish 
<http://www.lilliangish.com/about/bio.html>), who protects them with a rifle, 
he is confronted once again by Mitchum, who claims to be the boy’s father. 
Chapin says: “He ain’t my dad,” with a defiant half-smile.

Although the film was a critical and commercial failure on its release, it has 
long since gained classic status and was added to the Library of Congress’s
National Film Registry 
<https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/film-registry/complete-national-film-registry-listing/>
 in 1992 as a work of “cultural, historical and aesthetical” importance.

Such is the evanescence of child stars that, The Night of the Hunter proved to 
be Chapin’s penultimate film. His first was as Gary Cooper andTeresa Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/mar/09/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
’s baby girl in Casanova Brown (1944). He had been born only months before in 
Los Angeles, the second of three children of Roy Chapin, a bank manager, and 
his wife, Marquerite Alice Barringer. She was a stage mother who managed to get 
all of her children, Michael, Billy and Lauren, into films at very early ages.

However, they had deeply troubled childhoods. Their father was a brute who 
sexually abused Lauren, and their mother was an alcoholic. Perhaps some of this 
is reflected in Billy’s sensitive performance in The Night of the Hunter with 
his little sister, whom he has sworn to guard with his life.

Chapin got his first real break in the Broadway musical Three Wishes for Jamie 
(1952), in which he played a boy who cannot speak. It won him theNew York Drama 
Critics’ Circle award <http://www.dramacritics.org/> as the most promising 
young actor of the year.

This led to a busy career on television, starting as the orphan boy helping to 
delay his grandfather’s death in On Borrowed Time (1952), based on the hit Paul 
Osborn play, and the title role in The Kid from Left Field (1953), in which, as 
the unlikely nine-year-old manager of a big baseball league, he steals the 
picture from Dan Dailey (as his father) andAnne Bancroft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jun/08/obituaries.news>.

Besides appearing in TV series such as Dragnet, Chapin had roles in three 
films in 1954: little Steve Donohue (played as an adult by Johnnie Ray) in 
There’s No Business Like Show Business; a shoe-shine boy who helps the cop 
Sterling Hayden track down a villain in Naked Alibi – the only cheerful 
character among the gloom; and a boy genius who befriends the eponymous robot 
in Tobor the Great.

This was followed by A Man Called Peter (1955), a pious biopic of a celebrated 
Scottish preacher (Richard Todd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/04/secondworldwar-margaretthatcher>
), in which Chapin, as his young son, carries the upbeat finale, and Violent 
Saturday (1955), a heist thriller where he takes his father (Victor Mature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/aug/11/guardianobituaries>) to task for 
not having been a war hero like his best friend’s father.

Chapin’s last feature was Tension at Table Rock (1956), a decent western in 
which he is, once again, an orphan, this time rescued by gunman Richard Egan.

After a role in the TV series Fury in 1959, Chapin quit show business for 
ever, aged 16. Like his sister, Lauren, most remembered for her role as the 
youngest child in the television show Father Knows Best (1954-60), Chapin 
became addicted to drugs and drink. This dependency lasted until he was into 
his 30s, during which time he was unable to keep a job before kicking the habit.

He is survived by Lauren and Michael.

• Billy Chapin (William McClellan Chapin), actor, born 28 December 1943; died 
3 December 2016
 