
When politicians spend taxpayers money flying themselves to fundraising parties
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/16/bronwyn-bishop-agrees-to-pay-back-cost-of-5000-helicopter-trip>
 orflying to their own weddings 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/wa-liberal-mp-steve-irons-used-taxpayer-funds-to-attend-his-own-wedding-in-melbourne-20160925-gro9n6.html>
, we leave it up to the politician to decide if their claim is “outside of 
entitlement”.

When it comes to income tax we allow people to claim $300 worth of tax 
deductions without receipts because we think it petty to record of every minor 
expense. When the Australian Tax Office is in dispute with billionaires it 
adopts a “business like” approach, often settling for far far less than the 
initial estimate.

'Heartless to the core': autistic man chased by Centrelink debt collector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/04/heartless-core-autistic-man-chased-centrelink-debt-collectors>
But there is no such leeway, nor respect, shown to those people the parliament 
has deemed worthy of welfare support.Centrelink has sent tens of thousands of 
letters of demand to citizens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/centrelink-urged-to-stop-collecting-welfare-debts-after-compliance-system-errors>
 based on a computer algorithm that suggests they might have been overpaid. In 
the lead up to Christmas some of the most vulnerable Australians have been 
forced to choose between wasting days looking for six-year-old pay slips, 
spending days on the phone to Centrelink, which isnotorious for not answering 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-14/centrelink-customers-complain-of-long-waiting-time/7087770>
, or to succumb to enormous pressure from their own government and repay 
hundreds or thousands of dollars that they might not even owe. It’s obscene.

Like the economic modelling used to argue that a $50bn tax cut for big 
business is the best way to boost the wages of low paid workers, the data 
matching algorithm used byCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> to identify 
“overpayment” is only as accurate as the assumptions and data it relies on. As 
the old adage says: garbage in, garbage out.

As anyone who has ever tried to describe it knows, the Australian welfare 
system is exceedingly complex. Indeed, over the past three decades there have 
been repeated attempts to build computerised “expert systems” to help 
Centrelink staff get a clear understanding of exactly who is eligible for what. 
All attempts have failed. Tens of millions of dollars have been wasted on the 
futile effort to clearly define eligibility.

But the impossibility of accurately defining eligibility has not stopped the 
Turnbull government from using crude data matching to justify sending 
intimidating letters to large numbers of Australians,an estimated 20% of which 
are in error 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-03/centrelink-staff-to-receive-customer-aggression-training/8159694>
.

When ATO data collected on one basis is “matched” to data held by Centrelink 
on another basis guess what you get? Lots of “inconsistencies”. It’s not 
evidence of overpayment, but this government is using it as enough evidence to 
send people threatening letters, often to out-of-date addresses, and then 
commencing debt collection procedures when people can’t or don’t respond.

Even though it's an error, I have to start repaying my 'debt': Centrelink debt 
victims share their stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/even-thought-its-an-error-i-have-to-start-repaying-my-debt-centrelink-debt-victims-share-their-stories>
Hank Jongen, the general manager of the Department of Human Services is 
adamant that “the department is determined to ensure that people get what they 
are entitled to, nothing more, nothing less”. But that raises another important 
issue. If the department is just trying to help, how many cases of possible 
underpayment have they detected? How many letters encouraging people to seek 
back payment have they sent?

Commonwealth agencies are required to act as “model litigants” whenever they 
are engaged in legal action action against a citizen or a company. Going to 
court is expensive and, for individuals, highly stressful, which gives the 
commonwealth government an incredible advantage when deciding how hard to push. 
Should the commonwealth ever choose to be a vexatious litigant it could destroy 
the wealthiest of citizens, even if it had the weakest of cases.

But Centrelink is not acting as a model creditor. A company that sent 
threatening letters to tens of thousands of former customers demanding money 
when it knew that many customers owed nothing would potentially be engaged in a 
fraud. The willingness of the commonwealth to do similarly, to place the onus 
of proof on the citizen so many years after the fact, and to be hasty in the 
dispatching of debt collectors should shock conservatives and libertarians as 
much as it does progressives and welfare advocates.

Thomas Jefferson (may) have said that when governments fear their people there 
is liberty, and when people fear their governments, there is tyranny. But 
whether he did, or didn’t, there is no doubt that the Turnbull government has 
abandoned any hint of philosophical support for small government and the rights 
of the individual. A genuinely liberal government would never consider 
reversing the onus of proof and sending such threatening letters to its 
citizens. Nor would a “liberal” politician place the cost of fixing a 
bureaucratic mistake by a government agency like Centrelink on the individual 
victim.

Of course we all know that it is the Christian conservatives, not the “small 
l” Liberals that dominate the modern Liberal party. But since when is sending 
threatening letters to vulnerable people a Christian thing to do?

While the philosophy behind this assault on the citizenry is hard to fathom, 
the political strategy is pretty obvious. There are already 730,000 unemployed 
people in Australia and the government’s own forecasts suggest this will rise 
before the next election. As the government has no faith in its ability to 
manage the macroeconomic problem of unemployment, it is instead ramping up the 
political attack on the unemployed.

Centrelink debt notices based on 'idiotic' faith in big data, IT expert says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
Just as the 2014 budget was meant to be perceived as harsh, so too the 
decision to demean hundreds of thousands of welfare recipients was meant to 
attract attention. But, just like the 2014 budget, it seems the tin-ear of the 
Coalition cabinet has ensured that they are slow to react to the reality that 
they have pushed too far and upset too many people. Millions of Australians are 
happy to believe that strangers are “dole bludgers” but no one thinks that 
their mum’s Christmas should be ruined by a bureaucrat.

True to form, the Coalition is responding to the growing anger at its gung-ho 
approach to debt collection byspending more money training Centrelink staff how 
to deal with angry customers 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4086024/Centrelink-staff-given-aggression-training-amidst-debt-backlash.html>
.

Here’s a better tip: take the Labor party’s advice and stop sending letters 
that make so many people so angry. Stop treating citizens who are accessing 
benefits that the parliament has deemed them to be eligible for as “customers”. 
And stop telling the people with the least that they have already had too much.

Even the Business Council of Australia supports increasing the unemployment 
benefit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/13/axing-clean-energy-supplement-has-barely-caused-a-ripple-but-it-should>
, which at $250 per week is less than Coalition MPs pay themselves for one 
night’s travel allowance. Maybe it’s time we built them a dormitory to live in 
and gave them a Basic Card when they travel to Canberra. The statistics suggest 
they are more likely to defraud the commonwealth than welfare recipients.
 