
A body has been found on a popular Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> beach where a 14-year-old 
boy went missing while swimming earlier this week.

Tui Gallaher disappeared after he and his cousin got into trouble while 
swimming at Maroubra about 8.30pm on Tuesday.

A search aided by helicopters and jetskis was launched, and police reported a 
body had been found on the southern end of the beach just after 7.15am on 
Friday.

Earlier, Tui’s mother spoke of her heartache after finding out her son was 
missing.

Lifesavers alarmed at ‘horrific’ number of drownings in NSW
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/29/lifesavers-alarmed-at-horrific-number-of-drownings>
“You don’t know you can run out of tears until something like this happens,” 
Sandra Tamano told reporters on Thursday.

The teen’s cousin was pulled from the surf by a passerby shortly before Tui 
vanished. Police say the man who rescued the cousin then tried to look for Tui 
but could not find him

Tui’s death added to a shocking spate of drowning deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/29/lifesavers-alarmed-at-horrific-number-of-drownings>
 in New South Wales over the Christmas period, with at least nine victims.

On Thursday the second of two toddlers pulled unconscious from a Sydney 
swimming pool was confirmed dead.

The 23-month-old twins were rushed to hospital with a police escort last 
Tuesday after they were discovered in a backyard pool at Kellyville Ridge 
around 7pm.

The Children’s Hospital at Westmead on Thursday confirmed the little boy had 
died, three days after his twin sister’s death on Boxing Day.

In Wagga Wagga a search resumed on Friday morning for a missing swimmer who 
was swept away in a current.

Victorian man Peter Abd-El-Kaddous, 42, got into trouble at about 3.30pm on 
Wednesday while swimming in the Murrumbidgee river.

Police divers joined the operation when it resumed. Pockets of the river are 
up to eight metres deep and sonar was being used, Inspector Phil Malligantold 
the Armidale Express 
<http://www.armidaleexpress.com.au/story/4380076/search-continues-for-missing-wagga-swimmer-peter-abd-el-kaddous/?cs=12>
.

Abd-El-Kaddous is believed to have been in the area on holiday with his family 
from Craigieburn in Melbourne’s northern suburbs, and his wife had desperately 
tried to save him as he went under.
 