
Just last month Bradley Wiggins, the first British man to win the Tour de 
France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>, was basking in the 
glory of becoming the country’s most decorated Olympian at another glittering 
Games for Team GB’s cyclists.


Now he faces a fight for his reputation as some of his hitherto most loyal 
supporters echo questions around his record on performance-enhancing drugs 
arising from a Russian-led hacking effort into the World Anti-Doping Agency 
(Wada) database.

The questions surround the use of medical certificates to allow athletes to 
take otherwise banned substances for pre-existing conditions, and they are not 
particularly new. But the specificity and ferocity with which they are being 
asked in the wake of the Russian leak is new.

Wiggins has been forced to deny that the controversial Belgian doctor Geert 
Leinders was involved in his obtaining so-called therapeutic use exemptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/bradley-wiggins-denies-doctor-geert-leinders-gave-banned-steroid-tue>
 (TUE), after details of the TUEs granted to both him and fellow Tour de France 
winner, Chris Froome, were leaked late on Wednesday night. The leak detailed 
three TUEs obtained by Wiggins for the treatment of asthma and allergies 
between 2011 and 2013 – each before his major target race for that season.

Wiggins has also had to clarify apparent inconsistencies between what he wrote 
in 2012 about the use of needles and the details that have emerged via the 
Fancy Bears hackers.

Leinders was a Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> doctor 
between 2011-2012 – Wiggins won the Tour de France in the latter year – who was 
later banned for life for doping offences committed during a previous stint at 
the tainted Rabobank cycling team between 2001-2009.

Since the formation of Team Sky, originally envisioned as a professional road 
racing offshoot of British Cycling’s successful Olympic operation, the 
longstanding team principal, Sir Dave Brailsford, has preached a loud 
anti-doping message.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Frussian-hacking-group-releases-athletes-medical-records-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Froome%20and%20Wiggins%20targeted%20by%20Russian%20hack%20group%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Frussian-hacking-group-releases-athletes-medical-records-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Froome%20and%20Wiggins%20targeted%20by%20Russian%20hack%20group%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Frussian-hacking-group-releases-athletes-medical-records-video-report&media=>
Froome and Wiggins targeted by Russian hack group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/14/russian-hacking-group-releases-athletes-medical-records-video-report>
. 
After Froome’s Tour de France victory last year, achieved amid a toxic 
atmosphere of suspicion and friction, Brailsford likened those accusing Team 
Sky of cheating to hunting fruitlessly for the Loch Ness monster.

The stated aims of the team when it was launched in 2009 were to win the Tour 
de France with a British rider within five years and to do so as a demonstrably 
clean team. As though on a crusade to rescue cycling’s reputation in the wake 
of the near-fatal damage of the Lance Armstrong years, Team Sky outlined an 
evangelically “zero tolerance” policy to doping.

Bradley Wiggins: I can never dope because it would cost me everything
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/jul/13/bradley-wiggins-dope-drugs> 
This extended not only to insisting it would not employ anyone with a known 
doping past but to inviting David Walsh, the Sunday Times journalist who did 
much to bring down Armstrong, to live with the team under an open-door policy.

Even as the difficulties of working within a sport in which doping became the 
price of entry became clear, such as the ban for Leinders and a two-year doping 
suspension for rider Jonathan Tiernan-Locke, Walsh has hitherto seen no cause 
for concern.

But under the headline It looks bad, Brad 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/it-looks-bad-brad-k9s50whdd>, a disappointed 
Walsh concluded this week in the Sunday Times: “The team that wanted to be seen 
as whiter than white had been dealing in shades of grey. What they did was 
legal, but it wasn’t right.”

Walsh also suggests that a 2012 injection of triamcinolone, ahead of Wiggins’s 
historic Tour victory, was given as a preventive measure rather than to treat 
existing symptoms.

There is no suggestion Wiggins did anything to break anti-doping regulations. 
But those shades of grey are likely to be pored over even more closely in the 
coming days and weeks as the Fancy Bears release even more confidential medical 
records hacked from theWada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> database 
during the Rio Olympics.

The problem for Wiggins, for Brailsford, for Team Sky and even for British 
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> as a whole is that, 
having insisted so publicly and so vehemently they would be whiter than white, 
anything less starts to look like hypocrisy.

Ross Tucker, a respected South African sports scientist who is hawkish on 
whether TUEs should be banned altogether, said on Twitter: “I’d say Sky have 
been exposed on principle (their stated ‘line’ that wouldn’t be crossed) & 
promise.”

Wiggins, who will retire later this year, memorably railed against his 
doubters during his 2012 Tour victory and immediately afterwards wrote an 
autobiography in which he did not mention his TUEs. Not only that, he went 
further by outlining his aversion to needles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fbradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf4a07313145d9462a09bb73aca03002fbb0f800%2F0_15_3177_1906%2F3177.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bradley%20Wiggins%20faces%20a%20fight%20for%20his%20reputation%20in%20wake%20of%20Wada%20hack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fbradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bradley%20Wiggins%20faces%20a%20fight%20for%20his%20reputation%20in%20wake%20of%20Wada%20hack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fbradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf4a07313145d9462a09bb73aca03002fbb0f800%2F0_15_3177_1906%2F3177.jpg>
 The renewed speculation around Wiggins and other high-profile western athletes 
is exactly what the Russian hackers linked to the Fancy Bears leak wanted to 
achieve. Photograph: Bryn Lennon/Getty Images 
“British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> have always had a 
no needle policy, it’s been a mainstay of theirs; so it’s something I’ve grown 
up with as a bike rider,” he wrote.

“In British cycling culture, at the word ‘needle’ – or the sight of one – you 
go, ‘Oh shit’. It’s a complete taboo … I’ve never had an injection, apart from 
I’ve had my vaccinations and on occasion I’ve been put on a drip, when I’ve 
come down with diarrhoea or something.”

On Saturday, a spokesman for Wiggins said that the mention of needles referred 
to the practice of intravenous injections. The spokesman went on to clarify 
that the triamcinolone injection that Wiggins received was an intramuscular 
injection.

It must be repeated that there is no evidence that Wiggins or Sky did anything 
that was not within the rules. And, also, that the rationale behind TUEs is 
obvious in terms of allowing athletes with pre-existing medical conditions to 
compete.

“If the anti-doping community wishes to change the international standard [for 
allowing TUEs] then that could be done. But there are wide implications,” said 
Sir Craig Reedie, the Wada president, on Sunday.

Wada has repeatedly insisted that medical confidentiality dictates that TUE 
applications should remain private and points to the robustness and 
independence of the process. But on the other side of the argument, difficult 
questions over the use of TUEs to boost performance by unscrupulous coaches and 
doctors persist.

Appearing on the BBC’s Sportsweek programme on Sunday, the respiratory expert 
Dr John Dickinson of the University of Kent, said: “The way the rules are, it 
allows for that grey zone. It allows for that 1% of athletes with the help of a 
medical doctor to look at the system and say: ‘You know what, we can get you 
that drug.’ There is no clear evidence, but the rules can allow that to happen.”

The renewed speculation around Wiggins and other high-profile western athletes 
is exactly what the Russian hackers linked to the Fancy Bears leak wanted to 
achieve. Their aim is to set up a dynamic where the often legitimate use of 
TUEs muddies the waters to the extent that some start to equate it with the 
large-scale, state-sponsored cheating uncovered over the past year that almost 
resulted in Russia being banned from the Rio Games. That the two issues should 
not be conflated should not make either any less valid.

Jonathan Vaughters, a former American cyclist who now runs his own team, 
suggested a way forward that is being advocated increasingly loudly. “Want a 
good solution for TUEs? Make it compulsory to publicly disclose all TUEs,” he 
said. “Any athlete would think twice unless they really needed it.”
 