
The younger members of Team GB’s cycling squad in Rio amused themselves by 
addressing him asSir Bradley <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins>
. To the rest of us, he will for ever be Wiggo. He introduces himself as 
Bradley when we meet in London, days after his fifth and final Olympic gold 
medal triumph, and his unassailable place in the nation’s affections will 
ensure national hero status for life. More than admired, the cyclist is adored; 
he is the sportsman we feel we know, the one we can identify with. It seems 
odd, therefore, that the adjective favoured by those who work most closely with 
him is almost invariably “complex”. Reflecting on coming towards the end of a 
spectacular career – he is riding this week’s Tour of Britain, the London Six 
next month and the Ghent Six Day in November before allegedly retiring – the 
consensus in Rio among journalists and cyclists was that Bradley Wiggins 
remained “an enigma”.

Wiggins is a bit puzzled by this himself. “I had to Google it. What does 
enigma actually mean?”

He stepped off the plane from Rio less than 48 hours earlier and looks 
remarkably sharp in skinny jeans and a close-fitting T-shirt, but there is a 
diffidence about his bearing that may or may not be down to jet lag. The 
extensive tattoos and intermittent eye contact remind me of interviews with 
rock stars, and there is more than a touch of Noel Gallagher in Wiggins’ 
teasingly deadpan expression. But halting sentences quickly develop into 
disarming candour as he muses over his reputation as an enigma.

No excuse for Lizzie Armitstead’s missed drugs tests, says Bradley Wiggins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/bradley-wiggins-lizzie-armitstead-no-excuse>
“Maybe I’m perceived that way because I think while I’m talking and I’m honest 
and open, and I talk about things that upset me, vulnerability, and things that 
have happened in the past that have affected the way I am today,” he says. 
“I’ve got a habit of just talking and talking and talking, and elaborating far 
too much. What you see is what you get.”

That shouldn’t make him an enigma, but it certainly makes him an anomaly. The 
first time I saw Wiggins interviewed on television, he was on course to becoming
Britain’s first winner of the Tour de France, in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-cavendish>
. The skinny, tattooed man with sideburns looked and sounded so unlike a 
professional sportsman, for a moment I thought I was watching a spoof.

“Well, most post-race interviews end up becoming an interview of cliches,” he 
agrees. “I always find that just quite mundane and boring and rehearsed. So I 
find it easier just to be myself, because then I don’t trip myself up.”

Instead of the conventional, formulaic script about performance times and 
personal challenges, we were introduced to a laconic mod with a dry wit. Handed 
the microphone on the podium in Paris, he joked, “Right, we’re just going to 
draw the raffle numbers.” The French may have been nonplussed, but Britain fell 
in love. The Sun issued cut-out-and-keep paper sideburns; Wiggins was chosen to
strike the gong to open the London Olympics 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XqJOCpZfIrc>; and – two heady weeks and one 
gold medal later – was a household name who couldn’t fail towin Sports 
Personality of 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2012/dec/17/bradley-wiggins-sports-personality-year-video>
 and was knighted by the end of the year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34b12466a4573177dda03aa83015adf2cf5b6e38%2F0_0_3328_4864%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bradley%20Wiggins%3A%20'I%20don't%20want%20to%20be%20remembered%20as%20just%20the%20cyclist%20with%20the%20sideburns'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bradley%20Wiggins%3A%20%27I%20don%27t%20want%20to%20be%20remembered%20as%20just%20the%20cyclist%20with%20the%20sideburns%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34b12466a4573177dda03aa83015adf2cf5b6e38%2F0_0_3328_4864%2F3328.jpg>
 After receiving his gold medal for the men’s pursuit at Rio 2016, Wiggins 
caused a stir by gurning during the national anthem. Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
for the Guardian 
None of the seven Olympic medals he had won by then had conferred the kind of 
acclaim or wealth the Tour de France delivered. But Wiggins returned to the 
track, set a new world record last year for thefarthest distance cycled in one 
hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/bradley-wiggins-uci-hour-record> 
– 54.526km – and flew to Rio this summer for one more bid at gold. With the 
medal around his neck and the national anthem playing, Wiggins bade farewell to 
a 16-year Olympic career bysticking his tongue out at the camera 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=23hwpeglUi0>.

“I don’t know,” he offers sheepishly. “It was just spontaneous. We were just 
stood there and I got quite embarrassed because my stupid big head came on the 
screen and we were all just stood looking at the screen, and then it just 
focused right on my head up on the screen, and it just… It’s just my introvert 
character, like when I was at school and the attention was on me, I’d do 
something stupid. I just think it’s an uneasiness with all the attention, you 
know.”

His team-mates on the podium fell about laughing, but I ask if anyone took 
offence. “I think there might have been some of that,” he mumbles. “You know, 
there’s always going to be someone. I mean, Piers Morgan had a go at me four 
years ago for not singing the national anthem.” Did Wiggins care? “I don’t know 
him.” Pointedly, he adds, “I’ll know things are bad when I go on Piers Morgan’s 
Life Stories. That’s when I’d be scraping the barrel.”

It’s not an entirely throwaway line. Wiggins has been a competitive cyclist 
since his teens; now, at 36, he has to work out what to do with the rest of his 
life. On one matter at least he is clear: “You don’t want to become just this 
pointless celebrity who’s here, there and everywhere, going on Can’t Cook, 
Won’t Cook. I don’t want to become a captain on Question Of Sport and go on 
every week playing the fool.”

I arrive at the track and think, I don’t want to do this ever again. This is 
horrible, this. I hate it

He talks about his future ruminatively, weaving between subdued introspection 
and animated riffs. Winning theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> made him wealthy enough never 
to need to work again – “Not if I was careful” – but he says so with no obvious 
pleasure. “Cos you’ve got to do something, haven’t you? I can’t just retire now 
like I’m 64, and go in an old age pensioners’ home and sit in an armchair all 
day with a blanket on. I have to do something.

“I can’t go and get a normal job. I can’t go and work in Sainsbury’s next week 
stacking shelves, so I might as well use the success I’ve had to do things I 
feel are positive. People ask me all the time, ‘What’s your legacy?’ I don’t 
know how I want to be remembered on the bike. But I don’t want people to look 
back in 10 years and say, ‘Do you remember that famous cyclist with the 
sideburns? Whatever happened to him?’ And it’s like, ‘He was on the telly for 
ages, weren’t he? On all those game shows. And then he sort of disappeared.’ 
And then you read about me in the Mirror, walking through the park or 
something, you know, down and out. So I think about it a lot. Where do I want 
to be in 20 years’ time?”

Wiggins isn’t sorry he won’t race in another Olympics: his overriding 
sensation on winning gold last month was not joy or euphoria, but relief. 
“You’re just like: thank God that’s done.”

It wasn’t that conditions in Rio were dreadful, although, due to the 
“sanitation and crime and stuff”, he did keep his two children in England. His 
worst Olympics, by a mile, had been Beijing, in 2008. “It just had no soul to 
it, it was very sterile. Obviously nothing could top the atmosphere in London, 
but I thought Rio was actually really good.”

Nor, contrary to some media reports, did he have a big row with his fellow 
cyclist and friend,Mark Cavendish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/markcavendish>. Disappointed to be excluded 
from the team pursuit in Rio,Cavendish had said Wiggins “wants to be the hero” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/mark-cavendish-criticises-bradley-wiggins-olympic-team-pursuit-snub>
, and was absent from the velodrome when the team won gold. “That got all blown 
out of proportion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/mark-cavendish-british-cycling-row-denial>
,” Wiggins says. Wiggins received no congratulations fromChris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome>, the British rider who has won 
three Tours de France since 2013 and with whom he has a bumpy relationship, 
either. “But I mean, I wouldn’t expect him to, to be honest. We’re not really 
that close.”

The thing he won’t miss about the Olympics is the mental torture of pre-race 
tension. “If someone said to me now, ‘Let’s go out there and just do a team 
pursuit’, I could just do it without thinking, much like you get up out of a 
chair and walk. But there you can start overthinking the process.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fbradley-wiggins-becomes-britains-most-successful-olympian-rio-olympics-cycling-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20becomes%20Great%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20most%20successful%20Olympian%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fbradley-wiggins-becomes-britains-most-successful-olympian-rio-olympics-cycling-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20becomes%20Great%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20most%20successful%20Olympian%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fbradley-wiggins-becomes-britains-most-successful-olympian-rio-olympics-cycling-video-report&media=>
Sir Bradley Wiggins becomes Great Britain’s most successful Olympian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/13/bradley-wiggins-becomes-britains-most-successful-olympian-rio-olympics-cycling-video-report>
“Then I’m just talking to myself constantly, like, why are you getting 
nervous? It’s only like what you did in training last week, and you weren’t 
nervous then, so why are you getting nervous now? Then I’ll read for a bit and 
I’ll find myself reading the same page again, because you start thinking again, 
so you can’t focus on anything. That’s what it’s like for the days before. Even 
when you arrive at the track, you’re thinking, in four hours it’s going to be 
finished, it’s all going to be done, this. Then it’s three hours to go. And at 
that point you think, I don’t want to do this ever again. This is horrible, 
this. I hate it.”

Even now, Wiggins can’t bear to consider the possibility that Team GB might 
have lost. “I get really stressed about it and it starts to scare me, actually, 
because we won by 0.7sec, and I start thinking: God, we could have lost. So I 
can’t let myself think about it. That’s why this is like having a burden 
lifted.” For the first time since last Christmas, he can “just relax and have a 
nice meal and a drink”.

Wiggins could be forgiven for dreading the next chapter, though, because the 
most difficult times in his life have followed the biggest races. His father, a 
hard-drinking Australian cyclist, walked out when Wiggins was two, leaving his 
mother to raise him alone on a working-class estate in Kilburn, north-west 
London. Inspired byChris Boardman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/31/chris-boardman-when-i-got-into-cycling-i-was-something-of-a-weirdo>
 in the 1992 Olympics, Wiggins took up cycling at 12, raced through his teens 
and, with National Lottery funding, won a bronze medal at the Sydney Olympics 
in 2000. Having inherited his father’s “addictive, obsessive streak”, he 
dedicated the next four years to the track, returning fromAthens an Olympic 
gold medallist <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=luGP6TIo_8E>. And then he fell 
apart.

Lost and depressed without the discipline of a goal, Wiggins would be waiting 
outside his local pub at 11am, drink all day, and go home plastered to a 
pregnant young wife and a menacing overdraft. The birth of his son in 2005 
brought him to his senses and restored his sense of purpose. “It sobered me up, 
literally and metaphorically, for the first time since the Olympics,” he later 
wrote.

A daughter followed a year later, but after winning two more gold medals in 
Beijing, he turned his focus to road racing, which led to “the first really big 
public failure of my career”. Appointed leader of the newly formed, 
swaggeringly confident Team Sky in the 2010 Tour de France, he has admitted he 
became “pompous” and “up my own arse”. After finishing ahumiliating 24th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/24/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-tour-france>
 in that year’s race (he’d come third the year before), Wiggins decided he had 
to take abreak from the sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/25/tour-de-france-2010-bradley-wiggins>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e25bd2d379af200ce91d8baa3c8519461c5716f%2F0_223_3264_4433%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bradley%20Wiggins%3A%20'I%20don't%20want%20to%20be%20remembered%20as%20just%20the%20cyclist%20with%20the%20sideburns'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bradley%20Wiggins%3A%20%27I%20don%27t%20want%20to%20be%20remembered%20as%20just%20the%20cyclist%20with%20the%20sideburns%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e25bd2d379af200ce91d8baa3c8519461c5716f%2F0_223_3264_4433%2F3264.jpg>
 Winning stage 19 of the 2012 Tour de France. Photograph: Getty Images 
Even the triumphs of 2012 left him facing new problems for which he was 
unprepared.The Lance Armstrong doping revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lance-armstrong> that surfaced later that 
year exposed Wiggins to a constant barrage of, “Well, how do we know you’re not 
cheating as well?” which robbed him of victory’s pleasure, while his sudden 
celebrity horrified him. “We went home from the Olympics and needed to get some 
basics for the house – milk, bread – so we went in Somerfield and we came out 
and there’s paparazzi there. I was like, what? Wiggo getting his milk is a 
story? Those things were really difficult to deal with.”

I wonder whether he is bracing himself for another low. “I don’t know. I might 
get to March next year and I might think: God, I’m bored, or whatever. But I 
don’t anticipate a dip this time. I’m retiring content, for a start. I’ve 
achieved everything I want to achieve.”

Four years ago, Wiggins hated his new fame and “wanted everything to go back 
to normal”. But when I ask if he still wants his old anonymity back, he shakes 
his head. “It took about two years to come to terms with being hit over the 
head with a hammer with this fame thing, and shying away from it going, ‘I 
don’t want to be famous.’ But I’ve grown up with it and matured to it, and I’ve 
learned how to use it. It’s about finding role models for the next stage of 
your life.”

He has been following the post-cycling careers of Chris Boardman and Sir Chris 
Hoy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chrishoy>. “They’ve got massive bike 
ranges, they’re on TV, they’re educating people about what’s happening in bike 
races. Or, in other sports, Michael Johnson and Michael Jordan, or Gary Lineker 
– look at what he’s done. And I look up to those people and think that’s who I 
want to be like, as opposed to the Paul Gascoignes of this world.” So when the 
team he’s assembled to manage his post-competitive career asked if he had any 
ideas, he told them, “Well, I’ve always had this idea to design kids’ bikes. 
Because no one else does them.”

Is it easy to miss three drugs tests as Lizzie Armitstead did? ‘No. That’s 
ridiculous. I can’t fathom how that happened’

People are forever approaching Wiggins to tell him that he inspired them to 
get on a bike. The popularity of cycling has soared in the course of his 
career, and when I suggest he had a lot to do with this, he allows, “Maybe a 
bit.” As a child, he had to hide his Lycra in a bag as he cycled out of his 
estate, and dared put it on only once he was a safe distance away from the 
local boys who would tease and bully him. But a little while ago he spent a day 
at the velodrome in east London for a charity race “with about 20 kids from a 
local estate in Hackney that had sort of gone off the rails, involved in gangs, 
this, that and the other. And they’d all been kitted out with bikes and helmets 
and Lycra and everything. And these kids were just blown away by the fact I was 
there. That really struck me then. I just think that’s a testament to how far 
the sport’s come.”

Wiggins has designed a children’s range for Halfords, from balance bikes for 
toddlers up to road bikes for teens. “I just want to throw all that energy into 
ideas I’ve had in my head for years. It’s about grassroots and youth and 
finding the next Bradley Wiggins, as it were, or just inspiring the next 
generation.”

He looks happiest of all when mentioning the 2004 photograph of a 12-year-old 
Laura Trott standing beside Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shortcuts/2016/aug/16/olympians-meet-hero-laura-trott-bradley-wiggins-chris-hoy-michael-phelps>
, wearing the gold medal he’d won in Athens. “And now she’s won four gold 
medals. To think that another Laura Trott’s out there somewhere, who started by 
riding on one of these bikes – and in 10 years’ time they’ll be in a picture 
saying, ‘This was my first bike, and I’m an Olympic champion, and it’s because 
I watched Brad in Rio win the team pursuit.’ Those things are the important 
legacy.”

The astonishing success of the whole Team GB cycling squad in Rio has raised 
eyebrows in some quarters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/laura-trott-annoyed-team-gb-olympic-cycling-questioned>
. French, Australian and German cyclists all made comments such as, “The recipe 
should be asked for,” and, “We are human beings like them, we are made of the 
same stuff, we have a bike like they do, so why are they better?” But Wiggins 
looks untroubled: “Well, there’s been a lot of innuendo, and people saying, 
‘I’m not saying they’re cheating, what I’m saying is it doesn’t make any 
sense.’ It’s like, well, what are you saying then?” The insinuation is that 
there must have been doping.

“When you dominate something to the degree that Team GB dominated, that’s 
going to cause ill-feeling. But we peak every four years because of British 
cycling and the lottery funding thing is about winning medals at theOlympic 
Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>. So I think there’s a 
bit of sore-loser type.” Besides, he adds, “In this day and age, I don’t think 
anyone could get away with it. I’m talking blood doping. I just think it’s nigh 
on impossible now.”

But when I ask if it would have been better for all concerned had the British 
rider Lizzie Armitstead not been allowed to compete,after missing three drug 
tests in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/05/lizzie-armistead-olympic-2016-rio-road-race>
, he looks uneasy. “Umm, I don’t know. I just think that rules are rules, and 
they’re there for a reason.” Is it easy to miss three tests in a row by 
mistake? “No.” His bluntness takes me by surprise. Not even slightly? “No,” he 
repeats, maintaining a level stare.

Is it practically impossible? “Well, it’s bloody hard because what happens is 
you miss one test, they write you a letter, they ask you to explain what 
happened and you’ve got two weeks to put a case forward. If you ignore that and 
then you get another one, you end up having crisis meetings. You get a lot of 
support from UK Sport. They’re brilliant, actually. They’re on the phone daily. 
They send you emails, reminders, they’ll put plans in place for you in terms of 
someone helping you with the whereabouts, so you don’t end up… well, it’s very 
difficult, then, to go from two to three. And to get three within eight or nine 
months, there’s no excuse. When you’re a professional athlete and you’re a 
world champion, there’s no excuse, because it’s your career. You’re setting the 
standard for everybody else, and to say, ‘Cycling wasn’t my priority at that 
time’ [as Armitstead did] is ludicrous, because you nearly lost your career 
over it. That’s just ridiculous. So I can’t fathom how that happened.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F602db57a971c54877a4ecdd7897a1b25ca102039%2F0_295_4062_2438%2F4062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bradley%20Wiggins%3A%20'I%20don't%20want%20to%20be%20remembered%20as%20just%20the%20cyclist%20with%20the%20sideburns'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bradley%20Wiggins%3A%20%27I%20don%27t%20want%20to%20be%20remembered%20as%20just%20the%20cyclist%20with%20the%20sideburns%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F602db57a971c54877a4ecdd7897a1b25ca102039%2F0_295_4062_2438%2F4062.jpg>
 Wiggins wins BBC Sports Personality of the Year Awards 2012. Photograph: PA 
For years, media coaches have been trying to teach Wiggins to steer clear of 
controversial subjects. It hasn’t worked. On the referendum vote to leave the 
EU, he offers, “It was too complex an issue to leave to the public, because 
most people are thick.” He says he doesn’t follow politics, but has always 
voted Labour. “I grew up Labour, and you have to vote. You can’t not vote. For 
Russell Brand to ponce abouttelling people not to vote 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/10/russell-brand-on-revolution> – 
well, they’re just morons.”

If Wiggins’ team were hoping for a more diplomatic Sir Bradley in retirement, 
they will be disappointed. His fans would be even more disappointed if he did – 
which feels unlikely – master the professional athlete’s bland veneer. Anyway, 
Wiggins thinks his inability to hide his explains why others find him an enigma.

“Well, I just think people perhaps sometimes get confused, because I show them 
how I’m feeling daily. So if I’m feeling miserable about something else that’s 
on my mind, I can’t go into a press conference and switch all that off and go, 
‘Yes, everything’s great, this, that and the other.’ I’ll sit there and I’ll be 
moody and I’ll go, ‘I feel like shit today.’ And people are like, ‘Well, he was 
lovely yesterday, and he’s just walked past me today and not said hello. I 
can’t work him out.’

“But I am what I am. People like to put tags on people and say [about me], 
‘He’s the nicest bloke you’ll ever meet.’ And I think, ‘He’s not, actually. 
He’s a bit of a cunt.’ I’m sorry for the language, but you can’t be that good 
at cycling without that in you. I don’t think anyone can be successful and be a 
super-nice person. You have to be selfish.”

• The Wiggins bike range is available in Halfords shops and at halfords.com 
<http://www.halfords.com>.
 