
Dr Richard Freeman, the doctor at the centre of the furore surrounding the 
delivery ofa package of “medical substance” to British riders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/package-bradley-wiggins-doctor-2011-criterium-du-dauphine>
, will not travel with the team to the cycling Road World Championships this 
week.

Success on the track cannot mask a turbulent year for British cycling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/british-cycling-anti-doping-investigators>
British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> said on 
Saturday Freeman would not accompany the team to the championships in Doha, 
Qatar. “This was a decision jointly reached by the team management and 
Richard,” the governing body said. “The riders in Doha will instead be 
supported by UCI medical team [sic] at the worlds, alongside the usual GBCT 
support staff.”

Andy Harrison, British Cycling’s programmes director, said: “This was a 
decision taken with the best interests of Richard and the riders at heart. We 
have every confidence that the team will get all the support they need.”

UK Anti-Doping investigators have met British Cycling staff as the crisis 
engulfing the sport reached the home of the national governing body, which it 
shares withTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky>.

Two Ukad officials travelled to the Manchester Velodrome on Friday. Ukad would 
not comment further to “protect the integrity of the investigation”. Nor would 
it disclose whether the meeting was prearranged or the result of an unannounced 
visit.

The initial Ukad announcement came after reports last week that the 
anti-doping authority is investigatingTeam Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> and Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> over the contents of a 
medical package delivered by Simon Cope, the British Cycling coach, to the Team 
Sky doctor Freeman in France on 12 June 2011, ahead of that year’s Tour de 
France. It is unclear what the package delivered to Freeman contained.

Team Sky ‘100% stand by clean competition’ as Ukad visits HQ
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/ukad-visit-british-cycling-investigation-manchester>
The Daily Mail reported that Ukad is looking at what that package contained.

Wiggins said in a statement yesterday: “I welcome this investigation.” Team 
Sky are “confident there has been no wrongdoing” and had asked British Cycling 
to contact Ukad. BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> 
said it is “cooperating fully”.
 