
Sir Bradley Wiggins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> has for 
the first time given details of the history of asthma and pollen allergies that 
led him to apply for three therapeutic use exemptions (TUEs) to have injections 
of the banned corticosteroid triamcinolone. The use of the drug did not break 
any anti-doping rules, although they occurred immediately before major target 
races, but the 2012 Tour de France winner and nine-times Olympic medallist said 
he realised why the injections might be considered unethical.

In an exclusive and wide-ranging interview with the Guardian, Wiggins explains 
what he says is the complete chronology of his symptoms and treatment for those 
ailments, detailing why the injections were required before certain races but 
not others.

Wiggins: ‘I was paranoid about making excuses. It wasn’t something I was going 
to shout from the rooftops’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues> 
Asked if he understood those who said having the injections was unethical, 
Wiggins said: “Without all the context of someone’s history then I could see 
that on paper maybe, especially the way some of it has been reported. It’s been 
very sensationalised in parts and very personal in other parts. Straight off, 
the way cycling is today, yes, yes. Because it doesn’t take much in cycling now 
because of what’s gone before. So I understand that.”

In the interview, the full transcript of which is published 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues> 
on Friday on theguardian.com, Wiggins says:

• He had been suffering from the affects of pollen allergies since the 2003 
Giro d’Italia and they had significantly affected his performances.

• He had not previously revealed details of the allergies, particularly in his 
2012 autobiography, because he was “paranoid about making excuses” for not 
performing well.

• That rather than being performance enhancing, he believes the injections 
were sometimes “a detriment to my performance”.

• That although he is not certain who apart from the team doctor, Richard 
Freeman, knew about the injections, he assumes all senior coaches at Team Sky, 
including the team principal, Sir David Brailsford, were aware of them

Wiggins added: “I understand because … I saw the hoorah a couple of years ago 
with Froome with the Tour of Romandie inhaler and the last-minute TUE, racing 
on it.” Chris Froome, the three-times Tour de France winner for Team Sky, was 
the subject of controversy after he was revealed to have won the Tour de 
Romandie in 2014 after receiving a TUE for a steroid to treat a chest infection.

“I saw the hysteria that caused and I understand in the post-Armstrong [era],” 
Wiggins continued. “Yeah, I do understand. But what I don’t understand is that 
you’ve automatically just assumed that this was a performance enhancer.”

The Guardian has also constructed a detailed timeline of Wiggins’s three TUE 
applications for the first time; this highlighted several inconsistencies 
within the TUE approval forms that were leaked by the hacking websiteFancy Bears
 <> on 15 September. These appear in the main to be clerical errors. The Union 
Cycliste Internationale, cycling’s world governing body, has been asked for 
comment and clarification but has not responded before publication.

Triamcinolone formed part of the repertoire of banned drugs whose use has been 
described by self-confessed cycling dopers such as the Briton David Millar, the 
German Jörg Jaksche and the Dane Michael Rasmussen. Jaksche and Rasmussen both 
said that they had been issued the corticosteroid within the rules using TUEs; 
Jaksche described the way Wiggins had received his as being “the same 
procedure”.

Doctors including Prentice Steffen – Wiggins’s team medic at the Garmin team 
in 2009 – and Jeroen Swart, the South African expert in high-performance 
cycling, have said they were uneasy with the use of triamcinolone at such 
significant times, and for the treatment of pollen allergies. “You do have to 
think it is kind of coincidental that a big dose of intramuscular long-acting 
corticosteroids would be needed at that … exact time before the most important 
race of the season,” said Dr Steffen. “I would certainly say now that it does 
not look good, it doesn’t look right from a health or a sporting perspective.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fbradley-wiggins-reputation-fancy-bears-leak-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wiggins%20faces%20battle%20for%20reputation%20after%20Fancy%20Bears%20leak%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fbradley-wiggins-reputation-fancy-bears-leak-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wiggins%20faces%20battle%20for%20reputation%20after%20Fancy%20Bears%20leak%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fbradley-wiggins-reputation-fancy-bears-leak-video-report&media=>
Wiggins faces battle for reputation after Fancy Bears leak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/26/bradley-wiggins-reputation-fancy-bears-leak-video-report>
Wiggins said he had asked what he was being administered, and he had been 
“fully aware of this drug and the taboo surrounding it all … the misuse and the 
abuse of this drug in the past”. He added: “It was for a very specific thing … 
to treat something that was historically a problem for me and could be quite a 
serious problem for me. I’d become a potential favourite for the Tour de 
France, or certainly to get on the podium. I’d returned to the form I was in in 
2009 and the only thing that could really stop me from achieving that was if I 
struggled with allergies during the race. It happens.”

Wiggins told the Guardian that he began suffering from asthma at races at the 
age of 15, and that he first noticed the effects of pollen allergies during the 
2003 Giro d’Italia, his first major stage race. He described, “a noticeable 
difference to performance … When I had a severe attack, the day after I was 
wiped out.” Asked to describe his symptoms, he stated: “Uncontrollable 
sneezing, runny nose, watery eyes, the urge to rub my eyes constantly, and in 
doing that the eyes becoming bloodshot … extreme. My breathing became 
restricted, like breathing through a straw at times.”

He added that he had kept the condition under control using over the counter 
medicines: “Continual medication … two Clarityns per day, one in the morning, 
one at night, nasal sprays, inhalers – two in the morning, two at night, eye 
drops as and when. I was on the maximum for over the counter products.” He 
described a mountain stage in the 2010 Tour de France, where he finished 23rd 
while “sneezing my head off, blowing snot out of my nose, unable to breathe”.

Letters shown to the Guardian by Wiggins and others with the rider’s specific 
permission make it clear that the TUE applications were backed up by 
specialists’ reports, as detailed in the TUE formsleaked by the Fancy Bears 
hackers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
. The letters include the statement that the administration of triamcinolone 
would be likely to mitigate the symptoms suffered by Wiggins, for an extended 
period.

That tallies with the current manufacturers’ guidelines for the use of 
triamcinolone, which state: “Patients with hay fever or pollen asthma who are 
not responding to pollen administration and other conventional therapy may 
obtain a remission of symptoms lasting throughout the pollen season after a 
single injection of 40mg to 100mg.” Kenalog, the trade name for the treatment 
containing triamcinolone, was widely used in the UK as a last-resort treatment 
for severe hay fever until a few years ago, when NHS guidelines ruled against 
it due to its possible side effects. “It is highly effective and the effects 
would last three-to-four weeks,” a current GP told the Guardian.

Suspicions have been raised over the administration of the substance to 
Wiggins a few days before the 2012 Tour de France, which he won, and the 2011 
Tour and 2013 Giro d’Italia, other major target events, from which he withdrew 
because of crashes. Wiggins confirmed that he first saw a specialist on 28 June 
2011, shortly before he travelled to the start of that year’s Tour, which 
started on 2 July. He added that he first discussed the issue with his Dr 
Freeman at the Critérium du Dauphiné stage race that year; that event finished 
on 12 June, after which he went to training camp in Italy for a week.

Chris Froome calls for urgent action on the use of TUEs in cycling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/chris-froome-urgent-action-tues-cycling-bradley-wiggins>
Wiggins added that he was in some doubt about whether the triamcinolone 
injection might have been counter-productive in 2011, as he described his form 
during that year’s Tour declining. “I actually think it was a detriment to my 
performance,” he said. “As the first week went on I felt like I was getting 
weaker and weaker, I didn’t have the power. Obviously I crashed out so I will 
never know. I was borderline there anyway, right down probably below [the 
weight] that was ideal for me and I think this just tipped me over the edge.”

It is hard to assess how many people in Wiggins’s immediate orbit knew about 
his allergies. In his 2012 autobiography My Time, he described his form in the 
run-up to the 2012 Tour as near-perfect. Indeed, the condition is not mentioned 
anywhere in the book. When this was put to Wiggins, he explained: “I was 
paranoid about making excuses – ‘Ah, my allergies have kicked in.’ I’d learned 
to live with this thing.

“It wasn’t something I was going to shout from the rooftops and use as an 
excuse, and say: ‘My allergies have started off again’ - ‘That’s convenient, 
isn’t it Brad, your allergies started when you got dropped.’ I didn’t mention 
it in the book. I’d come off a season of … I’d won everything that year. When I 
was writing the book I wasn’t sat there thinking: ‘I’d better bring my 
allergies up.’ I was flying on cloud nine after dominating the sport all year. 
It wasn’t something that I brought to mind.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa271319a6ebbc600e37325b15bd35bbaf65a98ce%2F0_953_5824_3493%2F5824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bradley%20Wiggins%20opens%20up%20with%20full%20story%20on%20asthma%2C%20allergies%20and%20TUEs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bradley%20Wiggins%20opens%20up%20with%20full%20story%20on%20asthma%2C%20allergies%20and%20TUEs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa271319a6ebbc600e37325b15bd35bbaf65a98ce%2F0_953_5824_3493%2F5824.jpg>
 Bradley Wiggins: ‘I was paranoid about making excuses.’ Photograph: Pal Hansen 
for The Guardian 
Wiggins told the Guardian that the only member of Team Sky who he was certain 
knew about the treatment was Dr Freeman, but that he assumed the close-knit 
coaching team who worked with him would have known: Brailsford, Shane Sutton – 
the then head coach – and Tim Kerrison, who was his personal coach from 2011 
onwards at the team.

Wiggins repeated his assertion that the controversial doctor Geert Leinders, 
banned for life in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/22/geert-leinders-life-ban-team-sky-doctor>
 for doping violations, had no involvement in the decision to switch to 
stronger treatment for his allergies. Leinders worked for Sky in 2011-12; his 
doping violations relate to the period before he joined the team. “I never 
spoke to him about that. He never spoke to me about that.” Asked if Leinders 
had asked him about his allergies, Wiggins said: “Never.”

Timeline: Bradley Wiggins and therapeutic use exemptions

2011

Mid-June Wiggins discusses his allergy issues with Dr Richard Freeman, Team 
Sky medic, at the Critérium du Dauphiné event, which ends on 12 June

26 June Wiggins wins British national championship in Stamfordham, 
Northumberland

28 June Wiggins visits specialist Simon Hargreaves in Bolton for examination 
and tests. Letter seen by the Guardian with specific permission of Wiggins 
confirms meeting took place at 2pm. TUE application for use of triamcinolone is 
filed the same day

29 June TUE comes into operation and expires on this date

30 June TUE is authorised from this date

2 July Tour de France starts

2012

8 May Wiggins visits Hargreaves for examination and tests. Letter seen by the 
Guardian with specific permission of Wiggins confirms meeting took place

15 May Letter in support of TUE application is dictated by Hargreaves

31 May TUE application is filed

26 June TUE comes into force; authorised and expiring on this date

30 June Tour de France starts

2013

1 March Wiggins visits Hargreaves; letter to support application is dictated 
on that date, referring to a visit “today”. Letter seen by the Guardian with 
specific permission of Wiggins confirms meeting took place

10 April TUE application is filed

22 April TUE is authorised from this date; it expires on 30 April

4 May Giro d’Italia starts

Inconsistencies

2011 TUE approval form is dated 30 June, but the TUE comes into force on 29 
June and expires on that date. This is a single dose approval for a single day 
and no more. It is possible that the TUE was approved verbally by telephone due 
to time constraints – for example that Wiggins was flying to the Tour de France 
on the 30th – and the form filled out afterwards. It was also within the 
regulations for one person to approve the TUE. The UCI’s then head of medical, 
Mario Zorzoli, has been asked for clarification, as hasthe UCI.

Approval form leaked to Fancy Bears cites “endoscopy on July 2”. This is 
clearly impossible as the Tour started on that day and Wiggins’s specialist 
visit has been documented as 28 June. It can only be a clerical error. Zorzoli 
has been asked for clarification, as has the UCI.

2012 TUE approval form leaked to Fancy Bears cites “see TUE application 
30/5/11” whereas the 2011 application was made on the 28 June and approval 
given 30 June. The Guardian was shown the date on Wiggins’ application form 
with his permission and can confirm it was dated 28 June. One possible 
explanation is a clerical error mixing 30/5/11 with 30/6/11. Again, Zorzoli and 
the UCI have been asked for clarification.

The TUE approval form leaked to Fancy Bears states “nom de la competition” 
(name of relevant race) as Dauphiné Libéré whereas the TUE was actually 
intended for the Tour de France. This is because the race listed is the next 
race after the application, not its approval. The application was made on 31 
May; the Dauphiné began on 3 June.
 