
Bradley Wiggins has been retained on the British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> Olympic podium programme as he 
continues to mull over his competitive future in the sport.

The 36-year-old five-time Olympic champion and 2012 Tour de France winner had 
suggested 2016 would be his final year as a competitive cyclist but has hinted 
at possibly continuing in recent weeks.

“Sir Bradley Wiggins is continuing to consider the direction of his future and 
we are happy to give him the flexibility to allow him to do that,” said a 
British Cycling spokesperson.

Cycling Australia shortlists Shane Sutton for high performance director job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/cycling-australia-short-lists-shane-sutton-for-high-performance-director-job>
The Olympic podium programme is the group of Great Britain riders who benefit 
from UK Sport funding and support services. Wiggins is one of eight riders 
listed in the men’s track endurance squad. He won gold with Ed Clancy, Steven 
Burke and Owain Doull at Rio 2016 for his British record eighth medal, 
describing it as a “fairytale” way to bow out.

A month later Wiggins was embroiled in controversy when data stolen by hackers 
revealed he and Team Sky had sought and received therapeutic use exemptions for 
an otherwise banned substance ahead of three major races, including the 2012 
Tour when he became the first British winner.

Wiggins and Team Sky strenuously deny wrongdoing over his injections for 
triamcinolone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/dave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-tue>
, insisting they were medically necessary to deal with pollen allergies 
associated with his long-standing asthma. Wiggins left Team Sky in April 2015 
to return his focus to the track.

Wiggins suggested after October’s London Six Day that he might continue and 
did so again after winning the Ghent Six Day last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/bradley-wiggins-retirement-plans-ghent-six-day-race>
, with Mark Cavendish, in the Belgian city where he was born.

Dani King, London 2012 team pursuit gold medallist, returns to the programme 
as a road rider, having missed out on selection for Rio.

Six riders have graduated from the senior academy, while Shanaze Reade is 
listed among the women’s sprint group. The former BMX world champion is joined 
by Victoria Williamson, who is continuing her rehabilitation following a 
career-threatening back injury.
 