
Like your roses intensely floral, with wild lily aromas and notes of 
strawberry and raspberry? Also like the movieMr and Mrs Smith 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/105955/mr.and.mrs.smith>? Then chances 
are you'll raise a glass to the news that the stars of that film, Angelina 
Jolie and Brad Pitt, are to put their name to a plonk with exactly those 
attributes.

Next month will see the first batch of Miraval go on sale, produced from the 
vineyard attached to the couple's French estate, Château Miraval. Made in 
collaboration with veteran Gallic wine family Perrin, the wine was previously 
known as Pink Floyd, christened by the chateau's previous owner, American 
vintner Tom Bove, from whom the pair purchased the property in 2012.
 Angelina Jolie's and Brad Pitt's Château Miraval, where their wine is grown. 
Photograph: Michel Gangne/AFP/Getty Images 
A statement from Brad Pitt reported by Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-02-14/pitt-jolie-release-rose-wine-once-called-pink-floyd.html>
 suggests both he Jolie are excited about their lateral move into wine 
production. "We are intimately involved and quite enthused over the wine 
project with our friends the Perrin family." A red and white are due later in 
the year and all bottles will be organic.

The stars are following in the boozy footsteps of a rollcall of famous 
film-makers who have dabbled in alcohol. Francis Ford Coppola's Inglenook 
estate pumps out eight high-end vintages, including "classic library wine" 
Rubicon; the shop also sells china snack platters and pitchers in the shape of 
an owl ("Make a hoot with your table. Owls are a symbol of wisdom. Price: 
$325.00).Drew Barrymore <http://www.barrymorewines.com/>, Emilio Estevez 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/23/business/23proto.html?_r=0>, John Lasseter 
<http://www.lasseterfamilywinery.com/>, Olivia Newton-John 
<http://www.koalabluewines.com.au/>, Jason Priestley 
<http://www.blackhillswinery.com/webpage/1003055/1000818> and Sam Neill 
<https://twitter.com/TwoPaddocks> also have a finger in the vat. Sting 
<http://www.palagioproducts.com/the-wine/> and Trudie Styler's Italian estate 
produces olive oil, honey and three types of wine: Casino delle vie, Sister 
Moon and When We Dance.
 