
Every day tens of thousands of Australians have to take a syringe, prick their 
skin with a needle and then inject themselves with insulin. Imagine if every 
one of those diabetes sufferers had a device fitted inside their body that 
measured their sugar levels and automatically released insulin as and when 
required.

 That’s one of several projects on the go in a research partnership between the
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science 
<http://www.electromaterials.edu.au/> and Dublin City University in Ireland. 
Other initiatives include aSweatch <http://doras.dcu.ie/21115/> watch that 
measures levels of sodium ion in your sweat and a “smart tattoo” that tracks 
the status of dermatological diseases.

The medical possibilities for intelligent, internet-enabled medical devices is 
vast, with onerecent estimate 
<http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/iot-healthcare.asp> expecting 
the global market to be worth US$163bn by 2020. To date, the so-calledwearables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wearable-technology> market (think 
Fitbit, Apple Watch and so forth) has made the most of the early running. But 
the scientific value – and potential commercial returns – for next-generation
implantables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jan/13/future-eat-digesting-next-generation-wearable-tech>
 represents a different level of magnitude.

“The possibility for harvesting real-time health data from an implantable 
device is huge,” says Aoife Morrin, principal investigator at Dublin City 
University’s National Centre for Sensor Research. “A wearable typically has 
access to the outer layers of skin whereas an implantable can potentially look 
into internal organs and deeper tissues inside the body.”


Breakthrough market 

 It’s not only medical researchers that are growing excited at the prospect of 
knowing more about our insides. Predictably, pharmaceutical firms have been 
quick to seize on the technology’s potential. Automated systems get around the 
problem of patients failing to take their medication or not replacing it (a 
habitual problem that hits Big Pharma’s sales hard). As importantly, ongoing 
real-time diagnostic data helps corroborate a drug’s effectiveness, thus 
increasing the likelihood of that drug being prescribed.

The future of healthcare: AI, augmented reality and drug-delivering drones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/01/the-future-of-healthcare-ai-augmented-reality-and-drug-delivering-drones>
 Consider Proteus Discover <http://www.proteus.com/>, the brainchild of the US 
healthcare firm Proteus Digital Health. Discover is a microscopic sensor 
contained within an ingestible pill. The sensor activates on contact with 
stomach acids and then starts relaying clinical health data to a replaceable 
patch worn on the patient’s torso. The technique is initially being used 
primarily for patients with cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, such as 
hypertension and Type 2 diabetes.

 The patch also registers the time that the medication was taken and a 
patient’s subsequent behavioural patterns (sleep, exercise, etc). All this 
information is then loaded up wirelessly to an app on the patient’s smartphone 
and then to the Proteus Cloud.

 “By turning the high frequency act of medication taking into a digital event, 
Proteus is directly integrating therapies with greater measurement, feedback 
and behaviour cues,” says Andrew Thompson, Proteus’ chief executive. 

Healthcare investors appear to share his enthusiasm. In April, the biotech 
firm secured US$50m in its latest funding round, adding to the US$172m it 
raised in 2014.

Another company making inroads in the implantable market is Microchips Biotech 
<http://microchipsbiotech.com/>. The US firm has created an electronic device 
that employs “micro-reservoir” technology first developed by the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology to deliver therapeutic doses of a variety of drugs from 
within.

 A physician can alter the pre-programmed frequency or quantity of the dose 
via wireless communications. Alternatively, sensors embedded in the device can 
release the drug automatically in response to physiological or metabolic 
changes. Last year, the Israeli drug firm Teva Pharmaceuticals invested US$35m 
as part of a partnership with Microchips.


Cultural barriers

For all the hype around new-generation implantable technology, the market 
remains in its infancy. Most ideas are still at prototype stage, if that. Even 
assuming the technology can be cracked and proven to be safe, several important 
hurdles still stand in the way of implantables revolutionising medical care.

The first is cultural. Wearing a watch that monitors your heart rate or a 
bracelet that measures your sleep is one thing; having an electromagnetic 
sensor inserted permanently inside you is quite another. That said, few think 
twice now about surgically implanted pacemakers or hearing aids, say, so maybe 
time will overcome the initial ick factor.

 Less certain is the cultural aversion many have towards data privacy. The 
critical difference with a pacemaker or hearing aid, of course, is that 
implantables “talk” back. An endless supply of high personal data, always being 
generated, never stopping – and potentially going who knows where and for who 
knows what purpose.

 Device manufacturers, pharmaceutical firms and healthcare providers are 
naturally at pains to say patient data is protected by standard 
patient-physician confidentiality. Proteus, for instance, asserts that data is 
only passed on to healthcare providers with the patient’s explicit consent and 
with the sole purpose of “informing personalised treatment decisions”.

What about cybersecurity breaches, however? If hackers can infiltrate the 
medical records of sports stars such as British cyclistBradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
 and the US gymnastSimone Biles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/13/wada-russian-cyber-attack-espionage-group>
, what’s to say biometric information from your implantable might somehow find 
its way to your health insurance provider or to a tech company like Google 
(which is currently experimenting with a“smart” contact lens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/17/google-tests-smart-contact-lens-diabetics>
)?

 While such fears are not without reason, Erin Byrne, the chief client officer 
at the US healthcare communications firm Grey Health Group, insists that 
“proactive” measures can ease patient concerns. “If companies follow the 
governance regulations that are in place and communicate truthfully, then I 
think people recognise the benefit to them and that data is a propeller of good 
health.”


There’s also the question around who will pay to have a new-generation 
implantable inserted. If current implantable devices are anything to go by, 
Australians could find themselves having to reach deeper into their own 
pockets. Last month, thehealth department removed 2,500 pacemakers, artificial 
hips and other implantable products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/19/cutting-medical-device-and-prostheses-costs-should-lower-health-premiums-says-minister>
 from its official prostheses register. The move will reduce how much private 
insurance firms have to contribute towards the fitting of such devices in the 
future.

Data-driven spinning class? How tech is revolutionising fitness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/nov/15/data-driven-spinning-class-tech-fitness>
Joining the dots 

 The promise of better health – both for individual patients and, in the event 
their data is used for medical research, for the wider population – certainly 
serves as a powerful counterbalance to privacy concerns. But will implantables 
really deliver?

 Therein lies the second big hurdle: efficacy. The main selling point for 
implantables is that they can create “more accurate, more timely” information 
quicker than ever before, says Adrian Downing, the director of healthcare at 
the UK advisory firm Concentra Analytics. “But that suggests that clinicians 
have time to look at the data and, if they do, that they trust it and 
understand its full context,” he says.

 Implantables promise to usher in a patient-data led form of healthcare that 
discomfits many medical practitioners, which see it as a loss of their 
traditional control. Downing cites doctors’ reticence about allowing the 
development of a single database for patients’ medical information in the UK. 
The ill-fated scheme eventuallygot scrapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/06/nhs-to-scrap-single-database-of-patients-medical-details>
 because of low uptake by the medical profession.

 “The critical question governing implantables’ effectiveness is how the data 
is used within existing healthcare services,” Downing says. “Even now with 
wearables, none of the information is going to GPs [general practitioners]. The 
system is simply stopping it.”

 Joanne Hackett concurs. As chief commercial officer at Precision Medicine 
Catapult, a UK firm promoting the commercialisation of data-driven medicine, 
she stresses the need for patient’s information to “follow them” through the 
health system.

 She points to Sweden as a good example of a liberal, “linked-up” approach to 
patient data. The system stems for a very particular mentality, she adds. 
“Every patient is considered a research patient, so people don’t think twice 
about being included in a clinical trial.”

She also singles out Australia for its promotion of “person-controlled” 
electronic health records 
<https://myhealthrecord.gov.au/internet/mhr/publishing.nsf/content/home>. 
Earlier this year, the Australian Health Association issued arevised policy 
statement 
<https://ama.com.au/position-statement/shared-electronic-medical-records-revised-2016>
 that called for a “simple consent mechanism” that would allow doctors across 
the healthcare service to access patients’ records.

 “All healthcare providers involved in providing clinical care to a patient 
should have access to the core clinical information, provided their registered 
health profession board has a policy on electronic health records covering 
conditions for such access by their members,” the AMA argues.

 