
The government of Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> has been 
ordered by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to pay $5m (£4.1m) to 128 
former farm workers who were enslaved on a Brazilian farm between 1988-2000.

Brazil is the first country to be fined for failing to prevent slavery within 
its borders by the court, the legal arm of the Organisation of American States 
(OAS), a political and juridical forum comprising all 35 independent states of 
theAmericas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas>.

Related: Brazilian women kick back against Temer presidency with capoeira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/08/brazilian-women-kick-back-against-michel-temer-presidency-with-capoeira-protest>

In a judgment in late December 
<http://agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br/direitos-humanos/noticia/2016-12/corte-interamericana-de-direitos-humanos-condena-brasil-por>
, the court ruled that Brazil had failed to put in place adequate measures and 
policiesto prevent modern slavery 
<http://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/comunicados/cp_44_16_por.pdf> and ordered the 
government to pay $5m to the workers. The 128 men were used as slave labour on 
Fazenda Brasil Verde, owned by the Quagliato Brothers group, one of the biggest 
cattle ranching companies in the north of the country. The ministry of work 
conducted 12 raids on the farm between 1988 and 2000 andrescued 340 workers 
<http://freedomfund.org/blog/fazenda-brasil-verde-case/> from conditions of 
debt bondage and slavery.

In one of the last raids in 2000, officials found workers being watched over 
by armed security guards, threatened with violence and left without adequate 
shelter or food. They were promised salaries that they never received.

Xavier Plassat, coordinator of the National Campaign Against Slave Labour for 
the Pastoral Land Commission (CPT), said the ruling had far-reaching 
implications for the continent as it highlighted the responsibility of 
individual states for preventing slavery within its borders.

He also commended the Court for emphasising the role that racial inequality 
and poverty plays in increasing vulnerability to labour exploitation.

The case was brought to the OAS by the Centre for Justice and International 
Law (Cejil) and CPT in 2013. Until the court made the ruling in December, no 
criminal charges had been levelled at Fazenda Brasil Verde and none of the 
workers had received any compensation.

As well as demanding the $5m payment, the court also ruled that the Brazilian 
government must reopen investigations into the case.

According to the NGO Walk Free, an estimated 160,000 people are trapped in 
some form of slavery in Brazil 
<http://www.globalslaveryindex.org/country/brazil/>. More than 50,000 people 
have been released <http://reporterbrasil.org.br/dados/trabalhoescravo/> from 
conditions of slavery since 1995 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/brazil-slavery-idUKL8N15U3CD>.

Related: 'We are writing the history of Zika': one year into the crisis in 
Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/11/zika-brazil-babies-microcephaly-one-year-later>

The ruling comes amid growing concern about proposed legislation 
<https://nacoesunidas.org/onu-manifesta-preocupacao-com-projeto-de-lei-que-altera-conceito-de-trabalho-escravo-no-brasil/>
 that would amend and narrow the legal definition of slavery, something that 
anti-slavery activists fear would curtail efforts to clamp down on widespread 
and hidden labour abuses in Brazil’s corporate supply chains.

Leonardo Sakamoto, a political activist and director of the NGO Repórter 
Brasil, described the proposed amendment to existing slavery definitions as an 
“ambush from all quarters”, which is being propelled forward by the hugely 
influential agricultural lobby in parliament.

“Michel Temer’s government could dismantle everything that has been built to 
end slavery, and it could happen at any minute,” he said.

Brazil’s Special Secretariat for Human Rights has confirmed that the 
government accepts the judgment delivered in the Fazenda Verde Brasil case and 
affirmed that itpresents an opportunity for the state to strengthen and improve 
national policy on slave labour 
<http://blogdosakamoto.blogosfera.uol.com.br/2016/12/15/brasil-e-condenado-no-ambito-da-oea-em-caso-de-trabalho-escravo/>
.

Xavier Plassat said, “It’s hard to believe that the Brazilian government will 
take effective measures to break the slavery cycle, in terms not only of 
prevention, but of repression, punishment and social inclusion.”
 