
Capoeira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/mar/17/healthandwellbeing.features4>
 has been used as a tool of resistance in Brazil for centuries. Today,women are 
employing the martial art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2014/oct/29/kiesza-capoeira-video-off-record>
 to protest against the country’s new president, Michel Temer.

“As feminists and capoeiristas we have been protesting in the street against 
President Temer,” said Paula Barreto, a Brazilian capoeira mestra of nearly 32 
years and still one of the few female masters in the country.

Funding for women’s rights groups in poor countries falls by more than half
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/funding-womens-rights-groups-poor-countries-falls-awid-forum-brazil>
“Before, we had President Dilma Rousseff from the Workers’ party. Under her, 
we started to have institutionalised support for blacks, for native Brazilians, 
for marginalised people and for women. Now our democracy has entered a very 
difficult period.”

Barreto was speaking during the Association for Women’s Rights in 
Development’s (Awid <https://www.awid.org/>) forum, which was held in Bahia, 
northern Brazil – also the birthplace of capoeira Angola, the style associated 
with the African roots of the practice.

Barreto’s school of capoeira, which she co-founded 21 years ago, often takes 
part in street demonstrations. Most recently their protests have been against 
what they regard as thesexist impeachment of Dilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/05/in-brazil-women-are-fighting-against-the-sexist-impeachment-of-dilma-rousseff>
, the first woman elected president of the country.

The nature of the impeachment charges and Vice-President Temer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/michel-temer-brazil-president-rebuild-impeachment>
’s rise to power was seen by the thousands of Brazilians who took to the 
streets in protest as a parliamentary coup d’état.

Barreto’s group have protested under the slogan Golpe, só de capoeira – 
meaning roughly “A coup, but only in capoeira”. It is a play on the Portuguese 
wordgolpe, which in this case means both coup and kick.

“We are against the political coup – we support only the capoeira ‘coup’,” 
explained Barreto.


In his Little Book of Capoeira, Nestor Capoeira, a renowned master, calls the 
practice “the culture of the oppressed”. Emerging in the 17th century, it was 
developed as a form of self-defence by dissenting slaves in the vast colonial 
mire that was Brazil’s sugar and coffee plantations. Supreme fighting skills 
allowed many slaves to escape their captors and establish largequilombos 
(settlements).

Capoeira soon became associated with gangs and criminality. It was not until 
1932 that the first legitimate capoeira academy was established inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> and only in the late 1960s were 
women accepted as participants.

“Even then capoeira was still considered inappropriate for women,” said 
Barreto. “As feminists, we had to confront the gender norms within this 
male-dominated space.”

During the Awid forum, students from Barreto’s school formed a roda, or 
circle. The mostly female group sang and clapped in rhythm to the sound of the
berimbau <https://www.britannica.com/art/berimbau>, a kind of musical bow, as 
the two players swerved, swooped and rotated around each other without making 
contact.

“Men learn to fight and to move their physical bodies,” said Barreto. 
“According to gender norms women cannot do certain movements. We go against 
this by opening our legs, going into inverted positions and even fighting 
against men inside theroda. It is a game but also a fight. Capoeira empowers 
women because we have to learn to fight and move our bodies in different ways.”

By the time Barreto had started practising in the late 1970s, a new 
contemporary style was emerging.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrazilian-women-kick-back-against-michel-temer-presidency-with-capoeira-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0a39b720822594ab84365b30655bd2b280910a2%2F26_0_1791_1075%2F1791.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazilian%20women%20kick%20back%20against%20Temer%20presidency%20with%20capoeira&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrazilian-women-kick-back-against-michel-temer-presidency-with-capoeira-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazilian%20women%20kick%20back%20against%20Temer%20presidency%20with%20capoeira&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fbrazilian-women-kick-back-against-michel-temer-presidency-with-capoeira-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0a39b720822594ab84365b30655bd2b280910a2%2F26_0_1791_1075%2F1791.jpg>
 A capoeira demonstration at the 2016 Awid forum in Bahia. Photograph: Kary 
Stewart 
“Capoeira Angola comes from African rituals and philosophy and is an 
affirmation of blackness,” explained Barreto. “Capoeira Contemporânea became 
prominent as a solely Brazilian art form, away from African or black Brazilian 
origins.”

Feminist capoeiristas saw this new style as an attempt to stigmatise African 
cultural practices, and racial relations became appropriated into their folds 
of resistance.

Brazil and Argentina unite in protest against culture of sexual violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/03/brazil-argentina-unite-protest-sexual-violence-gender>
“We had to defend capoeira Angola,” added Barreto. “We could not accept an 
invisibility of the black and African roots of the practice.”

In 2003 President Lula de Silva made moves to address racial discrimination in 
the country with theproposal of the Statute of Racial Equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/29/brazil-race>. In that same year, 
themusician Gilberto Gil <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/7534323.stm>
 joined Lula’s government as only the second black person to have served in the 
cabinet.


“When Gilberto Gil took up his post as minister of culture in 2003, capoeira 
was recognised as a key aspect of Brazilian culture,” said Zoë Marriage, who is 
researching the political economy of capoeira at Soas University of London.

“Gil himself appeared on stage at the UN in Geneva with some capoeira adepts, 
using the diversity and difficulty of their backgrounds as a message to promote 
peace in the world.”

When the Statute of Racial Equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/29/brazil-race> was finally 
approved in 2010, it recognised and pledged financial support to the 
descendants of thequilombo communities, as well as declaring capoeira an 
official sport.

In his short term in office, Temer has attempted to dissolve the ministry of 
culture, and has relegated the ministry of women, racial equality and human 
rights to a subset of the ministry of justice,contentious moves 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2016/07/brazil-government-rolling-women-rights-160704090348170.html>
 for both women and Afro-Brazilians.

“Temer is a white patriarchal man who comes from the elite. He stigmatised 
Dilma as a woman who didn’t act like a woman or have a family. It is a 
reflection of the patriarchal attitudes in Latin America and Brazil in 
particular,” said Barreto.
 