
Hadley, you’ve written on Brexit elsewhere in the paper, but not in your style 
column. Why is that?

Robert, by email

You’re right, Robert! I have stayed away from Brexit in this column because 
that would mean looking at what it means for the fashion industry, and the 
answer to that is, well, no one knows. Confusion over Brexit, how strange – 
don’t see that in any other industry, do you?

On the one hand, thanks to the plummeting pound (boo!) luxury goods are now 
cheaper for tourists (er, yay?). So, for example, a Louis Vuitton Speedy bag is 
currentlyabout $200 cheaper in the UK 
<http://hypebeast.com/2016/10/cheap-luxury-products-london-brexit> for US 
visitors – although I wouldn’t exactly count this as sticking it to the elites, 
as the leave campaign repeatedly claimed voting its way would achieve. But, 
someone at the back bellows, this will help the British industry as a whole. A 
surge of tourism! Bringing in money! To the economy! Yay!

All right, little Mikey Gove, try to calm yourself. Maybe go and have an ice 
cream out the back,but not Ben & Jerry’s because we can’t afford that at the 
moment 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/10/13/brexit-to-blame-uks-biggest-retailer-is-running-out-of-ben-jerrys.html>
. So some tourists might spend more at Harrods, but let’s look at what this 
means on a more granular level, as proper columnists would put it. Yes, British 
exports will be cheaper, but only if they don’t rely on imported goods and 
manufacturing. And, as much as it might pain certain members of the Tory party 
to hear this, pretty much every British fashion brand relies on those two 
things. This isn’t because British fashion labels are trying to chisel their 
own nation’s economy with cheap Chinese knockoffs and eastern European workers, 
but rather because it is simply not possible for most fashion labels to be 
entirely manufactured in this country, relying instead on European factories 
and skilled labour. So the net result of Brexit on all this is that British 
brands will become much more expensive for British customers, as companies find 
their costs going up and their workforce depleting. Um, yay sovereignty?

When the Tories talk about curbs on foreign workers, they don’t mean me. Or do 
they?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/15/brexit-britain-where-not-wanted>
Also, let’s look at British fashion as a whole. Now, what this country’s 
fashion industry has always lacked in terms in of infrastructure, slickness and 
big-brand money, it has made up for in creativity. At least, that’s what those 
who work in it love to tell themselves. OK, we don’t have Dior or Calvin Klein, 
but look! We have the best fashion schools in the world, where the best 
students from around the world come to study. And look! We also produce some of 
the most acclaimed designers who then work at the biggest labels around Europe, 
such as Phoebe Philo (Chloé, Céline), Stella McCartney (Chloé), Alexander 
McQueen (Givenchy), John Galliano (Givenchy, Dior, Maison Margiela), etc, etc. 
Yay, Britain! But how, exactly, will this continue to work if it’s harder for 
foreign students to come here and European companies have to sort out complex 
visas when they hire British workers? Oh stop worrying, says the leave camp, 
relying, perhaps, on British fashion’s much-vaunted creativity to get around 
these little problems.

Finally, I’d say the ultimate problem is bigger and more amorphous than visas. 
So much in fashion is about image and association: buy a New York label and 
you’re buying into the fantasy of Manhattan dynamism and power lunches; an 
Italian label suggestsdolce vita glamour; French labels promise chic. British 
labels, more than any other country’s, play on such national stereotypes: ideas 
of heritage (the tweed, the crown), punkish rebellion and, most of all, a kind 
of gonzo creativity in which Britain has always taken pride. But what image, 
Britain, do we have now, in our post-Brexit era on the global stage? I’d wager 
it has a lot less to do with enviable sovereignty and more about a silly little 
country that cut off its nose to spite everyone’s face. Is that the sort of 
look people want to buy into?

Look, as even Boris Johnson would almost certainly admit if you caught him in 
a rare moment of honesty, Brexit has far bigger problems facing it than how it 
will affect the fashion industry. But all of these issues underline the central 
question of Brexit, which is: what kind of country do we want to live in? 
Because, at the risk of tipping into pomposity, fashion encapsulates fantasy 
and aspirational self-image. So when a country’s fashion industry looks like it 
will struggle to achieve this, on both a practical and mental level, it’s 
perhaps time to take a good long look in the mirror again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fdisaster-british-fashion-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35d7098abcd9aab1d7fff9ebda937cd2e09233be%2F224_80_4359_2615%2F4359.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20is%20a%20disaster%20for%20British%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fdisaster-british-fashion-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20is%20a%20disaster%20for%20British%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fdisaster-british-fashion-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35d7098abcd9aab1d7fff9ebda937cd2e09233be%2F224_80_4359_2615%2F4359.jpg>
 The right look? Bob Dylan. Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
What to make of Bob Dylan winning the Nobel?

Marcus, by email




Sure, Dylan knows how to write a line or ten million. But as singer Tracey 
Thorn quite rightly tweeted last week, “So much Bob adulation is bound up in 
the fact that he looked so cool,” which is why, she continued, even more 
rightly, “Paul Simon loses out, because fewer iconic photos.” Truer words were 
rarely ever tweeted. Sure, Dylan’s fine, but, I’ll be honest, he’s never 
written anything that has struck me as purely poetical as, say, The Boy in the 
Bubble, The Boxer or even just the opening lines of Graceland. Also, Simon 
never wrote any doggerel as tedious as Blowin’ in the Wind. And I don’t see 
anyone saying he should get a Nobel.

I’m not trying to detract from Dylan (OK, maybe I am, just a little), but 
isn’t it funny how even the mighty Nobel committee is as swayed by appearances 
as anyone else? Because Bob’s look – which can be summed up as “Jewish beatnik 
who pawned his coat” – is undoubtedly as much a part of his legend as his 
songs. So here, Dylan, have the Ask Hadley award for Most Adored Look. You can 
keep it next to your Nobel.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
 