
The boss of one of Britain’s biggest high street retailers has signalled that 
clothing prices could rise next year as the impact of Brexit boosts inflation, 
amid warnings that food prices could also climb.

Lord Wolfson, the chief executive of Next and a prominent Vote Leave 
supporter, spoke against the backdrop of acollapse in the value of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/ftse-100-and-sterling-plunge-on-brexit-panic>
 that will increase sourcing costs for retailers who import goods in dollars.

Brexit: Sturgeon seeks Brussels talks to protect Scotland's EU membership – 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/25/brexit-live-emergency-meetings-eu-uk-leave-vote>
Wolfson said many retailers will have currency hedges in place, which offer 
short-term insurance against swings in sterling, but that will only delay the 
impact on high street prices for the time being.

“Most retailers will have covered forward the balance of this year so [the 
fall in sterling] will not be reflected in prices this year,” said Wolfson. 
“Next has covered 60% of its requirement of dollars and euros for spring/summer 
next year and I imagine the rest of the industry will be in a similar 
position,” he added. “So the volatility in currency markets will have no effect 
until the spring, maybe the summer of next year.”


However, analysts have warned that food price rises could hit shelves more 
swiftly. Bruno Monteyne, a retail analyst at Bernstein Research, said the cost 
of food for retailers could rise by up to 3% – a sharp turnaround from recent 
years in which shoppers have beenenjoying annual price falls in the supermarkets
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/07/surprising-fall-cost-food-uk-eggs-bread-meat>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fbrexit-raise-cost-of-clothing-and-food-warns-next-boss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e3bb8e400d58267b7266d64da52a099516de6a1%2F0_213_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20likely%20to%20raise%20cost%20of%20clothing%20and%20food%2C%20warns%20Next%20boss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fbrexit-raise-cost-of-clothing-and-food-warns-next-boss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20likely%20to%20raise%20cost%20of%20clothing%20and%20food%2C%20warns%20Next%20boss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fbrexit-raise-cost-of-clothing-and-food-warns-next-boss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e3bb8e400d58267b7266d64da52a099516de6a1%2F0_213_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Fifteen per cent of the fresh fruit sold in the UK is grown here. Photograph: 
Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Only 15% of the fresh fruit sold in the UK is grown here, and 55% of 
vegetables, with most of the rest coming from the EU. Nearly 40% of pork sold 
in the UK also comes from overseas. If sterling remains weak or falls further, 
prices will inevitably rise, said Monteyne.


Analysts were already worried about the outlook for the retail sector as 
consumer confidence was fragile even before the Brexit vote. Store chiefs are 
battling competition from online retailers while staff costs are rising due to 
the national living wage.

Wolfson said there was “no logical reason” for the Brexit vote to hit consumer 
spending as nothing would happen for two years. “There has been no change in 
the underlying economy,” he said. “As far asNext 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> is concerned our forecasts have 
already factored in a consumer downturn and other retailers may also have a 
degree of pessimism in their budgets.”

Homebuyers wobble in wake of Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/25/homebuyers-wobble-in-wake-of-brexit-vote>
In March, the Conservative peer, regarded by many as a sage on the economy, 
predicted thetoughest trading conditions since the financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/next-warns-of-toughest-trading-since-financial-crisis-and-cuts-sales-forecast>
 on the back of weakening economic data and evidence Britons were choosing to 
spend spare cash on eating out and holidays rather than a new wardrobe.

Wolfson said it was a shame the Brexit debate had been dominated by 
immigration. “A large number of people voted leave for this reason but it’s not 
about that, it’s about being a sovereign nation that can build positive links 
with the rest of the world as well as Europe,” he said, adding: “A lot of 
remainers wanted to remain for the right reasons and a lot of leavers wanted to 
leave for the right reasons.”

City of London could be cut off from Europe, says ECB official
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/city-of-london-could-be-cut-off-from-europe-says-ecb-official>
The key now, said Wolfson, was the economic path charted by David Cameron’s 
successor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/tory-party-embarks-on-leadership-contest-after-camerons-resignation>
. “What we do having made the decision to leave is more important than the 
decision itself,” he said.

“In the long term I think there is potential for a huge benefit to the economy 
but that will depend on the choices made by whoever leads the next government,” 
said Wolfson. “If they take an outward-looking, free-trading approach to the 
rest of the world, that would make a difference to sentiment and investment. 
The opposite would be to pull up the drawbridge and protect our way to economic 
prosperity, which I think would be catastrophic.”
 