
Brexit campaigner Lord Wolfson, chief executive of clothing retailer Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next>, has called on the government to 
lay out some of the core principles of its Brexit strategy.

Simon Wolfson, who has previously warned that the British economy would be 
“finished” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/lord-wolfson-isolationist-brexit-course-next-chief-executive-economics-prize>
 if the government pursued an isolationist Brexit course, said: “It would be 
helpful to understand the principles and objectives of the government with 
which they are going to enter negotiations.”

Sir Tim Barrow appointed as Britain's EU ambassador
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/sir-tim-barrow-appointed-as-britains-eu-ambassador>
He said more openness on immigration policy, which could have a big impact on 
retail businesses which directly employ a large proportion of EU nationals and 
whosesuppliers are also reliant on immigrant labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/worker-shortages-for-uk-food-industry-at-12-year-low>
, would be particularly helpful.

About 10% of Next’s 51,000 employees are non-UK EU nationals – just over 5,000 
people – and are being affected by thegovernment’s refusal to confirm their 
rights in Britain post Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/theresa-may-defends-refusal-guarantee-eu-citizens-rights-uk>
.

The Conservative peer said: “There is uncertainty around Brexit but I would 
much rather that the government came up with a good plan than something rushed 
out to get rid of people worried about uncertainty. It would be a mistake to 
rush it.”

But, while revealing disappointing trading figures for the Christmas period 
and a gloomy outlook for 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
, Wolfson said he did not think Brexit jitters were stopping people from 
shopping: “It is more the fact that incomes are likely to be squeezed.”

Next's gloomy 2017 forecast drags down fashion retail shares
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
Wolfson was one of a handful of senior business leaders to openly back Brexit 
but has said in the past that the referendum vote was about UK independence, 
not isolation, and the country should be aiming for “an open, global-facing 
economy”.


Despite backing Brexit, Wolfson has warned that clothing prices are likely to 
rise by about 5% because of the related fall in the value of the pound against 
the dollar, which is used to source goods in the far east.
 