
The impact of leaving the EU is likely to hit anticipated increases to the 
national living wage next year, a report has warned.

Weak pay growth is set to cut 10p off the figure, with the rate now expected 
to increase to £7.50 an hour, said the Resolution Foundation. The current rate, 
under the policy introduced by George Osborne when he was chancellor, is £7.20 
for adults. The thinktank said the expected 10p-an-hour increase will still 
deliver annual rises of up to £600 for more than 4 million workers.

The foundation has forecast that by 2020 the national living wage will reach 
£8.20 –less than previously estimated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/12/government-likely-to-miss-9-minimum-wage-target-thinktank-warns>
. The report said the wage was set to transform earnings, helping 800,000 
workers out of low pay by 2020.

The policy, which had been expected to raise the minimum wage for over-25s to 
approximately £9 an hour by 2020, was the centrepiece of Osborne’s 2015 budget.

Conor D’Arcy, policy analyst at the Resolution Foundation, said: “While there 
is much uncertainty over Britain’s long-term economic outlook, most economists 
agree that wage growth in the next few years is likely to be weaker than 
expected prior to the referendum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fbrexit-will-stunt-national-living-wage-growth-by-10p-an-hour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ef6e15a52c59917ed86737e72d2043d421e67e6%2F0_90_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20'will%20stunt%20national%20living%20wage%20growth%20by%2010p%20an%20hour'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fbrexit-will-stunt-national-living-wage-growth-by-10p-an-hour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20%27will%20stunt%20national%20living%20wage%20growth%20by%2010p%20an%20hour%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fbrexit-will-stunt-national-living-wage-growth-by-10p-an-hour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ef6e15a52c59917ed86737e72d2043d421e67e6%2F0_90_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 The national living wage was introduced by George Osborne. Photograph: Andy 
Rain/EPA 
“That means we’re unlikely to see the £9 national living wage that George 
Osborne talked about in this parliament. As we approach the autumn statement 
we’ll soon learn what the [national living wage] will be next year. An increase 
to around £7.50 will deliver a welcome annual pay rise of up to £600 for 
full-time staff.

“Though that’s less than the £800 raise previously forecast, it’s sensible 
that the size of the rise adjusts in line with wages of typical workers. This 
flexibility means that calls from some businesses to scale back the wage even 
further are wide of the mark.

“With over 4 million workers set to be earning the new legal minimum by 2020, 
ministers need to work closely with employers to ensure that they’re not just 
able to pay the legal minimum, but can offer staff a route out of low pay 
altogether.”

A spokesman for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 
said: “The government is committed to building an economy that works for all 
and the national living wage is doing just that, with more than 1 million 
workers already benefiting from a pay rise. The independent LowPay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pay> Commission is chiefly responsible for 
making recommendations for national minimum wage rates.”

The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, said: “This Tory Brexit government is 
creating ‘breadline Britain’ by hitting the poorest hardest. Brexit was 
supposed to be about taking back control when actually it seems it is just 
taking out of the pockets of the people who can least afford it.”
 