
As the planet’s finest cyclists battled through Doha’s searing temperatures 
and eerie crowd-free calm at the world road racing championships, Brian Cookson 
could be forgiven if he was starting to feel the heat too.

Amid the furore over the three therapeutic use exemptions (TUE) granted to 
Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
 in 2011, 2012 and 2013, thenthe claims made by the former Sky rider Jonathan 
Tiernan-Lock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-former-rider-looks-suspicious>
 about the powerful painkiller Tramadol and, finally,the mystery medical 
package delivered to Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/package-bradley-wiggins-doctor-2011-criterium-du-dauphine>
 on the day Wiggins won the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011, increasingly 
uncomfortable questions have been posed toTeam Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky>, British Cycling and Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins>.

In each case Wiggins, Team Sky and British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> insist no rules have been 
broken but the silent leader of the sport has largely escaped scrutiny, even as 
the questions over cycling’s “grey areas” have returned at ever louder volume.

Team Sky’s Nicolas Roche says ‘ethically wrong’ to seek Wiggins TUE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/team-sky-roche-nicolas-wiggins-bradley-tue>
The former British Cycling president, who took on the same role at the UCI 
amid the fallout from the Lance Armstrong revelations to seize control of a 
broken sport conflicted by the tension between cheating within its ranks and a 
desire not to kill the golden goose,could not have arrived with more goodwill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/27/pat-mcquaid-uci-loses-election>.

His predecessor, Pat McQuaid, was closely tied to an era in which doping was 
endemic throughout the peloton and the UCI was regularly accused of either 
being, at best, complacent and, at worse, complicit.

Cookson was around throughout that era but successfully pointed to his success 
with BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> and his 
willingness to challenge the status quo from within as proof of his desire to 
wield a new broom.

It was McQuaid who bequeathed the UCI the depressing scenes in the Doha desert 
over the past few days. As with much else, Cookson was left to deal with the 
consequences. It is rapidly becoming apparent that any honeymoon is long since 
over. Where we may have expected leadership and transparency after the 
questions raised by the recent Fancy Bears hack, there has been only silence 
and more questions.

For almost three weeks Cookson felt unable to respond to the furious debate 
that was raging about the ethics of TUE applications and the extent to which 
certain teams and riders may have pushed the limits of the existing rules.

In Doha, Cycling News caught up with him. “It’s clear, as far as I can see, 
that no rules have been broken here. If the rules have been followed and 
applied, that’s the end of the matter, in effect,” Cookson said, before adding 
that perhaps there could be a longer‑term debate over the rules but only if the 
World Anti-Doping Agency agreed.

It was too little, too late. Cookson, a softly spoken Lancastrian who insists 
he is mending cycling’s broken culture by consensus rather than conflict, was 
not so reticent when he was asked about the issue in 2015.

“I think we should take note of what is being told us by CIRC [the Cycling 
Independent Reform Commission]in respect of cortisone and potentially other 
medical and quasi-medical abuses,” he told CyclingTips then. “Again, this ties 
up with our ethical processes and so on.”

He went on: “I am anxious to look at the TUE regulations, for instance. TUEs 
are allowed under the Wada Code, as you know. If we have a set of particular 
circumstances that are facilitating the use of substances which are in the 
rules but perhaps ethically challenging, then I think we ought to try to exceed 
the Wada Code if we can.”

When asked in 2016 whether the TUE system should be looked at again, the UCI 
could only respond: “The management of therapeutic use exemptions in cycling is 
robust and fully safeguarded.” It also indicated it would not be looking into 
past cases.

Go back a little further to the interviews he gave before winning the top job 
in a closely fought and brutal contest and Cookson boasts of being instrumental 
in the setting up of Team Sky. “We had a very strong anti-doping ethos and a 
no-needles policy at British Cycling for 25 years. One of the things I wrote 
into Dave Brailsford’s contract was that we should seek to develop our own 
professional team. OK, there have been some mistakes made with recruitment but, 
by and large, people have confidence in Team Sky,”he told the Guardian then 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/17/head-british-cycling-brian-cookson>
.

Until 2013 Cookson was not only president of British Cycling but also on the 
supervisory board that oversaw the new professional team, along with the 
current British Cycling chief executive, Ian Drake. None of this is to imply 
that he has dealt with the issue anything other than properly.

But in not coming out strongly and considering whether that there has been a 
longstanding problem with the TUE system and other related issues around the 
use of substances that are not on the banned list but do confer an advantage – 
as many in the sport believe – he has allowed suspicion and cynicism to fester.

On taking office, one of the first things that Cookson did was establish the 
Cycling Independent Reform Commission process. Raised from the ashes of the 
shambolic attempts at “truth and reconciliation” that had gone before under 
McQuaid, the CIRC report was a serious attempt to come to terms with what had 
gone before.

That CIRC report was at the time hailed as a brave new dawn for the sport when 
it was published in March 2015. A chance to face its troubled past in the face 
and confront its demons. It had some interesting things to say about the TUE 
system.

“One team doctor stated that he believed the TUE system had been regularly 
abused, particularly as previously mentioned, in the area of corticoids. Today 
there appears to be concern among riders about the way in which TUEs are used 
for corticoids and insulin in particular, and the extent to which they are 
being abused,” it said. One rider put the number of applications seeking to 
gain an advantage at an extraordinary 90%.

In that Guardian interview before he became UCI president for a four year term 
that he will look to renew in 2017, Cookson also said: “If I look back at all 
of the history every time there has been an opportunity for something positive 
to have been done about doping in cycling it’s been fudged. On every occasion 
when there’s been an opportunity to do something about this and a real need to 
do something about it, the UCI has fudged it and lost the plot.”

Three years on, he must prove that he is not going to repeat those mistakes. 
On Wednesday afternoon, at a ceremony at one of Doha’s many high-end hotels, 
Cookson is likely to announce the 2019 world road racing championships will 
come to Yorkshire, unlocking £15m worth of facilities investment. It should be 
a another moment of triumph for British Cycling. In the current climate, the 
champagne may taste a little flat.
 