
Brianna Wu doesn’t know when she can go home again. She can’t tell me where 
she is – doing so might not be safe. Last Friday, her personal details were 
pasted on the chat forum, 8chan. Within minutes she was receiving sickening 
threats. One tweet said, “I’ve got a K-bar and I’m coming to your house so I 
can shove it up your ugly feminist cunt.” She said to her husband, “we’ve got 
to get out of here”. They called the police; the police agreed. She was sobbing 
uncontrollably.

Brianna Wu is a games developer. 

Four years ago, after working in animation, and then journalism, Wu founded a 
small development studio,Giant Spacekat <https://twitter.com/giantspacekat>. 
The company’s first game, Revolution 60, was launched earlier this year: it’s a 
cartoonish science fiction adventure for smartphones, notable for its 
all-female cast and cinematic story, a rarity on mobile platforms. The critical 
response has been favourable, andWu drew quite a following on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Spacekatgal>, both through her game and her work hosting 
the gaming podcast Isometric.

She has also been vocal in her condemnation of Gamergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamergate>, a loose affiliation of 
discontented gamers, ostensibly massing over fears of journalistic corruption – 
though originally driven by a 4chan campaign targeting another female game 
developer, Zoe Quinn, sparked by a rambling blogpost by an ex-boyfriend of 
Quinn’s, Eron Gjoni.

Last week, a fan of Wu’s work produced a photo meme, featuring some of her 
humorously barbed tweets about Gamergate. She liked the joke, so she 
re-tweeted. Gamers on 8Chan, the forum where a sizeable section of the 
Gamergate community now meets, took offense. So they started to generate their 
own versions of the meme, jammed with insults.
Brianna Wu (@Spacekatgal) 
A fan made a meme of 6 of my Tweets. #Gamergate 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Gamergate?src=hash> spent day filling it with 36 
pages of garbagehttp://t.co/tjzQxePXH0 <http://t.co/tjzQxePXH0> 
pic.twitter.com/aailgFlNM9 <http://t.co/aailgFlNM9>
 <https://twitter.com/Spacekatgal/status/520344200249090048> October 9, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Spacekatgal/status/520344200249090048> 
Then someone posted a stash of her personal details – a form of internet abuse 
known as doxing. “I was literally watching the chat room as the site posted my 
address and the conversation moved to places that threatened my personal 
safety,” she says. “I made the decision to leave, and law enforcement said it 
was reasonable. I basically just left the house. I have no idea where I’ll be 
living this week or even next month.”

The blame game

Wu blamed Gamergate’s participants; they took exception. There were genuine 
attempts by followers of the movement to take down the increasingly violent 
insults. But there were also dozens of tweets more concerned with defelecting 
blame than expressing horror. There was also skepticism: some suggested, just 
as they had when developer Zoe Quinn and cultural critic Anita Sarkeesian were 
forced from their homes by threats, that Wu had made it up (a practice 
generally known as a “false flag <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False_flag>”: 
such phrases from military psychological warfare are becoming part of the 
discourse).

Understandably, it’s an accusation that Wu scoffs at. “I’d like to think I’m a 
respected developer in this field,” she says. “At this point the FBI is 
involved. My local police department is involved, the Massachusetts cybercrime 
division is involved. If I made this up, I’ll be going to jail. I can think of 
no quicker way to destroy my career than doing something stupid like that.

“I think it shows a really disturbing mindset from people on the other side of 
this. They want to attack the person that’s the victim of a crime. It’s a 
terrible, destructive impulse.”

Wu is a game developer; that’s how she wants to be known. But she is now 
something else too – a media personality; a figurehead in this bizarre and 
bewildering cultural war between a subset of angry gamers, and just about 
everyone else. She has spent the week talking to media outlets – Bloomberg, 
CNN, CBS, the Washington Post. Sheappeared on MSNBC’s Reid Report 
<http://www.msnbc.com/the-reid-report/watch/sexism-and-the-battle-of-the-gamers-341581379929>
 talking about industry sexism and harassment. She has been on the recentBBC 
Tech Tent <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p028cm65> programme about Gamergate. 


“I think there is a war on women in technology,” she said to the BBC’s 
technology correspondent Rory Cellan-Jones. “It’s not like I’m advocating that 
we ban Call of Duty or anything silly like that, I’m asking is for companies to 
look at their hiring practices, to hire more women... and make sure they 
portray women in their games in a socially responsible way.”


The abuse continues. “Last night, someone was tweeting me quotes from my death 
threats,” she says. “Even scarier for me is the public campaign to discredit 
and destroy me by Gamergaters. Reddit has an entire thread devoted to it. 8chan 
and 4chan also have entire threads.” Just today, Wu tweeted a link to an 
apparent discreditation project named Operation Falseflag II: it proposes 
creating fake feminist Twitter accounts and then attacking her game for 
objectifying women.
Brianna Wu (@Spacekatgal) 
The campaign to destroy me professionally continues. They're targeting my game 
Revolution 60. Please RT!pic.twitter.com/ssQmgktgA1 <http://t.co/ssQmgktgA1>
 <https://twitter.com/Spacekatgal/status/523113644205555712> October 17, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Spacekatgal/status/523113644205555712> 
While many Gamergate voices have strenuously denied being involved in Wu’s 
harassment – even though much of it is being generated on the 8chan site (as 
Gamergate discussions have been banned from 4chan by the site’s owner) – the 
developer herself as no doubts.


Flames, misogyny and sexism

“I want to say unequivocally, Gamergate did this to me,” she says. “If I’m 
saying this less on Twitter it’s because I feel fanning the flames will 
endanger my life even more. I know that many #gamergate supporters are trying 
their best to distance themselves from these events, but I agree with many 
others that feel the movement is inexorably linked with misogyny and sexism.

“Don’t take my word for it. Anyone can go to 8chan, a website entirely for 
Gamergaters. You can read what they post about me and other women. It’s not 
just casual sexism, it’s angry, violent sexism. They don’t see me, Zoe or Anita 
as people, just objects to be destroyed.

“I am a programmer. If I write code, I don’t evaluate the results by what I 
hope the code will be. I evaluate it by what happens when I compile it. I 
evaluate it by results. Right now, the result of #gamergate is this: Every 
woman I know in the industry is scared. Many have thought about quitting. Three 
of us have been the victims of death threats, and some of this have been driven 
from our homes.”

So what’s next, what has to happen? “The most terrifying outcome from this 
would be if this becomes the new normal for women in this industry,” she says. 
“I can’t pretend there are easy answers. Both Zoe Quinn and I are represented 
by senator Elizabeth Warren in Massachusetts. I reached out to her this week, 
because I’d like to see what work can be done on a national policy level.

“We need legislation that requires sites like 8chan to store IP addresses. We 
need legislation that makes it possible for law enforcement to track down the 
people that do this. We need the game industry to cover these events when they 
happen - look at IGN, it’s radio silence from them.”

Wu says she’s not eating, and not sleeping well. She doesn’t know where she’ll 
be living or sleeping next month. This is because she made games, talked about 
sexism and enjoyed a joke at Gamergate’s expense.

And before that. Anita Sarkeesian, swamped with threats and hatred for 
analysing games and representation; Zoe Quinn, targeted because of disproved 
claims that she slept with a games journalist in return for positive coverage. 
Jenn Frank, one of the best writers about games and games culture for the last 
ten years, chased from the industry thanks toa piece she wrote for the Guardian 
about online abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/01/how-to-attack-a-woman-who-works-in-video-games>
. The irony is so bitter it burns. I commissioned that article. I edited it. I 
was devastated by Frank’s understandable decision; devastated for my part in it.

Banners and flags

I don’t think that everyone who uses Gamergate is evil, but moderates need to 
look at what is being done under, or within spitting distance of, its banner. 
Lives are being ruined and the world’s media is looking at gamers, just at a 
time when the medium was being taken seriously, and it is seeing its prejudices 
realised. Gamergate wasfront-page news in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/16/technology/gamergate-women-video-game-threats-anita-sarkeesian.html>
 when Sarkeesian had tocancel a talk over threats of a “massacre” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/15/anita-sarkeesian-feminist-games-critic-cancels-talk>
 (also dismissed as a “false flag” by Gamergate supporters); Cellan-Joneswrote 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-29642313> on the BBC’s site that while he 
wouldn’t pick over the rights and wrongs of Gamergate (for the BBC is assiduous 
in not taking any sides in any debate),

“a couple of things are clear. It started with attacks on a female developer 
and the journalists she knew, and has given rise to a whole lot more 
viciousness, most of it aimed at women who dare to raise their heads above the 
parapet.”

If a BBC correspondent states that, you can take it as fact.

Earlier this week, Gear of War designer Cliff Bleszinzki blogged on this very 
issue 
<http://dudehugespeaks.tumblr.com/post/45150472512/anonymous-internet-boy-taliban-tropes>
. He wrote this:

“We’re the gamers, the dorks. We’re the ones who were on our computers during 
prom. We’re the ones that were in the back of the lunch room who were playing 
D&D instead of tossing a football around on the quad. We were supposed to be 
the open, friendly ones, the ones who welcomed all into our wonderful geeky 
circle.

 “We’re not supposed to be a mob that’s storming the gates with our pitchforks 
and torches.”

It’s time for reasonable people to pull away. To form something else. To take 
everything they’ve learned about agitation and protest, and apply it in a very 
different way. Don’t have all this on your conscience.


We need to create an industry in which people can question practices and 
conventions, but also where all are welcome and safe. For a start, however, we 
need to create an industry in which, whatever you think of their views, Quinn, 
Sarkeesian and Wu can go home.

We just have to make sure they can go home in peace.

 