
A small cafe run almost singlehandedly by a British chef has been named 
France’s best village bistro.

Manchester-born Chris Wright set up the Epicerie de Dienne  
<http://www.lepiceriededienne.com/lepicerie.html>as a shop-cum-cafe in a remote 
village in the mountainous Cantal region of central France in June.

With Dienne having less than 200 permanent residents, the self-taught cook 
wasn’t expecting crowds.

“I wanted it to be a low-key thing,” said the 44-year-old, who was looking for 
a bit of a break after spending more than a decade cooking and serving day and 
night at Le Timbre (French for The Postage Stamp), a tiny but much-loved 
Parisian eatery.

“Looking at it from that point of view, it’s been a bit of a disaster. I was 
hoping to wind down with a quiet little place where you could get a nice slice 
of ham and cheese. I failed there,” he laughed.

10 of the best foodie retreats in rural France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/sep/01/10-best-rural-retreats-france-foodies>
Word spread quickly around the Auvergne Volcanoes regional park in which the 
village is located. “By mid-July it was mad and I had to get a bit of help,” 
said Wright, hours before he received the prize fromLe Fooding 
<http://lefooding.com/en>, France’s trendiest food and restaurant guide.

The same guide listed Marks & Spencer as one of the best places for takeaway 
food inParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>.


Parisians have long had a love affair with M&S and there was an outcry when it 
pulled out ofFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> in 2001. But it 
returned five years ago and now has 18 outlets in and around the capital.

Le Fooding picked out its quinoa, avocado and Brazil nut salad, Devon scones 
and vegan vegetable Kiev for particular praise.

Wright was one of several foreign-born chefs honoured by the guide, with the 
Italian Giovanni Passerini named chef of the year for his “modern trattoria” in 
Paris.

Le Fooding, known for its unstuffy cosmopolitan approach, also honoured the 
Japanese chefs Katsuaki Okiyama, for his Parisian restaurants Abri and Abri 
Soba, and Moko Hirayama, for his eatery Mokonuts.

The best Bordeaux reds | David Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/27/the-best-bordeaux-reds-wines-france>
Wright said he was a big fan of cabbage and loved marrying it with Cantal’s 
sausages, charcuterie and cheese.

“The locals have been great. Quite of a lot of people knew of me because I 
have been coming down for the last eight years or so and I love the food from 
around here,” he said.

“Others probably thought that (being English) I wouldn’t be capable of much 
more than a sandwich.”

Having closed the cafe for the winter, Wright plans to reopen for the February 
holidays, and then from May to October.

Whether he has found the peace he was looking for when he moved to the country 
is another matter. “Not really,” he joked. “But I don’t regret it. I love it 
there.”
 