
For all its successes on the track in 2016, British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> continues to lurch 
unsteadily through a series of public-relations mishaps off it – many of them 
of its own making.

Yet even by its standards, contriving to upset Jess Varnish and Shane Sutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-sutton> in an internal review designed 
to find the inner truth of their dispute – while also generating more fears 
about its lack of openness – is not a good look.

Varnish is understood to have been stunned when she opened the letter from 
BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> on Wednesday morning 
giving more detail about its internal investigation with Sutton. Five weeks ago 
that investigation had appeared to vindicate her, deciding that Sutton had used 
“inappropriate and discriminatory language”.

Now most of her allegations were rejected by the same pithy, two-word answer: 
Not upheld.

Sutton had every right to feel angry too, given British Cycling’s damning 
statement against him in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
. It had given the impression that all Varnish’s allegations, including her 
insistence that he had told her to “get on with having a baby” had been 
vindicated. In fact, only one of them – that he had used the word “bitches” – 
had been.

British Cycling is yet to comment on the leak, or to say whether it will 
release the full report. Yet without understanding how it came to the 
decisions, everyone is left in a curious and unsatisfactory limbo. Varnish has 
no grounds of appeal, while the rest of us are none the wiser as to why its 
original statement hung out Sutton to dry. Clearly parties have their 
supporters: publishing the report in full would reveal the weight of testimony 
the panel received, how it judged it, and why it reached the decisions it did.

These things need context and precision, not a misleading press release 
followed by a vow of silence. There is a worrying pattern here: a lack of 
openness and transparency in British Cycling.

We still do not know, for instance, what was in the package one of its staff 
delivered to Team Sky for Bradley Wiggins on the day he won the Critérium du 
Dauphiné in 2011 – an issue thatblew up in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/package-bradley-wiggins-doctor-2011-criterium-du-dauphine>
 – or whether British Cycling keeps a record of what its staff carry, 
particularly with regard to medicines.

There are questions too about the use and possible misuse of therapeutic 
medical exemptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/brian-cookson-team-sky-pushed-rules-to-limit-british-cycling-tues>
 (TUEs) within British Cycling and Team Sky.

Sutton is yet to comment but speaking to the Guardian yesterday Varnish’s 
lawyer, Simon Fenton, said his client has nothing to hide and reiterated his 
desire for the ruling body to release the full report. “British Cycling is 
supported by taxpayers via the National Lottery and because of that they have a 
duty not only to be fair but to be seen to be fair,” he said.

“And they are failing in that. If you are taking a GCSE maths exam you have to 
show your workings, because just coming up with an answer would fail. British 
Cycling need to come up with their workings because as it stands it looks like 
they have failed Jess.

Shane Sutton maintains innocence after Jess Varnish’s allegation is upheld
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/shane-sutton-jess-varnish-british-cycling-allegations-discrimination>
“She is angry and she feels betrayed by the process,” he added. “She wants the 
full workings to be out there because she believes she will be vindicated.”

We might have to wait for a separate independent review into British Cycling, 
which is being carried out after other riders, includingVictoria Pendleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/26/victoria-pendleton-olympics-shane-sutton>
 and Nicole Cooke, claimed there was a culture of sexism and bullying in the 
organisation while Sutton was in charge. That was due to be released last month 
but it is understood it will not now be published until the new year.

The impression of British Cycling as an organisation that is being buffeted by 
crosswinds and responding by curling up in a ball only deepens, meanwhile. It 
maintains that 2016 has been a hugely successful year, and of course it has 
been, with Olympic and Paralympic success and a new commercial partnership with 
HSBC.

But it seemed appropriate that as it was refusing to talk publicly yesterday 
an email arrived from the culture, media and sport committee, confirming that 
it would be questioning Bob Howden, the president and chair of British Cycling, 
Dr George Gilbert, the chair of the British Cycling ethics commission as well 
as Sutton and SirDave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> on 19 December.

Perhaps it will have more luck in getting answers.
 