
The chief executive of British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling>, Ian Drake, has confirmed 
that he will stand down in April after seven years at the helm of an 
organisation lauded for marrying medal success to participation growth but that 
is now mired in controversy.

It is understood Drake decided at the end of last year that he would leave the 
governing body, for which he has worked since 1998, following the Rio Olympic 
cycle if he could also secure a sponsor to replace Sky and win the bid to host 
the 2019 road world championships.

“Some time ago I made the decision that the Rio Games would be my last as CEO 
of BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling>,” Drake said in a 
statement. “I believe that the end of this Olympic cycle is the natural moment 
for a new CEO to take the organisation forward into the Tokyo Games and beyond.

“I have been involved with British Cycling in some form for almost 20 years, 
the last eight as CEO, and it is an organisation that I will always love. I 
have been privileged to be a part of the amazing success we have experienced 
over those two decades and I know that it will go on to even greater heights in 
the years to come.

“All organisations, particularly those operating at the highest level of 
sport, periodically require new leadership to take them to greater heights and 
tackle their new challenges - now is the right moment for both myself and 
British Cycling to move on.”

It was announced last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/british-cycling-hsbc-new-team-sponsors>
 that HSBC would take over from Sky as the headline sponsor of British 
Cycling’s participation programme, though the media giant still backs the 
professional cycling offshoot that is mired in controversy over Bradley 
Wiggins’s use of therapeutic use exemptions and a medical package that is the
subject of a UK Anti-Doping investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-ukad-investigate-wrongdoing-allegations>
.

Last week, cycling’s world governing body announced that the 2019 road world 
championships would be awarded to Yorkshire, unlocking £15m of government 
investment in grassroots facilities.

Ex-British Cycling boss Peter Keen says innocent riders risk being tainted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/peter-keen-british-cycling-innocent-riders-risk-tainted>
During his tenure as chief executive, British Cycling has enjoyed an 
unprecedented run of Olympic success and become one of the few sports to marry 
that with strong growth in the number of grassroots participants. But Drake’s 
departure will now also inevitably be seen through the lens of an ongoing 
review of British Cycling’s culture that was sparked by bullying allegations 
against the former performance director Shane Sutton and the furore engulfing
Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky>. UK Sport is conducting 
an independent review of the bullying and sexism claims, which are strongly 
denied by Sutton.

Team Sky grew out of British Cycling as part of an attempt to extend its 
dominance to professional cycling.

In its early years both Drake and Brian Cookson, the British Cycling president 
who went on to take the same role at the UCI, sat on an advisory board set up 
to oversee the new professional team.

Sir Dave Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> also 
initially acted as performance director for both wings of the organisation 
before concentrating on his role as Sky team principal.

Brailsford and Wiggins have denied any wrongdoing over claims that Sky pushed 
ethical boundaries in its use of the TUE system but have faced increasingly 
loud calls to further clarify their position.

Drake, a keen cyclist, first worked with the governing body as a consultant in 
1995 before joining full time in 1998 to develop the talent pathway that later 
paid such dividends.

In 2004 he became participations and operations director, before becoming 
deputy chief executive in 2007 and then chief executive in 2009 following the 
breakthrough at the Beijing Games.

Meanwhile Peter Keen, Brailsford’s predecessor as performance director who 
went on to take the same role at UK Sport and was a key architect of Team GB’s 
surge up the medal table, said “the need for conclusive investigations and 
evidence is greater than ever” andwarned of possible collateral damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/peter-keen-british-cycling-innocent-riders-risk-tainted>
 for other British riders such as Jason Kenny and Dame Sarah Storey.

“I have never sensed anything about them that says that what we have seen 
isn’t the absolute real deal,” he told the BBC. “Where there’s confusion and 
doubt about a very high-level performance sport, linked to a programme they are 
a part of, that’s my greatest fear.”
 