
The new issue of British Vogue is to be a “model-free zone” after editors 
decided to use only “real” women to showcase the designer clothes featured in 
the magazine.

Among the women included in the issue are the architectural historian Shumi 
Bose, the charity director Brita Fernandez Schmidt, Hello Love Studio creative 
director and Hello Beautiful founder Jane Hutchison, and ice-cream brand creator
Kitty Travers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/oct/15/ice-cream-maker-chef>, as 
well as some of the women behind London’s Crossrail project.

Alexandra Shulman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/apr/01/alexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion>
, the editor of British Vogue, said she commissioned the project because she 
felt strongly that professional women, or women in positions of authority or 
power, should be able to indulge their interest in fashion without it seeming 
frivolous. “In this country, there is still a stigma attached to clearly 
enjoying how you look and experimenting with it if you are a woman in the 
public eye and not in the fashion or entertainment business,”she told the 
Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/british-vogue-launch-real-issue-charity-workers-ceos--an-ice-cre/>
.

Absolutely Fashion: Inside British Vogue review – ridiculous, fascinating and 
fabulous, of course
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/09/absolutely-fashion-inside-british-vogue-review-ridiculous-fascinating-and-fabulous-of-course>
Shulman has edited British Vogue since 1992 and is venerated for her 
egalitarian attitude to body image. She does not publish stories about diets or 
cosmetic surgery, and in 2009 wrote a letter to all major designers arguing 
that the tiny sample sizes they offered for shoots encouraged models to be 
unhealthily thin. “I was also frustrated by a few designers’ PRs choosing only 
to lend their clothes if they approved of the appearance of the subject to be 
photographed rather than what they did,” she said.

The cover of the new Vogue issue, out on 6 October, may been seen to 
contradict Shulman’s previous claims that readers do not want a “real person” 
on the front of the magazine. In an interview for BBC Radio 2 in 2014, the 
editor told guest presenterLily Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lilyallen>: “People always say, ‘Why do you 
have thin models? That’s not what real people look like,’ but nobody really 
wants to see a real person looking like a real person on the cover of Vogue.

“I think Vogue is a magazine that’s about fantasy to some extent, and dreams, 
and an escape from real life. People don’t want to buy a magazine like Vogue to 
see what they see when they look in a mirror. They can do that for free.”

Shulman defended the choice of the actor Emily Blunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emily-blunt> as the cover star of the “real” 
issue by pointing out that she plays an everyday woman in her new film,The Girl 
on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/29/emily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
.According to Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/article/emily-blunt-covers-the-real-issue>, Blunt joked 
about appearing on her first cover: “It took three hours of hair and makeup to 
get me looking this real!”

The issue comes after H&M used the 60-year-old Scottish stylist Gillean McLeod 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/meet-gillean-mcleod-the-60-year-old-swimwear-model-urging-us-to/>
 as the face of its swimwear range and US brand J Crewused staff members and 
their friends 
<http://www.aol.com/article/lifestyle/2016/09/11/j-crew-nyfw-spring-summer-2017/21469909/>
 instead of models to showcase its clothes at New York fashion week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbritish-vogue-latest-issue-model-free-zone-real-women-emily-blunt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8845b6f01aefb12882617161d01858317f5b88aa%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20Vogue%20ditches%20models%20in%20favour%20of%20'real'%20women%20%E2%80%93%20for%20one%20issue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbritish-vogue-latest-issue-model-free-zone-real-women-emily-blunt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20Vogue%20ditches%20models%20in%20favour%20of%20%27real%27%20women%20%E2%80%93%20for%20one%20issue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbritish-vogue-latest-issue-model-free-zone-real-women-emily-blunt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8845b6f01aefb12882617161d01858317f5b88aa%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 Women’s Equality party leader Sophie Walker has spoken out against ‘systematic 
malnutrition’ in the fashion industry. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Observer 
The Women’s Equality party, meanwhile, is campaigning to change the fashion 
industry’s approach to body image by calling for designers showing in London to 
display at least two sample sizes, one of which must be more than a UK size 12.

Sophie Walker, the party’s leader, told the Guardian last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/04/models-women-weight-london-fashion-week>
 that these “tiny, tiny little clothes are such that normal-sized women have to 
starve themselves to fit into them. And we’re not talking a three-day soup diet 
here, which would be bad enough; we’re talking weeks and weeks of systematic 
malnutrition, for which young women are paid to fit into these tiny little 
sizes.”

Last week, four US Vogue editors were branded “jealous and hypocritical” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/29/vogue-editors-declare-war-fashion-bloggers>
 after complaining about the presence of “pathetic” and “desperate” fashion 
bloggers at Milan fashion week.

Shulman distanced herself from the row, tweeting: 
Alexandra Shulman (@AShulman2) 
Can I just be CLEAR. The current Bloggersgate furore is via American Vogue not 
@BritishVogue <https://twitter.com/BritishVogue>.
 <https://twitter.com/AShulman2/status/782881754281603072> October 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AShulman2/status/782881754281603072>  