
The boss of one of Britain’s biggest estate agent chains appears to have 
called the top of the property market, saying there has been a big slump in 
demand from buyers after the nation has “reached the limit” on house prices.

Paul Smith, whose company operates Haart, Felicity J Lord, Spicer McColl and 
Darlows chains across the UK, said there was “trouble in paradise” and sellers 
would have to cut prices to find buyers.

“We are starting to see a big slump in buyer demand with registrations down a 
huge 46% across the UK in just one month,” he said.

Smith warned that prices may be peaking after a 12% year-on-year rise to a 
record high of just over £234,000 for an average home, nearly nine times the 
average UK income.

'Ghost tower' bought up by foreign money is symbol of housing crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/revealed-foreign-buyers-own-two-thirds-of-tower-st-george-wharf-london>
“We believe the nation has now neared the limit in terms of price rises. Our 
data is already showing a slowdown in both house price growth and transaction 
levels. In order to maintain healthy sales levels sellers need to be much more 
realistic with their asking prices – properties are in danger of being 
overvalued and these homes will struggle to sell.”

Smith’s gloomy prediction – from an estate agent’s point of view – represented 
a sharp reversal from more optimistic statements he had issued about the market 
in recent weeks, but he said in the longer term the market will remain 
attractive.

But it comes after figures from HM Revenue & Customs  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524681/UK_Tables_May_2016__cir_.pdf>
revealed a dramatic collapse in the number of house sales in April after a boom 
in March to beat higher stamp duty rates on second homes.

Across the UK just 70,690 residential properties were sold in April compared 
with 173,430 in March as landlords rushed to beat the tax rise. The sharp drop 
in April took housing market activity back to the low levels last seen during 
the financial crash, but property experts said the decline was only to be 
expected after a bumper March.

David Brown of agents Marsh & Parsons said: “After most peaks comes a 
corresponding trough. The goalposts simply changed overnight, making it 
incomparable to an extremely hectic March, which was characterised by 
unparalleled activity from second home owners and buy-to-let investors rushing 
through completions.”

Many potential buyers are expected to hold off making purchases until they 
know the outcome of the EU referendum, potentially pushing down prices in the 
short term. Then from April next year, anotherbig cut in tax relief for 
buy-to-let landlords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/11/buy-to-let-budget-tax-profits-mortgage>
is likely to depress demand.

Nationwide building society, which reported bumper lending and profits figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/24/nationwide-says-mortgage-lending-back-at-pre-crisis-levels>
, said in future buy-to-let borrowers would face a much more demanding test 
before being granted a mortgage.

Prices have already begun to fall at the top end of the London market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/17/house-prices-drop-london-luxury-postcodes>
, with analysts split as to how far the falls will spread into the wider 
market. In Hampstead and Notting Hill, prices are down by as much as 10%, while 
agents Douglas Gordon said “overinflated prices [are] stymying sales” in 
markets further out.

But the continued ready availability of cheap mortgages, plus a persistent 
shortage of newly built houses, may see first-time buyers fill the gap left by 
landlords and keep prices high. The average interest rate on a 90% mortgage – 
where the buyer puts up a deposit worth 10% of the value of the property – has 
fallen from 5.97% in 2011 to just 3.01% today, according to data company 
Moneyfacts.

Doug Crawford of conveyancing company MyHomeMove said: “While house prices are 
high, buyers who can raise a deposit have been given a boost by extremely 
attractive mortgage rates which support borrowing.

“There are also signs of solid improvement in lending to first-time buyers, 
such as a growth in high loan-to-value mortgages available. Our forecast growth 
in sales is based on first-time buyers being able to access the high LTV 
mortgage products that will support their borrowing.”

The public finances have also enjoyed a large, albeit temporary, gain from the 
boom-and-bust in the property market, with stamp duty receipts hitting a record 
high of £1.2bn in April. Over the last 12 months the Treasury has collected 
£11bn from stamp duty, almost as much as inheritance tax and capital gains tax 
combined, and much higher than budget forecasts, according to an analysis by 
accountants Blick Rothenberg.


 