
British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> has 
stressed the need for “a commitment to equality and diversity” in its 
advertisement for a new performance director. The embattled national governing 
body, which is under scrutiny in an independent review, has left the position 
vacant since Sir Dave Brailsford’s departure to work full-time with Team Sky in 
April 2014.

Shane Sutton was promoted from head coach to technical director before leaving 
his role in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/british-cycling-crisis-shane-sutton-alleged-paralympians-remarks>
, 100 days before the Rio Olympics, amid allegations of discrimination which 
were the subject of an internal investigation.

Sir Dave Brailsford puts up stout defence but questions hang in the air
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/sir-dave-brailsford-stout-defence-team-sky-bradley-wiggins>
Sutton continues to deny the allegations  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/shane-sutton-jess-varnish-british-cycling-allegations-discrimination>
levelled by Jess Varnish, but the investigation concluded last week and found 
the Australian had used “inappropriate and discriminatory language” towards the 
rider.

Its findings have been fed into an ongoing independent review into the culture 
of British Cycling’s world-class performance programme, which is expected to 
conclude before the end of the year.

The candidate brief for the performance director role was advertised on 
Wednesday, seeking an individual with “exemplary performance leadership” to 
manage the budget and a team of around 60 staff.

A “commitment to equality and diversity” features as one of 12 points under 
“other qualities”.

Experience in cycling is desirable, while one of four “key priorities” focuses 
on culture. It reads: “Build a culture and climate that enables the Great 
Britain cycling team to achieve sustained success. Embed a culture of 
continuous improvement that facilitates a sustainable high performance 
environment.”

British Cycling’s programmes manager, Andy Harrison, has held the head role 
since Sutton’s resignation. The deadline for applications is 2 December, with 
interviews to take place before Christmas. Harrison will stay in charge in the 
interim and may be a candidate for the top job.

There was a clamour for Sutton to return from some riders during the Olympics, 
although that scenario appears even more remote after the investigation verdict.

There is likely to be no shortage of candidates as a troubled year for British 
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> has also featured numerous 
successes, including six gold medals out of 10 on the track at the Rio Olympics 
to finish top of the medal table. Britain also finished top of the cycling 
medal table at the Paralympics.

The performance director will report to the chief executive, a role Ian Drake 
will vacate in April.

Sailing’s Stephen Park admitted prior to and after the Olympics that a role at 
the National Cycling Centre may interest him. England Netball’s Sara Symington, 
a two-time Olympic cyclist, is another linked with the job. The performance 
director’s remit may be expanded from just the Olympic and Paralympic 
disciplines – track, road, BMX and cross-country mountain bike – to the 
non-Olympic disciplines. These include downhill mountain bike.
 