
Great Britain will boycott the biathlon World Cup in Russia in March, with 
executives branding Russian athletes “brainwashed” for disowning theMcLaren 
report. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/frustrated-anti-doping-organisations-turn-anger-ioc-thomas-bach>

The board of the British Biathlon Union has voted unanimously to shun the 
World Cup meeting in Tyumen in March.

Richard McLaren’s report claims more than 1,000 Russians benefited from a 
state-sponsored doping programme between 2011 and 2015, with the London 2012 
Olympics “corrupted on an unprecedented scale”.

British Biathlon is the latest body to object to competition in Russia after 
Lizzy Yarnold threatened to pull out of the skeleton World Cup event in 
February before it was switched from Sochi to Germany’s Konigsee.

“The board has taken the unanimous decision that Great Britain will not 
compete at the biathlon World Cup in Tyumen,” the British Biathlon Union’s 
statement read.

“This follows the brain-washed, deluded and dishonest comments of Russian 
World Cup athletes that McLaren is about politics, not sport and the 
unprecedented booing of the Russian female athlete who won the sprint at World 
Cup Two last weekend in Nove Mesto.

Anti-Doping organisations frustrated by IOC chief’s decision to sidestep 
meeting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/frustrated-anti-doping-organisations-turn-anger-ioc-thomas-bach>
“Moreover, the board felt that the whole integrity of the very successful 
London 2012 Olympic Games has been called into question. Finally, many of the 
results from Sochi must be regarded as ‘a joke’.”

The British biathlon board has now challenged the International Biathlon Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/04/international-biathlon-union-failed-drugs-test>
 to relocate the World Cup meeting away from Russia.

“On Tuesday morning the Czech Republic withdrew their teams and will not 
compete in Russia again until Wada and the IOC have given their approval that 
Russian Anti-Doping procedures are ‘clean’.

“That afternoon Norway demanded that IBU strip Russia of all sanctioned 
biathlon events until the procedures are ‘clean’ and also immediately ban all 
named Russian biathletes in the [confidential section of the]McLaren report. If 
these demands are not met Norway will consider boycotting all events in Russia.

“There is an emergency IBU executive meeting this Thursday. We will be 
surprised, and very disappointed, if the IBU do not agree with the comments of 
ourselves, the Czech Republic and Norway and relocate the World Cup and the 
youth/junior world championships from Russia this winter.”
 