
Few publications, however august or important, have had quite the same 
continuous cultural impact on British life as British Vogue. You feel it 
shouldn’t be so – it is a magazine devoted to chronicling the clothes women 
wear, after all. Yet it has always been more than simply a fashion bible: at 
key moments in its history, Vogue becomes something different – a record of 
where and who we are. Or at least, would like to be.

On Tuesday, I went to the National Portrait Gallery for a sneak preview of 
Vogue 100: A Century of Style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/07/vogue-centenary-exhibition-national-portrait-gallery>
 with my hair piled damp on my head and a red blister below one eye thanks to a 
splash of fat while cooking the previous night. Overwhelmed by home, children 
and work, I had failed to liberate any sophisticated clothes from the dry 
cleaner’s, so pitched up in a jumper that I realised afterwards was beginning 
to unravel at the hem.

This is my life and the life of many women. Yet I can look at the temple of 
style that Vogue represents and somehow feel I belong. Like Cecil Beaton’s 
famous wartime image of a woman gazing at the bomb-damaged ruins of Middle 
Temple, London, I may be in the midst of chaos, but somewhere deep inside me, I 
should know how to wear a well-tailored well-tailored suit by Digby Morton.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5e1c6d2240a84b42530397f99bdf2bb217b9b4c%2F0_0_2362_2934%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20Vogue%20at%20100%3A%20how%20a%20magazine%20pictured%20a%20nation%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20Vogue%20at%20100%3A%20how%20a%20magazine%20pictured%20a%20nation%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5e1c6d2240a84b42530397f99bdf2bb217b9b4c%2F0_0_2362_2934%2F2362.jpg>
 Fashion Is Indestructible by Cecil Beaton (1941). The Conde Nast Publications 
Ltd 
This mystery of inclusion and exclusion, of the highest fashion being at the 
centre of life, yet somehow apart from it, lies at the heart of Vogue’s appeal. 
And all of this is up for debate, prompted by the photographs that line the 
gallery’s walls. At one level, it is the quality of the images that guarantees 
Vogue’s continuing eminence.

It was founded in 1916, in the middle of the first world war, when the 
American publisher Condé Montrose Nast shrewdly calculated that if American 
Vogue sales had quadrupled since 1914, then a British edition might also 
thrive. But he also believed that the best paper stock and the most modern 
typography and design were key to the magazine’s success. So too was the 
photography. As Robin Muir, curator of the National Portrait Gallery show and a 
former Vogue picture editor, points out: “The magazine used the great names of 
modern photography.”

And there they are, the images glossy with beauty, dripping with class. Edward 
Steichen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/oct/29/fashion-edward-steichens-trailblazing-vogue-photographs-vanity-fair-in-pictures>
’s four cloche-hatted models (including Lee Miller) on a yacht, gazing out to 
sea like well-dressed nymphs; his portrait of a smiling Chaplin, leaning on a 
cane, dwarfed by his own shadow; Beaton’sVivien Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/vivien-leigh>, impossibly slim, surrounded by 
the detritus of photography itself, like “a Persian gazelle in the dark studio 
forest of chains and planks”.

Those early years also saw another quality of British Vogue established. Its 
first editor, Dorothy Todd, only lasted a few months before she was sent to New 
York, to learn magazine publishing the Condé Nast way. On her return to the 
editorship in 1922, it wasn’t entirely clear she had learned the lesson. “She 
attempted,” says Muir in his catalogue essay “to turn Vogue from a fashion 
magazine with light coverage of the arts into a magazine of the arts that 
hesitantly included fashion.”

The Bloomsbury set flocked to “sweep guineas off the Vogue counter”, as 
Virginia Woolf <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf> put it in her 
diary in 1925. The novelist herself wrote no fewer than five essays for the 
magazine, and although Todd’s defiant literary pursuits were a commercial 
disaster (and led to her sacking), they set the template for something Vogue 
has continued to be – a magazine for smart women in every sense, for thinkers 
as well as fashion lovers. Down the years it has happily accommodated writers 
from Rebecca West toJeanette Winterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jeanettewinterson>, from Nancy Mitford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nancy-mitford> to Antonia Fraser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/antonia-fraser> and Marina Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marina-warner>. It has straddled the broad 
cultural landscape with considerable ease, perhaps because so few of the 
editors have been fashion specialists.

Beatrix Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/25/beatrix-miller>, 
the editor who had a decisive impact on the magazine in her tenure from 1964 to 
1984, once defined the topography she called Vogueland. It was, she believed, 
“relatively superficial, but in the broadest sense, it is the mood of the 
moment translated visually – the words people use, the books they read, the 
sounds they hear, the houses they live in, the pictures they look at”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F265d2cb5ee2f56b8d33fa7db64da3c7b2f8a7394%2F0_0_2126_2090%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20Vogue%20at%20100%3A%20how%20a%20magazine%20pictured%20a%20nation%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20Vogue%20at%20100%3A%20how%20a%20magazine%20pictured%20a%20nation%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F265d2cb5ee2f56b8d33fa7db64da3c7b2f8a7394%2F0_0_2126_2090%2F2126.jpg>
 David Hockney, Maudie James and Peter Schlesinger in 1968. Photograph: Cecil 
Beaton/The Conde Nast Publications Ltd 
The current editor, Alexandra Shulman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman>, appointed in 1992 and 
now the longest serving in British Vogue history, expresses a similar 
sentiment. “Vogue has always been very true to its initial aim to report on the 
world of contemporary style using the best talent available to do it,” she 
says. “Although styles and fashions change, Vogue has remained constant as a 
chronicler and to some extent creator of a certain type of world that 
fascinates. And a large amount of the content has been about culture in 
general, which is a great complement to fashion and which gives it a broader 
base than some other fashion magazines.”

The breadth of that base is reflected in the photographs. Fred Astaire dances, 
Alfred Hitchcock <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfredhitchcock> squats like 
a toad,John Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne> smokes, 
Francis Bacon <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bacon> broods, Kate 
Winslet <https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet> shimmers, David Hockney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney> paints in vivid technicolour 
– the cultural life of Britain has shimmied across the pages, presented through 
the eyes of photographers such as Beaton and David Bailey, who became famous 
themselves as they redefined what a portrait could do. EvenMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, who took a stern view 
of fashion magazines – “When we look at fashions, ordinary people like me, we 
would love photographs that show you what the clothes are actually like” – 
takes her place in the Vogue pantheon, stern but glamorous in black velvet and 
pearls, photographed by Bailey.

It is a very British affair. As Shulman points out “All the Vogues are very 
home-culture specific. And British Vogue has certainly been helped by the 
culture of this country. There is such a rich mix of talent, creativity, 
society and influences for us to reflect.”

Historically, it was the second world war that established this national 
character. “It was the making of the magazine,” Muir argues. “It was given 
extra paper, even under rationing, because it was considered very important for 
morale on the home front. And it had to stand alone and find its own identity; 
it couldn’t rely on imported pictures from the US, and there is not much 
happening culturally so it looks very inward.”

I see no reason why it is in any way negative to portray a world that allows 
people to dream and indulge
Alexandra Shulman 
Beaton came into his own, swapping society beauties for wartime reporting. 
Norman Parkinson entered the lists, with bucolic images of farm girls in 
government-approved austerity wear, somehow turning digging for victory into an 
elegant art.Lee Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/sep/19/lee-millers-stunning-images-of-women-in-wartime-in-pictures>
, transformed from model into photographer, sent back astonishing images from 
the frontline, of the flames leaping from Hitler’s redoubt at Berchtesgaden set 
alight by allied troops, or of the young woman who has killed herself rather 
than face the repercussions of defeat. As Shulman points out: “Vogue has never 
pretended that it is warts-and-all reportage. Even Miller’s pictures were 
highly edited, but we have a point of view, and that is one of our strengths.”

That point of view encompassed a profound sense of place. It is there when the 
1960s finally arrive – they swing late in Vogue’s pages, with the brave new 
world of youth breaking into its rarefied atmosphere in 67. But their entrance 
is spectacular: Terence Donovan shoots an advertorial for Hoover in Crawley new 
town, with the rain reflected on the streets making it strangely unreal and 
instantly recognisable. The same sensation of being rooted in the society from 
which famous people spring is there decades later in 1999 when Posh Spice, as 
she then was, and a youngDavid Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham> are pictured by Juergen 
Teller sprawled in the corridor of the Midland Hotel, a symphony in beige with 
the cleaning staff lurking anxiously around the corner.

It’s there too in the pivotal photograph from 1993 when Corinne Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/aug/31/corinne-day-obituary> 
shot “a cocky kid from Croydon” almost without makeup, in a translucent top, 
and simultaneously madeKate Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss>
 a star and opened up a new direction for fashion photography.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bc84e1ae47a03584ad063501af38b2065134aca%2F136_156_1738_2608%2F1738.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20Vogue%20at%20100%3A%20how%20a%20magazine%20pictured%20a%20nation%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20Vogue%20at%20100%3A%20how%20a%20magazine%20pictured%20a%20nation%20in%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fpicturing-a-nation-british-vogue-100%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bc84e1ae47a03584ad063501af38b2065134aca%2F136_156_1738_2608%2F1738.jpg>
 Linda Evangelista. Photograph: Patrick Demarchelier for The Conde Nast 
Publications Ltd 
Where other magazines relaunch and alter, British Vogue has simply evolved, 
finding continuity within change. There is a direct lineage between the 
magazine that launched in 1916 and the one we buy today – it stays fresh by 
constantly reflecting the times without sacrificing its values.

In this context, the arrival of what Parkinson mockingly dubbed “the Black 
Trinity” – Bailey, Donovan and Brian Duffy – had the same energising effect on 
its photographs asthe Beatles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles> 
had on music. In photographing Jean Shrimpton in frank closeup, Bailey treats 
her as a friend and lover, breaking with the remoteness of much that had gone 
before. Lord Snowdon, now the magazine’s longest serving photographer, also 
made an impact; his arrival in 1956 brought humour to fashion shoots and a 
different kind of formality to portraits of the new stars:Martin Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> intensely gazing at the camera, 
David Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> posing on a park 
plinth.

Twenty years later, the supermodels swept through, in all their 
big-shouldered, confident swagger, taking the breath away with their pizzazz, 
as in Patrick Demarchelier’s first cover ofNaomi Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/naomi-campbell>, dressed like a golden 
idol, or his vision of Linda Evangelista in sweeping Versace, chin raised, best 
foot forward. In latter days,Mario Testino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mario-testino>, Nick Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nickknight> and Tim Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tim-walker> all conjure startling images 
that are as redolent of their own times as Beaton was of his.

One of my favourite photographs in the show is by Frank Horvat, taken in 1960, 
and designed to promote Bradford as a centre of the British woollen industry. 
It shows a smiling model surrounded by neatly dressed children on a cobbled 
street, and it’s full of life. It also reveals the tightrope that British Vogue 
has walked for 100 years – that precarious balance between the real and the 
unreachable, the dream and the grim reality.

Cecil Beaton's rare war photography – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2012/aug/31/cecil-beaton-war-photography-pictures>
It is a tension with which even its own editors have struggled; in 1927 Alison 
Settle, who had a background on women’s pages in newspapers, took up her new 
post and grumbled that it was “unbelievable how snobbish it was”. Yet the 
Fabian socialistAudrey Withers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/oct/31/guardianobituaries>, who regarded 
fashion as “slight and ephemeral” according to Parkinson had no difficulty in 
fitting herself to the editor’s chair.

As far as Shulman is concerned, those who query the magazine’s purpose are 
asking the wrong question. “I see no reason why it is in any way negative to 
portray a world that allows people to dream and indulge. The Vogue filter is 
optimistic and inclined towards beauty, elegance and high style but that is the 
point of us,” she says. “We allow people to indulge to some extent in a world 
that is not necessarily their own but something they enjoy looking at.”

I’d go further. What puts Vogue’s photographs on the walls of an art gallery 
is its clarity of vision. You might dismiss that view as superficial, but it is 
impossible to deny the magazine’s power. Beaton wanted to call his autobiography
When I Die I Want to Go to Vogue. It may not be heaven for everyone, but 
sometimes it comes pretty close.

 * Vogue 100: A Century of Style is at the National Portrait Gallery 
<http://npg.org.uk>, London WC2H, from 11 February. npg.org.uk 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/>
 