
It started on the Iffley Road running track in Oxford, with Roger Bannister 
and the four-minute mile <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wTXoTnp_5sI>. It 
continued with Chariots of Fire, the filmed version of the same, and it was 
reinforced in the national consciousness withLondon 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympics-2012>, the glorious festival of 
sport that everyone thought was going to be a disaster, but wasn’t.

Along the way came England’s victory (over Germany) in the 1966 World Cup, 
whoseanniversary has been celebrated this year with mawkish nostalgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/29/1966-world-cup-england-50th-anniversary>
. And when the medals kept on coming, in this year’s Olympics and the 
Paralympics in Rio, the self-image of the UK as a highly successful and, of 
course, squeaky clean sporting nation seemed secure.

Fifa is awful, but the Olympics takes the gold medal for sleaze | Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/05/fifa-bad-olympics-gold-medal-sleaze>
That image has been thoroughly discredited this week with the departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
, by mutual consent, of the new England football manager, Sam Allardyce, after 
a mere 67 days. He was the subject of a Panorama exposé 10 years ago – and even 
I, as a football ignoramus, had caught the drift – which helped to explain why 
this “obvious” candidate for the England job had never been offered it before.

But now there he was, on camera, courtesy of a classic journalistic sting 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/26/exclusive-investigation-england-manager-sam-allardyce-for-sale/>
 (by the Daily Telegraph), setting out how the rules of the transfer market 
could be circumvented, and considering a nice little supplement to his salary.

Nor, it would appear, is he alone in regarding the Football Association’s 
rules as an inconvenience to be challenged rather than a standard to be upheld. 
At leasteight more guardians 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/27/exclusive-eight-premier-league-managers-took-transfer-bungs-clai/>
 of the supposedly “national” game, it is claimed, agree with Sam Allardyce 
that ethics are for others upright or unambitious enough to heed them. The real 
pros know different.

If dubious practices were unique to football, that would be one thing. After 
all, everyone knows – do they not? – that there is far too much money sloshing 
round in the game generally, not least in England’s Premier League – money that 
is taking ticket prices out of reach of ordinary families and stifling the 
growth of homegrown talent.

We also know about the rot that set in long ago at Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/05/fifa-bad-olympics-gold-medal-sleaze>
, the headquarters of international football, so it is hardly surprising if 
something putrid also contaminates national organisations – including, alas, 
our own.

But it is not just English football, is it? Football may be the richest and 
most egregious example, but revelations in recent weeks suggest that question 
marks hang over other areas of UK sport. Nothing illegal, mind, nothing so 
crude as the“state-sponsored doping” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/09/wada-iaaf-russia-dick-pound-banned>
 we so loudly deplore in others, but little tweaks here and there, and 
especially close readings of the rule book that identify the opportunities 
between the lines.

So it is that the stellar success story of our times, Britain’s emergence as a 
world leader in cycling, looks slightly less glorious now thathacked reports 
have revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
 the chemical help some cyclists were receiving – quite legally, it must be 
stressed – in order, as the people’s hero and multiple Olympic gold harvester 
Bradley Wiggins put it, to ensure “a level playing field”. Is a doctor’s note 
now to be considered part of sportsmanship?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20did%20not%20seek%20an%20unfair%20advantage%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20on%20banned%20substances%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20did%20not%20seek%20an%20unfair%20advantage%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20on%20banned%20substances%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video&media=>
‘I did not seek an unfair advantage’, says Bradley Wiggins on banned substances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/25/unfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video>
And on the eve of the Rio Paralympics, there were reports of unhappiness 
within the British camp over allegations that classifications were being – how 
shall we say? – manipulated in the pursuit of more medals. We are sticklers for 
observing the letter of the law, it would seem, where the spirit of sport is 
concerned. But the story is starting to look a little different.

The shock here – if it is a shock – should not be that UK sports officials are 
as adept at playing the system as anyone else – within but sometimes also 
outside the law. It should rather be the persistence of the myth that only 
foreigners (especially Russians) cheat, and that British sport across the board 
– just because it is British – is cleaner, more honest and, yes, more innocent 
than everyone else’s. It isn’t.
 