
Stephen Park has been appointed the British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> performance director at the 
embattled governing body.

The Glasgow-born 48-year-old might have stayed in place as the Royal Yachting 
Association’s Olympic manager but the fact he has jumped ship to an 
organisation veering from one crisis to another – and a new sport – shows his 
ambition.

“Welcome aboard,” British Cycling declared on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/BritishCycling/status/812228794413105153> in announcing 
Park’s arrival. The two-times Olympic sailing competitor becomes British 
Cycling’s first performance director since Sir Dave Brailsforddeparted to 
concentrate solely on Team Sky in April 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/10/sir-dave-brailsford-team-sky-leave-british-cycling>
.

Brailsford’s position as Team Sky principal is under scrutiny in a crisis that 
has engulfed cycling in Britain. The British Cycling chief executive, Ian Drake,
is to leave in early 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/british-cycling-ian-drake-ceo-leave-post>
, with the recruitment process for his successor continuing during a period of 
transition for Britain’s most successful Olympic sport.

Official who delivered Team Sky decongestant may face MP questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/official-delivered-team-sky-decongestant-may-face-mp-questions-bradley-wiggins>
British Cycling is also without a technical director after Shane Sutton 
resigned in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/shane-sutton-resigns-british-cycling-paralympians>
 over allegations of discrimination. An independent review into the culture of 
the world-class performance programme is continuing and scheduled to conclude 
early in 2017.

Despite the disruption to preparations, Great Britain won six gold medals from 
10 track events at the Rio Olympics and were the dominant team at the Rio 
Paralympics. Park will have to ensure that dominance continues at the Tokyo 
Games and beyond.

British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> said it was always 
the intention to appoint a performance director for the Tokyo 2020 cycle. 
However, the appointment of Park, a non-cycling specialist, means there could 
be further restructuring of the coaching programme. A new technical director 
could be appointed to work with Park. The head coach, Iain Dyer, could fulfil 
that role.

Park recognises the challenge. “I feel privileged and excited to be given this 
opportunity and look forward to building on the high-performance culture at 
British Cycling,” he said.

“Clearly cycling poses very different challenges to sailing but it’s a sport I 
am very passionate about from a personal perspective. I’m looking forward to 
meeting its challenges head on and working intensively with a highly motivated 
and experienced group of athletes, coaches and support staff.”

Park is accustomed to success, having led Britain’s sailors to the top of the 
Olympic medal table in Rio. He has worked for the Royal Yachting Association 
for 15 years, with Britain amassing 23 Olympic and Paralympic medals during 
that period. He backed sailing to continue to thrive in future. He will begin 
work at the National Cycling Centre in the spring and should be in place for 
April’s track world championships in Hong Kong.

Chris Boardman, the 1992 Olympic individual pursuit champion and a key 
protagonist in British Cycling’s successes since, was part of the selection 
process. “The standard of applicants was predictably high and in appointing 
Stephen Park I am extremely confident we have someone in place who can now go 
forward and build on the fantastic success that British Cycling has enjoyed in 
recent years,” he said.

“The role calls for a highly effective, ambitious leader with a track record 
of successfully delivering at the highest level and an ability to instil a real 
sense of team and get the most out of the wealth of experience that is evident 
in the Great Britain cycling team. Throughout the selection process, it was 
very clear Stephen demonstrates each and every one of these characteristics.”
British Cycling (@BritishCycling) 
Welcome aboard @Sparky_rya <https://twitter.com/Sparky_rya>

Stephen Park has been appointed British Cycling performance director 
https://t.co/IcBElhlfAe <https://t.co/IcBElhlfAe> pic.twitter.com/cbEQkHrsnZ 
<https://t.co/cbEQkHrsnZ>
 <https://twitter.com/BritishCycling/status/812228794413105153> December 23, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/BritishCycling/status/812228794413105153> 
Chelsea Warr, the UK Sport performance director, said: “In this critical 
appointment of Stephen Park – well known across the system as Sparky – to the 
role of performance director at British Cycling, we have one of our world-class 
performance system’s most successful leaders, who has worked at the highest 
level of Olympic and Paralympic sport and has been tremendously successful over 
multiple Games.

“In collaboration with the brilliant coaches and support team at British 
Cycling, I am very confident Stephen will lead the programme to achieve even 
more success in the Tokyo cycle and beyond with a renewed focus on leadership, 
innovation, high-performance culture and behaviours, to meet the needs of the 
athletes and help them reach their full potential.”
 