
Britain’s fashion awards has taken place with all the usual signs of glamour 
for such an event: 4,000 guests, including top models, designers and 
celebrities dressed up to the nines, being tended to by 260 butlers and 
surrounded by 8,000 Swarovski crystals at the Royal Albert Hall as the comedian 
Jack Whitehall compered.

But this year’s event – now called simply the fashion awards, the “British” 
bit dropped – was also the inaugural fundraising gala for the British Fashion 
Council’s Education Foundation charity, which provides scholarships for 
students to design, and supports apprenticeships. £10m is expected to be raised 
in the next 10 years.

Worthy cause in place, the fashion industry did what it does best – 
celebrating itself. The big hitters of 2016 were rewarded: Alexander McQueen 
was named British brand of the year and Vogue received a special recognition 
award for its centenary year. But, in keeping with the awards’ new cause, it 
was youth that dominated. This was evident in the case of Jaden and Willow 
Smith, 18 and 16 respectively, the winners of the new fashion icons award. The 
21-year-oldGigi Hadid <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gigi-hadid>, up 
against her sister, Bella, was rightly crowned international model, as her 26.2 
million Instagram followers would no doubt attest.

The design awards felt like they were focusing on youth and zeitgeist too. 
Craig Green and Simone Rocha – both 30 – won the British menswear and 
womenswear awards, which traditionally have gone to more established brands. 
The loudest voices in the current fashion conversation were also acknowledged.

The reworked, newly fashionable Gucci won two awards – international 
accessories designer for its creative director, Alessandro Michele, and 
international business leader, an award introduced this year, for its chief 
executive, Marco Bizzarri.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbritains-fashion-awards-nod-to-youth-and-internationalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03d45d392882fe9a772b567d7e880566fa64f5a3%2F0_128_3928_2357%2F3928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20fashion%20awards%20makes%20nod%20to%20youth%20and%20internationalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbritains-fashion-awards-nod-to-youth-and-internationalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20fashion%20awards%20makes%20nod%20to%20youth%20and%20internationalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbritains-fashion-awards-nod-to-youth-and-internationalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03d45d392882fe9a772b567d7e880566fa64f5a3%2F0_128_3928_2357%2F3928.jpg>
 President and CEO of Gucci, Marco Bizzarri, poses with his award after being 
named winner of the International Business Leader award. Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
Demna Gvasalia, fashion disruptor du jour, was named international 
ready-to-wear designer for his work for Balenciaga. Vetements, the Paris-based 
collective where he is head designer, was the recipient of another new award, 
international urban luxury brand, which has been introduced to address growth 
of sportswear in fashion. It was somewhat incongruously presented by corset and 
makeup fan Marilyn Manson. Gvasalia, on message as ever, was in a GAP baseball 
cap.

The fashion awards emphasised the international in a post-Brexit-vote world – 
as ditching the “British” in the awards’ title seems to suggest. Two US giants 
received hefty awards. Photographer Bruce Weber, who has been taking pictures 
that define American style for five decades, won the Isabella Blow award for 
fashion creator. Designer Ralph Lauren, a regular Weber collaborator with an 
equal talent for American style, received the outstanding achievement award, 
perhaps in mind of 2017 marking 50 years of his brand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbritains-fashion-awards-nod-to-youth-and-internationalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15cb15a6d3dad4171de37f33bcbcf8249578fb28%2F0_0_2321_1393%2F2321.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20fashion%20awards%20makes%20nod%20to%20youth%20and%20internationalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbritains-fashion-awards-nod-to-youth-and-internationalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20fashion%20awards%20makes%20nod%20to%20youth%20and%20internationalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbritains-fashion-awards-nod-to-youth-and-internationalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15cb15a6d3dad4171de37f33bcbcf8249578fb28%2F0_0_2321_1393%2F2321.jpg>
 Photographer Bruce Weber poses with his award after being named winner of the 
Isabella Blow Award for Fashion Creator award. Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
Natalie Massenet, who chairs the British Fashion Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/british-fashion-council> , described Weber 
as “one of the foremost photographers and creative talents of our age”, and 
praised 77-year-old Lauren’s “outstanding legacy”. Lauren’s award was presented 
by another global brand name, David Beckham, who received a huge cheer from the 
audience. The fashion crowd, full of those who once reserved such enthusiasm 
only for one of their own, is learning that wider international recognition has 
its charms.

The fashion industry is estimated to employ 880,000 people in Britain and 
generates £28bn a year for the UK economy, so focus on the next generation 
makes sense. The awards coincided with the launch of a British fashion platform 
on Google’s arts & culture site.

With content on Kate Moss’s first ever show at London fashion week and the 
ability to zoom in on the embroidery on an Alexander McQueen dress, it is 
designed to make fashion accessible. “We hope this legacy project will not only 
inspire but also educate,” said Caroline Rush, the chief executive of British 
Fashion Council.
 