
Britain is falling short in its ambitions to educate the poorest and most 
vulnerable girls around the world, the aid watchdog has found.

The Independent Commission for Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> Impact (ICAI) said despite 
a commitment to helping girls, too many aid programmes lost their focus on them 
and in some cases abandoned targets for helping girls altogether.

In one project in Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, in 
which out-of-school children were to be given vouchers allowing them to enrol 
in private schools, the vouchers were given to a relatively low proportion of 
girls compared with boys.

Department for International Development (DFID) staff told the review that 
only 43% of the vouchers were given to girls, despite them making up a higher 
proportion of out-of-school children in the province where the project was run.

More widely, the report found that focus on girls was lost to competing 
priorities, that the DFID did not have sufficient influence on government-run 
programmes in certain countries and that girl-focused interventions were 
sometimes poorly designed.

'Girls' education is the global civil rights issue of our time'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/11/girls-education-global-civil-rights-issue>
DFID’s desire for value for money risked creating an incentive to focus on 
those easiest to reach, rather than those most in need, like vulnerable girls.

There was also a lack of expertise among organisations tasked with delivering 
education to marginalised girls and difficulties with “challenging 
environments”.

The ICAI’s commissioner Tina Fahm, who led the review, said: “Globally, 62 
million girls miss out on an education.

“The UK Government has made a strong commitment to tackling this huge problem, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/07/uk-government-pledges-100m-poorest-girls-universal-primary-secondary-education-2030>
 but has struggled to maintain the focus on girls and on results for 
marginalised girls in particular.

“Weaknesses in performance means that girls, and especially hard-to-reach 
girls, are less likely to get the education which they so desperately need to 
improve their life chances.

“We welcome DFID’s significant investment in girls’ education but DFID now 
needs to improve its focus and performance to make a difference to as many 
lives as possible.”

The report rated DFID’s performance as “amber-red” - “requiring significant 
improvement to ensure a clear, strategic direction, and to tackle a pattern of 
under-performance”.

The ICAI said the department should develop a clear strategy for supporting 
marginalised girls, monitor aid programmes to ensure focus on girls is not 
lost, and better balance cash concerns with equality considerations.
 