
Britons are expected to embark on a record-breaking £1.3bn online spree as 
Black Friday <https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> kicks off the 
biggest shopping weekend of the year.

The US import has taken the UK by storm, with retailers launching discounts 
even earlier than usual this year as the battle for Christmas shoppers 
intensifies. Some of the high street’s biggest names, including Tesco, Argos, 
Currys PC World andAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> have 
upped the ante: offering more discounts, spread over more days, and, in Tesco’s 
case, opening its largest stores at 5am.

Black Friday 2016: UK's best deals and discounts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/all-you-need-to-know-black-friday-uk-retailers-deals-and-dates>
The pattern of spending on Black Friday has evolved since Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/amazon-to-spread-black-friday-sales-over-two-weeks>
 imported the event to the UK in 2010. In 2014 some stores witnessed violent 
scenes as bargain-hunting consumersfought in the aisles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/28/black-friday-sales-police-attend-supermarkets-amid-scuffles>
 for cut-price widescreen televisions, but by last year the discount 
extravaganza had morphed into a predominantly online event.

The association for online retailers, IMRG, predicted £1.27bn would be spent 
online on Friday, up 16% on last year. It will be the busiest day in a 
week-long spending orgy that is expected to see retailers ring up online sales 
of £6.77bn in the seven days to Monday 28 November.

“Black Friday started out as a single day of discounting, which then became a 
weekend and now spans an entire week, during which time we anticipate that a 
high volume of pre-Christmas sales will be made,” said IMRG’s managing 
director, Justin Opie.

It has become increasingly hard for retailers to hold their prices in the face 
of rivals’ Black Friday discounts as industry sales data shows Britons are not 
spending more, they are just starting their Christmas shopping earlier.

Paul Martin, the UK head of retail at KPMG, said the traditional Christmas 
shopping period had been distorted by Black Friday.

 “For retailers it has always been questionable whether Black Friday really 
benefits them in the long run, and in the current environment of rising costs 
and squeezed margins – perhaps it’s even more so,” he said. “This year some 
retailers have decided not to partake, while others have spread their offers 
out over a longer period in order to ease pressure on logistics and IT 
infrastructure.”

The surge in orders stemming from Black Friday puts major strain on both 
retailers’ websites and the couriers that deliver parcels. Last year the 
websites of large retailers, including Argos, Tesco,John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> and Boots, crashed due to the 
volume of shoppers logging on. Now, with more consumers than ever choosing 
next-day delivery, industry experts think carriers may struggle to keep 
delivery promises.

How to make sure you really are saving on Black Friday bargains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/24/make-sure-saving-black-friday-bargains>
“Some retailers have gone to great lengths to ensure they are ready and others 
less so, but even big e-retailers, such as Amazon, have experienced issues on 
busy days like Black Friday,” said Robert Castley, a senior performance 
engineer at the digital analytics firm Catchpoint.

John Lewis’s operations director, Dino Rocos, said that Black Friday week last 
year delivered the highest sales in the department store’s 150-year history, 
with its website experiencing a 300% increase in traffic during the early hours 
of Friday. “We are well prepared for the demand but it’s our customers who will 
decide the exact pattern of trading,” Rocos said.

Although many bargain hunters are expected to log on in their pyjamas rather 
than join early morning queues,Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is drafting in extra security at 
its largest stores, many of which are opening at 5am. The shopping centre firm 
Intu, which owns the Trafford Centre and Lakeside, said it was expecting an 
influx of shoppers after experiencing a 30% increase in visitors on Black 
Friday last year.


Gordon McKinnon, the operations director at Intu, said: “Early signs this year 
indicate that Black Friday is still evolving as retailers stretch out the sales 
period.”
 