
Bronwyn Bishop has weighed into the Sussan Ley expenses controversy, blaming 
“socialists” for criticising the embattled MP whostood aside as health minister 
on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 pending two inquiries into her taxpayer-funded travel.

Bishop, who exited politics after an expenses scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/04/bronwyn-bishop-gives-final-speech-as-mp-blaming-tony-abbott-for-downfall>
 for chartering a helicopter from Melbourne to Geelong to attend a Liberal 
party fundraiser, told Sky News on Monday that Ley was being attacked by 
“people behaving like a pack of dogs”.

Bishop said when she resigned in 2015 as Speaker of the lower house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/brownyn-bishop-resigns-as-speaker-tony-abbott-announces>
 she had done so because Tony Abbott had asked her to, and said her staff had 
arranged her travel.

Multimillionaire Sarina Russo hosted Sussan Ley at New Year's Eve parties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-used-taxpayer-money-for-gold-coast-events-with-multi-millionaire>
“I can only imagine that Sussan Ley’s travel was done in exactly the same way, 
but I have no personal knowledge of that,” she said. “But I do know that there 
are socialists out there who want to attack free enterprise and anyone who 
sticks up for it.

“And I know that socialists, like alcoholics, will blame anyone but 
themselves. And whereas alcoholics can damage their own family, socialists can 
destroy the whole country.”

Bishop said that the two inquiries into Ley’s travel expenses should be 
allowed to run their course before people came to conclusions. The former 
Speaker said she was sure Ley could survive politically.

“I was within the rules, she was within the rules,” Bishop said despite urging 
people not to pre-empt the inquiries into Ley’s travel.

Bishop said she was “disappointed” more of Ley’s colleagues had not defended 
her.

Bishop noted that the acting Labor leader, Penny Wong, had criticised Ley, and 
said it was “pretty disgusting”, characterising it as “theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> sending out a woman to 
attack another woman”.

“To be blunt, if you look at the socialist side of the Labor party ... blokes 
have done many more things like that and, frankly, nothing happens.”

Bishop said that politicians had to adjust to such personal attacks in the 
24-hour news cycle and the era of the “Twitterati”.

“We hear lots about the pub test, but there are rules and then there’s the pub 
test ... it depends which pub you’re in too.”

Bronwyn Bishop has never welcomed the kind of scrutiny she applies to others | 
David Leser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/bronwyn-bishop-has-never-welcomed-the-kind-of-scrutiny-she-applies-to-others>
Bishop repeatedly linked criticism of Ley to socialism, describing the 
political ideology as “always on the march”.

Asked what the expenses controversy had to do with socialism, the former 
Speaker emphatically said it had “a lot” to do with it, and said that all 
political critiques were motivated by ideology.

“Socialists will always blame anyone but themselves.”

On Sunday Ley apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/08/sussan-ley-apologises-over-gold-coast-luxury-apartment-scandal>
 for what she called an “error of judgment” in charging taxpayers for a trip to 
the Gold Coast in which she boughta $795,000 apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
.

At a press conference in Albury earlier on Monday, Ley said she was “very 
confident” the investigation would show she had not broken travel entitlement 
rules.

She said her decision to pay back funds relating to four claims for Gold Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> travel and 
accommodation did not amount to an admission she had broken the rules. The 
decision to step aside had been “mutually agreed” with the prime minister, she 
said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sussan%20Ley%20steps%20aside%20during%20investigation%20into%20taxpayer-funded%20travel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sussan%20Ley%20steps%20aside%20during%20investigation%20into%20taxpayer-funded%20travel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video&media=>
Sussan Ley steps aside during investigation into taxpayer-funded travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video> 