
The former Speaker Bronwyn Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bronwyn-bishop> claimed official 
car expenses on the same day she attended a New Year’s Eve party at the Sydney 
Opera House.

Bishop made the claim of $91 for a Comcar on 31 December 2014. On the same 
date,according to her pecuniary interests register 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/~/media/03%20Senators%20and%20Members/32%20Members/Register/44p/AB/BishopBronwyn_44P.pdf>
, she had complimentary tickets to Opera Australia’s New Year’s Eve 
celebrations.


The claim is among the latest six months of politicians’ entitlements 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/publications/parliamentarians-reporting/> published 
on Thursday by the Department of Finance.


Barnaby Joyce's Armidale ministerial office the most expensive on record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/04/barnaby-joyce-armidale-ministerial-office-most-expensive-on-record>
Bishop has previously defended the use of taxpayer-funded entitlements to 
attend the theatre 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/bronwyn-bishop-expense-scandal-speaker-defends-trips-to-the-opera-20150722-gihrxv.html>
. “It’s quite proper,” a spokesman told the Sydney Morning Herald in July. 
“Members of both sides use entitlements for [such] events.

“They get invited because of the position that they hold. She would not have 
been invited otherwise. It’s not like she bought a ticket herself.”


It is not known whether Bishop had any official engagements in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> on New Year’s Eve – or 
whether the event would be considered an official engagement – and the MP has 
not responded to questions on the subject.


The MP also spent $4,100 on a charter flight to Port Macquarie, where she 
spoke at theHastings Heroine awards 
<http://www.hbwn.com.au/blog/women-who--make-it-happen--honoured-at-hastings-heroines-awards>
, an International Women’s Day event.


Bishop resigned from the Speaker position after controversy surrounding her 
use of entitlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/brownyn-bishop-resigns-as-speaker-tony-abbott-announces>
, including the use of charter flights to attend party fundraisers.


Also revealed in the statements is the fact that the agriculture minister 
Barnaby Joyce’s decision to move his ministerial office to the northern New 
South Wales town of Armidalehas resulted in the most expensive fit-out claimed 
by a politician for at least five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/04/barnaby-joyce-armidale-ministerial-office-most-expensive-on-record>
.


This contributed to make Joyce’s overall expenses of $1,073,991 the highest 
amount of any politician in the period, followed by Michael Keenan, Julie 
Bishop, Sussan Ley and Adam Bandt:

Top ten total expenses 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1GdcG1BVk4cOwnCT1QnJgzRVf-xhV-vy5Fg2n_o6w3Ls>
For a full breakdown of the latest politician’s expenses, see Guardian 
Australia’s searchable database here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/ng-interactive/2015/dec/04/expenses-of-australian-politicians-for-january-to-june-2015>
.
 