
In early June, when everyone in Britain was arguing about Europe, I found 
myself inBudapest <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/budapest>. I had fond 
memories of my only previous visit, in 2013, when I’d been there for a literary 
festival. After one of the endless drinks parties I’d fallen into step with a 
group in search of dinner and wound up talking to a tall man with prominent 
eyebrows and burgundy trousers. “I got married in there,” he said casually, 
pointing atSt Stephen’s Basilica <http://en.bazilika.biz/>.

“It must have been hard to fill,” I replied with a certain froideur. This was 
a bit like someone nodding at Wembley Stadium and mentioning their seven-night 
run there. I wasn’t about to wave it through unchecked.

“Not really. In fact, people crowded outside and it was shown on television.”

“I see. Why was that?” “Well, my grandfather was the last emperor,” he 
explained, moments before I fell back to Google him. Though theHabsburgs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jun/11/great-dynasties-habsburg-empire>
 no longer rule, I learned later that the name still secures preferential 
treatment in a steakhouse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3b97717f826e67baf05313d9672e351b20e6895%2F0_217_6439_3864%2F6439.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest%20to%20Berlin%3A%20stranger%20on%20a%20train&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%20to%20Berlin%3A%20stranger%20on%20a%20train&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3b97717f826e67baf05313d9672e351b20e6895%2F0_217_6439_3864%2F6439.jpg>
 ‘Brooklynite dream for a tenth of the price’: a ruin bar in the Jewish 
quarter. Photograph: Alamy 
My other enduring impression was of an anarchic day that began as a walking 
tour of the old city and ended with hamburgers and beer in a pedal cart. My 
guide Zsuzsi and I stayed in touch through Facebook, and I looked her up as 
soon as I arrived this time.

If you haven’t been to Budapest recently, you probably have the wrong idea 
about it. For my parents’ generation it was a cheap weekend behind the Iron 
Curtain, where your interest was pitched against your growing boredom with 
goulash. Since joining the EU it has become a cheap favourite for stag and hen 
dos, a fact not unrelated to pints of beer that adhere stubbornly to a price of 
less than £1. But a smarter and more interesting scene is emerging, too.

The ruin bars – dilapidated buildings, mainly in the Jewish quarter, given new 
life over the past decade by canny entrepreneurs – have become markedly smarter 
and hipper. At bars like Mazel Tov, Racskert andMost <http://mostbisztro.hu/> 
you can sit in designer furniture in airy atriums, enjoying the kind of night 
out Brooklynites dream of, for a tenth of the price. “The local owners complain 
about the noise but their apartments are worth five times what they were,” 
Zsuzsi’s boyfriend Alex told me. He owns a hostel himself,Casa de La Musica 
<http://www.casadelamusicahostel.com/home/>, in an old dance school.

The seats were all burgundy. I settled into mine and waited for a stranger to 
ask me to murder his father

The next morning I woke at six to catch a train to Berlin. I was excited about 
the journey. Over 11 and a half hours it would take me through four countries, 
three of which I hadn’t visited before. My first-class ticket, bought the day 
before, was just €60. Take that, easyJet. The seats were wide and comfortable, 
with a plug for my devices. The next carriage along had old-fashioned private 
compartments with a corridor down the outside. Beyond that was a dining car. 
All were upholstered in deep burgundy. As we rolled out of the city, tracing 
the Danube back towards its source, a man served coffee and handed out 
newspapers. I settled into my chair and waited for a stranger to ask me to 
murder his father.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F402138ae14ec8b6321be44e6fa953457a9e22e53%2F0_171_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest%20to%20Berlin%3A%20stranger%20on%20a%20train&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%20to%20Berlin%3A%20stranger%20on%20a%20train&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F402138ae14ec8b6321be44e6fa953457a9e22e53%2F0_171_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
 City lights: the banks of the River Spree at sunset. Photograph: Getty Images 
After half an hour we crossed into Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/slovakia> towards Bratislava. From there we 
turned north towards theCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/czechrepublic>, close enough to look into 
Austria but not quite crossing its frontier. At each border a new conductor got 
on to stamp my ticket. I was the only one in the carriage going the whole way. 
Nobody asked for a passport. As we leftBrno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/jun/19/low-cost-fun-brno-czech> I was 
peckish, so went to the dining car and ordered paprika chicken with dumplings 
and a cold beer. Sweeping crumbs off the tablecloth I pondered how many BLTs 
I’d eaten on British trains. A hundred? What a sad waste of life.

At Prague the platform was three-deep with Interrailers, who piled on to the 
train. Luckily none of them had booked into first class except for one American 
girl with a suspiciously new-looking backpack. We exchanged a glance which 
conveyed what we thought about the passengers at the back of the train, 
specifically that they were suckers.

The physical geography of this part of the continent is quite uniform, at 
least to a man seeing it for the first time with half an eye on his WhatsApp. 
It slid past as a kind of Mittel-European diorama. Meadows and mountains grew 
darker-green as we trundled north under a breathless blue sky, the Bohemian 
landscape carved by rivers of flashing silver. More noticeable was the human 
geography. The nearer you get to Germany the newer the cars, the more neat the 
gardens, the fresher the paint on the walls. It’s like seeing a history of 
neglect in reverse. As we crossed the Elbe at Dresden two rowing eights beat a 
lazy pace upstream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61ea31392e48b70774959e992b9130bfe57ff88%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest%20to%20Berlin%3A%20stranger%20on%20a%20train&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%20to%20Berlin%3A%20stranger%20on%20a%20train&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbudapest-to-berlin-stranger-on-a-train%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61ea31392e48b70774959e992b9130bfe57ff88%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A cafe in the heart of Kreuzberg. Photograph: Maremagnum/Getty Images 
We pulled into Berlin <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/berlin> in the early 
evening, two minutes later than scheduled. I have been delayed for longer 
between Charing Cross and Embankment. At Hauptbahnhof I tried to buy a ticket 
for the S-Bahn. The ticket machine listed options for refugees and those 
interested in a gay tour of the city but not, as far as I could tell, for 
“single journey to specific station”. I chose something that promised “all 
access” but it wouldn’t take my Visa. Cursing, I made a mental note never again 
to be rude about Oyster cards and went to look for a cab. Time was tight: I had 
an early train to Paris to catch the next day and I wanted to spend some time 
with my cousin Kate.

She moved to Berlin last year with her boyfriend, lured by cheap rent and 
exhilarating, keenly priced nightlife. They insisted on showing me some of the 
latter, or at least the parts of it in walking distance of their flat in 
Kreuzberg. I only recall the first two bars with any clarity. One was decorated 
with pictures of the Muppets. “We are the same, you and I,” said the owner, 
with his hand on his heart in a gesture of solidarity. He seemed to have 
sampled some of his own wares. “Me – Saxony. You – Saxon,” he said. We ordered 
more beer.

The ticket machine in Berlin listed options for refugees and those interested 
in gay tours of the city

The train to Paris left just after seven the next morning. Or rather, I assume 
it did, but I can’t be sure because at the time I was lying with my mouth open 
on Kate’s futon. “You’re still here,” she said unhelpfully as I stumbled 
towards the bathroom in pursuit of my contact lenses. We passed the rest of the 
morning walking aroundTempelhof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/05/how-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers>
 Field, the former airport which since 2008 has been left to become a public 
park. My hangover eased enough to recognise what an extraordinary public space 
this is. The imposing terminal, planned by Albert Speer to be the hub of the 
1,000-year Reich, now houses refugees. To the trilling of unseen skylarks, 
rollerbladers and joggers trundle up and down the runway that was once at the 
heart of the Berlin Airlift. Airlift. Planes. Struck by a cunning plan, I took 
out my phone. In less than 30 seconds I’d booked a ticket to Paris that 
afternoon. Sorry about what I said earlier, easyJet.

Essentials

Train tickets from Budapest to Berlin start at £33 (mavcsoport.hu 
<https://www.mavcsoport.hu/>). Take a tour of Budapest with Zsuzsi Szoke 
through curiocity budapest.com.
Fly from Paris to Berlin by easyJet from £129 (easyjet.com 
<http://www.easyjet.com/en/>). Take the train from Paris to London on Eurostar 
from £29 one-way (eurostar.com <http://www.eurostar.com/>)
 