
The federal budget deficit is projected to expand by another $24.3bn over the 
next four years, asAustralia’s record-low wages growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/australian-wages-growing-at-slowest-rate-on-record-statistics-show>
 and a shortfall in company tax blow a hole in the income tax take.

It means the Turnbull government’s hopes of returning the budget to balance in 
2020-21 have become even slimmer, raising the spectre of a major credit ratings 
downgrade.

Deloitte Access Economics’s latest Budget Monitor, released on Monday, shows 
the commonwealth government’s fortunes are tied uncomfortably to rising global 
commodity prices and the unlikely prospect of the return of inflation.

Australia's combined budget deficit will grow by $14.9bn, fiscal outlook shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/australias-combined-budget-deficit-will-grow-by-149bn-fiscal-outlook-shows>
It shows the recent rise in global commodity prices, particularly the price of 
coal, will not be enough to stop the deficit expanding by billions.

Chris Richardson, Deloitte director, said when making his budget calculations 
he also assumed, generously, that the Senate passes all savings measures by 
mid-2017, that state governments accept the Turnbull government’s savings 
measures that have been made at their expense, and that Australia’s economy 
finally reflates.

He said the 2016-17 budget assumed the nation’s finances would repair 
themselves over coming years thanks to a projected doubling of the pace of 
nominal GDP growth, which is very unlikely when the world is stuck with 
“lowflation”.

Budget numbers in context: how many submarines in the deficit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/may/05/budget-numbers-in-context-how-many-submarines-in-the-deficit>
He said these assumptions were unrealistic, so the projected budget deficit 
could end up being even larger than his predicted $24.3bn blowout by 2019-20.

“That speaks to the underlying vulnerability of official budget forecasts,” he 
said.

“They assume the next four years are a turnaround versus the last four: so 
they depend on a lot of things going right.”

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, and the shadow minister for finance, Jim 
Chalmers, have jumped on the news, saying yet anotherbudget deterioration will 
jeopardise Australia’s AAA credit rating. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/23/why-government-debt-isnt-the-biggest-threat-to-australias-credit-rating>

“With the ratings agencies already expressing concern about the budget 
position, any further blowout of this nature will put our hard-earned AAA 
credit rating at even more danger of being lost,” they said in a joint 
statement.

“Already Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> have delivered a 
budget deficit for 2015-16 eight times bigger than they inherited, the 2016-17 
deficit has tripled and net debt for this year has blown out by more than 
$100bn on their watch.

“It is time for this government to take responsibility for the state of the 
books and stop pointing the finger at everyone else for their failings.”

But Morrison said Labor’s approach to budget repair could not be taken 
seriously.

“Any claims made by Labor about risks to the AAA credit rating need to 
recognise that Labor’s approach at the last election was to worsen the budget 
deficit over the forward estimates and increase taxes that would slow economic 
growth,” he said.

Credit downgrade assured if Coalition keeps hiding from its debt and deficit 
disaster | Stephen Koukoulas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/credit-downgrade-assured-if-coalition-keeps-hiding-from-its-debt-and-deficit-disaster>
“Labor’s resort to cynical populism is also no panacea to repairing the 
budget. It should make the right decisions to support the government’s savings 
measures and contribute to the national interest.

 “The goal of our national economic plan outlined in the budget is to lift 
what Australians are earning from their wages and their businesses, not tax 
them more, as Labor propose to do. That is why our enterprise tax plan is so 
important.

“You can’t expect businesses to earn and invest in providing more hours of 
work per week for their employees when you are demanding that they keep paying 
higher taxes,” he said.
 