
Bugaboo buggies are the rage in the coffee shops and parks – but fashion comes 
at a price. TheBugaboo Cameleon 
<http://www.bugaboo.com/learn/bugaboo-cameleon?id=1820> is an all-terrain 
solution for parents who want to go for strolls in the woods or wade through 
sand on the beach (which can have the equivalent aerobic benefit of 10 minutes 
on a rowing machine!) while at the same time being able to navigate through 
cracks, potholes and oncoming pedestrians encountered in urban sprawls.

It is a multi-function buggy converting from pushchair to car seat or carry 
cot. Make no bones about it, this is not for bargain hunters – it is more of a 
luxury model allowing you to colour co-ordinate with matching accessories. 
PriceCheck has sourced the best prices – as always, if you find the buggy 
cheaper elsewhere please add details in the comments section below.

Bugaboo Cameleon comes in a range of colours, but the prices we show do not 
include the tailored fabrics, though we have mentioned the additional costs for 
the basic extras which can be bought in outlets and online, includingeBay <>. 
Some are required to make the buggy fully functional, for example the hood for 
the pushchair and carry cot, and also the front apron and liner for the chair, 
so if you are buying from the internet navigate through the pages with care. 
There are other accessories in the colour of your choice, including a footmuff, 
breezy canopy and parasol.

High street

John Lewis <http://www.johnlewis.com/230446054/Product.aspx?source=14798> and 
Mothercare 
<http://www.mothercare.com/Bugaboo-Cameleon-base-unit/dp/B00126803U/ref=sr_11_1/275-2640123-8145131?_encoding=UTF8&mcb=core>
 are both priced at £659.05 in store, however ordering online with Mothercare 
will gain you a further 10% discount if you use the code found at
Vouchercodes.co.uk <http://www.vouchercodes.co.uk/mothercare.com>, which brings 
the price down to £593.15.

The discount will also apply to the tailored fabrics 
<http://www.mothercare.com/gp/product/B000VVOYPA/sr=1-45/qid=1215897686/ref=sr_1_45/202-9743151-2386244?ie=UTF8&m=A2LBKNDJ2KZUGQ&n=44333031&mcb=core#productInfo>
 (online only) you choose; the basic set includes the fabric colour for seat, 
canopy and bassinette apron (£89.95 in store and £80.96 online with the voucher 
code).

Online

Baby2K is best priced 
<http://www.baby2k.com/sBP.cfm?brand=Bugaboo&name=Cameleon_Pushchair_and_Carrycot_Base&productColour=Dark_Grey&stage=2>
 at £592.99 and if you find the product cheaper elsewhere, letting them know 
the details could gain you a price match and a luxury sheepskin liner. They 
also do abasic tailored fabric 
<http://www.baby2k.com/sBP.cfm?brand=Bugaboo&name=Cameleon_Canvas_Tailored_Fabric&productColour=Red&stage=2>
 for £80.95, which includes hood, carrycot apron and pushchair seat cover.

Cheaper alternative

A Hauck Condor all-in-one travel system will cost £204.99 at Kiddisave 
<http://www.kiddisave.co.uk/store/product/3799/Hauck-Condor-All-In-One-Travel-System-2010-Lolli-Lime/>
 and comes in a range of colours including charcoal, turquoise and orange.
 