
Social enterprise is emerging as an important tool for doing good, 
piggybacking on the traditional profit model. But how can we make sure these 
passion-driven businesses thrive?

Whether it’s selling sleepwear to help support young homeless people 
<http://onenightstandsleepwear.com.au/>, or baking bread to fund baking 
apprenticeships for refugees <http://thebreadandbutterproject.com/>, social 
enterprise is a new model that’s gaining traction – and attention – all over 
Australia.


According to Tom Dawkins, co-founder of crowdfunding platform StartSomeGood 
<https://startsomegood.com/>, “Social enterprises can combine the head of a 
business with the heart of a non-profit”.

He says the business side focuses on “customer development, financial 
efficiency and scale” while the non-profit heart ensures they don’t just turn a 
profit but “do so in a way that improves outcomes for individuals, communities 
and the planet”.

According to Mark Daniels, Head of Market and Sector Development at Social 
Traders <http://www.socialtraders.com.au/>, Australia’s leading social 
enterprise development organisation, two to three per cent of turnover from 
Australian businesses is generated by social enterprises. “It’s bloody big and 
it’s not something to be trivialised,” he says.

Daniels says social enterprise is a great way of utilising the business 
marketplace, by bringing in new money to help solve complex social issues, 
often coming up with better solutions than any program could possibly have 
designed.

The first ever research into social enterprise in Australia, the FASES report 
<http://cdn.socialtraders.com.au/app/uploads/2016/07/FASES-2010-full-report.pdf>
, estimates there are around 20,000 businesses in operation locally. By 
comparison, the UK has around 60,000 social enterprises.

And it’s gaining momentum. As Daniels says, “There are a lot of people coming 
into the field, and the language is getting bandied around a hell of a lot more 
than it was five or 10 years ago.” However, in terms of infrastructure and 
support for social entrepreneurs in Australia “we’re probably not up there”.

Globally, who’s leading? 

The UK, US, Europe and Canada are all leaders in the space, with 
infrastructure, history and investment in social enterprise on their side.

In Asia too, the movement has caught on, with Hong Kong, Korea, China and 
Singapore all sprouting multiple social enterprises over the last three to four 
years.

In terms of trends, Daniels says, “We’re starting to see real globalisation of 
social enterprise – even in systems that haven’t supported social enterprises 
historically like communism and socialist type governments.”

Another big global pattern is the emergence of intermediaries, such as Social 
Traders, and universities offering social entrepreneurship courses.

But, ultimately, it’s big business and government coming to the party that 
will shape social enterprise in the future and boost its growth in Australia.

Big business and government – social enterprise’s best allies

Corporate Australia is starting to develop strategic relationships with social 
enterprise, but more is needed.

“Corporates can support social enterprises in a variety of ways. This can mean 
providing them with access to seed capital, insights and experience they lack, 
or even just purchasing from them,” says Dawkins.

I think government, corporate and philanthropic sources need to play a greater 
role in providing that seed funding.
Tom Dawkins, co-founder of crowdfunding platform StartSomeGood 
Some corporates have already demonstrated great leadership in being 
responsible ‘citizens’. One example of big business contributing to the 
long-term sustainability of social enterprises isING DIRECT’s Dreamstarter 
<https://www.campaigns.ingdirect.com.au/dreamstarter> initiative – it provides 
a valuable combination of dollars and capacity-building support.

Dawkins would like to see a day when we go a step further: when a social 
entrepreneur could be housed within a sympathetic corporate and lean on their 
infrastructure, resources and human capital.

At the moment no state or federal government has an explicit or comprehensive 
public policy support for social enterprise, or any social enterprise strategy. 
The Victorian state government is in the process of bringing down a social 
enterprise strategy in the coming months – they will be the first.

“We have examples overseas of governments really creating an enabling 
environment for social enterprise through tax benefits, seed funding and new 
investment mechanisms like social bonds, and I’d love to see more of that here” 
Dawkins says.

He believes the critical piece is creating an environment to support social 
enterprises up to the stage where they can be sustainable. “I think government, 
corporate and philanthropic sources need to play a greater role in providing 
that seed funding. While the destination is an enterprise that does not require 
ongoing philanthropic or government support, getting there requires more 
risk-tolerant early support, and that’s a great role for philanthropy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fbuilding-a-bright-future-for-australian-social-enterprise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F483e6ffc0c92b186a3e4b1bffbfbf6a2b7236974%2F0_255_5074_3132%2F5074.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Building%20a%20bright%20future%20for%20Australian%20social%20enterprise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fbuilding-a-bright-future-for-australian-social-enterprise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Building%20a%20bright%20future%20for%20Australian%20social%20enterprise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fbuilding-a-bright-future-for-australian-social-enterprise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F483e6ffc0c92b186a3e4b1bffbfbf6a2b7236974%2F0_255_5074_3132%2F5074.jpg>
 A work in progress by an artist Claire Nakazawa as part of theStreet Art 
Murals Australia <http://www.streetartmurals.com.au/> (SAMA) project. 
Photograph: Adam Scarf Photography/Supplied by Street Art Murals Australia 
(SAMA) 
Procurement

The FASES report showed that social procurement is seen by social enterprises 
as one of the biggest opportunities. Professor Jo Barraket, who co-authored the 
report, says businesses can help social enterprises grow their markets by 
purchasing from them and promoting them to other prospective consumers.

It’s a view backed up by Jessica Grynberg, one of the founders of social 
enterpriseThe Bread & Butter Project <http://thebreadandbutterproject.com>, who 
says: “In the UK and Canada there’s a requirement in government to look at 
procurement from a social enterprise, and it changes the whole market dynamic. 
Even if the local councils looked to do their procurement through social 
enterprise it would make a huge difference.”

Why stop at local government? Social entrepreneur Jarrod Wheatley from Street 
Art Murals Australia <http://www.streetartmurals.com.au/> (SAMA) wants to take 
it to the top. “The Turnbull government has clearly signalled a desire for 
innovation: look no further than social ventures. Innovation in our social 
sector is synonymous with the future wellbeing of our nation.”

What a rosy, socially enterprising future might look like

In the future, Mark Daniels would like to see the supply chain of corporates 
include a significant number of social enterprises, and their behaviour start 
to reflect a stronger social conscience. “Public awareness needs to grow 
significantly as well,” he says.

Some in the movement, including One Night Stand 
<http://onenightstandsleepwear.com.au/>’s Jamie Green, have a dream that one 
day all businesses will be run on a social enterprise model.

Shannon Carruth is Sustainability Manager for ING DIRECT, whose Dreamstarter 
initiative helps social enterprises with funding and mentoring. She hopes that 
in future all startups - not just social enterprises - will think about how 
they could create change in the community from the very beginning of their 
business.

She would like to see every product category eventually offering a social 
enterprise option. “At the moment you don’t have a social choice in computer 
providers, for instance. If you could make a positive choice in all of your 
purchasing decisions, that for me would be the best opportunity.

“If you’re supporting a social enterprise business by simply doing your 
grocery shopping, it makes it more accessible for people to play their part in 
a better tomorrow every day,” says Carruth.
 