
Christopher Bailey was more succinct than usual in his summation of the new 
Burberry collection. “The Mitford sisters, glam rock, military, wellies. Just a 
patchwork of things that I love,” he said backstage after theLondon fashion week
 <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week> show.

The point is that the Burberry story right now is much bigger than the clothes 
on the catwalk.Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/23/burberry-bonus-makes-christopher-bailey-high-paid-ftse-100-chiefs>
 and Burberry represent the forces of modernisation in an industry whose 
traditional business model, of catwalks showcasing clothes six months before 
they appear in stores, is on the brink of being declared unfit for purpose now 
that the fashion consumer can see the collections instantaneously on the 
internet. This Burberry collection will be the last to operate on a time delay. 
From September, the brand’s clothes will be shown on the catwalk at the same 
time as going in stores.

“When we started livestreaming our shows in 2009, that invited people into a 
world that had been conceived in an industry format. The catwalk is not just an 
industry event any more,” said Bailey. “The audience for fashion shows has 
changed completely, and we need to adapt what we do to take that into account.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fburberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9ed9b4bc6761b014fa6b2d1b91ed0be71cd7033%2F91_276_3004_3755%2F3004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burberry%20ready%20to%20modernise%20fashion%20without%20delay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fburberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burberry%20ready%20to%20modernise%20fashion%20without%20delay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fburberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9ed9b4bc6761b014fa6b2d1b91ed0be71cd7033%2F91_276_3004_3755%2F3004.jpg>
 Greatcoats were among Burberry’s standout pieces. Photograph: John 
Phillips/Getty Images 
Not everyone agrees. While Bailey was talking to reporters in his Hyde Park 
marquee,François-Henri Pinault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/24/fashion-environment-sustainability>
, chief executive of the Kering group, was on his way to his front row seat at 
theChristopher Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/13/christopher-kane-lovers-lace-fashion-interview>
 show, a label in which Kering owns a majority stake. Pinault has recently 
spoken out against the see-now-buy-now model, telling Bloomberg it “negates the 
dream” of luxury. In a bullish statement, backed by strong sales figures for 
current Kering star Gucci, Pinault defended the traditional model, saying the 
six-month wait creates desire.

How social media are killing the notion of the old-fashioned catwalk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/14/fashion-industry-in-flux-end-of-the-runway-show>
When Tom Ford announced that he, like Burberry, would postpone showing his 
autumn 2016 collection until September in order to fall in step with store 
delivery, he cancelled his slot on this season’s calendar.Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> stayed on this week’s 
schedule, but this collection inevitably felt like a glamorous holding position 
rather than a key seasonal statement.

The standout pieces were military outerwear but with an indie slant: the kind 
of greatcoats and parkas you might find in an army surplus store, not on 
parade. The vintage store mood was accentuated by unorthodox layering – a 
sequin tracksuit top under a chequered wool overcoat, for instance – and an air 
of cool-kid quirkiness. This season’s trench coat, for instance, comes in green 
snakeskin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fburberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d749bc0d584bf03258ea2315436c9abdb063b83%2F0_23_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burberry%20ready%20to%20modernise%20fashion%20without%20delay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fburberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burberry%20ready%20to%20modernise%20fashion%20without%20delay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fburberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d749bc0d584bf03258ea2315436c9abdb063b83%2F0_23_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Models present creations at the Christopher Kane show, which mixed 
ultra-sophisticated ideas with deliberately awkward ones. Photograph: Neil 
Hall/Reuters 
Kane is less interested in giving the customer what she wants now than in 
thinking about what she might want next. “Most things are so normal now,” the 
designer said after the show. “Why not do something completely different?”


Christopher Kane stripped bare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/13/christopher-kane-lovers-lace-fashion-interview>
First on to the catwalk came a coat in camel leather, pleated to look like 
corrugated cardboard, and stitched together with faux silver staples. Kane had 
been watching a documentary about hoarders, so “I was thinking of, like, a 
reclusive ex-pianist”, he shrugged.

On Kane’s catwalk, ultra-sophisticated ideas are tangled up with deliberately 
awkward, off-key ones. A mink coat worn with a plastic rainhood, for instance. 
A luxury handbag fastened with a seatbelt strap. A gauche, boxy cardigan with a 
virtuoso Lesage appliqué of trailing vines. Kane may not be on board with the 
modernising see-now-buy-now movement, but his are the ideas moving fashion 
forward.

 