
How strange it was that the final day of Britain’s twice-yearly celebration of 
men’s fashion, London Collections Men, fell on the morning that we learned of
David Bowie’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69>
.

Monday’s hot ticket, the Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> show, was full of 
flamboyant dressers who idolised the musician, such as fashion editors who 
danced to Ziggy Stardust at the Blitz Club as teenagers and stylists whose 
first experiments with crimson hair dye and silver nail varnish were inspired 
by him.

David Bowie: legendary rock star dies of cancer aged 69 – latest updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-of-cancer-aged-69-reports>
“There isn’t a single person in this room, or single LCM designer, who hasn’t 
been touched by him in some way,” said GQ editor Dylan Jones before the show, 
as Oh! You Pretty Things played in the background. Many in the crowd hugged and 
consoled each other, united in the belief that they had lost one of their own.

Bowie adopted so many looks over the years – psychedelic sci-fi, androgynous 
dandyism, razor-sharp tailoring – that it would be impossible to view a men’s 
catwalk show without seeing a glimpse of him. At the Burberry show his 
influence was literal: models wore glitter on their faces in tribute, whilesome 
had his name written across the palm of their hands 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BAZr-WhBYn1/>.

The rest of Burberry’s autumn/winter 2016 collection centred on one item – the 
zip-up tracksuit top – a piece that has been recently elevated to high fashion 
status across men’s and women’s fashion courtesy ofChloe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/27/rio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion>
, Gucci,Prada 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/fashion/spring-summer-2016/mens/prada/close-up-photos/gallery/1425474>
, and the hotly tipped Russian designerGosha Rubchinskiy 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/spring-2016-menswear/gosha-rubchinskiy/slideshow/collection#2>
.

Here the tracksuit was zipped up under the brand’s famous honey-coloured 
macintosh and layered beneath longline double-breasted military coats. There 
were further terracewear touches in black trainers with red piping, loose jeans 
cut awkwardly at the ankle and khaki bomber, parka and puffa jackets.

The palette was either restrained and 1970s-influenced – forest green, 
mustard, black and tobacco – or red and black with shining buttons and golden 
frogging, giving a changing of the guard feeling to the show, appropriately 
enough for a brand that trades on its Britishness. The final looks included two 
fully sequinned tracksuit tops in tomato red and azure blue that sparkled like 
Christmas baubles under the spotlights.

A couple of looks centred on the cream, red and black Burberry check worn in 
the noughties by celebrities who, to put it delicately, Burberrywould not have 
sought as brand ambassadors <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/4381140.stm>. 
The pattern appeared as a scarf over a camel-coloured cable knit sweater inone 
look 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/fall-2016-menswear/burberry-prorsum/slideshow/collection#27>
, with a more delicate version used for an overcoat inanother 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/fall-2016-menswear/burberry-prorsum/slideshow/collection#30>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fburberry-nods-bowie-menswear-show-reclaims-camel-checked-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d0d97f02e65b0c8a08a67c33beb92818af48cf%2F0_282_2133_1278%2F2133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burberry%20nods%20to%20Bowie%20in%20menswear%20show%20%E2%80%93%20and%20reclaims%20camel-checked%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fburberry-nods-bowie-menswear-show-reclaims-camel-checked-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burberry%20nods%20to%20Bowie%20in%20menswear%20show%20%E2%80%93%20and%20reclaims%20camel-checked%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fburberry-nods-bowie-menswear-show-reclaims-camel-checked-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d0d97f02e65b0c8a08a67c33beb92818af48cf%2F0_282_2133_1278%2F2133.jpg>
 Burberry autumn/winter 2016. Photograph: Tristan Fewings/Getty Images 
Speaking backstage in a scrum of journalists and celebrities – Brooklyn 
Beckham, Mark Ronson and Steve McQueen, to name a few, issued bear hugs and 
compliments – Burberry’s CEO and creative director, Christopher Bailey, said 
the collection was a “mixture of different worlds” and that he had looked to 
vintage Burberry pieces, from the 1930s onwards, for inspiration.


Tellingly, Burberry’s recent collections have usually taken high brow 
references as their starting point – David Hockney, the Bloomsbury group, 
Lucien Freud – in further efforts to distance the brand from the associations 
of its much-counterfeited check.

Burberry attracts the attention of short-sellers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/10/burberry-shares-attract-the-attention-of-short-sellers>
The fact that Monday’s show offered no such esoteric references suggested that 
the Burberry brand has developed to such an extent that embracing this part of 
its past is now possible.

Burberry will announce its Christmas trading figures later this week, with 
analysts predicting disappointing results owing to unusually warm weather and 
the economic slowdown in China. Creatively, however, Monday’s show suggested 
the company is on solid ground – and is confident enough to reclaim its 
camel-checked past rather than gloss over it.
 