
Many tenants renting privately are likely to be hit with rent increases 
following changes to the tax regime for landlords, according to a report to be 
published this Friday.

Research by the lender Kent Reliance found that about a third of buy-to-let 
landlords intended to pass on increased costs to their tenants following the 
surcharge on stamp duty for second property owners and cap on tax relief for 
buy-to-let mortgages.

Four in 10 of the landlords expected to increase rents in the next six months, 
with three-quarters saying they would do so to offset the reduction in tax 
relief on mortgage interest. The average rent rise buy-to-let investors 
anticipated was 5.6%, or £49 a month.

Buy-to-let lobby accuses Osborne of 'outright assault on the sector'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/16/budget-buy-to-let-lobby-accuses-george-osborne>
In his budget following last year’s election, the chancellor, George Osborne, 
surprised property investors by cutting the rate at which higher rate taxpayers 
could claim relief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/11/buy-to-let-budget-tax-profits-mortgage>
 on their mortgage interest payments. The change, which will be phased in from 
next April, means that by 2021 only relief of 20% will be available.

The research, carried out for Kent Reliance’s latest Buy to Let Britain 
report, found that a large number of landlords had changed the way they managed 
their properties to counteract the change, with many switching to running their 
portfolio through incorporated companies, which are exempt from the changes.

The number of mortgage applications through limited companies increased by 
more than 80% in 2015 to 54,750 a month, making up more than a fifth of the 
market. So far in 2016, 40% of buy-to-let loan applications had been from 
companies, the report said.

As well as the planned changes to tax relief, a new rate of stamp duty for 
second-home owners was brought in during April 2016.

March mortgage lending 'supercharged' by stamp duty deadline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/17/stamp-duty-rush-pushes-march-mortgage-lending-nine-year-high>
Three-quarters of the landlords surveyed said that government intervention was 
the biggest threat to investment. However, the report found that those who 
owned property were still getting strong returns.

Total rent collected by landlords across Britain had risen to £4.5bn a month, 
with tenants paying on average 3.5% more than the previous year. The average 
monthly rent was £872, while the average total annual return, including capital 
growth, stood at £28,617.

Andy Golding, chief executive of OneSavings Bank, which owns Kent Reliance, 
said the buy-to-let market was now “firmly in the crosshairs of both 
politicians and regulators”, and that landlords were reacting. “But it is 
tenants who are feeling the real brunt,” he said. “Rents are rising and 
landlords will increase them further as they pass on the increased cost of 
running their businesses. Far from supporting tenants, recent intervention will 
see [tenants] bear a heavier financial burden.”

A separate report from the property group LSL showed a 0.4% fall in house 
prices in England and Wales in May, suggesting some “welcome respite” for those 
hoping to move out of the rental market and find their own home. The index 
showed prices fell to an average of £293,599 across England and Wales, and in 
London dippedbelow £600,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/11/average-london-home-doubles-price-house-property>
 to £598,421.

The report suggested April’s change to stamp duty was having an impact but 
that the forthcoming EU referendum was the biggest factor.

Adrian Gill, director of Your Move and Reeds Rains estate agents, which are 
owned by LSL, said: “That tax hike and the government’s anti-landlord policies 
are weighing down the market, but the main factor is short-term confidence 
ahead of the 23 June referendum.”
 