
The average monthly rent for a home in England and Wales rose to an all-time 
high of £846 in July, amid strong demand for let accommodation.

The overall figure for England and Wales was 5.2% higher than a year 
previously, according to the latest monthly index of buy-to-let rentals from 
the estate agents Your Move. The biggest year-on-year increase occurred in 
south-east England, with rental costs rising by nearly 15% to £924 as people 
moved out ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> to escape the 
capital’s high rents.

Confidence in housing market rising after Brexit vote, say surveyors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/08/confidence-housing-market-house-prices-rising-brexit-vote-rics-surveyors>
Rents had been expected to fall as landlords rushed to buy property ahead of 
the new stamp duty rates for buy-to-let properties in April. Your Move’s index 
shows a slowdown in the early part of summer, but surveys suggest that demand 
for rental property is outstripping supply.

The latest report from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics), 
published on Thursday, shows demand from tenants gathered pace in July, while 
there was a reduction in the number of new properties for renting..

“This supply/demand mismatch is expected to squeeze rents higher during the 
year ahead,” a Rics spokesman said. “This is generally the case across the 
whole of the UK, although London is a slight exception, where respondents 
envisage virtually no rental growth over the coming 12 months.”
English and Welsh monthly rent levels, from 2011 to 2016 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-08T18:06:23/embed.html>
Your Move’s figures show that average rents in London were down by 0.7% in the 
12 months to July, and, at £1,225, were below the peak of £1,301 recorded in 
September 2015. However, rents in the capital remained the highest across 
England and Wales. The cheapest region was Yorkshire and the Humber, where the 
average cost of new tenancies was £565 a month.

The agency also asked landlords about whether they planned to add to their 
portfolios following the UK’s decision to leave the EU. It found 72% were 
equally, or more likely, to buy more properties.

Generation rent: the housing ladder starts to collapse for the under-40s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/22/pwc-report-generation-rent-to-grow-over-next-decade>
Adrian Gill, director of Your Move, said: “The UK’s vote to leave the EU has 
not caused any immediate change in the rental market, although we must wait for 
longer term trends to develop. For landlords, market sentiment remains positive 
with the vast majority still looking to add to their portfolio of properties, 
despite the Brexit vote.”

Separate figures from the estate agent Knight Frank also show that landlords 
in London have seen prices fall. Its figures for the market in prime central 
London show that in the capital’s most upmarket districts rents were down by 
4.1% year-on-year in July. Knight Frank said the number of properties available 
for rent in the three months to July 2016 was nearly 40% higher than in the 
same period of 2015, while the number of prospective tenants had risen by 7.2%.

Tom Bill, Knight Frank’s head of London residential research, said: “Supply 
has increased steadily over the last year due to uncertainty over price growth 
in the sales market following a series of tax rises and, to a lesser extent, 
the potential impact of the UK’s decision to leave the [union]. As supply 
increases at a faster rate than demand, it means landlords have to show 
increased levels of flexibility when negotiating with tenants. In addition to 
levels of rent, this includes flexibility around break clauses, works to the 
property, levels of furnishing and payment arrangements.”
 