
One of the most brilliant and unexpected treats of recent years was Konami’s 
PT, a “playable teaser” for an unreleased and possibly cancelled reboot of the 
horror series Silent Hill. Directed by the greatHideo Kojima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/18/can-metal-gear-survive-without-hideo-kojima-konami>
, alongside the film maker Guillermo del Toro, PT is notable not just for 
moving a third-person series into a first-person perspective, but also for 
offering an ingenious solution to a problem that faces every high-end developer 
of video games. As game assets become even more expensive and time-consuming to 
produce, how do you squeeze the most out of them?

PT’s solution was a small but detailed house interior which plays out 
repeatedly, a snack-sized Groundhog Day. The player wakes afresh in the same 
room, explores the house and, depending on their actions, small details change. 
If you experiment enough, mysteries are solved and new secrets are uncovered. 
As an experience it has issues, primarily that it’s too obtuse, but as a 
proof-of-concept, PT is exceptional, even if Konami’s may never follow it up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHXVx2bPgBp8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHXVx2bPgBp8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHXVx2bPgBp8&media=>
 Konami’s PT ‘playable teaser’ 
Video game history loves a coincidence, and so we come to the new Resident 
Evil. Resi and Silent Hill share very little in terms of tone or structure, but 
as both are third-person survival horror games made by Japanese studios, they 
have been viewed as competitors since the days of the original Playstation. 
Announced this summer and due for release in January 2017, Resi 7 is a dramatic 
reinvention for Capcom’s biggest-selling series of all time that – though 
having been in development for many years before PT saw release – it is toying 
with very similar concepts.

Subtitled “Beginning Hour”, Resident Evil 7’s Playstation-only playable teaser 
stars a spooky house, a switch to a first-person perspective and a total 
absence of combat. It was recently Resident Evil’s 20th anniversary, and such a 
drastic reinvention was sorely-needed – these two decades saw dozens of 
individual Resi titles, but almost all were based on just two templates: the 
original game and 2004’s Resident Evil 4 (itself a reinvention). That 
repetition – and the need to ensure mainstream success in an era of rapidly 
escalating budgets – led to an identity crisis, as “survival horror” inexorably 
gravitated towards “action horror” and then just “action with a few blobby 
monsters”.

In that context, Resident Evil 7 is one hell of a bet. Not only does it rip 
the series free from the defining third-person perspective, but it also 
doubles-down with VR implementation. Such a radical shift is accompanied by, in 
the teaser at least, a new focus on scares over combat, and the creation of a 
claustrophobic, shifting environment. What remains of Resident Evil is simple: 
the house.

Because, in the very first game, the star character was not one of those 
panicking STARS operatives – it was the Arklay Mansion, a byzantine 
architectural masterpiece designed for re-use: players would criss-cross the 
layout several times during the game, unlocking and discovering new rooms and 
nightmares. This design solved a technical problem at a time when 3D 
environments were relatively new (polygonal structures are computational 
expensive), but the parallel to Resident Evil 7’s environment is spookily close.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fresident-evil-7-survival-horror-games-capcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa182fb004b37420114a31bfb2f9307bc4390fbf4%2F121_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Resident%20Evil%207%20save%20survival%20horror%20games%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fresident-evil-7-survival-horror-games-capcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Resident%20Evil%207%20save%20survival%20horror%20games%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fresident-evil-7-survival-horror-games-capcom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa182fb004b37420114a31bfb2f9307bc4390fbf4%2F121_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 The environment in Resident Evil 7 is unsettlingly naturalistic. This could be 
a real house. Photograph: Capcom 
The teaser’s dilapidated house is cramped, but packed. It’s designed like a 
house, for a start, with a believable layout and dimensions. The wall and 
furniture textures are beautifully detailed, with the kind of worn leather 
chairs you can imagine feeling raggedy on your fingertips. Minor objects such 
as photographs withstand and repay examination.

This grounded setting establishes a new tone for Resident Evil, which has 
always had as much schlock as shock. It has an effect that resonates, 
powerfully, through how this game works. You still move like a video game 
character, and understand you’re in a video game horror house, but in the 
moment-to-moment experience this character feels convincingly flesh-and-blood. 
One of the strangest things was noticing that, when hiding, I was holding my 
breath.

This would be promising enough, but Beginning Hour has even more unusual 
elements. What makes this house special is that, as you explore, creepy things 
start happening – and when you play again, it’s not quite the same. In a 
first-floor room there are three mannequins. While checking a corner I heard a 
shuffle, turned around – and there was a fourth, at the top of the stairs I’d 
just walked up. Subsequently I’ve been to the same room, done the same things, 
and nothing’s happened. On those same stairs, I saw the apparition of a girl 
for a split-second before she vanished. Never again.

The short playtime (it should really be called “Beginning 20 minutes”) 
combines very well with tricks like this, in not only encouraging but rewarding 
multiple playthroughs – the potential of seeing something new maintains the 
atmosphere’s tension. Even when you become familiar with the interior, and some 
of the more frequent scares, the tiniest event can set you on edge.

The biggest part of this is the spectacularly creepy audio design, with its 
disturbing creaks and shuffles. Was that someone upstairs, or just an old 
timber settling? You’re in an empty room, and something rustles in a corner 
that, now you look, is empty. The squeaks of old pipework lengthen into moans. 
Are those footsteps fading away?

The puzzles are simple – a fuse box is missing a fuse, a mechanism needs 
power, a door is locked – but as with the original game, the point is more to 
make the player take journeys around the interior. Here we come to a unique 
characteristic of Beginning Hour, because there’s never been a demo quite like 
this. For all it says about Resident Evil 7, there’s a strange relationship 
with what’s to come – Beginning Hour is not part of the main game, but a 
self-contained taster.

This in itself is not unheard-of, but since release Capcom has been changing 
Beginning Hour with updates – adding items and allowing players to access new 
parts of the house. This is not only in-keeping with the shifting experience of 
Beginning Hour, but taps into that obsessive element of large fanbases to 
create an on-running mystery leading up to the full game’s release. As 
marketing it’s a stroke of design-led genius: Beginning Hour works both as a 
(free!) standalone miniature for any player, and by parcelling out its 
mysteries to build and maintain interest among more dedicated players.

It also means, in this age of pre-release over-exposure, Resident Evil 7 is 
still something of an unknown quantity. We know the specifics of some nastier 
incidents, thanks to a spoiler-tastic age rating – don’t look it up if you’re 
interested in the game. We know there will be a combat system, and enemies to 
fight – though clearly the days of Resi 4 crowd control are long-gone. We know, 
thanks to the “lantern” demo of in-game content, the hints of being hunted in 
Beginning Hour will become virtual reality. And this last point, along with the 
whole horror and scares thing, has a predictable effect.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8daUsjQj2ko&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8daUsjQj2ko>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8daUsjQj2ko&media=>
VR may be an obviously appropriate fit for horror, but that doesn’t mean 
people will necessarily like it. There’s a level of abstraction in 
“traditional” horror video games that allows a mass audience to enjoy feeling 
threatened in a very obviously virtual world. Resident Evil 7 won’t be the 
first or last VR horror game, and VR-ready consumers will likely make up a 
small part of its audience, but this is a big leap in the dark.


Beginning Hour is full of promise, but answers none of these questions. It 
offers tempting glimpses, too, of an even more radical approach than expected – 
using the great big brand behind it to deliver a new horror experience, one 
where the moment-to-moment experience is prized above deadening requirements 
such as campaign length. Midway through Beginning Hour the protagonist changes. 
We watch a videotape and inhabit the cameraman filming it, as a small TV crew 
reccy the house you’re in for a low-budget horror series. Everything’s fine and 
dandy until, unseen, the producer goes missing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fresident-evil-7-survival-horror-games-capcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf2c128d3a22d8c49fcf9b8235e54a9c809620fa%2F72_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Resident%20Evil%207%20save%20survival%20horror%20games%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fresident-evil-7-survival-horror-games-capcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Resident%20Evil%207%20save%20survival%20horror%20games%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fresident-evil-7-survival-horror-games-capcom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf2c128d3a22d8c49fcf9b8235e54a9c809620fa%2F72_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 The first-person perspective puts players right inside the horror, changing 
the feel of the experience. Photograph: Capcom 
In the 1989 film Sweet Home, a documentary crew visit an old mansion – and 
find a paranormal terror rooted in domestic tragedy. Capcom’s Tokuro Fujiwara 
directed a video game adaptation on the NES so good, an historical classic, 
that the original Resident Evil is widely-acknowledged as a 3D adaptation of 
his design (Chris and Jill’s “special items” of a lighter and lock pick are the 
most obvious tribute). How you crisscross the map, the puzzle design, the way 
characters can die if you make the wrong decisions – all of this became 
Resident Evil. Sweet Home is no zombie horror, though – it’s a supernatural 
tale of human tragedy.

“Meet the Baker family” <https://youtu.be/v8m2YJaidbc> ran Capcom’s press line 
last month while premiering a new trailer – though you’ll have met Pa Baker 
when he knocks you out in either one of Beginning Hours’ endings. Many game 
series remain in a state of perpetual adolescence, convinced that their 
audience is doing the same – and if not, the next generation’s coming along. 
When you look at Resident Evil 7: Biohazard, there’s a sense of a studio maybe 
– maybe – ageing a little with its audience. Understanding there are more 
horrible things that can happen to characters than just being killed by a 
bio-weapon.

Perhaps the most tantalising possibility is that Resident Evil 7 augurs a 
future for video gaming’s blockbuster franchises where horror is not simply a 
synonym for violence. At the very least, we may get less gore and more brains. 
At most it’ll feel like home, Sweet Home.
 