
The very first thing I saw in virtual reality was Wevr’s theBlu demo, back in 
the early days of the HTC Vive headset. It’s the thing a lot of people mention 
when they’re asked about the most compelling VR experiences, and with good 
reason: the demo transports you to the helm of a sunken ship, the whole ocean 
above your head; it allows you to take in the beauty of the scene for a few 
minutes before, out of the depths, a vast blue whale slowly emerges, dwarfing 
you.

I took the headset off and walked away across the busy floor of the game 
conference, but I could still feel the water around me. I told my friends. They 
joined the long queues. They told their friends. And that was the entire story 
that was told: there is a whale and it is beautiful. Since then, I’ve flown 
spaceships and climbed buildings and repaired robots in VR. I’ve shot a variety 
of floating objects. I’ve sat cross-legged in the middle of Venice’s Piazza San 
Marco and looked down on the people in the flooded square.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMFKbL-GU-_U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMFKbL-GU-_U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMFKbL-GU-_U&media=>
But here’s what I haven’t done. I have never met a single original, memorable 
character in virtual space. I have never interacted in a conversation. I cannot 
recall a single line of dialogue. When I bring this up with Jason Rubin, head 
of content atOculus <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/oculus>, the 
company behind the Rift headset that kickstarted the modern VR revolution, the 
reason becomes clear: storytelling – actual storytelling – is very, very 
difficult with this technology.

Rubin is no newcomer to narrative games. The co-founder of Naughty Dog 
(Uncharted, The Last of Us) and former president of THQ, he has a history of 
design, production and storytelling across a vast swath of best-selling titles. 
Originally joining Oculus in 2014 as their head of worldwide studios, Rubin was 
promoted to head of content this year, where he essentially acts as a high 
level producer for all of Oculus’s VR development. If there are to be stories 
on this platform, it’s his job to facilitate them.

Rubin closes his eyes and tips his head back. “The first story that I saw in 
VR would have probably beenLost 
<https://www.oculus.com/experiences/rift/1016967501697367/>, from Oculus Story 
Studios, and I was sitting on the ground,” he says. “I laid down on my back, 
because most stories I’d seen up until that time gave you a fixed camera – they 
told you where to look. But Lost has a 360 camera, the world is all around, so 
the first thing you want to do is look behind you. What you see is forest, and 
more forest. And so … I started standing up.”

When Jason Rubin talks about VR, he can’t sit still. During our conversation 
he scrutinises a soda can held an inch from his face, he spins in slow circles 
in his chair, he moves his hands in front of him exaggeratedly to demonstrate 
ways to use Oculus’s new Touch controllers. Partly this is the result of his 
animated personality, but it’s also an illustration of the importance Rubin 
places on physicality in his medium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcan-virtual-reality-move-beyond-immersive-experiences-to-tell-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41b3e760de9e01d2c438d7207c7b6c73e3dd8f61%2F25_0_900_540%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20virtual%20reality%20move%20beyond%20immersive%20experiences%20to%20tell%20stories%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcan-virtual-reality-move-beyond-immersive-experiences-to-tell-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20virtual%20reality%20move%20beyond%20immersive%20experiences%20to%20tell%20stories%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcan-virtual-reality-move-beyond-immersive-experiences-to-tell-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41b3e760de9e01d2c438d7207c7b6c73e3dd8f61%2F25_0_900_540%2F900.jpg>
 The Lost demo is a short cinematic experience which puts the player in a 
forest with a giant robot. Photograph: Oculus 
Later, I play Lost on a demo station in the middle of Facebook’s London 
office. It certainly doesn’t feel appropriate to lie down. The first thing I 
do, after my eyes adjust, is look up at the sky and there is a bright moon up 
and to my right, framed by tall pine trees. There are ferns. A firefly lazily 
bobs in front of me. “It’s alive,” says Rubin. “It reacts to you being there.” 
The thought is so enticing that I instinctively move my hand towards the insect 
– but there is no representation of my body in this world. Lost predates the 
touch controllers and Oculus’s new focus on tactility, and so the firefly zips 
away.

It’s an interesting moment, but it’s not a story. It’s interesting that when 
Rubin describes Lost, he talks about immersion, but never any sort of plot. He 
doesn’t even mention the gigantic, lamp-eyed robot that, at one point in the 
demo, leans down through the trees and rumbles “Hello” at you. He doesn’t 
mention the disembodied hand of the robot, about the size of a horse, crashing 
through the undergrowth. In a standard game that would be a major talking 
point, a key encounter, but here, it cannot compete with the sensation of 
existing in a place, under a wide sky. “Put me on the top of Everest,” Rubin 
says later, “and I can sit there for 15, 20 minutes and just look around at the 
beauty. But –” and there’s a note of frustration in his voice, “there’s no 
story there.”

He’s right. 

This isn’t to say that Oculus hasn’t begun to dip its toe into VR 
storytelling. Later, I’m shownHenry 
<https://storystudio.oculus.com/en-us/henry/>, a 10-minute experience by Oculus 
Story Studio that put me in the brightly coloured treehouse of a small hedgehog 
who is having a bad birthday. While watching the hedgehog walk around me in 3D 
was charming and the experience was polished, it felt like it was seriously 
missing something. Just as I found with the firefly, I was unable to touch or 
interact with anything. The story played independently of my intentions. It 
existed around me but my hands were tied.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F134754691&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F134754691>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F134754691&media=>
Earlier in the day, I had been shown First Contact 
<https://www.oculus.com/experiences/rift/1217155751659625/>, an unbelievably 
polished demonstration of Oculus’s new Touch controllers. Under the guidance of 
a big-eyed, Pixar style robot, I feed floppy discs into a 3D printer that 
creates increasingly outlandish tactile toys. I sweep colourful trails through 
the air. At one point, I have to keep very still, and a purple butterfly drifts 
down and perches on the tip of my index finger.

When Rubin talks about the potential of Touch, he speaks more generally about 
play rather than narrative. He brings up Toybox, a game where “There is no 
game, there is no score, there’s no win or lose state … but there are blocks in 
front of us.” His hands folding naturally into the shape of the controllers as 
he demonstrates. “If I throw the block and you catch it … [get] your virtual 
hand under it and grab … and then we say ‘how many times can we catch this 
before we drop it’, you’ve just created a game.”

I am reminded suddenly of the way Half Life 2 turned the act of throwing a can 
into a tiny narrative punchline, way back in 2004. Valve realised that the 
Gravity Gun could be just as useful for playing a quick game of basketball with 
a robot dog as it was for hurling energy at soldiers, and I can’t help but 
wonder if we’ll see similar moments appearing in VR. Will improvised games 
bring us closer to fictional characters?

First Contact’s 3D printer gave me a gun. “Shoot the robot!” said the 
demonstrator. I did not want to shoot the robot, but he pressed me, so I did. A 
harmless suction dart slapped on to its forehead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcan-virtual-reality-move-beyond-immersive-experiences-to-tell-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b277a7bbf8951bf87f7549eb892ec7d19cbab5%2F121_0_1220_732%2F1220.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20virtual%20reality%20move%20beyond%20immersive%20experiences%20to%20tell%20stories%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcan-virtual-reality-move-beyond-immersive-experiences-to-tell-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20virtual%20reality%20move%20beyond%20immersive%20experiences%20to%20tell%20stories%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcan-virtual-reality-move-beyond-immersive-experiences-to-tell-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b277a7bbf8951bf87f7549eb892ec7d19cbab5%2F121_0_1220_732%2F1220.png>
 First Contact is a short demo designed to help Rift users learn how to use the 
Touch controllers Photograph: Oculus 
At one point, curious about what would happen, I tried to lean my head 
forwards through a table. The problem, it turns out, with giving players 
interactivity in VR stories, is that they take it as a golden opportunity to go 
completely off piste.

“How do you tell a story when the player’s got their head under the table?” I 
ask Rubin. He pauses. “We are really early when it comes to VR storytelling,” 
he says, “I don’t think we fundamentally understand the ruleset.

“When the first video cameras came out, it took a long time to get a current 
language that we use in films and we all take for granted,” he says. He talks 
me through the invention of the “over the shoulder shot”, the standardised 
method for shooting conversation. “We don’t even notice it’s happening in film 
[anymore]. That took a while.”

Rubin moves through a list of reasons why that simple shot doesn’t work in VR, 
with the air of somebody who has clearly identified a problem but is unsure of 
the solution. “If you put a camera over someone’s shoulder, you’re like: ‘It’s 
discombobulating to be jumping back and forth between two people and reversing 
my view’. Additionally I may be looking [in the over the shoulder position] and 
I notice how huge someone’s ear is, which you never really notice in film.”

The more I think about presentation of even the most basic conversation, more 
difficulties emerge. How does the player enter or leave a conversation in VR 
space?Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> like Mass Effect 
employ a cut or a fade through black, both of which are fairly jarring in 
virtual reality. Is the player a participant in the conversation? If so, how do 
they interact with the dialogue systems in a way that doesn’t compromise 
immersion? If not, do the participants acknowledge their presence?

Do the participants make eye contact with the player? Do they know where 
you’re looking? Do they care? The tactics that standard video games have 
developed to simulate human interactions are useless here.

“Right now,” says Rubin, “each one of these problems exists before you even 
get to the question of what story should be told.”

At no point, however, do I get the feeling that Rubin is simply throwing his 
hands up in the air and admitting defeat. Each frank concern with the 
practicality of VR storytelling is countered by some new description of an 
issue Oculus has overcome: how 3D cursors need to be drawn in scenes to allow 
players to accurately follow objects, how to track the player’s gaze to control 
narrative timing.

I ask him if there are developers who are getting close to cracking the other 
problems we’ve discussed. The whole over-arching problem of creating something 
that isn’t just an immersive environment, but also a world in which a cogent 
story takes place. “There is a submission,” he says carefully, “which is 
currently sitting in the office and has not yet been run, because we’re missing 
a file.” I am caught by how unexpectedly evocative the situation seems. “This 
is a first attempt at something that Oculus has funded as a storytelling 
device.”

He is deliberately cagey, and it’s clear this is partly because he hasn’t 
played it. There is an air, though, of Rubin as a stage magician drawing the 
audience’s attention towards a disk on a desk. I cannot help but wonder what 
problems it could be trying to solve, and my mind goes back to our chat about 
the complexities of depicting conversation, and the pioneers who first moved 
the camera over somebody’s shoulder.

“It has a plot,” says Rubin. “It has characters.” 

It is fascinating to hear these basic building blocks of story being spoken of 
with such trepidation. But if VR is to move beyond its “train approaching the 
screen” stage, this is attitude that must be taken.


 