
African and EU leaders met in Malta this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/11/eus-deep-dilemmas-over-refugees-laid-bare-at-malta-summit>
 to try to find new solutions for an ongoing political conundrum: the 
increasing number refugees travelling to Europe to seek safety.

Giving money to Eritrea and Sudan to stop refugees is almost satire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/migration-summit-refugees-sudan-eritrea>
Should Europe’s borders be more open? This is what the German chancellor, 
Angela Merkel, has long advocated, offering refuge to thelion’s share of 
Europe’s arrivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/refugees-welcome-uk-germany-compare-migration>
.


Or should they be closed? This is the policy favoured by Hungary’s prime 
minister, Viktor Orbán, which heenforced with razor wire 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCAQFjAAahUKEwjj_PPAoI3JAhVHORoKHUotADE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fhungary-migrants-razor-wire-fence-roszke&usg=AFQjCNFy9D4FgV4KU3eLmFh0ABfGjkgfWA&sig2=4Dus3xG91OKZ9aonREJn5g>
 and the effective abolishment of the asylum system.

A key outcome from the two-day meeting was a $1.9bn pot of money for African 
leaders to try to stop migrants leaving forEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in the first place.

But the creation of this so-called “trust fund” had a mixed response from its 
supposed beneficiaries.

The Somali prime minister, Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, and Mahamadou 
Issoufou, the president of Niger, have both argued that investment in the 
continent would be more effective.

Senegalese President Macky Sall suggested  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/11/12/us-europe-migrants-africa-idUSKCN0T11E820151112#L5IL6IgxMLMRVJEw.97>
that Africa’s problems could be eased if world leaders did something to address 
the tax avoidance costing countries many times what they receive in aid.

Others on Twitter questioned the rationale of sending more aid without clear 
guidance on how it should be used – and how exactly governments will prevent 
people from leaving.
Barbara Afya Bemah (@afyabemah) 
The extent to which the proposals at #Maltasummit 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Maltasummit?src=hash> is achieved is dependant on 
African leaders ACTUALLY using the aid received wisely
 <https://twitter.com/afyabemah/status/664763186227372032> November 12, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/afyabemah/status/664763186227372032> 
There’s a bigger ethical question at stake too. Will the EU cash end up in the 
hands of authoritarian regimes such Sudan andEritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea> without addressing the extreme 
oppression that is forcing so many to leave?

What do you think?

Is this the right way to help ease the refugee crisis? Should the EU have 
offered more? Or no money at all?

Merkel has said that both African and European leaders “have a great deal of 
work ahead”, if you were in her shoes where would you start?

Add your thoughts in the comments below or tell us on Twitter @GuardianAfrica 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianAfrica> and we’ll add the key pillars of debate to 
the article throughout the day.
 