
In recent years, Amsterdam has earned a reputation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/amsterdam-smart-cities-work> 
as a genuine smart city. Not because it is pioneering technological urbanism – 
building megastructures filled with interconnected digital sensors and robots – 
but rather,as urban sociologist Saskia Sassen puts it 
<http://lsecities.net/media/objects/articles/urbanising-technology/en-gb/>, 
because the city actively urbanises technology.

In other words, Amsterdam has got very good at melding previously disparate 
systems of data, technology, energy and mobility through government, business 
and citizen-led initiatives.

Mobility and food have emerged as important pillars of the city’s quest for 
smart sustainability. Earlier this year, the city council presented its newfood 
vision 
<http://www.amsterdam.nl/gemeente/organisatie-diensten/dienst-ruimtelijke/publicaties-dro/overige-pub/algemeen/voedsel-amsterdam/>
, a strategy intended to create a more sustainable and economically-strong food 
system. One of its main priorities is transport, whereby distribution is done 
by cleaner vehicles doing fewer miles. With a large chunk of the transport 
network taken up with urban food distribution – 15 millionannual food miles 
<http://www.duurzaambedrijfsleven.nl/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/Rapport-KEO-Hongerig-Amsterdam.pdf>
 in Amsterdam alone – there is work to be done.

While large food and drink wholesalers are now using electric trucks for 
distribution, and the country’s largest supermarkets are using them for home 
deliveries, the products delivered by these big players do not necessarily 
promote the production and consumption of locally-sourced quality food. And it 
doesn’t solve the issue of congestion: Amsterdam’s urban core – much of it 
pre-18th century – is not built for cars, let alone heavier transport.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Famsterdam-e-trikes-revolutionise-local-food-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411486538501%2F45133c8f-4cd3-4820-a0bf-c2105570e581-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Amsterdam%E2%80%99s%20e-trikes%20revolutionise%20the%20city%E2%80%99s%20food%20system%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Famsterdam-e-trikes-revolutionise-local-food-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Amsterdam%E2%80%99s%20e-trikes%20revolutionise%20the%20city%E2%80%99s%20food%20system%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Famsterdam-e-trikes-revolutionise-local-food-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411486538501%2F45133c8f-4cd3-4820-a0bf-c2105570e581-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Amsterdam is famous for its bicycle-friendly culture and infrastructure, which 
has inspired its new food transportation initiative. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson 
But alternatives are entering the arena – and not only from existing large 
businesses or public/private partnerships. This month saw the launch of
Foodlogica <http://foodlogica.com/>, which aims to contribute to the localised 
food system by providing affordable zero-emissions transport and less traffic 
congestion. This urban delivery service uses solar-powered electric tricycles 
for the final link in the food distribution system, as well as aiming to 
shorten the chain between local food producers and sellers.

Running a small pilot since June, Foodlogica is working with six 
environmentally-conscious local food businesses, using two electric trikes 
working out of transport hubs. Three of these businesses sell produce from 
local and regional farmers to supermarkets, workplaces and households, and 
Foodlogica is expanding its client base at a rapid rate. Beginning life as a 
lean startup, it hopes to become a model for sustainable urban food 
transportation around the world.

“Once we’re up and running, and when we have acquired more clients, we will 
scale up,” says the company’s founder, Francesca Miazzo. “We are talking to big 
parties who do thousands of weekly deliveries and are interested to have part 
of that delivered in a smart way.”

Foodlogica’s transport hubs, each consisting of a recycled shipping container 
equipped with solar panels to charge the two e-trikes, will be located at 
strategic locations across the city where incoming food is transferred to the 
urban delivery system. The first station was placed at theAmsterdam Food Centre 
<http://www.foodcenter.nl/information/entrance--subscription> – the city’s main 
food distribution node – and from there the tricycles carry out the deliveries 
into the urban centre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Famsterdam-e-trikes-revolutionise-local-food-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411483770871%2Fb8ddff1d-d34a-47b6-8058-98d703608115-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Amsterdam%E2%80%99s%20e-trikes%20revolutionise%20the%20city%E2%80%99s%20food%20system%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Famsterdam-e-trikes-revolutionise-local-food-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Amsterdam%E2%80%99s%20e-trikes%20revolutionise%20the%20city%E2%80%99s%20food%20system%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Famsterdam-e-trikes-revolutionise-local-food-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411483770871%2Fb8ddff1d-d34a-47b6-8058-98d703608115-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Foodlogica e-tricycle provides affordable zero-emission urban food 
transport. Photograph: Mark Minkjan 
“Ideally, we’ll have four transport hubs in various spots around Amsterdam in 
a year from now,” Miazzo says. If this proves possible in Amsterdam’s 
constricted urban environment, the system could easily be duplicated in other 
cities around the world.

Miazzo is not new to the local food world. She co-founded CITIES Foundation 
<http://citiesthemagazine.com>, whose Farming the City project was created in 
2010 to map and research Amsterdam’s urban food initiatives, as well as explore 
how local food systems contribute to more resilient cities around the world.

One of the project’s findings was that transport in Amsterdam remains a 
barrier to sustainability and efficiency. The research identified a need for 
swift, flexible urban food transport not hampered by traffic jams and one-way 
streets; hence Foodlogica’s e-trikes.

“It’s not only a delivery service,” Miazzo explains. “You should see it as a 
platform for good food companies from Amsterdam, bringing them together and 
showcasing them.”


Mark Minkjan is editor-in-chief at Failed Architecture 
<http://failedarchitecture.com/> and part of Non-fiction 
<http://non-fiction.nl/>. He co-edited the book Farming the City 
<http://issuu.com/citiesthemagazine/docs/ftc-book-preview>.
 