
It was a wild night in the Yemeni port of Aden. At the first nightclub, we met 
a group of musicians who had finished their set and were drinking local beer –
made in Arabia’s only brewery 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1990-06-17/news/mn-163_1_south-yemen>. They said 
we should all go to the Mövenpick hotel club. They promised a sensational 
evening.

When we arrived, a full Egyptian orchestra in tuxedos was already whipping up 
a storm of wailing and crashing for a Syrian bellydancer who was gyrating 
across the tables. The songs were all classics from the 1930s and 40s by 
singers such as Umm Kulthum, Sayed Darwish and Mohamed Fawzy, an urgent storm 
of melancholy and longing. I felt we had entered an orientalist’s paradise: the 
world of classic Egyptian cinema and Flaubert’s Cairo. No one mentioned the 
explosion in the car park a few weeks before. None of us noticed that we were 
witnessing the end of an era in the Arab world.

That was early 1993 and the bomb in the Mövenpick car park had been put there 
on 29 December 1992 by an obscure Afghan war veteran called Osama bin Laden. It 
was his first terror operation.

He had wanted to murder some US marines, targeting the Mövenpick and the 
nearby Gold Mohur hotel, butthe two bombs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1992_Yemen_hotel_bombings> instead killed one 
Austrian tourist and one local. At the time, the incident barely made the press 
and Bin Laden’s role was not known until much later, but you could say that, 
right from the start, western tourism and jihadist terrorism were fatally 
linked.

With Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> in the midst of war, 
there are no tourists in Aden now, nor in Sana’a, the mountain city to the 
north whoseancient centre used to be on many people’s wishlists 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/385>, along with other currently inaccessible 
World Heritage sites such asLibya’s Leptis Magna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/apr/19/short-breaks-libya>, Syria’s 
Palmyra (or what’s left of it) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/isis-destruction-of-palmyra-syria-heart-been-ripped-out-of-the-city>
 and theAfghan buddhas of Bamiyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/10/rebuild-bamiyan-buddhas-taliban-afghanistan>
. And if Sana’a, supposedly founded by Noah’s son Shem, is still largely 
intact, in terms of visitors it is dead. The hotels of the Old City, grand 
merchants’ tower houses converted in the 1990s, lie empty as do the astonishing 
samasir, the vast labyrinthine caravanserai, some of which had been converted 
to tourist-oriented craft workshops and markets. There are no visitors, not 
even the sort of occasional intrepid adventurer that used to come in the 18th 
century. Anyone who once depended on tourists for a living has moved on. There 
are stories of younger men heading off on the long road to Europe. No doubt 
others are feeling the lure of jihadist causes, particularly as that path 
brings weaponry, money and respect. The country is in the grip of a civil war 
that offers little likelihood of ending soon. An entire generation of 
travellers may never experience Yemen, missing out on a unique civilisation. 
Nor will the country gain what it deserves, and needs: friends and admirers in 
the outside world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faac589ed655bf83121a3efcc98927164c2221506%2F0_326_3661_2197%2F3661.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faac589ed655bf83121a3efcc98927164c2221506%2F0_326_3661_2197%2F3661.jpg>
 Bab Yemen Square in Sana’a, the ancient jewel of Yemen. Photograph: Alamy 
In Syria and Libya, the story is similar: an optimistic, and brief, surge in 
tourism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/oct/24/syria-damascus-travel-news> 
brought to a rapid demise by conflict. These were relatively small markets but, 
with 2015 proving to be an annus horribilis for terrorist attacks, there are 
serious concerns that the downward plunge is about to be repeated across the 
entire Middle East, dragging down mass tourist destinations such as Egypt, 
Morocco and Turkey. A multi-billion-dollar industry is teetering on the brink 
of collapse, a disaster that could leave millions jobless and faced with the 
grim choices of a hopeless existence, perilous emigration or violence. In Egypt 
alone, 1.3 million people directly depend on the tourism. Yeganeh Morakabati, 
who researches the subject of tourism and terrorism at Bournemouth University, 
puts it like this: “The tourist industry in the Middle East may have reached a 
tipping point. It doesn’t look good at all, certainly in the short term.”

Those gloomy words are backed up by eyewitness evidence. All across the 
region, even in areas untouched by violence, you can see empty hotels, lines of 
concrete boxes standing close to beaches, beauty spots and ancient cities. One 
recent visitor toPetra in Jordan <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/petra> 
told me he had the place to himself. Another returnee from Sinai, post-Russian 
Airbus bomb, mentions driving past the shells of unfinished hotels on the road 
between resorts. When asked why they weren’t open, the taxi driver’s reply was 
simple: “No tourists.” In Luxor one recent visitor asked about the hundreds of 
river boats all tied up and disused. “Tourism,” her guide declared gloomily, 
“Is the oxygen of Egypt.”

Most investors will never see anything back from those stalled ventures. 
Yassar al-Majali, head of the Jordan’s Hotel Association, admits to me that 10 
hotels has closed in Petra, despite the government slashing electricity prices 
by half. “We need to work hard to attract new clients,” he says. “Maybe the 
Russians who used to go to Sharm el-Sheikh, the Chinese or Indians. If we 
don’t, there will be 10 more closing.”

In Tunisia, scene of two terrible tourist massacres this year, hotels have 
scraped through the season on local holidaymakers, but the foreigners are 
staying away and no one knows what the future holds. Even in Turkey, people are 
already experiencing a serious downturn. Alkan Sisli, a guide who I have 
travelled with around Şanliurfa in the east of the country, tells me most tours 
there have been cancelled. One of his favourite spots, the sixth-century
monastery of Darul Zafaran near Mardin 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mor_Hananyo_Monastery#/media/File:Deyrulzaferan.jpg>
, has seen visitor numbers drop by 90% this year. Another young guide, Ossama 
Mahmoud, in Jordan, bemoans that his country is seen as unsafe, tainted by 
association with violent neighbours. “Thousands have already lost their jobs,” 
he says. “I used to do a tour every week; now I’d be lucky to get half that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f02bbce5f51628b3282353ea17f37eba716491d%2F0_3_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f02bbce5f51628b3282353ea17f37eba716491d%2F0_3_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
 Divers in the waters off Sharm el-Sheikh: Egypt has been particularly badly 
hit by terrorism. Photograph: Getty Images 
The problem doesn’t stop with tours and hotels. In Egypt, tourism was only 
about 6% of GDP in 2014 
<http://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic%20impact%20research/country%20reports/egypt2014.pdf>
, but its influence on other sectors is immense, particularly in agriculture, 
the country’s biggest employer. Jobs that indirectly depend on tourism amounted 
to around 1.5m in 2014. As a foreign exchange earner and attractor for 
investment, it is also hugely important. In 2013, about 6,000 businesses 
invested $26.4bn in the Egyptian tourism industry. It does not bode well for 
these optimists that the British Foreign Office advice on Egypt begins with the 
words “There is a high threat from terrorism” and goes on to advise against 
anything except “essential travel” in all the country outside the Nile valley. 
The response from potential tourists has been to stay away. Travel deals company
Travelzoo <http://www.travelzoo.com/uk/> reports advance bookings as “extremely 
low” and, for the moment, has abandoned publishing any Egypt deals.

In Tunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>, the picture is even 
worse: every seventh worker is dependent on tourism. Morakabati makes the point 
that everyone knows, and fears: “More unemployment and poverty will create the 
circumstances that the terrorist groups want. Recruitment for them will 
increase. It’s a vicious circle.”

There have been many low points on the road to this situation. After Bin 
Laden’s first foray into terror, he mainly attacked US military or diplomatic 
targets, but in November 1997 he orderedan attack on Egypt’s Deir al-Bahri 
archaeological site at Luxor 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1997/11/18/world/70-die-in-attack-at-egypt-temple.html>
. Six assailants entered the site and murdered 58 tourists and four Egyptians. 
The effect on Luxor was disastrous, devastating an economy that was heavily 
reliant on tourism. Any hopes of sustained recovery were repeatedly dashed by 
further attacks in Egypt.

This year has seen the worst carnage yet: a list of terrorist attacks so far 
makes for shocking reading, with fatal incidents happening almost daily. Most 
of these kill local people, not tourists, but there have been several 
large-scale atrocities. The attack on theBardo museum in Tunis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/18/eight-people-killed-in-attack-on-tunisia-bardo-museum>
 on 18 March left 19 tourists dead; that was followed by a further38 murders at 
Sousse in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/tunisia-tourist-hotel-reportedly-attacked>
, then theloss of 224 passengers aboard the Metrojet flight to St Petersburg 
from Sharm el-Sheikh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/egypt-plane-crash-bomb-jet-russia-security-service>
 in October. After that attack, all flights to Sharm were cancelled for a week, 
witheasyJet announcing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/easyjet-suspends-flights-to-sharm-el-sheikh-until-2016>
 on Tuesday that there would be no further flights until early January.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002bdac425053a65c7f575eb82e1bd254698fe22%2F0_320_5110_3067%2F5110.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002bdac425053a65c7f575eb82e1bd254698fe22%2F0_320_5110_3067%2F5110.jpg>
 The beach at Sousse, Tunisia, before the terrorist attack in June that killed 
38. Photograph: Alamy 
In the past, tourism has proven to be remarkably resilient. One highly placed 
insider in the British travel industry told me he expects 2016 will reveal a 
round of price cuts that will attract some people to book again. And not all 
the Middle East is badly affected. Jonny Bealby, the founder of adventure tour 
operatorWild Frontiers <http://www.wildfrontierstravel.com/en_GB/>, points to 
areas where visitors have been snapping up tours. “In 2013, we took two groups 
to Iran, but next year we are planning 15 or 16 groups and the same number of 
tailor-made tours.” Countries such as Algeria and Georgia are also proving 
popular, as is the whole Central Asia region. Jordan, on the other hand, which 
ramped up security after the2005 Amman bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/nov/12/alqaida.topstories3> and has 
widespread public support for anti-terrorist measures, has remained unpopular.

The rapid, and sometimes quixotic, ways in which travel and tourism adapt to 
circumstances in regions afflicted by violence can throw up some strange 
anomalies. Back in 1877, when the US cavalry was still fighting its war against 
indigenous tribes, bands of fugitive Nez Perce Indians and the soldiers 
encountered vanguard groups of tourists visiting sites such as Yellowstone 
Park. In March 2011,when I reported on the return of tourism to northern Sri 
Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/mar/12/sri-lanka-mannar-island-pesalai>
, I received a stern rebuke from John Mann MP complaining that encouraging 
tourism to areas that still suffered from death squads was “ignorant 
propaganda”. But the urge to explore and experience cannot be held back and the 
local people were delighted to welcome visitors after their long and agonising 
period of isolation.

It is this that makes me hopeful, at least in the long term. Tourists and 
travellers build up loyalties and friendships that can trump any amount of 
media negativity, even Foreign Office advice. These small human contacts help 
diminish the power of xenophobia and hatred. Bealby says: “What is important is 
that tourists and travellers gather the sort of knowledge that only comes from 
first-hand experience, not through the media.”

Nicholas Kirk, travel consultant at tour operators Tunisia First and Great 
Little Escapes, is clear about it: “The British don’t like restrictions. They 
are unwilling to be scared off. We have clients who will go for the entire 
winter to Tunisia, whatever the official advice. Others are just waiting for 
the restrictions to be lifted, purely to get travel insurance. They are 
regulars and feel an allegiance to the people and the place.”

Maat Barlow, a regular traveller from London who I met in Kyrgyzstan in 2014, 
has visited the Middle East, but would not now. “I’ve changed my destinations 
because of terrorism,” she says. “I’ll do Tibet or New Zealand, but not Morocco 
or Iran.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F810a4bda2bd41af8b321daae88285c079ebd4ce9%2F0_96_4752_2851%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F810a4bda2bd41af8b321daae88285c079ebd4ce9%2F0_96_4752_2851%2F4752.jpg>
 Sightseers visiting Palmyra, before Isis embarked on its targeted destruction 
of the ancient city’s ruins. Photograph: Alamy 
For most people, however, a little adventure is welcome as long as risks are 
carefully considered. Linda and Mark Grenyer, both lawyers from Yorkshire, have 
travelled a lot and were inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> in 
late October. “We felt perfectly safe all the time,” says Linda. “But it was 
very quiet - even at the Pyramids.” They would not, however, consider Jerusalem 
at the moment. “The violence just seems too random. We always organise trips 
through a good travel agent and we would never go against FCO advice.”

My own experience of Syria was in calmer times, late 2009, just over a year 
before government troops opened fire on protesters in Damascus, triggering the 
civil war. I was in Aleppo one chilly Sunday morning, wondering what to do with 
my day. I decided I would celebrate the city’s diversity by visiting every 
available house of worship. I walked through the souk first, skipping past the 
barrow boy who called out: “Antelope-skin scarf for the woman you love? Or silk 
for the mistress?” And finally, as I hurried away: “Make it polyester for the 
wife! I’ll throw in free divorce papers!”

The banter and good humour lasted all day. I sat through services at the 
Armenian, Syriac, Maronite and Latin churches alongside my Muslim guide. “Why 
not? Jesus is our prophet too.” Then we joined pilgrims at the Shi’ite shrine of
Mashhad al-Hussain <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Hussein_Mosque>. An 
Iranian woman showed me how to tap my head on the baked tablet of earth from 
Kerbala in Iraq. A severe-looking old whitebeard wanted to discuss football. In 
the distance, we could hear the sound of church bells mingling with the cry of 
the muezzin at the Great Mosque, our next stop.

Later, I ambled back through the newer parts of town, marvelling at the 
juxtaposition of frou-frou lingerie shops, spice emporiums and sellers of holy 
books. It seemed to me that there was nowhere quite like Syria for breadth and 
depth of cultural experience in such a short space of time.

Memories such as these make me optimistic that one day these wonderful places 
will be sufficiently peaceful for normal human interaction between strangers 
from different cultures to happen again.

Visiting the Middle East and North Africa: destinations for intrepid travellers

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a99a859151cac7c5ba8a49e03c9d1558447d63%2F0_204_5375_3226%2F5375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a99a859151cac7c5ba8a49e03c9d1558447d63%2F0_204_5375_3226%2F5375.jpg>
 The oasis township of Taghit in Algeria. Photograph: Alamy 
1. Algeria


Violence and tragedy are no strangers to Algeria, but things have quietened 
down considerably in recent years, and travellers and tour groups are visiting. 
Highlights are theCasbah in Algiers <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/565>, the 
oases ofTaghit 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taghit#/media/File:AG_006_large.jpg> and Béni 
Abbès <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B%C3%A9ni_Abb%C3%A8s>, and Unesco sites 
such asDjémila <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/191> and Tipasa 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/193>.

2. Iran


A diverse and fascinating country, filled with many treasures for the visitor. 
Persepolis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persepolis#/media/File:20101229_Top_panoramic_view_of_Persepolis_Iran.jpg>
 is the big must-see draw: the ancient capital of Darius and Xerxes is 
incredibly well-preserved.Isfahan 
<http://en.unesco.org/silkroad/content/isfahan> is likewise unmissable, but it 
is the less well-known and obscure sites that can really bring a sense of 
adventure. TryTakht-e Soleyman <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1077> and Hamedan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kg61STqILAY> in the east, or explore the 
Elburz mountains <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alborz> on the southern shores 
of the Caspian Sea. Some analysts believe that, with political stability, Iran 
could rival, even replace, Egypt as the Islamic world’s most visited country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F712ce7ef0c5345207cf090c5cd734fa6b41f7494%2F0_260_5200_3122%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F712ce7ef0c5345207cf090c5cd734fa6b41f7494%2F0_260_5200_3122%2F5200.jpg>
 The gilded domes of Samarkand in Uzbekistan – one of the great sights of 
Central Asia. Photograph: Alamy 
3. Central Asia


This vast area of the Islamic world also contains some of its greatest 
highlights: Samarkand’s blue domes,Bukhara <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/602>
’s maze-like old town and Khiva’sfortress walls 
<http://wikitravel.org/upload/shared//f/fa/Uzbekistan_2011_377.jpg> – and that 
is just in Uzbekistan. Further east, Kyrgyzstan is gathering a reputation for
wilderness experiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/10/kyrgyzstan-adventure-group-trip-horse-riding-holiday>
, with the highest percentage of mountainous terrain of any country on earth. 
It also has a rather wonderful and well-organised system of homestays.




4. Oman


The south-east corner of Arabia has long stood apart from the trials and 
tribulations of its neighbours.Oman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/aug/30/oman-travel-hidden-treasures> 
is about the same size as Poland and has some breathtaking scenery:Jebel Shams 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jebel_Shams> is the most frequently visited, but 
there are many other mountain areas that only occasionally see a foreign 
tourist, especially down in remote Dhofar province.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24b8a05c7f79a83629425f244cf26aca924cdbb7%2F0_398_5224_3133%2F5224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Middle%20East%20tourism%20ever%20recover%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcan-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24b8a05c7f79a83629425f244cf26aca924cdbb7%2F0_398_5224_3133%2F5224.jpg>
 Water taxis ply their trade on Dubai Creek. Photograph: Alamy 
5. Dubai


The Disneyland of Arabia may be its reputation, but Dubai does possess a real 
underbelly for the traveller who is not interested in buying another 
diamond-encrusted watch in another shopping mall. Get down to the waterfront 
and explore the markets, criss-crossing the Creek by simple water taxis. Great 
fun, especially at night.

6. Jordan


There is plenty of truth in the Jordanian complaint that it is a quiet country 
surrounded by noisy neighbours. The per capita income is high and it has 
somehow managed to absorb massive populations of refugees without drama. 
Highlights are the incomparable rose-red city ofPetra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2007/jul/14/saturday.petra>, the Dead Sea, 
the fortress-cum-caravanserai ofQusayr Amra 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/327/gallery/> and various desert adventure 
activities.

To check the latest Foreign & Commonwealth Office advice for these and any 
other countries, go togov.uk/foreign-travel-advice 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice> 
 