
The march of the robots  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/capita-to-replace-staff-with-robots-to-save-money>
has begun. After it has axed a couple of thousand jobs, including by 
outsourcing posts to India (groan), Capita wants to ramp up “a proprietary 
robotic solution to achieve scale automation across some of our operations”. 
Let’s hope chief executive Andy Parker uses plainer language, rather than 
management blurb, when he explains to affected staff in call-centres why they 
are being replaced by machines.

Mind you, Parker’s hold on his own position looks less than secure. His worry 
is not a robot but Ian Powell, a big cheese out of PwC, who arrives as chairman 
in January. In the five months since Powell’s appointment was announced, Capita 
has blown its status as the star turn of the outsourcing sector.Thursday’s 
profit warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/capita-shares-profit-warning-brexit-vote>
 wasthe second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/29/capita-shares-crash-brexit-woes-vote-profit-warning>
 in three months. The shares are down 60% this year and stand at a 10-year low.

Any incoming chairman would want to know if this catastrophe for shareholders 
could have been avoided. The case for the defence is that Capita has suffered a 
series of unfortunate accidents, such as a Brexit-related slowdown, delays in 
installing IT for the London congestion zone and upheaval in a recruitment 
business. Add them all up, though, andCapita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup>, even on the latest 
prediction, will still make pre-tax profits this year of £515m, only about 
£100m less than expected in the summer.

The shortfall has done so much damage to the share price only because Capita 
was running with too much debt. Borrowings are approaching 2.9 times top-line 
profits, well beyond the company’s definition of a prudent cap. A slowdown in 
spending by clients made the ratios balloon. It looks as if the company 
believed its own hype about the predictable nature of its revenues. If so, that 
could have been avoided.

Parker’s solution is to sell Capita Asset Services, a registrar business that 
also serves the fund-management industry. If the division fetches £700m, debt 
ratios will look healthier and Parker may achieve his primary goal of avoiding 
a dividend cut. Yet you can understand why investors are rattled. Capita Asset 
Services used to be seen as a prized business but has suddenly been declared 
“non-core”. Meanwhile a second profits warning within three months suggests 
Capita’s ability to read its own markets is not what it once was. Powell’s 
verdict is keenly awaited.

Sports Direct’s Hellawell should get out of the spotlight

Morale of staff at Sports Direct has suffered, says chairman Keith Hellawell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
, but here’s news to cheer them up: profits have halved but the company can 
still afford to buy a £40m corporate jet. Employees can even hire it themselves 
– if they pay “open market rates”, which may deter 99% of the workforce.


But the arrangement that will infuriate outside shareholders is surely the 
deal whereby Sports Direct will buy cosmetics – under that must-have brand 
Sport FX – from a company where founder Mike Ashley’s 20-year-old daughter, 
Matilda, is a director.

Matilda’s outfit is called Double Take, which is probably what shareholders 
did. Yes, Sports Direct really has responded to accusations that it is run as a 
personal fiefdom by doing this deal (other arrangements involveAshley’s brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/sports-direct-pays-mike-ashleys-older-brother-international-delivery>
 andthe boyfriend of Ashley’s other daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/boyfriend-of-mike-ashleys-daughter-gets-key-sports-direct-role>
). Ashley, it seems, doesn’t care what outsider investors say.

Hellawell, though, is jolly angry about the “extreme campaign” that has been 
“waged” against Sports Direct by the media, politicians and trade unions: “I 
begin to question whether this intense scrutiny is all ethically motivated.”

Unfortunately, the former chief constable of West Yorkshire didn’t say what 
conclusions he has reached. Here are a few facts to help his inquiries. This 
paper’s exposé of working conditions at the Shirebrook warehousewas honoured at 
the British Journalism awards this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/07/guardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards>
. Thebusiness select committee’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
 was a cross-party affair and supported the thrust of the complaints made by 
Unite, the trade union, for many years. Sports Direct workershave been awarded 
£1m in back pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
 as a result of the scrutiny. The company itself has acknowledged 
“shortcomings” and pledged to do better.

No doubt, life in the spotlight is uncomfortable. But there is a simple 
remedy, at least for Hellawell. After seven years in the job, and having failed 
to spot a crisis that was brewing for ages, he could resign. That wasthe wish 
of a majority of outside shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/07/sports-direct-annual-general-meeting-showdown-mike-ashley-business-live?page=with:block-57d021eae4b042bbfb3243ab#block-57d021eae4b042bbfb3243ab>
 at September’s annual meeting.

Ashley, with his 53% stake, saved his chairman but it remains hard to see how 
Sports Direct can genuinely claim to have turned a corner while Hellawell 
remains in post, raging impotently about scrutiny that would be applied to any 
high-profile public company.
 