
It felt like we’d been cycling for hours when we stopped for lunch in Epping 
Forest, on the north-eastern edge of London. After downing a portion of vegan 
tagine and some homemade cake, I asked how far we’d come. “About 15 miles,” 
said Simon, the tour leader, cheerfully. Only 15 miles? Gulp. Suddenly the idea 
of cycling 160 miles from London to Amsterdam over three days seemed rather 
daunting.

Many people cycling from London to Brighton, Paris or, indeed, Amsterdam, are 
taking part in a charity challenge. Others, travelling to the continent for a 
cycling holiday, won’t really start riding until they get there. But with 
newly-launched Beespoke Tours, things are a bit different: the journeyis the 
holiday. So the pace is relatively slow, with plenty of breaks and time to take 
in the view. There is a support vehicle to carry the bags. And, crucially, the 
starting point is in central London and the end point is in central Amsterdam.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432229255996%2F550f2fb5-d38c-423a-9ff3-4784b14b607c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Capital%20transfer%3A%20a%20cycling%20trip%20from%20London%20to%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Capital%20transfer%3A%20a%20cycling%20trip%20from%20London%20to%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432229255996%2F550f2fb5-d38c-423a-9ff3-4784b14b607c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rachel’s group prepares to set off from King’s Cross, London 
We set off from King’s Cross station. Of the three others on this inaugural 
trip, one was an experienced cyclist, one was a hobbyist who averaged 25 miles 
at weekends, and one was, like me, a cycle commuter with no long-distance 
experience. Simon and his partner Clarissa (who drove the van) are eager to 
show that anyone who is reasonably active can cycle long distances; it’s not 
just for the Lycra brigade. Simon, a keen cyclist who used to work for an 
investment bank, noticed that lots of people now own quality bikes thanks to 
schemes likeCycle2Work <http://www.cycle2work.info/>, but don’t get much chance 
to use them. He had the idea of offering trips where participants ride their 
own bike (road or hybrid recommended) from London to Amsterdam, Paris or Bruges.

Top 10 cycling holidays in Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/08/top-10-cycling-holidays-europe-france-italy-spain>
Until that first lunch stop, we’d ridden through back streets of Islington and 
Hackney, and along canal towpaths further east. The going was easy but 
stop-start, as roads and pedestrians got in our way – which is why it took us 
so long to cover 15 miles. For the rest of that day and all the next, we were 
on Essex country lanes, picking up speed over rolling hills, exhilarated to 
have escaped the city under our own steam. We saw pheasant, grouse and rabbits; 
cycled past bluebell woods; and rode through idyllic villages with “Warning: 
ducks crossing” signs – and even saw some ducks actually crossing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432228825194%2F4cb57d13-d3e2-49fb-921c-42ca826486bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Capital%20transfer%3A%20a%20cycling%20trip%20from%20London%20to%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Capital%20transfer%3A%20a%20cycling%20trip%20from%20London%20to%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432228825194%2F4cb57d13-d3e2-49fb-921c-42ca826486bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Refuelling station … breakfast, lunch and snacks are vegetarian, and usually 
organic 
There was some traffic as we skirted Chelmsford, but all was peaceful again 
when we stopped for dinner at theJolly Sailor 
<http://www.thejollysailorheybridgebasin.co.uk/> in Heybridge Basin near 
Maldon, overlooking the Blackwater estuary. I thought we were spending the 
night here, so it was a bit of a shock to have to climb back on the bike and 
cycle another couple of miles toOsea Meadows 
<http://www.osealeisure.com/camping-in-essex.html> campsite, where we were all 
sharing a huge lodge tent. I had my own canvas room and a proper bed, and was 
anticipating a good night’s sleep after cycling about 50 miles, but regretted 
not having built up the wood-burning stove before going to bed, as it was 
freezing cold.

The next day, we faced the same distance again, all the way to Harwich. Again, 
we were on country lanes, with a few main roads around Colchester. My legs felt 
surprisingly fresh, but the stops were welcome and well-chosen: a country park, 
the banks of the Colne at Rowhedge, a pretty churchyard.

We giggled our way through Fingringhoe, and again as we passed a sign for a 
“secret nuclear bunker”. We drank tea on a village green next to an old red 
phone box that had been turned into a book swap. But it wasn’t all ye olde 
England. In Essex, the car is king: we were honked at by more than one 
impatient driver, and some of the overtaking was too close for comfort. It was 
a relief to arrive in Harwich, where we ate fresh crab and dover sole at the 
brilliantAlma Inn <http://www.almaharwich.co.uk/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432228631735%2F4f021f58-4382-4474-99d4-4dccf6b66e83-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Capital%20transfer%3A%20a%20cycling%20trip%20from%20London%20to%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Capital%20transfer%3A%20a%20cycling%20trip%20from%20London%20to%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432228631735%2F4f021f58-4382-4474-99d4-4dccf6b66e83-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A churchyard the party came across in eastern Essex 
It was a completely different story in the Netherlands. After a comfortable 
night in a cabin on the ferry to Hoek van Holland (cycling on and off with all 
the lorries is great fun, like going round a Scalextric track), we rode 
straight on to a cycle path and stayed on it, more or less, all the way to 
Amsterdam. The first stretch took us along the coast, with unexpectedly 
beautiful wide sandy beaches and impressive dunes. The Netherlands’ 
non-motoring infrastructure is incredible: at one point, there was a cycle 
lane, a footpath and a bridle path side by side – and all three were well-used, 
by people of all ages.

Simon and Clarissa are committed to green travel, and the whole trip had 
reflected that ethos. Breakfast, lunch and snacks were vegetarian, and often 
organic and locally sourced (dinner was a matter of personal choice).
 Tulip fields were greeted by cheers from the cyclists 
Of course, there is a carbon cost to the support vehicle and ferry crossing, 
so some of guests’ money goes to Trees for Life, a charity working to restore 
1,000 square miles of Caledonian forest in Scotland. Even the company website 
is hosted by a wind-powered provider.

How Amsterdam became the bicycle capital of the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/amsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord>
Skirting the Hague, we turned inland, through farming country. Our first tulip 
field raised a cheer, as did each windmill. The wind was behind us and we flew 
towards Haarlem, freewheeling for long stretches. Sixty-five miles just flew by 
and after a beer break in Haarlem we had just 15 miles to go. This was the 
hardest section, through saddle-soreness, knotted shoulders and just the 
knowledge that we were nearly there. But finally we were cycling through leafy 
Rembrandtpark and bike-clogged city streets to our eco hotel, Conscious Hotel 
Vondelpark.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432229645019%2F96fedac1-e361-460b-b1b1-b01ec6e958f1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Capital%20transfer%3A%20a%20cycling%20trip%20from%20London%20to%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Capital%20transfer%3A%20a%20cycling%20trip%20from%20London%20to%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F24%2Fcycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432229645019%2F96fedac1-e361-460b-b1b1-b01ec6e958f1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Finishing line … the cyclist-friendly streets of Amsterdam Photograph: 
/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
I had planned to spend a day seeing Amsterdam before taking the train and 
ferry home (while Clarissa and Simon took the bikes back to London) but as it 
turned out, I was too exhausted to do more than the Rijksmuseum.

That first evening, though, we all felt a little giddy at our success in 
getting from one capital to another by our own efforts (with a little help from 
a big boat). When we arrived, one member of the group stripped down to his bib 
shorts for celebratory photographs; another had to be talked out of getting a 
bee – for Beespoke Tours – tattooed on his bottom. The champagne flowed, and 
those tough first and last 15 miles were forgotten. In the Netherlands, there 
are no cyclists – just people who cycle. It felt good to be one of them.

• The trip was provided by Beespoke Tours (07766 073545, beespoketours.co.uk 
<http://beespoketours.co.uk/>), whose three-night London-Amsterdam tour costs 
£650pp, including accommodation, ferry crossing from Harwich (return trip from 
Amsterdam not included), breakfast, lunch, support vehicle, luggage transit and 
bike return
 