
A British outsourcing company whose contracts include collecting the BBC 
licence fee is to replace staff with robots as it slashes costs.


Capita <https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup>, a FTSE 100-listed 
firm that also runs the London congestion charge, said it needed to axe 2,000 
jobs as part of a cost-cutting drive in response to poor trading.

It said it would use the money it saved from sacking thousands of staff to 
fund investment in automated technology across all of the company’s divisions. 
The announcement will fuel growing fears thathuman workers will have to make 
way for robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/07/robots-replacing-jobs-luddites-economics-labor>
, as companiesturn to technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/14/robots-taking-jobs-rethink-robotics-baxter-sawyer>
 to boost profits.

The Apple and Samsung supplier Foxconn was reported to have replaced 60,000 
workers with robots <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-36376966> earlier 
this year, while the former chief executive of McDonald’ssuggested a similar 
tactic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/25/former-mcdonalds-ceo-threatens-replace-employees-robots>
 in response to low-paid workers’ demands for better pay and conditions.

In a gloomy statement that sent its shares to a 10-year low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/capita-shares-profit-warning-brexit-vote>
 at one stage,Capita said it had been hit by “headwinds” as its corporate 
clients reined in their spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/capita-shares-profit-warning-brexit-vote>
. The company unveiled plans to shore up its finances, saving £50m a year via 
austerity measures, including greater use of “proprietary robotic solutions” 
and moving around 200 jobs to India.

The chief executive, Andy Parker, said Capita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup>, which made a pre-tax profit 
of £186m in the first six months of this year, would use robots to help 
eliminate human error and make decisions faster. The company employs 78,000 
people.

“It doesn’t remove the need for an individual but it speeds up how they work, 
which means you need less [sic] people to do it.”

He said a human assisted by automated robotic technology could do a 40-minute 
job in much less time.

“They [human staff members] can then do 10 times the amount they used to, so 
you need less [sic] people to do the same amount of work.”

Parker said this would make the company more efficient by “taking away some of 
the decision-making and cutting down potential errors”.

Capita, which provides services ranging from electronic tagging for offenders 
to store card services for retailers, will also move some of its IT operation 
abroad. Parker said this would involve “a couple of hundred” jobs being shifted 
to India.

The company’s decisions on staffing are part of an attempt to reduce costs 
without causing shareholders any financial pain. Parker said the cost cuts – 
coupled with asset sales – would allow Capita to avoid reducing its annual 
dividend, which was worth £200m last year and £180m the year before.

But despite the effort to protect investors, shares in the company finished 
down more than 4%, having fallen more than 14% during the day, as investors 
were left stunned by the company’s pessimistic outlook.

Parker said he “would have thought there’d be a more positive reaction”.

Rehana Azam, the national secretary for public services at the GMB union, 
said: “Public services are predominantly delivered by people so it’s hard to 
see how they’re going to provide a cost-efficient service from call centres in 
another country.

“We’d want to sit down with Capita and make sure people are treated fairly in 
any process that ends with them losing jobs.”


Azam cast doubt on whether using robots to automate some of its systems would 
work. “We’ve never had a good track record with private providers delivering 
computerised systems. I’d like to see where there have been good examples of 
that kind of automation.”

Capita has struggled as its clients, which include O2, M&S, John Lewis and 
Dixons Carphone, have looked to cut costs in areas such as corporate travel and 
recruitment.

The company refused to blame the Brexit vote for the disappointing update but 
said earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/jul/27/ftse-moves-higher-but-capita-drops-as-it-warns-on-brexit-effect>
 that uncertainty over the UK’s relationship with the European Union had hit 
its business, delaying key contracts.

Capita is predominantly UK-based, unlike bigger rivals, such as G4S and Serco, 
which have been sheltered to a large degree from the Brexit-related fallout by 
their bigger geographical footprint.
 