
The family of Debbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds> and Carrie Fisher, the 
mother-daughter acting stars who died on consecutive days last week, have paid 
tribute to their relatives.

Fisher’s daughter, Billie Lourd, posted a photo of herself with her mother and 
grandmother on Instagram. It is the first time the actor, 24, has spoken 
publicly since confirmingFisher’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-dies-star-wars-princess-leia>
, aged 60, on 27 December through a spokesperson.

“Receiving all of your prayers and kind words over the past week has given me 
strength during a time I thought strength could not exist,” she wrote. “There 
are no words to express how much I will miss my Abadaba and my one and only 
Momby. Your love and support means the world to me.”

❤👩‍👩‍👧❤ Receiving all of your prayers and kind words over the past week has 
given me strength during a time I thought strength could not exist. There are 
no words to express how much I will miss my Abadaba and my one and only Momby. 
Your love and support means the world to me. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BOxYL-rlIKK/>

A photo posted by Billie Lourd (@praisethelourd) on Jan 2, 2017 at 10:09am PST

Reynolds, 84, died on 28 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/28/debbie-reynolds-hospital-carrie-fisher-mother>
 of a stroke, while planning her daughter’s funeral. They will be buried 
together on 5 January.

Writing in the Hollywood Reporter, Joely Fisher, best known for her role in 
Ellen, remembered both her elder half-sister and Reynolds, the ex-wife of her 
and Carrie’s father, Eddie.

“Talking to Carrie always made me feel more interesting by osmosis,” wrote the 
actor, who had planned to spend Christmas with her sister, and who spoke to her 
just before the Christmas Eve flight on whichshe had a heart attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/25/carrie-fisher-heart-attack-stable-condition>
.

“My sister would have wanted a dramatic exit; she just might have wished for 
another couple of decades before making one,” wrote Fisher. “She told me she 
wanted to see this political horror play out. She likely would have crafted a 
sharp, piercing novel about her non-conventional goings on with this national 
nightmare as the backdrop.”

Fisher also touched upon the extraordinary circumstances of Reynolds’s death, 
after Carrie’s brother, Todd, had said their mother“did not die of a broken 
heart” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/31/debbie-reynolds-did-not-die-of-a-broken-heart-says-her-son>
.

“Of course, Debbie loved nothing more than the spotlight. And I can imagine 
Carrie is having a laugh right now, rolling her eyes at the kind of crazy 
ending that only happens in Shakespearn [sic] tragedies … and Fisher novels. 
Carrie’s mom has once again stolen the show.”


Also writing in the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/mark-hamills-carrie-fisher-tribute-making-her-laugh-was-a-badge-honor-guest-column-96017>
, Mark Hamill, Fisher’s longtime co-star in the Star Wars films, paid frank 
tribute to his friend of 40 years. “She was a handful,” he wrote. “She was high 
maintenance. But my life would have been so much drabber and less interesting 
if she hadn’t been the friend that she was.”

Hamill, 65, described how he first met Fisher, then 19, at a dinner in London 
before they shot the first film in 1977.

“I was just bowled over,” he wrote. “I mean she was just so instantly 
ingratiating and funny and outspoken. She had a way of just being so brutally 
candid.

“I’d just met her but it was like talking to a person you’d known for 10 
years. She was telling me stuff about her stepfather, about her mom, about 
Eddie Fisher – it was just harrowing in its detail.”

Hamill continued: “Carrie and I occupied a unique area in each other’s lives. 
It was like we were in a garage band together that somehow hit it huge.” There 
were times when they were “in love with each other” and “hated each other’s 
guts,” he recalled, before expressing thanks that they were to work together 
again onStar Wars: Episode VIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars--episode-viii>, which will be 
released in December.

“I’m grateful that we stayed friends and got to have this second act with the 
new movies,” he concluded.
 