
At a time when primetime drama is rarely more than 20 minutes away from the 
next dead body, viewers suffer a problem common to detectives – getting the 
stories straight. In the second series ofUnforgotten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/unforgotten>, the cops are trying to 
identify the skeleton of a stabbing victim found in a suitcase, while in No 
Offence, they are trying to put a name to a head with a spade through it. Or is 
it the other way round? One thing to be said for Death in Paradise is that at 
least there is no risk of its storyline – a suspicious death at a research 
station on a Caribbean volcano – having come from anywhere else.

With Death in Paradise on BBC1 directly scheduled against Unforgotten on ITV 
in this Thursday’s 9pm slot – exactly 24 hours after Channel 4 launched No 
Offence – it’s a good opportunity to investigate whether, in the current 
epidemic of detective dramas, there are enough interesting cops and corpses to 
go around.

One tactic in crowded places is to elbow out territory of your own, as Chris 
Lang, the creator of Unforgotten, has impressively done. A key pleasure of the 
genre is that the viewer becomes an investigator, trying to identify the 
culprit from the clues. Lang has perfected a variation of this technique in 
which the challenge is to connect a pile-up of apparently separate plot strands 
to a victim discovered in the opening scene.

In the first series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/unforgotten-episode-recaps>, 
old bones found in the cellar of a demolished building were intercut with 
present-day shifty behaviour from a priest, a tycoon, a retiree and a social 
worker, whose names, it turned out, were contained in a diary beside the 
skeleton. The second series starts similarly. A suitcase dredged from a London 
river is opened to show human remains, among which the only potentially 
identifying items are a watch on the wrist and a rusty pager where the breast 
pocket would have been.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90abed6f957fc69a57c5e0c6a8a9522d360786d%2F0_267_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Case%20closed%3A%20it's%20beyond%20reasonable%20doubt%20%E2%80%93%20we've%20reached%20peak%20cop%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Case%20closed%3A%20it%27s%20beyond%20reasonable%20doubt%20%E2%80%93%20we%27ve%20reached%20peak%20cop%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90abed6f957fc69a57c5e0c6a8a9522d360786d%2F0_267_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Crime drama of the highest class … Unforgotten. Photograph: ITV / Rex Features 
In what has already become an enjoyable signature rhythm, scenes of Nicola 
Walker’s DCI Cassie Stuart and Sanjeev Bhaskar’s DS Sunny Khan trying to trace 
the victim’s possessions are intercut with classy character actors playing out 
slices of life in picturesque English locations. A police chief prepares for 
retirement; a barrister and his husband adopt a child; a nurse in a children’s 
cancer clinic crosses a professional guideline; and in a lesson on Macbeth, an 
English teacher discusses whether women are less naturally homicidal than men. 
These people, we know, will prove to be relatives, suspects, witnesses – or 
some combination of the three – and so we can satisfyingly lay our bets.

It’s a tribute to the talents of Walker and Bhaskar that they create 
interesting differentiation from the millions of TV cops before and alongside 
them. At breakthroughs in the case, Walker gives Cassie the rapidly dampened 
smile of someone who fears that pride is unprofessional. This is crime drama of 
the highest class. How ITV could have done with another Unforgotten in last 
year’s threadbare schedules; how welcome it is now.

It also seems potentially fatal opposition to its BBC rival. Watching Death in 
Paradise at the start of its sixth series, the show’s own continuing existence 
seems the most baffling mystery it will ever present.

English crime fiction tends to descend from either Arthur Conan Doyle or 
Agatha Christie, and Death in Paradise aspires to the latter in its exotic 
foreign setting (the islands of Guadeloupe) and the tendency of its central 
sleuth (Kris Marshall now having replaced Ben Miller) to gather together all 
the suspects to explain, with flashbacks, who the murderer was. This week, his 
explanatory monologue occupies almost a third of the screen-time, and feels 
longer, especially when it becomes clear that the solution is borrowed from one 
of Hercule Poirot’s most famous cases.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e25f061b85cddf79741cea2701421f3fb7380da%2F0_43_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Case%20closed%3A%20it's%20beyond%20reasonable%20doubt%20%E2%80%93%20we've%20reached%20peak%20cop%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Case%20closed%3A%20it%27s%20beyond%20reasonable%20doubt%20%E2%80%93%20we%27ve%20reached%20peak%20cop%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e25f061b85cddf79741cea2701421f3fb7380da%2F0_43_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 A bumbler on secondment from Scotland Yard … Kris Marshall’s DI Humphrey 
Goodman in Death in Paradise. Photograph: BBC/Red Planet Pictures/Denis Guyenon 
Unfortunately, Marshall’s DI Humphrey Goodman, a bumbler on secondment from 
Scotland Yard, is no Poirot. His observations are so obvious that the BBC might 
attract stray viewers from a superior crime franchise by retitling this one No 
Shit Sherlock. Goodman says things such as, “I think he’s not telling the whole 
truth,” after interviewing suspects who actually let fall that cliche: “I’m 
certainly not the murderer, if that’s what you’re suggesting.”

And yet the thing is somehow a hit. What the series has going for it is 
loyalty from an audience that presumably enjoys a familiar January comfort, and 
a co-production deal attractive in financially tough times. (The closing 
credits express gratitude to a French tax-break.)

The series is also commendably one of the few that gives decent screen-time to 
non-white British actors, though the parts are stronger on opportunity than 
content. Don Warrington, whose fine theatre King Lear on BBC4 on Christmas Day 
is followed 10 days later by his Commissioner Selwyn Patterson in Death in 
Paradise, may have set a new record for going from the sublime to the 
ridiculous. And, to add injury to the insult of the scripts, one guest star has 
claimed thatthe set was rife with the Zika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/death-paradise-actor-tony-gardner-contracted-zika-virus-filming-bbc>
.

No Offence, given a second season on Channel 4, is surely the strangest case 
in the TV crime files. Thrillingly resisting TV’s desire to impose genre, Paul 
Abbott’s scripts alternate between sending up cop shows and matching them for 
ingenuity and action.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2acf238c990fbb713e88ca45207ebc7ef80ef6b7%2F0_171_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Case%20closed%3A%20it's%20beyond%20reasonable%20doubt%20%E2%80%93%20we've%20reached%20peak%20cop%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Case%20closed%3A%20it%27s%20beyond%20reasonable%20doubt%20%E2%80%93%20we%27ve%20reached%20peak%20cop%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcop-drama-no-offence-unforgiven-death-in-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2acf238c990fbb713e88ca45207ebc7ef80ef6b7%2F0_171_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Daring … gutsy Manchester super-cop DI Vivienne Deering (Joanna Scanlan) in No 
Offence. Photograph: Ian Derry/Channel 4 
Joanna Scanlan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/04/no-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being>
’s gutsy Manchester super-cop DI Vivienne Deering feels like a deliberate nod 
to terrifying tecs in Jed Mercurio’s Line of Duty, while the mystery that 
begins the second run – in which bodies are found counterintuitively buried at 
a crematorium – seems a cheeky smile at Sherlock. This is a show in which 
daring gags alternate with deadly serious stake-outs and shootouts, as, we 
suspect, they do in real policing.

As the range of types of cop and crime is relatively limited, there is 
inevitable overlap. Yet across these three shows, the spectrum of detective 
drama proves impressively wide: Unforgotten and No Offence represent peaks of 
offbeat mainstream drama. The appeal of Death in Paradise, however, remains 
unsolvable.

• No Offence is on Channel 4 at 9pm on Wednesday; Unforgotten is on ITV on 
Thursday at 9pm; Death in Paradise is on BBC1 on Thursday at 9pm.
 