
Long queues. Days off work. Loss of assets. Not the effects of an economic 
crash, but rather what has happened in recent weeks after India’s prime 
minister, Narendra Modi,announced a policy of “demonetisation” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/rupee-note-cancellation-panic-in-india-banks-500-1000>
, which banned with immediate effect the two notes most widely used throughout 
the Indian economy.


Modi said demonetisation was necessary for several reasons, among them: 
combating corruption and terrorism financing; promoting formal savings; and 
ensuring transactions could be properly taxed. To comply with this policy, 
Indians mustwait in long queues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/india-bank-lines-controversy-cash-for-queuing>
 at banks with strict deposit limits to swap their old notes for new ones. This 
policy has had a profound effect, as estimates indicate as many as98% of all 
transactions throughout the country are handled in cash 
<http://www.bloombergquint.com/business/2016/11/09/the-beginning-of-the-end-of-the-parallel-economy-in-india>
.

India's silk road offers path to prosperity but not equality for female 
weavers | Vidhi Doshi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/05/india-silk-road-prosperity-not-equality-female-weavers-west-bengal>
The result has been chaos. Some men and women must now take their life savings 
in cash and convert them into new notes, the supply of which is insufficient, 
requiring them to queue at banks for days, if not weeks. Further, there have 
been stories of people needing urgent medical care being denied transport to 
clinics because they didn’t have the new currency notes. These anecdotes are 
shocking and illustrate the stark reality of the immediate effects of this 
policy, but they are only the tip of the iceberg, as those who are already 
vulnerable and disadvantaged will continue to suffer disproportionately.

While policies like Modi’s are enacted in the name of security, they are 
frequently implemented without any understanding of those they affect the most: 
people who are poor, rural and female, and are far less likely to have bank 
accounts and more likely to operate in a cash economy.

In India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, as in many lower- and 
middle-income economies, it is less usual for women to have bank accounts or 
access to financial services and they will often save cash in their own homes. 
Women are less likely to use banks because they often lack the identity 
documents required to open accounts, and are rarely financially literate. 
Additionally, women may distrust formal financial services, have lower 
earnings, be seen as less-valuable clients by financial institutions and face 
more mobility restrictions in travelling to banks and ATMs. They are also far 
less likely to have access to formal credit. This means more difficulty in 
using financial services, such as insurance, and more limited opportunities to 
invest in and grow their businesses.

For many women, most of whom are not working or are in the informal sector, 
keeping cash squirrelled away at home provides a cushion for their future, and 
their financial and physical wellbeing. Women are much more likely than men to 
hold small amounts of cash so that they can meet expenditures for health, their 
children’s education and even weddings and dowries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fcash-chaos-india-banknotes-shows-women-need-financial-system-they-can-bank-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0ac429f703c3b48869c5af1060ced93e59024a5%2F0_141_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cash%20chaos%20shows%20India's%20women%20need%20financial%20system%20they%20can%20bank%20on%20%7C%20Sarah%20Gammage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fcash-chaos-india-banknotes-shows-women-need-financial-system-they-can-bank-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cash%20chaos%20shows%20India%27s%20women%20need%20financial%20system%20they%20can%20bank%20on%20%7C%20Sarah%20Gammage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fcash-chaos-india-banknotes-shows-women-need-financial-system-they-can-bank-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0ac429f703c3b48869c5af1060ced93e59024a5%2F0_141_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Demonstrators in Bangalore protest against the demonetisation policy 
introduced by prime minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party. 
Photograph: Jagadeesh Nv/EPA 
With this new policy, women are likely to be disproportionately affected, 
particularly if they do not have bank accounts. Relying on male family members 
to act as financial intermediaries can mean reduced autonomy over financial and 
household decision-making and the inability to save individually. This 
dependence may also leave women’s savings exposed to a greater risk of being 
used by others in the family. In the event that the male family member dies or 
the woman is divorced, this could leave her without life savings and assets.

El Salvador 
<https://voiceselsalvador.wordpress.com/2011/06/08/ten-years-later-the-impact-of-dollarization-in-el-salvador/>
 provides another example of how changes in monetary policy can affect women 
and the poor disproportionately. In 2001, the country adopted the US dollar in 
an effort to stabilise currency and reduce inflation. When prices went up as a 
result of this “dollarisation” and wages did not, the poor, and those who 
disproportionately used cash, many of whom were women, were unable to purchase 
necessary goods and services.

India’s all-female paper goes digital to make gender taboos old news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/10/india-all-female-newspaper-khabar-lahariya-gender-taboos-old-news>
These types of measures, when implemented swiftly, overnight and without 
warning – as was the case in India – and which require people to deposit cash 
in existing bank accounts or open new ones, will continue to have an outsized, 
negative effect on women.

 Before implementing policies like these, governments must undertake far 
greater efforts to ensure women have bank accounts, which should include 
determining that they have the necessary legal documents (such as 
identification) needed to open them, investing in financial literacy, and 
expanding access to digital payments and mobile banking. Governments must also 
focus on women’s financial inclusion more generally using social benefits, cash 
transfers and pensions systems or mandate that banks open accounts with no 
transaction costs for clients with small amounts of cash and savings.

Including financial literacy in the national school curriculum is another way 
to effectively reduce barriers to accessing financial services.Offering postal 
services has also proved particularly effective in giving hard-to-reach 
populations banking access 
<http://www.upu.int/uploads/tx_sbdownloader/genderAndFinancialInclusionThroughThePostEn.pdf>
.

Getting more women and poorer people to use banks is not rocket science, it 
just requires a concerted effort on the part of governments and financial 
institutions to make sure that the services provided meet the needs of the 
populations they are trying to reach. By leaving out the gendered dimensions of 
banking, policies like those in India and El Salvador will do little more than 
further widen the gap between women’s and men’s economic empowerment, and will 
hinder efforts to truly tackle poverty.

 * Sarah Gammage is director of gender, economic empowerment and livelihoods 
at the International Center for Research on Women
 