
Sunday could be a momentous day for Catalonia – and for once it will have 
nothing to do with the left foot of Barcelona striker Lionel Messi. The 
ever-restless Catalans are going to the polls in regional elections that 
pro-secessionists have billed as a vote on independence from Spain.

Catalonia goes to the polls in an 'incredible moment for democracy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/25/catalonia-votes-democracy-election-independence-spain>
Its 7½ million people are famously proud – arrogant is how people from 
elsewhere in Spain often describe them – but they have much to be proud of. 
Barcelona hogs the limelight, of course, but outside the capital the sheer 
variety of alluring places to visit – from mountains to coast, lively cities to 
dozing villages, is staggering.
Catalonia map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/travel_catalonia_map/giv-31114sWRe4Qp5GFgl/>
Four provinces make up Catalonia: Barcelona, Lleida, Tarragona and Girona. I’m 
going to miss out Barcelona province because the city itself – plus Montserrat, 
Sitges and Penedès – already gets more than its fair share of attention, and 
there’s so much more to be discovered beyond.

Many Catalans don’t think of themselves as Spanish – and they don’t let you 
forget it. Get a sense of what makes them different by readingRobert Hughes’s 
Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/jun/08/top-10-books-barcelona-burgess>
. It is an entertaining study of the whole land’s history, culture and people.

LLEIDA PROVINCE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443183308032%2F65e92f91-2d53-4f44-9c4f-d86acaddf4f6-2060x1576.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443183308032%2F65e92f91-2d53-4f44-9c4f-d86acaddf4f6-2060x1576.jpeg>
 Footpath cut into cliffs above the spectacular Mont-rebei gorge. Photograph: 
Alamy 
What to see and do

Even Lleida city’s mum probably wouldn’t say it is the most charming place, 
but it is home to one of Spain’s standout buildings,La Seu Vella 
<http://www.turoseuvella.cat/>. This 13th-century hilltop cathedral with its 
majestic tower dominates the skyline and has a vast, breathtakingly beautiful 
cloister. An hour’s drive to the north-east, the little town ofSolsona has a 
wonderful tangle of medieval streets and the air of a place that knows its 
luck’s in. The hills around here (seeturismesolsones.com 
<http://turismesolsones.com/>) and south towards the lovely old town of Cervera 
make for great walking. The tower ofVallferosa on the GR170 is particularly 
worth seeking out. Even the tiniest village in these parts has its own castle; 
a prime example isMontfalcó Murallat. Fans of modernisme can get their fix near 
Solsona, at the extraordinary cemetery of Sant Esteve inOlius, with its 
Gaudíesque parabolic arches.

Further west is the spectacular Mont-rebei gorge, with a narrow footpath cut 
into the face of a cliff hundreds of metres above the Noguera Ribagorçana 
river. There’s no handrail, and it’s terrifying – and unmissable.

Heading north into the Pyrenees brings an array of marvellous places. My 
favourite is absurdly prettyVall de Boí, where the villages often boast 
12th-century Romanesque churches. Many of their frescoes have been moved to 
Barcelona’sMuseu Nacional d’Art de Catalunya <http://www.museunacional.cat/en>, 
but an ambitious scheme to recreate their effect has just been completed at the 
church of Sant Climent inTaüll. I sat in darkness, and in awe, as its original 
frescoes were digitally projected 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rFTUajbJhoQ&feature=youtu.be>, brushstroke by 
brushstroke, on to the walls. At the northern end of the valley isParc Nacional 
d’Aigüestortes <http://parcsnaturals.gencat.cat/en/aiguestortes/index.html>, 
with forests, lakes and peaks crying out to be hiked.

Where to eat
 Organic food at L’Antic Forn, Cervera 
In Lleida, Zeke (tapas from €4, Avenida Prat de la Riba 42, no reservations) 
has some of the most innovative tapas outside Barcelona and is a rare find in a 
very conservative city. In Solsona,La Gatera (Plaça Sant Pere 3, +34 973 48 15 
07) is a real locals’ favourite, with tasty meals for a few euros. Or go trad 
with snails and pig’s trotters atRestaurant Mare de la Font  
<http://www.maredelafont.net/castellano.htm>(around €20pp, Carretera de 
Bassella, +34 973 483967) in a pretty woodland setting just outside town. In 
Cervera, the eco-friendlyL’Antic Forn 
<https://www.facebook.com/lanticforn.cervera> restaurant (Plaça Major 18, +34 
973 533152) has a very goodmenú del diá (set lunch) for €13. The hearty 
mountain fare on the menu atLa Cabana in Boí village (set meal €17, Carretera 
de Taüll, +34 973 696213) hits the spot after a trek or a hard day’s 
church-hopping.

Where to sleep
 Hotel La Freixera 
No offence to Lleida city, but it’s probably not worth an overnight stop. In 
Solsona,Hotel La Freixera <http://www.lafreixera.com/en/> (doubles from €99 
B&B), in a 14th-century building, is lovely; a little less lovely, but great 
value and almost as central, isHotel Solsona Centre 
<http://www.hotelsolsona.com/> (doubles from €53 room-only). In Senterada, 
charmingCasa Leonardo  <http://casaleonardo.net/web/en/casa.php>(doubles from 
€74 B&B, dinner €15pp) is the perfect base for heading south to the Mont-rebei 
gorge or north into the Pyrenees.


TARRAGONA PROVINCE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443183900683%2Fc8354482-3d27-413d-b3ee-7fde1626306e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443183900683%2Fc8354482-3d27-413d-b3ee-7fde1626306e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tarragona’s Roman Amphitheatre, built in the second century AD. Photograph: 
Manuel Cohen/Getty Images 
What to see and do


Another good thing about Lleida is the road out of town. The drive south 
follows theEbro river, Spain’s second-longest, through marvellous scenery to 
the endless rice fields of the Ebro delta. Day-tripper Barcelonians squeeze 
into a few beachside spots at weekends and eat bad paella made out of good 
local ingredients. A better bet is to rent a bicycle (around €10 a day from
Hostal Cling 43 <http://www.hostalcling43.com/en/#> in Deltebre, see below) and 
explore the dusty tracks of theParc Natural del Delta de l’Ebre 
<http://www.ebre.com/parc-natural-del-delta-de-l-ebre/>, spotting herons, marsh 
harriers and flamingoes. Pack a sandwich from Hostal El Faro (see below).

Penedès, west of Barcelona, may be Catalonia’s biggest wine-growing area, but 
Tarragona’s wineries concentrate on quality.El Priorat is a 50km sliver of land 
north-west of the city, and produces some of the world’s best red wines. Its 
capital, Falset, is an attractive little town with a modernista winery designed 
by Cèsar Martinell, who worked with Antoni Gaudí on the Sagrada Familia. Many 
wine estates offer visits: tryCosters del Siurana 
<http://www.costersdelsiurana.com> (+34 977 839276) in the village of 
Gratallops.

Tarragona was a major Roman city when Barcelona was a provincial backwater but 
there has been a dramatic change in the cities’ fortunes since, something not 
even Ryanair flights to nearby Reus could reverse. That means, though, that 
Tarragona’s magnificent ruins, which include an amphitheatre and a 
well-preserved Roman circus, don’t get the number of visitors they deserve. Add 
a delightful old town and a tremendous cathedral and Barcelona’s thronging 
Ramblas looks, well, less fun.


Tarragona is fascinating, but it doesn’t do barbecued giant spring onions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/11/calcots-food-festival-catalonia-spring-onions>
. For that, a 20km a detour north to Valls is essential. But only if it’s late 
January, when this mildly interesting town is consumed by a passion for the
calçot. Hundreds of thousands are wolfed down during its annual festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/11/calcots-food-festival-catalonia-spring-onions>
 (festadelacalsotada.com <http://www.festadelacalsotada.com/>).

Where to eat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107360901%2Fba297b00-942a-4b85-90f7-510fcbd1e837-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107360901%2Fba297b00-942a-4b85-90f7-510fcbd1e837-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Degvsta restaurant, Tarragona 
Mas de Prades <http://masdeprades.cat/en/> (set menu €18, +34 977 059084) is a 
farmhouse on the edge of Deltebre – away from the day-trip madness – that 
serves local specialities such as eel.Hostal El Faro (Avinguda de les Goles de 
l’Ebre 357, +34 977 480229) in the centre of Deltebre does delicious sandwiches 
for a few euros to fuel a bike ride.Degvsta <http://www.degvsta.com/> (set menu 
€16.50, Carrer dels Cavallers 6, +34 977 252428) in a splendid modernisme 
townhouse in Tarragona does a modern take on Catalan classics such as duck 
confit. There’s a genuine passion for locally sourced ingredients atEl Celler 
de l’Àspic <http://www.cellerdelaspic.com/> (three course dinner around €30, 
Carrer de Miquel Barceló 31, +34 977 831246) in Falset.


Where to sleep
 Hotel Cal Llop in Gratallops 
Masia Tinet <http://www.masiatinet.com/> (doubles from €60 B&B) is a pretty 
former farmhouse with garden, but sits on a rather nondescript road at the edge 
of Deltebre. My pick would be new, friendlyHostal Cling 43 
<http://www.hostalcling43.com/en/hostal-bedbreakfast/> (doubles from €50 B&B) 
which is in the centre of town and can arrange bike and kayak hire. Boutiquey
Cal Llop <http://cal-llop.com/> (doubles from €90 B&B) is a superbly renovated 
medieval mansion in Gratallops. The owners can arrange winery visits and its 
bar stocks the superstar local wines. In Tarragona, hotelPlaça de la Font 
<http://hotelpdelafont.com/en/> (doubles from €55 room-only) is on a square in 
the old town and its terrace is a fine place for an evening drink.

GIRONA PROVINCE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443182660958%2F3ce7e5f9-37f0-4db6-80de-e600140d77df-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443182660958%2F3ce7e5f9-37f0-4db6-80de-e600140d77df-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Girona cathedral and the Eiffel Bridge over the Onyar river. Photograph: 
Michal Krakowiak/Getty Images 
What to see and do

Who needs Barcelona? The northern city of Girona has history, a fascinating 
old quarter, interesting food, and no marauding gangs of stags and hens. Its
cathedralsits high over the city and is worth the climb for its spectacular 
22-metre-wide single nave – only St Peter’s in Rome is wider. The tiny streets 
and vaulted passageways of theBarri Vell, opening into little squares with 
bars, are ideal for an aimless stroll and there are plenty of museums for a 
cultural fix. In the 13th century, the city was home to one of the largest 
Jewish communities in Spain and this history is explored at theMuseu d’Història 
dels Jueus <http://www.girona.cat/call/cat/museu> (€4). The atmospheric Banys 
Àrabs(€2) is the best-preserved Moorish bath complex in Catalonia.

Girona province has by far the finest coastline in Catalonia, the Costa Brava, 
stretching for more than 100 miles to the French border. There are so many 
wonderful places – the ports of Sant Feliu de Guíxols and Palamós, Roman ruins 
at Empúries, stunning coves near Cap de Begur – that it’s hard to pick one, but 
my favourite is the town ofCadaqués. It’s surrounded by high cliffs and its 
little whitewashed houses cluster around the port.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107646066%2Fbf17a33b-358f-4986-b9dc-55e7cd199936-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107646066%2Fbf17a33b-358f-4986-b9dc-55e7cd199936-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sculptures in Salvador Dali’s garden at Portlligat. Photograph: Corbis 
There are fabulous walks along the coast from here to the tiny village of 
Portlligat.Salvador Dalí had a house here (€11, book in advance, 
salvador-dali.org 
<http://www.salvador-dali.org/museus/casa-salvador-dali-portlligat/en_index/>) 
and was inspired/driven slightlyloco by the pure light and fantastic rock 
formations. Footpaths carry on north-east to dramatic and undevelopedCap de 
Creus, or the coast can be explored from the water on a half-day guided trip 
with Kayaking Costa Brava  <http://www.kayakingcostabrava.com/en>(€45pp).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107698779%2Fdce65395-76c7-4c2e-a6f8-dc11c5cdae76-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107698779%2Fdce65395-76c7-4c2e-a6f8-dc11c5cdae76-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Besalú bridge. Photograph: Alamy 
Catalonia, a land of volcanoes, who would have guessed? North-west of Girona 
liesLa Garrotxa, a parc natural dotted with around 30 dormant cones. The area 
around the medieval village ofSanta Pau (its white beans, fesols, are famous 
for no apparent reason) makes for scenic walks, including into the crater of
Volcà de Santa Margarida, the largest in La Garrotxa, with a picture-perfect 
chapel at the bottom. There are loads more walking routes aroundSant Feliu de 
Pallerols further south. If that all sounds too strenuous, hot-air balloon rides
 (€140pp,en.turismegarrotxa.com 
<http://en.turismegarrotxa.com/companies/on-hot-air-balloon-flight/santa-pau/vol-de-coloms/>
) over the craters are popular. The walled town ofBesalú, with its 11th-century 
dog-legged fortified bridge, makes a good base for exploring the area.

Where to eat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107858556%2F444336a3-6065-4402-9365-879fc17bc7a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107858556%2F444336a3-6065-4402-9365-879fc17bc7a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Oysters with garlic at Compartir, Cadaques 
El Bullí may be closed and El Celler de Can Roca (currently top of the World’s 
50 Best Restaurants list 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/list/1-50-winners/El-Celler-de-Can-Roca>) is 
booked solid/too expensive, but anyone visiting these parts who is interested 
in food benefits from their massive influence. In Girona,Nu 
<http://nurestaurant.cat/index.php?idm=en> (Carrer de Abeuradors 4, +34 972 
225230) has an innovative €54 tasting menu with an Asian twist that is worth 
the blowout.

El Bullí alumni (they are everywhere) run Compartir 
<http://ca.compartircadaques.com/restaurant/> in Cadaqués (meal around €50pp, 
Riera Sant Vicenç, +34 972 258482) and they deserve all their plaudits, but I 
also like the healthy, simple food atCan Tito (set menu €15, Carrer Vigilant 8, 
+34 972 259070) just off the waterfront. There are only a handful of tables at
Amb els 5 sentits <https://www.facebook.com/ambels5sentitsbesalu> in Besalú 
(€11.40 for five courses, Carrer Abat Zafont 8, +34 633 633390) and there’s no 
choice. You just sit down and eat delicious food.

Where to sleep
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443108042051%2Fd20b41d7-4080-4ec1-86aa-d5245610fd6d-1020x679.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20do%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcatalonia-holiday-guide-hotels-restaurants-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443108042051%2Fd20b41d7-4080-4ec1-86aa-d5245610fd6d-1020x679.jpeg>
 A bedroom at Bells Oficis, Girona 
Bells Oficis <http://www.bellsoficis.com/> (doubles from €40/€85 B&B with 
shared/private bathroom) is a characterful B&B in Girona just a few minutes’ 
walk from the main sights.Hotel Port Lligat <http://www.port-lligat.net/hotel/> 
(doubles from €70 room-only) is remarkably good value bearing in mind its prime 
spot just metres from the beach. You may never manage to drag yourself away 
from the view from your room’s balcony. In Besalú,Hotel 3 Arcs 
<https://www.facebook.com/hotel3arcs> (doubles from €70 B&B) is right in the 
centre of town in a beautifully renovated building.
• There are several budget airlines that fly from the UK to Barcelona, Girona 
and Reus airports
 