
Catalonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/catalonia> heads to the polls on 
Sunday to elect the 135 members who will sit in the region’s 11th parliament. 
Billed as a plebiscite on independence, the vote will be the most important 
Catalan election since its parliament was first elected in 1980.

How did we get here?

Before the previous election (in 2012) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/barca-loners-will-breakaway-catalonia-fracture-spain>
, the Catalan parliament adopted a resolution asserting “the right of the 
people of Catalonia to be able to freely and democratically determine their 
collective future through a referendum”.

In the elections that followed later that year, the mostly pro-referendum 
parties – Convergence and Union (CiU), Republican Left of Catalonia (ERC), 
Initiative for Catalonia Greens-United and Alternative Left (ICV-EUiA) and the 
the Popular Unity Candidature (CUP) – won the most votes and seats.

2012 Catalan election result 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/catalan_results-zip/giv-31114QHajR2EgTsNm/>
However, the CiU party of Catalonia’s president, Artur Mas, lost 12 seats, and 
he had to rely on the support of the ERC to secure the numbers needed to form a 
government.

Despite their differences, and diverging factions within, the pro-referendum 
parties were able to muster enough votes in 2013 to passa declaration 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catalan_Sovereignty_Declaration> that affirmed 
Catalonia’s right to self-determination, and set forth the beginning of a 
process to call an independence referendum.

But Spain’s constitutional court declared the declaration void and 
unconstitutional.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fecdfd8d80980abcb775bc8436dabd9d473981d%2F0_199_5238_3143%2F5238.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20election%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20its%20most%20important%20vote%20yet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20election%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20its%20most%20important%20vote%20yet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fecdfd8d80980abcb775bc8436dabd9d473981d%2F0_199_5238_3143%2F5238.jpg>
 The mayor of Barcelona, Ada Colau, whose leftwing Barcelona en Comú is allied 
to the Catalonia Yes we Can (CSQEP) party. Photograph: Emilio Morenatti/AP 
Since then, the size of demonstrations has got bigger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/11/catalans-join-hands-human-chain-independence-spain>
 andbigger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/11/catalonia-pro-independence-rally-barcelona-spain>
 – and support for a referendum has intensified.

The Spanish government, though, has remained firmly opposed to an independence 
vote, declaring attempts to hold one illegal. Technically speaking, Madrid is 
on the right side of the law because in order to hold a legally binding 
referendum the central government would need to transfer authority to the 
region (just like in Scotland’s referendum) – and it says it won’t.


The standoff led the Catalan government to call a snap election, the third in 
five years, and to label Sunday’s vote a plebiscite on independence.

How many Catalans support independence?

It’s complicated. In November 2014 Catalonia held an informal consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/09/catalans-vote-symbolic-referendum-independence-catalonia-madrid>
, in which more than 80% of participants voted in favour of an independent 
Catalan state.

But even the organisers of that vote wouldn’t claim the 80% figure should lead 
to independence, nor does it mean that a majority wants independence.

About 2.3 million people cast a ballot in that participatory exercise, which, 
using census data, would roughly translate into a 36% turnout.

At the last election, more than 2 million people voted for the parties that 
supported the pro-referendum declaration. In votes prior to that,support for 
pro-independence parties was relatively steady on around 1.5 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/nov/10/why-an-independence-referendum-in-catalonia-is-inevitable-in-two-charts>
.

On the specific question of full independence, polls show Catalonia is quite 
evenly divided.
Catalan independence polls 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/catalan-independence/giv-31114ss5bROiVZg2i/>
And the same polling <http://ceo.gencat.cat/ceop/AppJava/pages/index.html> 
also reveals important nuances: the “against independence” camp is split down 
the middle between those content with the status quo and those who want more 
powers handed over to the region, for example through a federal arrangement.

What is evident is that, if a referendum were to be held, how the electorate 
is defined (who gets to vote) and the offer/s on the table would be crucial 
factors.

However you interpret these numbers, though, three trends are clear: 

 * Catalans are split over the question of independence. There isn’t a clear 
majority either way.

 * A majority isn’t happy with the current constitutional setup and 
relationship with Madrid.

 * The numbers supporting pro-independence or pro-referendum positions have 
increased noticeably over the past five years.

Who are the parties standing in this election?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F596393a11205dd79bbc0951412597349a6f5ac83%2F193_187_2956_1775%2F2956.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20election%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20its%20most%20important%20vote%20yet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20election%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20its%20most%20important%20vote%20yet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F596393a11205dd79bbc0951412597349a6f5ac83%2F193_187_2956_1775%2F2956.jpg>
 Human towers, orcastellers, in Tarragona. Photograph: David Ramos/Getty Images 
Catalonia’s political landscape has changed substantially since the 2012 
election.

This will be the first regional election in which the Democratic Convergence 
of Catalonia (CDC) and Democratic Union of Catalonia (UDC) run separately, 
following the dissolution of the Convergence and Union (CiU) in June 2015.

The UDC will run on its own, while CDC is running with the ERC, Democrats of 
Catalonia (DC) and Left Movement (MES) under the Together for Yes (JxSí) 
banner. Members of the pro-independence Catalan National Assembly (ANC), Òmnium 
and the Municipalities’ Association for Independence (AMI) also support 
Together for Yes (JxSí).

Outgoing president Mas is the platform’s candidate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82fdff4c1a1364f080355ed61554916c98e9efc0%2F208_431_4289_2572%2F4289.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20election%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20its%20most%20important%20vote%20yet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20election%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20its%20most%20important%20vote%20yet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82fdff4c1a1364f080355ed61554916c98e9efc0%2F208_431_4289_2572%2F4289.jpg>
 Artur Mas, Catalonia president and CiU leader. Photograph: Matthias 
Oesterle/Zuma Press/Corbis 
Together for Yes says it will proclaim independence within 18 months, if there 
is a parliamentary majority to do so.

The other openly pro-independence party is CUP.

The leftwing ICV and EUiA parties are running in an alliance with 
anti-austerity Podemos and Equo, called Catalonia Yes we Can (CSQEP), a 
platform similar toBarcelona en Comú, which won elections in Barcelona earlier 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/25/spains-indignados-ada-colau-elections-mayor-barcelona>
.

Although independence isn’t directly supported, the group is in favour of a 
consultation on the relationship between Spain and Catalonia 
<http://news.yahoo.com/podemos-backs-urgent-consultation-catalonia-ties-spain-205206447.html>
 and its leaders aresympathetic to Catalans’ right to decide on 
self-determination 
<http://www.catalannewsagency.com/politics/item/podemos-leader-promises-to-respect-the-democratic-will-expressed-by-catalans-on-self-determination>
.

On the unionist benches, the position on independence is clear.

On the centre-right, there’s the Catalan branch of the People’s party (PP), 
the party of prime minister Mariano Rajoy; and on the centre-left, the regional 
affiliate of the socialist party PSOE (although it should be noted that several 
of its members have abstained in the past on votes about the right to a 
referendum).

Also on the centre-right are the liberal party Citizens (Cs), which over the 
past few months has gone from small regional party topolling above 10% 
nationally <http://www.electograph.com/p/electograph-poll-of-polls.html>.

47% of the 1,281 candidates 
<http://www.parlament2015.cat/en/dades-electorals/dades-proces-electoral/index.html#bloc3>
 standing in Sunday’s election are women.

How does the election work?

The 135 members of the Catalan parliament are elected in four districts using 
proportional representation: Barcelona (85), Tarragona (18), Girona (17) and 
Lleida (15).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa30649f3163712d1af569d92a5c413e913db4cdb%2F0_46_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catalonia%20election%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20its%20most%20important%20vote%20yet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catalonia%20election%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20its%20most%20important%20vote%20yet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fdatablog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fguide-catalonia-most-important-election-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa30649f3163712d1af569d92a5c413e913db4cdb%2F0_46_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Pro-independence marchers with their faces painted with the CatalanEstelada 
flag. Photograph: Francisco Seco/AP 
A list must take at least 3% of the vote in each district in order to win 
seats.

68 seats are needed for a majority.

There are 5.5 million voters on the electoral role. And there will be 2,697 
polling stations open on election day.

You can find more data about the election here 
<http://www.parlament2015.cat/en/dades-electorals/dades-proces-electoral/index.html>
.

What do the polls say?
Catalan polls 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/catalan_poll_avg_-zip/giv-31114EY8qUpf2gdpQ/>
If the election result matches the polling, the secessionist parties will have 
the majority they need to move forward with their plans to proclaim 
independence within 18 months.

But the independence debate is only one factor – albeit the most significant 
one – to follow in this election.

With a Spanish general election due later this year, other numbers of interest 
will be the support garnered by the anti-austerity vote and by the surging Cs, 
as well as the performance of Spain’s two main parties, the PP and PSOE.

How to follow election day

The Guardian will be covering the election in depth, with a live blog 
detailing the results as they come in on Sunday evening; all related coverage 
will behere <https://www.theguardian.com/world/catalonia>. The paper’s Spain 
correspondent, Ashifa Kassam, tweets at@ashifa_k <https://twitter.com/ashifa_k>.

Polls open at 9am (8am BST) and close at 8pm (7pm BST).
 