
Catherine McGregor has apologised for describing the appointment of the former 
chief of army David Morrison as Australian of the Year as “weak and 
conventional”, saying the comments were made in “poor judgment”.

Morrison, who gained international prominence as a gender diversity advocate 
after adressing-down to Australian defence force members after the so-called 
Skype scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/no-one-loves-the-army-more-than-me-says-outgoing-chief-david-morrison>
 went viral,was named 2016 Australian of the Year on Monday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/david-morrison-former-chief-of-army-named-australian-of-the-year>
.

In the speeches and interviews that followed he thanked McGregor, who wrote 
the “Skype” speech in her role as the army’s chief speechwriter, and the former 
sex discrimination commissioner, Elizabeth Broderick, for influencing his views 
and opening his eyes to gender inequality.

David Morrison, former chief of army, named Australian of the Year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/david-morrison-former-chief-of-army-named-australian-of-the-year>
But McGregor, a transgender rights advocate and as a group captain is the 
highest ranking transgender officer in the Australian military, was reportedly 
critical of his selection andtold LGBTI newspaper the Star Observer 
<http://www.starobserver.com.au/news/local-news/cate-mcgregor-wants-to-train-new-australian-of-the-year-on-trans-issues/144998>
 that Morrison was “on a steep learning curve when it comes to LGBTI and trans 
issues – he needs to learn a lot and rapidly”.

McGregor said she had hoped to be named Australian of the Year for the sake of 
the wider trans community.

“I felt really sad that they [National Australia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day> board] did not have 
the courage to go with an LGBTI person,” she said. “I thought it was time … It 
was a weak and conventional choice.

“I think I’ll die without seeing a trans Australian of the Year and I think 
that’s terribly sad.”

In an apology posted on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> on Wednesday afternoon, 
McGregor said she had made the comments in the context of praising Morrison’s 
record on women’s rights and in response to a discussion in the trans community 
online about him referring to her by her former name in some post-award 
interviews.
Catherine McGregor (@CateMc3273) 
I wish to apologise to the National Australia Day Council unconditionally for 
my remarks in the@star_observer <https://twitter.com/star_observer> . I made a 
criticism about
 <https://twitter.com/CateMc3273/status/692236942050725888> January 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/CateMc3273/status/692236942050725888> Catherine McGregor 
(@CateMc3273) 
the choice of AOTY based on my personal view that an opportunity had been 
missed to name an LGBTI Australian. THis was poor judgement.
 <https://twitter.com/CateMc3273/status/692237356255019009> January 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/CateMc3273/status/692237356255019009> 
“I wish to apologise to the National Australia Day Council unconditionally for 
my remarks in the Star Observer,” she said. “I made a criticism about the 
choice of AOTY based on my personal view that an opportunity had been missed to 
name an LGBTI Australian. This was poor judgment.

“I am entirely accountable for this and withdraw this aspersion unreservedly.”

She told the Star Observer that the mis-gendering “shows a lack of skill on 
trans issues. He didn’t do intentionally … but that showed a clunkiness he 
needs to learn.”

In her apology, she said that language was “wrong”. “I apologise to David 
Morrison and to the selection committee. I will not make further comment on 
this issue.”

McGregor had earlier repeated the sentiment to Fairfax Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/australian-of-the-year-catherine-mcgregor-says-david-morrison-choice-was-weak-20160127-gmf5g2.html>
, saying Morrison was “safe” and “predictable”.

Morrison was one of the first people McGregor told about her gender struggle 
and both have spoken warmly about their friendship.

He retired as army chief last year and is now chairman of the Diversity 
Council. The Australia Day awards organisation said he was chosen for the 
honour for his commitment to gender equality, diversity and inclusion.

In his acceptance speech on Monday night, he said he would use his year in the 
role to focus on domestic violence, closing the gender pay gap, andthe campaign 
to make Australia a republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/26/malcolm-turnbull-says-republic-doomed-to-heroic-defeat-unless-driven-by-public>
.

“For reasons beyond education, or professional qualifications, or willingness 
to contribute, or a desire to be a part of our society and our community, too 
many of our fellow Australians are denied the opportunity to reach their 
potential,” Morrison said.

“It happens because of their gender, because of the God they believe in, 
because of their racial heritage, because they’re not able-bodied, because of 
their sexual orientation, and we as a nation ... should be able to give them 
the chance to reach their potential.”

McGregor was named Queensland’s Australian of the Year and announced in 
December thatshe would retire from the Royal Australian Air Force 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/australian-of-the-year-2016-finalist-catherine-mcgregor-to-leave-military-to-shine-light-on-transgender-issues-20160118-gm8cx1.html>
, where she has worked since transferring from the army in 2014, to focus on 
that role and her transgender advocacy work.

• On 28 January 2016 this article was amended. A previous version incorrectly 
said David Morrison was a former chief of the Australian defence force (he was 
chief of army) and that Cate McGregor had transferred from the ADF to the air 
force, when she had transferred from the army. The army and the RAAF are part 
of the ADF.
 