
“In spite of France’s political predicament,” writes Beaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/sep/05/cecil-beaton-war-photography-exhibition>
, “the trades of luxury have to be kept alive. It is vital for her that Paris 
remains the fashion centre and that the challenge of ‘What’s new?’ from the 
ravenous buyers, arriving from the four corners of the world, should be met 
with complete authority.

“At this moment Paris designers, returned from rest cures in the ‘midi’ or 
sanatoria in Switzerland, are at work on the collections that will dictate 
fashion next winter. With accord they bravely say, ‘Only in difficulties is 
one’s most creative work done – crises give stronger force to stimulus.’

“An aura of mystery envelops the artists at this time of gestation. Ideas that 
will emerge from their incubators during the next weeks are guarded like state 
secrets. Who are these people whose word carries such weight?”
 Illustration: Cecil Beaton for the Observer 
FIRST Balenciaga <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga>, who of all 
dressmakers is to-day the most revered and influential. Even his rivals are 
generous in praise of his genius. “He is our master,” says Givenchy. “During 
the war he entirely changed the concept and construction of women’s clothes,” 
says Castillo. “All the latest trends can be traced to him,” acknowledge the 
younger generation who live off his ideas. “His work is based on eternal rules; 
even his fantasy is built on the classic. He is the Molière of dressmakers,” 
says the connoisseur, Marie-Louise Bousquet.

Balenciaga is a raven-haired, stolid looking Spaniard of middle height and 
age, with piercing eyes, hooked beak, and birdlike movements of the head. He is 
of humble origin, his taste is impeccable and he expects perfection in all 
things. A man of such granite integrity is easily shocked by the tactics of the 
jungle warfare of fashion. He ignores the offers to design for wholesalers, 
participate in publicity, or indulge in forms of exploitation that “save” so 
many firms. He refuses to enlarge his business and could never be backed by a 
great organisation. His taste and talent could not be “bought.” He must work 
with complete freedom.

Unlike most designers, Balenciaga understands every aspect of his craft. He is 
a tailor and cutter. He knows as no one else how to make stuff live – to play 
with material and give it articulation. Even to-day he can be caught behind the 
scenes sewing one of his dresses. His sense of colour is essentially Spanish – 
strong, hard, yet subtle. He can forage through a hundred patterns of grey 
before he finds the one he needs. He abjures the pretty, takes away any 
unnecessary decoration or ornamentation, and reduces every design to the 
simplest.

In none of his work is there that slight touch of vulgarity which is so often 
the reason for a dressmaker’s success. There are no surprises for their own 
sakes. He never indulges in bluff or trickery. His designing is entirely built 
on the importance of the linear – of measure and proportion. His collections 
seldom vary from one season to another, but continue to follow a definite 
development, and they are always three years ahead of others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e48212ff5f465d0cf153f109e14527b8d8bd47f%2F0_241_2764_3261%2F2764.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cecil%20Beaton%20on%20Paris%20style%20dictators%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2022%20June%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cecil%20Beaton%20on%20Paris%20style%20dictators%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2022%20June%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e48212ff5f465d0cf153f109e14527b8d8bd47f%2F0_241_2764_3261%2F2764.jpg>
 Cristobal Balenciaga, 1927. Photograph: Roger-Viollet/REX/Shutterstock 
Before Balenciaga, well-dressed women wore a good suit (well-fitting, with a 
neat neck), a blouse, and a becoming hat. Balenciaga took away the blouse, 
pulled open the coat at the sides and back of the neck, cut the sleeves between 
elbow and wrist, thickened the shoulders, let out all seams, and put a dog’s 
hat on the head. At first women appeared as if they had escaped from a 
cataclysm wearing someone else’s clothes, but the provocatively covered forms 
and loose-fitting sacks, in fact the silhouette of to-day, were all inventions 
of this lone master mind.

Balenciaga is seldom to be seen by his clients and rarely goes out into 
society. By his elusiveness he is vouchsafed an atmosphere of mystery. In fact, 
he is sad and somewhat taciturn of nature, and leads an extremely quiet life in 
a luxurious apartment decorated with the acme of restraint in sombre Spanish 
taste.

As Balenciaga, shy and dignified, peers at you through his blue glasses (he is 
anxious about his eyesight) your heart goes out to him. Here is a man of such 
deep intensity of feeling that suffering is something he cannot escape, and you 
surmise that somewhere life went wrong for him. Perhaps success came to him too 
late; maybe he merely works too hard and worries. “Why worry yourself to 
death?” he asks. Let us hope he does not contemplate retirement, for if he 
does, then an era will be ended.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0a46126ac85663a19c488616c202611f6dcc1da%2F0_1548_3649_2673%2F3649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cecil%20Beaton%20on%20Paris%20style%20dictators%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2022%20June%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cecil%20Beaton%20on%20Paris%20style%20dictators%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2022%20June%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0a46126ac85663a19c488616c202611f6dcc1da%2F0_1548_3649_2673%2F3649.jpg>
 Coco Chanel in her apartment at the Hotel Ritz Paris, 1960. Photograph: 
AFP/Getty Images 
IT is a miracle of fashion that someone who, forty years ago, made all women 
dress the way she did, should still, with unabated vitality, be continuing to 
do just the same thing.Chanel <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel> is 
indestructible.

Ignoring the vagaries of fashion, Chanel’s clothes now have become costume. 
Yet based on an effect of simplicity they fit perfectly into the concept of 
to-day. With short jackets, shorter skirts, immaculate white cuffs, and a 
tam-o-shanter, this living legend has the power to lash out at any who do not 
concede that, in all facets of the art of living, she is the supreme oracle.
 Illustration: Cecil Beaton for the Observer 
I PREDICT a long, healthy future for Pierre Cardin. He is a well-bred, quiet 
young man, with the pallor of a convolvulus, but he is seething with “inner 
combustion”; when he speaks of his work his eyes blaze, his saliva runs dry, 
and his voice assumes enough volume to crack the Edwardian plasterwork of his 
ceiling.

He learned as a tailor for Dior all the arts of fitting and cutting, then – in 
spite of being no draughtsman – migrated to stage designing for Cocteau and 
Bérard. But the business that he now owns goes in for the antithesis of 
costume. “Style becomes costume only before or after its day,” he asserts. 
“Nothing lasts. Anything too much seen automatically becomes ugly. The 
strip-tease and Paris nudes have made the tight-fitting dress no longer pretty 
or even young.”

When a rich manufacturer upbraided him for his present mode of disguising the 
feminine form divine, Cardin exploded. “You are proud of your mistress’s body 
but you don’t display it when you envelop her in a huge sable coat. Why should 
I display it in cotton? Besides it is for us to give her a mystery. We must 
make an enigma of her breasts and haunches. All artists, from Brueghel to 
Modigliani, have used distortion to create allure. To-day breasts must go back, 
the sex thrust forward.”

Cardin, like Givenchy, is a member of the Martian school: his young models are 
equipped for any science-fiction activity. Their heads protected by crash 
helmets, firemen’s masks, or culinary weapons, they are silhouetted like pears, 
torpedoes, or rocket missiles, in light hairy materials. They are in the 
advance guard of those exploring outer space; they leave Lollobrigida below, 
looking earth-bound and pedestrian.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e8447b326e0b8a7e505926191a82913a454d506%2F0_242_3082_1796%2F3082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cecil%20Beaton%20on%20Paris%20style%20dictators%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2022%20June%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cecil%20Beaton%20on%20Paris%20style%20dictators%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2022%20June%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e8447b326e0b8a7e505926191a82913a454d506%2F0_242_3082_1796%2F3082.jpg>
 Yves Saint Laurent styles Tessa Beaumont, 1959. Photograph: 
Lipnitski/Roger-Viollet/Rex Features  Illustration: Cecil Beaton for the 
Observer 
PERHAPS it is still too early to gauge quite how talented Dior’s “l’Aiglon,” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L'Aiglon> the young St. Laurent, may be. The 
legacy of possibly the best organised fashion empire in Paris helped him 
considerably over the hurdle of the first collection after the death of the 
great Emperor. But from the confidence given to him by Dior, and the respect 
shown him by all now employed under him, this gangling, bespectacled youth, 
looking like the “twenty-two misfortunes” professor in “The Cherry Orchard,” 
makes his decisions with quiet determination, and he is admired for the 
prolixity of his ideas. So far to his credit can be counted the trapeze dress 
and the disappearance of that disfiguring welt, the zipper.

The first time I met St. Laurent, he came late in the evening, after the Bal 
de Têtes had started, to make a head-dress of ivy for Madame Ratli. He was 
timid to the point of being inarticulate, and the excitement of having already 
made seven different head-dresses that day had caused him to faint several 
times. A plate of cold ham was offered but ignored. His hands, with fingers as 
thin as cheese straws, trembled paralytically. Yet soon a little masterpiece of 
originality was created.

Highly impressionable, with great likes and dislikes, he is at the beginning 
of a difficult journey, but his youthful zest and inspiration allow him no time 
to ponder the obstacles ahead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7918350f9a1387ab919177ce2a92deb3aebc227%2F0_94_2800_1796%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cecil%20Beaton%20on%20Paris%20style%20dictators%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2022%20June%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cecil%20Beaton%20on%20Paris%20style%20dictators%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2022%20June%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fcecil-beaton-chanel-balenciaga-saint-laurent-cardin-1958%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7918350f9a1387ab919177ce2a92deb3aebc227%2F0_94_2800_1796%2F2800.jpg>
 The Observer, 22 June 1958.View the page in full. 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/14/Cecil_Beaton_on_Balenciaga_Chanel_Pierre_Cardin_Yves_Saint_Laurent_Observer_22_June_1958.jpeg> 