
I first discovered the Jan Van Eyck when I was visiting Maastricht to do an 
exhibition. I just walked past this slightly mysterious looking building and 
wondered what was going on inside. It’s quite subtle, but beautiful: a 
modernist building designed by Frits Peutz – a cool, glass and concrete 
structure, very minimal. Once you’re inside it’s like a temple of light. Inside 
art production goes on; people make art and people think about making art. And 
they also think about design, which is taken very seriously in the Netherlands.

I’m eight months into a one year residency there. There are very few places 
like this in Europe – a post-academic place where you can just come and stay. 
There are no restrictions put on you. It’s quite utopian in a way, without 
wanting to be too overenthusiastic. But there’s a lot for day-to-day visitors 
too. It’s open to the public and if you feel like a bit of art theory then 
Thursday evening is a great time to pop by. Most weeks there’s a presentation 
where either the resident artists present their work or guest visitors (often 
theorists or thinkers) present their work or films and then hold discussions or 
debates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fjan-van-eyck-acadmie-maastricht-netherlands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417611991729%2Fa09a34ff-9df0-4777-af72-3d21e7f9f31a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cedar%20Lewisohn%20on%20the%20Jan%20van%20Eyck%20Academie%2C%20Maastricht%2C%20the%20Netherlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fjan-van-eyck-acadmie-maastricht-netherlands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cedar%20Lewisohn%20on%20the%20Jan%20van%20Eyck%20Academie%2C%20Maastricht%2C%20the%20Netherlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2Fjan-van-eyck-acadmie-maastricht-netherlands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417611991729%2Fa09a34ff-9df0-4777-af72-3d21e7f9f31a-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Cedar Lewisohn at the Jan Van Eyck. Matylda Krzykowski Photograph: Matylda 
Krzykowski 
It’s also a good place to hang out. There’s an exhibition space as well as a 
cafe, which I hear has the best coffee in Maastricht, and they have all the 
international papers for you to read. I’ve got a big light studio in the 
building which looks out on to a beautiful garden that you can also visit; it 
has a herb garden next to it with a beehive.
• janvaneyck.nl <http://www.janvaneyck.nl/en/home/>. Cedar Lewisohn’s Plywood 
Transmission show runs from December 12 to January 9 at the Cock ‘n’ Bull 
Gallery, London EC2,cocknbullgallery.co.uk <http://cocknbullgallery.co.uk/>
 