
26 January is a day of national significance on which we should all come 
together to celebrate something that really matters – my birthday. ButAustralia 
Day <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day>? Not so much.

Growing up, I loved being born on such an excellent day. It was at the end of 
the school holidays, there were fireworks, and everybody was always free to 
come to my party. Then, when I turned 16, I started sharing my day with the 
Hottest 100. Perfect.

But I also remember when I realised that for some, 26 January wasn’t exactly a 
day to celebrate. In 1988, amid the nationwide pomp of the bicentenary,Burnum 
Burnum <http://www.portrait.gov.au/people/burnum-burnum-1936> staged a landing 
at Dover, planted the Aboriginal flag and offered the British a negotiated 
peace.

Australia Day is a time for mourning, not celebration | Nakkiah Lui
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/26/australia-day-is-a-time-for-mourning-not-celebration>
Even back then, I admired anyone who used a stunt to make a point, and Burnum 
mixed his protest with good humour. “In claiming this colonial outpost, we wish 
you natives no harm,” hesaid 
<http://www.50yearjourney.aiatsis.gov.au/stage9/stage05_item5.htm>. “But we’re 
here to bring you good manners, refinement and an opportunity for a 
‘Koompartoo’, or a fresh start.” 

And a fresh start is what’s required here, as well as good manners and 
refinement.

WA premier Colin Barnett responded to Fremantle’s decision to move their 
celebration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/fremantle-moves-australia-day-events-to-28-january>
 to 28 January bycalling the move “disloyal” 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-27/colin-barnett-on-row-over-fremantle-delaying-australia-day/8061644>
 and claiming that “most Aboriginal groups accept” the status quo, but given 
the long history of opposition, it’s unclear who he’s been consulting. ADay of 
Mourning 
<http://www.nma.gov.au/online_features/defining_moments/featured/Day_of_Mourning>
 was held on the 150th anniversary in 1938, and 40,000marched in 1988 
<http://collections.museumvictoria.com.au/articles/2835>. 

The premier believes that on Australia Day, we “put history to one side” – but 
obviously not everyone finds it so easy. The eloquent Nakkiah Lui explained why 
Aboriginal people can’t celebrate on that datein the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/26/australia-day-is-a-time-for-mourning-not-celebration>
 in 2014, but I want to add to her comments from a non-Aboriginal perspective.

We should move Australia Day away from 26 January because it’s a date that 
anyone with the tiniest shred of empathy can see is difficult for many people 
with Indigenous heritage. How is that not enough to settle the argument?

Now before you accuse me of wearing a black armband, being politically correct 
or sipping lattes (my insipid milk coffee is a flat white, for the record), 
just go and read the Wikipedia entry on “Australian frontier wars 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australian_frontier_wars>”, would you? (I cite 
Wikipedia because it’s known for its neutral point of view.) Why would anyone 
want to celebrate the anniversary of the start of all that?

George III charged Governor Philip to “conciliate the affections 
<http://www.foundingdocs.gov.au/item-did-35.html> ” of the “Natives” – instead, 
the First Fleet brought disease, dispossession and death.

I’m not saying today’s white people should feel guilty about what other white 
people did centuries ago. I’m not saying the violence only went one way, 
either. But the start of a protracted, tragic conflict isn’t a fitting occasion 
for fireworks, awards and pavlova. As a gesture of reconciliation, moving the 
date is literally the least we can do.

As long as we keep 26 January, Aboriginal Australians will keep telling us 
that it’s a day of sorrow for them, even when we name themAustralian of the Year
 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/australian-of-the-year-adam-goodes-mixes-sorrow-with-celebration-on-australia-day-20140125-31ffk.html>
. As long as we keep it, a significant proportion of non-Indigenous Australians 
will be unable to celebrate without feeling like they’re letting off party 
poppers at a memorial service. And as long as we keep it, we’ll keep having 
debates like this every single year.

Let’s not forget that what we’re commemorating on 26 January is the foundation 
of New South Wales, and specifically, Sydney. Colin Barnett’s defence of this 
date is the only time I can remember someone from WA wanting to celebrate 
anything to do with the east coast.


The truth is that it doesn’t matter to most of us when our national day is, as 
long as we get a day to go to the beach, have a picnic or a barbie, play 
cricket, scoff lamingtons, dance along to the Hottest 100 or whatever feels 
most Aussie. And it should be in summer, obviously. But otherwise I can’t 
imagine that most of us give a rat’s, to use a charming Australianism, what 
date our national day is.

What would we be losing by making the change? Sure, I’d be sacrificing a 
public holiday on my birthday, but what’s at stake for everyone else? The 
opportunity to spend a day every year wrestling with our violent past? The 
chance for a celebration that’s necessarily tinged with sorrow for many of our 
fellow Australians?

And don’t talk to me about tradition. 26 January became an annual, national 
public holidayin 1994 <http://www.australiaday.org.au/australia-day/history/>. 
It’s younger than the Hottest 100!

Even those who most fervently defend the “institution” of Australia Day that’s 
been so dear to (some of) us for 22 precious years surely, in their hearts, 
realise it’s a pretty dubious anniversary to celebrate. That’s why Barnett said 
it was a day when we “put history to one side”. What kind of a national day 
requires us to gloss over our history, anyway?

Let’s make the change, and do it in such a way that everyone wins. 26 January 
can be First Fleet Day (at least until a grateful nation renames it Dom Knight 
Day, obviously) and not a public holiday, but Australia Day should move around, 
like the Queen’s Birthday, to be the first Monday in February.

Australia Day: what makes us great, and what that greatness demands of us | 
Stan Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/25/the-overwhelming-response-to-my-speech-tells-me-we-can-be-better-than-our-racist-history>
That way, we all get a long weekend right at the end of summer when we’ve 
returned to work and need it most. (Erik Jensen haspointed out 
<https://www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/opinion/topic/2016/11/26/change-the-date/14800788004016>
 that Australia Day always used to be a Monday for that very reason.) A 
guaranteed long weekend is a tradition that all Australians can all get behind.

Barnett says that “Australia Day is now a day for all Australians” – so let’s 
choose a day when all Australians can all celebrate. On another day, we could 
sing “Australians all let us rejoice” and truly mean it. And we could all 
genuinely celebrate the many wonderful things that all of us, whether 
Aboriginal, Torres Strait Islander or English-Welsh-Scottish mongrel like me, 
have brought to this wonderful country we now all share.

I admit that I’ll regret having to work on my birthday for the first time 
ever. But it’ll be worth it to know that my country isn’t throwing a nationwide 
patriotism party on a day when an important part of our community would rather 
remember, and mourn.
 