
Strange encounters are guaranteed this year in the small Dutch city of 
’s-Hertogenbosch. A squirrel-fish might shake you warmly by the claw and 
proffer an image of hellfire and damnation. On a peaceful canal, a demonic 
figure might play a harp while riding a goose – but the goose turns out to be a 
penis with a giant breast as its hindquarters. (It is, the boat pilot confides, 
an image of lust.)

All of the Netherlands knows that this respectable city (known colloquially as 
Den Bosch) goes off its rocker once a year, celebrating the country’s most 
raucous carnival. But in 2016, the madness will continue long after it should 
have slept off its hangover. Hundreds of events are planned on, under and above 
the streets, marking the 500th anniversary of the death of its most famous son: 
Hieronymus Bosch (bosch500.nl <http://www.bosch500.nl/en>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fnetherlands-s-hertogenbosch-hieronymus-bosch-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff12f7ba65c12e34b0bba0f17dcaf5baa1301db72%2F0_80_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrating%20the%20life%20of%20Hieronymus%20Bosch%20in%20%E2%80%99s-Hertogenbosch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fnetherlands-s-hertogenbosch-hieronymus-bosch-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrating%20the%20life%20of%20Hieronymus%20Bosch%20in%20%E2%80%99s-Hertogenbosch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fnetherlands-s-hertogenbosch-hieronymus-bosch-anniversary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff12f7ba65c12e34b0bba0f17dcaf5baa1301db72%2F0_80_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
 Some of the town’s restaurants have created special plates as part of the 
commemorations. Photograph: Holland Media Bank 
There will be boat trips through the city’s tunnels to view projections of his 
hellish creatures – but not until April when the roosting bats will have left. 
However, surreal figures already stud the streets, parks and and shops, or are 
projected onto buildings. A dazzling exhibition (advance booking essential (
hetnoordbrabantsmuseum.nl) <http://www.hetnoordbrabantsmuseum.nl/english> 
closes in May, but reproductions fill a former church now devoted to one of the 
strangest minds of the 15th century.

Restaurants on pretty street Korte Putstraat have commissioned special plates: 
inAllerlei <http://www.allerlei-visserij.nl/NL/menu/>, we ate roast cod which 
revealed a naked woman with a bunch of herbs for a head as it disappeared.

Most locals affectionately call the artist Jeroen. He was born Jeroen van 
Aken, from Aachen in Germany, only adopting the grander Hieronymus Bosch as he 
became famous – so patrons knew where to find him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fnetherlands-s-hertogenbosch-hieronymus-bosch-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd191e5310ac58ca44aaf4ba7c38bbd07dc288a34%2F0_81_1291_775%2F1291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrating%20the%20life%20of%20Hieronymus%20Bosch%20in%20%E2%80%99s-Hertogenbosch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fnetherlands-s-hertogenbosch-hieronymus-bosch-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrating%20the%20life%20of%20Hieronymus%20Bosch%20in%20%E2%80%99s-Hertogenbosch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fnetherlands-s-hertogenbosch-hieronymus-bosch-anniversary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd191e5310ac58ca44aaf4ba7c38bbd07dc288a34%2F0_81_1291_775%2F1291.jpg>
 The market in ‘s-Hertogenbosch. Photograph: Holland Media Bank 
The city centre and the triangular market place where Bosch lived and worked 
are a 10-minute walk from the station. A few minutes walk from here is the 
grandest fraternity, theZwanenbroedershuis 
<http://www.zwanenbroedershuis.nl/index.php/nl/>, of which Bosch was a member – 
a rare honour when artists were considered mere craftsmen. It’s another minute 
to the gigantic cathedral where the fraternity would bury him in 1516 – a 
beautifully carved stone marks his final journey.

The Wondrous Climb 
<http://www.holland.com/global/tourism/interests/jheronimus-bosch-500/wondrous-climb.htm>
, a dizzying tower installed for this year, gives an exhilarating panorama of 
his entire world, from wooden walkways around the cathedral roof. In the 
distance is the river, but close at hand a crowd of grotesque carved stone 
figures perch on the flying buttresses. The battered originals are now in a 
museum nearby but modern replacements capture their spirit: musicians, demons, 
dragons, a man guzzling a whole barrel of beer, a bear eating a hive of honey 
and an angel on a mobile phone – a 21st-century joke the 15th-century artist 
would surely have enjoyed.

• The trip was provided by the Netherlands Tourist Board (holland.com 
<http://www.holland.com/global/tourism.htm>). The Duke hotel (thedukehotel.nl 
<http://thedukehotel.nl/en>) in Den Bosch centre has doubles from £74 
room-only. Direct trains from Schiphol airport cost €16.20 one way
 