
The man handpicked by Malcolm Turnbull to head the government’s digital 
transformation has said the error rate in Centrelink’s data-matching process is 
so unfathomably high that it would send a commercial enterprise out of business.

Paul Shetler, the former digital transformation office head, criticised the 
government’s response to its latest IT crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/minister-defends-centrelink-over-welfare-debt-compliance-system>
, telling Guardian Australia it was symptomatic of a culture of blame aversion 
within the bureaucracy.

“It is literally blame aversion, it is not risk aversion,” Shetler said. 
“They’re trying to avoid the blame, and they’re trying to cast it wide.

“The justifications that have been given I think are just another example of 
the culture of ‘good news’, reporting only good news up through the bureaucracy.


Minister defends Centrelink over welfare debt compliance system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/minister-defends-centrelink-over-welfare-debt-compliance-system>
“I’m sure that the bureaucracy was being told at every single level that 
everything was OK.

“That’s how it works in the bureaucracy. Bad news is not welcomed, and when 
bad news comes, they try to shift the blame.”

It is the first time Shetler, formerly the government’s chief digital officer 
and a former chief digital officer for the UK ministry of justice , has broken 
his silence on the series of IT failures that have plagued the government in 
recent months: the census debacle, the failure of the Australian Tax Office 
systems and now Centrelink’s debt recovery problems.

Shetler resigned in November 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/national/public-service/digital-transformation-agency-boss-paul-shetler-resigns-20161130-gt0tot.html>
 after being hired by Turnbull to transform the government’s approach to 
digital technology 
<http://www.themandarin.com.au/73275-paul-shetler-16-months-digital-transformation-australia/>
.

He said it was difficult for him to watch successive IT failures, which he 
described as “cataclysmic” and “not a crisis of IT” but a “crisis of 
government”.

“I said when I came in that this would be happening, I said this was already 
happening, I said it was unacceptable and I made that case the entire time I 
was at the DTO [digital transformation office], and the DTA [digital 
transformation agency],” he said.

“I was very explicit about it internally, not nearly as much so externally. It 
was a fight that I fought from day one, not an easy fight to win, because 
you’ve got an entire bureaucracy of IT bureaucrats who are backed by large 
vendors, who have large numbers of staff, and because ministers, I’m going out 
on a limb here, very quickly become captive to the departments that they deal 
with.”


Shetler said the consequences of the  failures of the Centrelink system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
 were different from problems with the census or the ATO becausethey were felt 
by those least able to deal with it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
.

He said data-matching systems must have human oversight to deal with mistakes. 

“The way they did it, obviously it’s dangerous, because their algorithms are 
flawed in the first place,” Shetler said.

“Secondly, you have to be careful with data. Much of the data that’s in the 
federal government, how good is it really? There is this sort of a blind faith 
in data.”


The government has continued to deny any problem with its automated compliance 
system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/29/government-confident-in-centrelink-debt-compliance-system-despite-reported-errors>
, which relies on data-matching income reported to Centrelink with tax office 
records.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcentrelinks-welfare-debt-mistake-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Centrelink's%20welfare%20debt%20mistake%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcentrelinks-welfare-debt-mistake-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Centrelink%27s%20welfare%20debt%20mistake%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcentrelinks-welfare-debt-mistake-video-explainer&media=>
Centrelink’s welfare debt mistake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2017/jan/03/centrelinks-welfare-debt-mistake-video-explainer>
It confirmed it developed the data matching software in-house, rather than 
buying it from a private vendor.

The software has been used for data-matching operations for several years, 
raising questions about what the government knew of its potential flaws before 
using it for such high-volume debt recovery.

“As with all new software, rigorous testing has been carried out by the 
department to ensure the system is working as intended,” department general 
manager Hank Jongen, effectively head of communications, said.

The department said individuals were given ample opportunity to contest the 
discrepancies, and that 80% of those who received a letter had paid the money 
back.

Shetler said a 20% error rate would be unacceptable in any other industry. 

“All I can say is, if they were a commercial company, you would go out of 
business, with a 20% failure rate, a known 20% failure rate, you would go out 
of business, any other kind of matching service would,” he said.

“Come on. Could you imagine the stock exchange doing that? Could you imagine 
Amazon, Apple or a bank doing that? An insurance company doing that?

“It’s just unfathomable, and yet government thinks it can do that.

“This is the real problem. Government needs to be less arrogant. You’ve got 
senior public servants there who are drawing private sector salaries, but 
they’re not holding themselves to the same standard.”

Shetler identified a series of problems that could be immediately addressed. 
He said it should start with building capability and upskilling across all 
areas of the public service.

A “radical” upgrade of IT skills was needed, he said, starting from the top 
levels of the public service. That would include ensuring only technically 
proficient executives were placed in senior IT leadership roles. Public 
servants should be increasingly placed in front of real users, so they can see 
the impacts of their decisions and systems on the ground.

Shetler said the current Centrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> situation had exposed a 
gap between government policy and service delivery. That divergence must be 
addressed, he said.

“Policy is not just something you dream up on a piece of paper,” he said. 
“It’s actually also the results that you see on the streets.”
 