
Conflict in Central African Republic has left 2.3 million people needing aid 
and raised fears of a“gradual disintegration of the state” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/12/central-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided>
. Clár Ní Chonghaile metmidwives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/12/central-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided>
 attempting to save lives amid the chaos,teachers giving lessons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/19/central-african-republic-car-children-dream-of-education-and-peace>
 on peace and reconciliation, and thehead of the UN mission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/26/head-un-mission-central-african-republic-pledges-end-troop-abuses-minusca-parfait-onanga-anyanga>
 pledging to end troop abuses.

Elsewhere on the site

A slave in Scotland: ‘I fell into a trap – and I couldn’t get out’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/28/slavery-human-trafficking-hotel-workers-bangladesh-scotland>

‘It’s like Florence Nightingale’s time’: South Sudan’s public services collapse
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/27/south-sudan-public-services-collapse-juba-teaching-hospital-like-florence-nightingale-time>

How southern Africa is coping with worst global food crisis for 25 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/southern-africa-worst-global-food-crisis-25-years>


‘My grandsons’ fight to avenge their father’: child soldiers in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/25/child-soldiers-afghanistan-grandsons-fight-to-avenge-their-father>


Divert 10% of EU funds to deal with refugee crisis, says Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/24/divert-10-of-eu-funds-refugee-crisis-germany-gerd-muller>

‘I just got trapped’: Nepal tries to expand girls’ horizons beyond marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/18/trapped-child-marriage-nepal-attempts-to-expand-girls-horizons>

Opinion

The International Monetary Fund has failed to live up to its own hype on 
social protection,argue Alexander Kentikelenis, Thomas Stubbs and Lawrence King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/25/the-imf-international-monetary-fund-has-not-lived-up-to-hype-on-social-protection>
. Their research shows the IMF is more interested in enforcing fiscal austerity 
than supporting health and welfare programmes.

Sexual health deserves greater attention in times of crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/sexual-health-little-attention-crisis-devastating-results-reproductive-healthcare-world-humanitarian-summit>
, says International Planned Parenthood Federation head Tewodros Melesse. He 
says there are devastating consequences of ignoring the issue, as 60% of 
preventable maternal deaths take place in fragile settings.

Kevin Watkins makes the case for a global fund for education in emergencies to 
ensure that the30 million children who have lost their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/16/education-30-million-children-have-lost-their-homes-syria-new-fund>
 don’t also lose their education.

Multimedia

Why are so many children around the world out of school? In our latest podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/may/19/why-are-so-many-children-around-the-world-out-of-school-podcast>
, Global development editor Lucy Lamble looks at why 75 million children can’t 
access adequate education. The impact conflict has on education is highlighted
in this gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/may/24/schools-ruins-conflict-war-yemen-syria-south-sudan-in-pictures>
 showing schools reduced to rubble in Yemen, South Sudan and Syria.

‘When I have my period I’m not allowed to …’: girls in Nepal share their photo 
diaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/may/28/menstrual-hygiene-day-girls-nepal-when-i-have-my-period-im-not-allowed-to-photo-diaries-in-pictures>
 to explore the taboos that still exist around menstruation.

Are you good in a crisis? Try your luck with our humanitarian aid quiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/20/humanitarian-aid-quiz-are-you-good-in-a-crisis>
.

What you said

Which film do you think provides an accurate portrayal of humanitarianism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/26/the-last-face-sean-penn-cannes-aid-dramas-emergency-assistance>
?Gregory Barrow wrote:

Blood Diamond (2006) had a reasonably good stab at grappling with the issue of 
illegal diamond mining but tend to feel that The Constant Gardener got the 
balance right between drama and highlighting an interesting angle on 
humanitarianism.

Highlight from the blogosphere

The Overseas Development Institute shares thoughts from the world humanitarian 
summit – was ita political breakthrough or a fringe festival? 
<https://www.odi.org/comment/10401-world-humanitarian-summit-political-breakthrough-or-fringe-festival>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team –@swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 