
Senior levels of government would have known the risks posed by Centrelink’s 
new automated debt recovery system before it was rolled out, according to a 
former high-ranking departmental official.

The welfare compliance system continues to face sustained criticism this week, 
and the independent MPAndrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie> on Wednesday renewed 
calls for it to be suspended, saying his office had fielded more than 100 
complaints, including from four individuals who were suicidal.

Australians with a disability say they have been chased by debt collectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/04/heartless-core-autistic-man-chased-centrelink-debt-collectors>
 over inaccurate debts, and the Australian has reported that the visa status of
asylum seekers has been threatened 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/asylumseekers-caught-in-4bn-welfare-crackdown/news-story/ebc995d001361afff9858bbf16f5d92e>
 in instances of non-payment.


'Heartless to the core': autistic man chased by Centrelink debt collector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/04/heartless-core-autistic-man-chased-centrelink-debt-collectors>
The main focus of complaints continues to be on the system’s automated 
comparison of an individual’s reported income toCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> and information held by 
the Australian Taxation Office.

The Department of Human Services source, who is no longer with the agency, 
told Guardian Australia the risks of using the automated data matching system 
in such a fashion would have been known at senior levels before it was rolled 
out.

“Knowing the process, a risk assessment would have been done,” they said. “The 
risks would have been discussed at very senior levels. The minister would have 
been briefed – if he wasn’t, it would be extremely rare.”

The source said using data matching to detect potential overpayments could 
work but it needed manual oversight to ensure flaws and inaccuracies were 
weeded out.

Before July, Centrelink staff manually checked discrepancies and followed up 
with customers via telephone and letter, a process that was stopped to allow 
the government to ramp up its efforts to claw back $4bn of debt in the next 
four years.


Centrelink's 10% debt recovery fee comes as news to human services minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/centrelinks-10-debt-recovery-fee-comes-as-news-to-human-services-minister>
The human services minister, Alan Tudge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/centrelinks-10-debt-recovery-fee-comes-as-news-to-human-services-minister>
, remains on leave. Asked whether either Tudge or the social services minister, 
Christian Porter, had been briefed on the potential risks of the system, a 
spokesman for Porter said: “Minister Tudge has been constantly briefed on the 
success of the compliance system which, as minister Porter reiterated 
yesterday, has led to $300m in overpayments being returned to taxpayers with a 
very low level of complaint.”

The government insists the system is working well, saying 80% of the 169,000 
completed reviews resulted in an individual paying back the money.

Porter said the process afforded individuals proper opportunity to clarify 
their debts and said it was “as reasonable a process as you could possibly 
derive”.

Wilkie, who raised concerns about the system in early December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
, criticised Porter’s comments on Wednesday, saying they were at odds with the 
experience of his office.

Wilkie said the system was driving people to the brink of suicide. One of the 
more than 100 complaints he had received involved a woman being erroneously 
told she owed $69,000, more money than she had ever received. When she queried 
the debt, it was reduced to $3,000, still without explanation.

Acoss criticises government's 'appalling' jail threats to welfare recipients
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
“This is a systemic problem, the harm it is causing is very broad,” Wilkie 
said. “I’ve had people who have approached me who have been frightened, 
absolutely scared, people who are paying this money because they are so 
frightened by this very official letter.

“I’ve had four people now approach me in my office who I would describe as 
presenting as suicidal and in all those cases we’ve taken what action we 
thought was appropriate.”

Wilkie referred the matter to the commonwealth ombudsman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/ombudsman-asked-to-investigate-if-centrelink-wrongly-pursuing-welfare-debts>
 four days before Christmas. He said the ombudsman’s office had now responded 
and was gathering information.

Senator Nick Xenophon also referred the matter to the ombudsman late last 
month, and wrote to Tudge to warn that his office was being “inundated” with 
complaints about the system.

“The fact is, the government stuffed it up, they are treating genuine 
Centrelink recipients as criminals,” Xenophon said on Wednesday. “They need to 
apologise and go back to the drawing board. Clearly this is a system that 
appears to be run by robots and overly automated.”

Last month Guardian Australia spoke with another whistleblower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
, a Centrelink compliance officer, who said the system was flawed and was 
treating welfare recipients unfairly. The source said only about 20 of the 
hundreds of disputed cases they had handled turned out to be genuine debts.

The government has sent out 169,000 letters to welfare recipients since July 
and plans to expand its debt recovery efforts, including by removing a six-year 
time limit on retrieval and, in some cases, charging interest, imposing a 10% 
debt recovery fee and banning travel for those who have not paid.

Before July, staff manually reviewed discrepancies between Centrelink and tax 
office data.

• Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; 
Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467. Beyond Blue also provides information 
and support on 1300 22 4636
 