
Centrelink <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> has removed 
advice telling welfare recipients they only needed to keep payslips for six 
months, which conflicted with the government’s efforts to claw back debts from 
up to six years ago.

The pressure on the government over problems with its automated debt recovery 
system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/centrelink-crisis-people-targeted-with-inaccurate-debts-may-be-able-to-sue>
 continued on Tuesday, as the Greens called for the issue to be referred to a 
Senate inquiry.

Senator Rachel Siewert urged the government not just to suspend the system, 
but to scrap it altogether, saying it had caused “too many issues to remain 
viable”.

“When parliament resumes I will work with Senate colleagues to initiate a 
Senate inquiry into the debacle,” she said.

Centrelink crisis: people targeted with inaccurate debts may be able to sue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/centrelink-crisis-people-targeted-with-inaccurate-debts-may-be-able-to-sue>
“We need clear answers on how this program went so wrong and what the real 
implications are.”

The Community and Public Sector Union, which represents Centrelink workers, 
say its members have repeatedly found the debts are being wrongly issued.

The assistant national secretary, Michael Tull, said staff were already 
“desperately overstretched”, and that the problems with the debt recovery 
program were piling on “even more pressure and feeding more aggression from 
understandably frustrated customers”.

He called for the system to be immediately suspended.

“We hold very serious concerns about Centrelink’s ability to cope in coming 
months,” he said.

“There’s a perfect storm of work coming, with this debt recovery scheme likely 
to be just part of the problem.”

The system, as it has done for years, relies on data-matching between 
Centrelink and the Australian Taxation Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/centrelink-crisis-cataclysmic-turnbull-former-head-digital-transformation>
 to detect discrepancies in income. But wherehumans would have previously 
examined those discrepancies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
, Centrelink now automatically demands individuals prove they were entitled to 
benefits within 21 days using its online system.

Those debts could be up to six years old, and new laws will allow the 
government to pursue debts even further back. Up until at least last week, the 
Department of Human Services website informed customers they only needed to 
hold payslips for six months as proof of income.

“You need to keep evidence of your earnings as we may ask you to show proof of 
your income. We recommend keeping your payslips for at least 6 months,” it read.

Users on social media noticed the flawed advice, and also noticed this week 
when it was quietly removed.

Lorde de Voterati (@OzEquitist) 
Ping @Asher_Wolf <https://twitter.com/Asher_Wolf> @natecochrane 
<https://twitter.com/natecochrane> @1petermartin 
<https://twitter.com/1petermartin> @knausc <https://twitter.com/knausc> 
@triplejHack <https://twitter.com/triplejHack>#Centrelink 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Centrelink?src=hash> changed payslip retention 
info today!#NotMyDebt <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NotMyDebt?src=hash> #RoboDebt
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/RoboDebt?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/5Vw79z9aGt 
<https://t.co/5Vw79z9aGt>
 <https://twitter.com/OzEquitist/status/818431594251698182> January 9, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/OzEquitist/status/818431594251698182> 
Now, the advice simply reads 
<https://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/enablers/income-reporting>: “You 
need to keep evidence of your earnings as we may ask you to show proof of your 
income.”

The Department of Human Services general manager, Hank Jongen, who is 
effectively head of communications, said the phrase was identified as 
potentially confusing.

“The Department of Human Services website consists of more than 1,300 pages 
and around 475,000 words of content for customers,” he said.


“The phrase in question was drawn to our attention and deemed to be 
potentially confusing, so it was removed.”


Human services minister Alan Tudge, who has now returned from leave, issued a 
statement on Tuesday defending the system.

Tudge said Centrelink had been using data-matching for years, and all it had 
done was make it more automated.

“The only major change is that it is more automated so we can complete more 
checks,” he said. “Where there is a discrepancy between the tax office 
information and the self-reported Centrelink information, a notice requesting 
clarification is sent to the welfare recipient.”

“It is only after the recipient has clarified the discrepancy or ignored the 
notice, that any debt may be calculated.”

He said individuals can call Centrelink’s phone lines for assistance at any 
point. Those phone systems have seen lengthy wait times, and an audit in 2015 
found almost a quarter went unanswered.

Tudge said individuals were given at least three opportunities to ensure their 
employment income was accurate.

“Firstly when the request for information is sent, secondly they can request a 
review of any debt that is raised, and finally by appeal to a tribunal,” he 
said. “Labor is demanding we cease a process that has successfully recovered 
over $300m of incorrectly paid taxpayer’s money since July and, frankly, I 
don’t think many taxpayers would support that call.”

Labor’s Linda Burney continued to criticise the system on Tuesday, saying it 
must be suspended.

“Sending out 20,000 letters a week, potentially 4,000 of those letters are 
mistakes, is crazy,” she said. “It is not the way in which public policy should 
be exercised.”

She described Centrelink as “at breaking point”, and said its staff were being 
put under immense pressure and were not to blame for the government’s “cash 
grab”.

When asked whether Labor would support a Senate inquiry, Burney said she had 
already referred the issue to the auditor general, and highlightedthe recently 
initiated commonwealth ombudsman investigation. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/ombudsman-launches-investigation-into-centrelink-debt-recovery-crisis>

Fiona the Unemployed Bettong visits Centrelink to discuss her debt notice | 
First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/fiona-the-unemployed-bettong-visits-centrelink-to-discuss-her-debt-notice>
She said she expected to receive communications from the auditor general next 
week.

Tull said CPSU members tasked with reviewing cases had found serious problems 
with the debt recovery system.

“We have members in Centrelink who’ve been tasked with reviewing cases through 
this scheme saying in almost every case the poor customer ends up owing 
nothing, or just a fraction of the debt claimed,” he said.

“In at least one case an initial debt for $9,000 ended up being $90. That’s 
not a minor discrepancy but a clear sign of a failed system.”

That accords with the recent story of a Centrelink compliance officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
, who told Guardian Australia that of the hundreds of disputed cases reviewed, 
only about 20 were legitimate debts.
 