
A Centrelink <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> 
compliance officer has broken ranks to describe the government’s crackdown on 
welfare debts as grossly unfair, saying its new automated compliance system is 
flawed and overly harsh on those on sickness benefits.

The government continues to insist there are no flaws with its compliance 
system, which is being used toretrieve debts from hundreds of thousands of 
Australia’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/centrelink-urged-to-stop-collecting-welfare-debts-after-compliance-system-errors>
 lowest paid and most vulnerable.

The system relies on an automated data-matching process to detect discrepancies
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
 between fortnightly income reported to Centrelink and annual pay information 
held by the tax office, a comparison that has been criticised as too crude.

Once a discrepancy is detected – currently occurring at a rate of about 20,000 
cases a week, compared with 20,000 a year previously – welfare recipients must 
prove they were entitled to the welfare benefit, or pay the debt.

Ombudsman asked to investigate if Centrelink wrongly pursuing welfare debts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/ombudsman-asked-to-investigate-if-centrelink-wrongly-pursuing-welfare-debts>
The Centrelink compliance officer, who asked for anonymity, told Guardian 
Australia the system was error-prone but that most customers were paying debts 
without checking them first. The source said of the hundreds of cases they had 
reviewed, only about 20 (at a “generous estimate”) turned out to be genuine 
debts.

The worker said the system was particularly harsh on those who received 
Centrelink’s sickness allowance – a benefit for employees who are unable to 
work temporarily due to serious illness but are not paid by their employer.

“The ATO matched data will show that they worked the entire financial year and 
will apportion the gross payments over that financial year without taking into 
account their time off,” the source said. “This means the system raises a debt 
for the entire sickness allowance they received. For many, that’s a debt of 
over $1,000.

“Although we may have documented evidence of their medical issues on the 
system, we as [compliance officers] are not allowed to look in the system to 
find any of that evidence. Instead customers must obtain all their pay 
information for that financial year.”

When a discrepancy between Centrelink and ATO data is detected, some 
individuals are being asked to track down pay slips that may be several years 
old 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/ombudsman-asked-to-investigate-if-centrelink-wrongly-pursuing-welfare-debts>
 or obtain letters from their employers. That is particularly difficult where 
past employers have gone into liquidation or no longer exist.

The Centrelink source said their team was instructed to tell those people to 
contact the consumer affairs watchdog in their state or territory, which could 
then help them track down the necessary information. Colleagues had recently 
learned that those state and territory agencies did not hold such information.

Centrelink's 10% debt recovery fee comes as news to human services minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/centrelinks-10-debt-recovery-fee-comes-as-news-to-human-services-minister>
“[We] were told to keep telling customers this false information until another 
way is found,” the source said.

The Department of Human Services said in a brief statement that it remained 
“confident in the online compliance system and associated checking process with 
customers”.

The department said more than 70% of those who had received a compliance 
letter since September had resolved the matter online and only 2.2% were 
requested to supply supporting documentation such as payslips.

Frustrations with the debt recovery process have been compounded by errors 
with Centrelink’s online customer portal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/fears-centrelink-online-glitch-may-send-welfare-recipients-to-debt-collectors>
, where individuals must go to lodge a dispute. The department said the errors 
with its online service had affected only a small number of people and had 
since been resolved.

But the compliance officer said that was untrue. They said they were “stunned” 
when the department stated the online system was working.

“This is completely false,” the source said. “Not only do customers, 
especially past customers, have access issues all the time but, since the 
compliance system was placed online, [compliance officers] have had many access 
issues.

“For the past two weeks we’ve had to turn customers away because we could not 
access [the system] and neither could they.”

Guardian Australia and other media, including the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/triplej/programs/hack/centrelink-boss-offers-personal-email/8136138>
 andCrikey 
<https://www.crikey.com.au/2016/12/21/how-to-dispute-a-centrelink-debt/>, 
continue to receive reports of incorrectly issued debts, which are causing 
stress and anxiety just before Christmas.


This week the independent MP Andrew Wilkie asked the commonwealth ombudsman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/ombudsman-asked-to-investigate-if-centrelink-wrongly-pursuing-welfare-debts>
 to investigate complaints about the automated system.

The Australian Council of Social Service (Acoss) wrote to the human services 
minister, Alan Tudge, on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/centrelinks-10-debt-recovery-fee-comes-as-news-to-human-services-minister>
, urging him to investigate complaints about the system.
 