
Centrelink <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> has warned 
staff that leaking information may constitute a criminal offence as a Senate 
inquiry into its controversial debt recovery system now appears all but certain.

One Nation and the Nick Xenophon Team confirmed to Guardian Australia that 
they would support an inquiry, easily giving the opposition and the Greens the 
numbers.

The automated system has been the subject of a series of damaging leaks since 
mid-December, when acompliance officer told Guardian Australia that only a 
fraction of the debts being issued were genuine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
.

On Tuesday the Department of Human Services people services manager, Adrian 
Hudson, sent an email to staff, reminding them of the consequences of improper 
leaking.


The memo did not directly reference the debt recovery system but warned public 
servants that they would not be protected if they leaked information externally.

Hudson told workers they would only be protected if they disclosed information 
in accordance with the Public Interests Disclosures Act. “Disclosures made 
under the public interest disclosure arrangements and ‘leaking’ information are 
not the same thing,” he said.

“Outside of the PID Act, an employee who makes a disclosure externally will 
not be protected and may in fact be committing a criminal offence or be in 
breach of the APS Code of Conduct.”

The Community and Public Sector Union has hit back at the department, saying 
it was trying to keep problems with the debt recovery system secret.


Its deputy national president, Lisa Newman, described the memo as an 
“extraordinary broadside at DHS staff” who were working on the frontline to 
deal with the government’s debt collection mess.

Newman said it was “especially galling” because the controversial system was 
the result of decisions by senior management and the federal government.

“DHS staff work hard to help ordinary Australians and are frustrated that the 
agency has been run into the ground and that service standards are totally 
unacceptable,” she said. “Rather than work with the CPSU and our members to fix 
these problems, DHS management is trying to keep its many problems secret.

“Adrian Hudson could be better spending his time than monstering staff with 
threats. Instead, perhaps he could spend some time listening to their 
suggestions on how to fix this situation so that people who’ve done nothing 
wrong stop being sent debt notices.”


Earlier on Wednesday, the auditor general rejected a request to investigate 
the Centrelink system.

The Australian National Audit Office said it did not want to duplicate the 
work of a separate investigation into thecontroversial system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/12/centrelink-human-oversight-slashed-after-cost-benefit-analysis>
 now being conducted by the commonwealth ombudsman, but would consider the 
issue again next financial year.

“I have consulted with the Ombudsman regarding the scope of his own motion 
investigation and do not intend to commence an audit while the Ombudsman’s 
investigation is underway,” the auditor general, Grant Hehir, wrote to Labor’s 
Linda Burney on Wednesday.

“Nonetheless, I will consider the inclusion of an audit in the development of 
my 2017-18 Audit Work Program.”

On the proposed Senate inquiry, a spokesman for One Nation senator Brian 
Burston confirmed that his party would offer its support.

The Nick Xenophon Team has been critical of the debt recovery system and 
Xenophon told Guardian Australia on Wednesday the party would support the 
inquiry.

Related: Labor pushes for Senate inquiry into Centrelink robo-debt 'debacle' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/18/labor-pushes-for-senate-inquiry-into-centrelink-robo-debt-debacle>

On Wednesday Anglicare became the latest organisation to call for the 
suspension of the system on Wednesday, joining unions, lawyers,disability 
advocates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/05/disability-advocates-add-to-calls-to-suspend-centrelink-debt-recovery-system>
, welfare rights centres, the Australian Council of Social Services and other 
charities.

Anglicare Australia’s executive director, Kasy Chambers, said the system was a 
“step towards criminalisation of poverty and disadvantage”, because it shifted 
the onus on to individuals to prove they do not owe Centrelink a debt butmade 
it difficult to respond appropriately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/fears-centrelink-online-glitch-may-send-welfare-recipients-to-debt-collectors>
 through Centrelink’s overloaded systems.

“It is the failure to take the impact of these processes seriously and to 
treat everyone concerned with respect which concerns us,” Chambers said.


“Mistakes will be made in all complex systems, however it reflects 
particularly poorly on government ministers who reject out of hand evidence of 
the inaccuracy of this clumsy process and the distress it has caused,” she said.

Earlier on Wednesday Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> defended 
Centrelink’s debt recovery system as “quite appropriate”. The prime minister 
said Centrelink was simply identifying discrepancies in reported income, as it 
had always done.

Related: Centrelink crisis 'cataclysmic' says PM's former head of digital 
transformation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/centrelink-crisis-cataclysmic-turnbull-former-head-digital-transformation>

“The letters that go out in the first instance are simply saying there is a 
discrepancy,” Turnbull said. “Your employer says you earn this and you say you 
earned that. Can you explain what that discrepancy is? That is entirely 
responsible and appropriate.

“Obviously it is important to make sure that the recipient gets the letter and 
you have seen the measures that theminister, Alan Tudge, has announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/alan-tudge-says-centrelink-may-check-letters-received-before-debt-imposed>
.”

But the data-matching process has been roundly criticised for its inaccuracies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
, which, with reduced human oversight, arecausing vulnerable Australians to be 
wrongly issued with debts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/even-thought-its-an-error-i-have-to-start-repaying-my-debt-centrelink-debt-victims-share-their-stories>
.

Protests are being planned across the country, including one outside the 
Centrelink office in Redfern, Sydney, on Wednesday afternoon. The National 
Union of Students plans further protests in major cities in March.

A small group of protesters also staged a sit-in at Tudge’s electorate office 
on Wednesday, handing him a debt notice for $300m – the amount the government 
has identified in recoverable debts.

Tudge was not at the office. The protesters played mock Centrelink hold music 
through loudspeakers, which included messages like: “At Centrelink we’re 
paranoid that you’re stealing from us. We can’t really prove it, so we’re going 
to steal from you.”

Police attended and the protesters agreed to leave. 

In Tasmania, welfare and community service groups have joined together to 
create a disaster relief fund to help support those affected. The fund is 
designed to help those issued with debts to navigate Centrelink’s systems to 
lodge a dispute.


Labor and the Greens have both pledged to push for a Senate inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/18/labor-pushes-for-senate-inquiry-into-centrelink-robo-debt-debacle>
 into the system, while the commonwealth ombudsman’s office hasreportedly begun 
scheduling meetings 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-17/ombudsman-to-meet-welfare-groups-over-centrelink-debt-recovery/8188420>
 with welfare groups.
 