
Twenty years almost to the day, on 6 January 1995, Nintendo revealed its new 
Virtual Boy virtual reality headset at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las 
Vegas. Technologists had been experimenting with virtual reality since the 
1960s, but the headset was a significant milestone by the then thriving 
Japanese games company. The press were unwilling to write off anything by 
Nintendo, but VR aficionados were not convinced. And as it turns out, they were 
right: players complained of dizziness, nausea and headaches and Nintendo sold 
only 770,000 – a tenth of predicted sales. The device was canned.

“When Virtual Boy was introduced there was a lot of excitement about virtual 
reality and augmented reality as part of the future of gaming, but it didn’t 
happen that way for a variety of reasons,” said Regina Joseph, a forecasting 
expert and lead at New York University’sFuture Lab 
<http://www.sps.nyu.edu/about/newsroom/news/2015/nyu_school_of_profes_16.html>. 
“The technology simply wasn’t at the same level as it is now, and there were 
some fundamental ergonomic issues. The hype concentrated in the press, and in a 
press run by fanboys, often doesn’t pan out. History is littered with the 
corpses of devices, projects and ideas that people got behind in a big way but 
that failed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fces-2016-cars-virtual-reality-and-a-lot-of-hype%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4b5ab9ccee60965fa90192ea4fc9f6e79730a59%2F0_266_3460_2076%2F3460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=CES%202016%3A%20cars%2C%20virtual%20reality%20and%20a%20lot%20of%20hype&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fces-2016-cars-virtual-reality-and-a-lot-of-hype%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=CES%202016%3A%20cars%2C%20virtual%20reality%20and%20a%20lot%20of%20hype&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fces-2016-cars-virtual-reality-and-a-lot-of-hype%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4b5ab9ccee60965fa90192ea4fc9f6e79730a59%2F0_266_3460_2076%2F3460.jpg>
 There are 27 drone exhibitors at CES 2016, up from 4 in 2015. This DJI Phantom 
2 Vision was unveiled at CES 2014 Photograph: Britta Pedersen/DPA/Corbis 
The vast CES <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces> event has long been 
regarded as the essential showcase for all the world’s new technology products. 
It’s the most comprehensive gathering of technology companies and devices on 
the planet, with 170,000 delegates and 2.2m square feet of exhibits showing off 
everything from fridges and robots to drones and new TVs. From here, one can 
traditionally see right through to next Christmas – and beyond.

All eyes this year are, again, on virtual reality, which appears to be heading 
toward the mainstream with three major consumer headsets – the HTC Vive, Oculus 
Rift and Sony’s Playstation VR - all due for release this year. How to define 
the success of those devices? There is financial momentum, and the support of 
major investors such as Facebook in Oculus; consumer interest, which will show 
in the sales numbers of these devices later in the year; but also the 
creativity of software developers, because without compelling games and 
experiences, VR has no stories to tell. Joseph says: “VR still needs a lot more 
software - those are the pivotal catalysts for these devices.”

Are autonomous cars ready to take off?

Also centre stage will be autonomous and electric cars. Car manufacturers 
have, in recent years, used CES to show off their progress with autonomous 
vehicle software, and new prototypes will be unveiled from Faraday Future, VW 
and Chevy, a slew of new developments from the major car firms and also the 
likely confirmation of a joint initiative between Ford and Google on a new 
mainstream self-driving car initiative. Google has said that it is in talks 
with car manufacturers, and that it expects to see10 million autonomous 
vehicles on the road by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/13/self-driving-cars-bmw-google-2020-driving>
.

Joseph is sceptical about the pace of adoption for electric and autonomous 
vehicles, which demand more of a leap in consumer faith, and said that Google’s 
prediction is too ambitious. “The US is a country built on cars and oil. 
Driving is cultural and there’s a profoundly held experiential feeling attached 
to it. Appeals to culture are extraordinarily difficult, whether politically or 
to consumers, because you are dealing with the world of moral values,” says 
Joseph. “Advertising is in the business of shaping moral values and consumer 
attitudes, but when they do a product launch they have to soften the ground for 
years before introducing something controversial. There needs to be a cultural 
conversion.”

America was built on cars and oil - it's going to take a cultural conversion 
for electric cars to take off
Regina Joseph, forecaster 
She points to the relatively slow adoption of mobile phones, which took ten 
years to progress from the size of a brick to a flip phone. “Ten years. And 
mobile phones are far more accessible from a safety perspective than cars. 
Introducing autonomous vehicles into rolling stock of driver-led cars? It will 
take 20 years, not five.”

Kickstarter’s barometer of emerging tech trends

Beyond the major brands, CES has expanded to provide a platform for startups 
and inventors. The crowd-funding platform Kickstarter has seen CES’s 
entrepreneurial space Eureka Park grow significantly in the past four years. 
“Before that we were in the dungeons,” jokes John Dimatos, director of 
Kickstarter’s design and technology communities, many of whom will be 
exhibiting at the show. “CES is a family moment for us. If you go to see the 
big brands here you’ll be talking to someone in marketing, but when you walk up 
to aKickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> team 
you’re talking to the engineer. Everybody is learning from everybody else - 
it’s an exciting time to be doing hardware and consumer electronics.”

At CES 2015, a small French team called Prynt <https://www.pryntcases.com/> 
hadn’t yet launched the crowdfunding campaign to fund their device, a small 
camera and instant printer which attaches to a smartphone. One year on and 
their first device is already on sale. Another popular Kickstarter project has 
beenChip 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1598272670/chip-the-worlds-first-9-computer/description>
, an Oakland based team that has developed a $9 mini computer designed to be 
used as a component to power other projects. Dimatos says: “It adds up to 
something like the Homebrew Computing Club [the hobbyist club attended by a 
young Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak in the late 1970s] but this is more visible 
and public.”

Kickstarter’s overview of the thousands of projects proposed each year, and 
the varying popularity of different hardware and software, means it is well 
placed to identify new trends. Better placed, maybe, than CES. Of the 19,802 
technology projects launched on the site so far, 3,887 have been successfully 
funded by the public, from drones and 3D printers to awired air guitar 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/kurv/kurv-guitar?ref=discovery> and 
headphones. The now ubiquitous (and controversial) hoverboards started on 
Kickstarter with a project calledHovertrax 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/687658339/hovertrax> which was first 
funded in May 2013. Dimatos says that was just one of a wave of “last mile of 
transportation” projects on Kickstarter, and though many start as curios they 
occasionally break out, as the hoverboard did. (Battery powered rollerskates 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/petertreadway/acton-r-rocketskates-worlds-first-smart-wearable-m>
 have yet to break free in quite the same way.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fces-2016-cars-virtual-reality-and-a-lot-of-hype%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F609881cfc3c9dbe42f069ccd8ccecaddd5d0cd31%2F23_189_5708_3427%2F5708.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=CES%202016%3A%20cars%2C%20virtual%20reality%20and%20a%20lot%20of%20hype&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fces-2016-cars-virtual-reality-and-a-lot-of-hype%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=CES%202016%3A%20cars%2C%20virtual%20reality%20and%20a%20lot%20of%20hype&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2Fces-2016-cars-virtual-reality-and-a-lot-of-hype%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F609881cfc3c9dbe42f069ccd8ccecaddd5d0cd31%2F23_189_5708_3427%2F5708.jpg>
 One of a wave of food technology projects funded on Kickstarter, the Livin 
‘hive’ farms edible mealworms on your kitchen worktop. Mmm, nice. Photograph: 
Voisin/Phanie/REX 
2015 saw a big increase in food technology projects and the trend, says 
Dimatos, and is set to grow.Livin 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1468268424/l-i-v-i-n-hive> is a hive for 
growing edible mealworms in your kitchen, designed to provide a more 
sustainable form of protein that avoids the intensive farming industry.Grove 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/grove-ecosystem/grove-ecosystem-grow-fresh-food-in-your-home/description>
 is an aquaponic system where waste from a fish tank supports the growth of 
herbs and vegetables.

Another strong trend is battery technology, which may not seem as exciting but 
is a critical technology for almost every consumer electronics device. TheOrison
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FY_jgySyVRg> project, soon to be on 
Kickstarter, is an energy efficient storage device that allows energy saved 
during the day to be used at night.

Joseph says that beyond the hyped products of CES, the seemingly mundane nuts 
and bolts of component technology can be one of the most revealing predictors 
of trends to come. The technology behind flexible, energy-efficient and high 
quality OLED screens (organic light-emitting diodes) have facilitated many new 
devices, enabling good quality products at affordable prices.

Consumer adoption is more about psychology than technology

But with so much money ploughed into marketing spectaculars at CES, how much 
does the event really indicate future trends? Is it really a reliable indicator 
- or just a platform for generating hype and sales?

Bob Sawyer, an investment manager, says that the industry experts and market 
analysts that flock to CES are not necessarily the best at predicting trends. 
“They know too much, or have conflict of interest,” he says. “Mobile experts 
have been saying for 20 years that mobile payments are just around the corner - 
but most experts are in mobile payments businesses.” Given the popularity of 
plastic and, in the US, paper checks, there needs to be a tipping point for 
those services to take off.

Sawyer says society tends to overestimate short-term change while 
underestimating long-term change. Forecasters in the 40s and 50s, he said, made 
impressively accurate predictions about medical breakthroughs, yet completely 
missed the internet.

“Most people at CES want to hear that their product will be a slam dunk hit 
and be under everyone’s Christmas trees this time next year. But the culture of 
consumer behaviour and adoption means it’s much less about the technology and 
more about psychology and economics.”
 