
Chanel has threatened to close its perfumery in the French city of Grasse over 
plans for a high-speed rail line, which it claims threatens the flowers used to 
make its best-knownfragrance <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fragrance>, 
Chanel No 5.

A sweeter choice: synthetic perfumes, while unpopular, are better for the 
planet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/23/perfume-synthetic-sustainability-vanilla-madagascar>
The company has threatened to leave the city – the luxury perfume capital of 
the world – if a TGV line is driven through the Provençal fields where it grows 
flowers for the perfume.

In a strongly worded open letter to planners, Chanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel> said a viaduct to carry trains 
over the picturesque Siagne valley would be a disaster. “The construction of a 
viaduct and the regular passage of high-speed trains over these fields of 
flowers would force Chanel to cease supporting its artisanal activities in the 
region,” the label said.

A dozen May roses and 1,000 jasmine flowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2012/jun/26/grasse-jasmine-festival-video>
 are used in every 30-millilitre bottle of No 5. In its letter, Chanel said the 
quality of the flowers harvested around Grasse was “unique and exceptional ... 
and indispensable for the creation of Chanel perfumes”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fchanel-no5-threatens-close-grasse-perfumery-high-speed-rail-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d0146adfda51362f084f934e24af964dc9d8d9%2F0_71_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chanel%20threatens%20to%20close%20perfumery%20over%20high-speed%20rail%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fchanel-no5-threatens-close-grasse-perfumery-high-speed-rail-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chanel%20threatens%20to%20close%20perfumery%20over%20high-speed%20rail%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fchanel-no5-threatens-close-grasse-perfumery-high-speed-rail-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26d0146adfda51362f084f934e24af964dc9d8d9%2F0_71_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 A bottle of Chanel No 5 perfume. Photograph: Alamy 
France’s state-owned railway company, SNCF, argues that the €6.7bn (£5.6bn) 
line would knock an hour off the trip along theFrench Riviera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/31/what-wore-this-week-riviera-chic-jess-cartner-morley>
 from Marseille to Nice. It said the line was the most congested in France 
outside Paris and desperately needed investment.

Despite its high tourist numbers, the Côte d’Azur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/jun/08/cote-dazur-france-beach-hotels-budget>
 is one of the worst served by the country’s high-speed rail network. The 
journey time from Paris to Nice is about six hours.

Chanel has already fought off plans for a dump not far from the fields where 
the Mul family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/04/chanel-perfume-legislation-guerlain-loreal>
 grow the flowers. The classic scent was created byCoco Chanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/feb/24/top-10-amazing-facts-you-didnt-know-about-coco-chanel>
 in 1921 and quickly came to define a new type of independent, modern woman.

She commissioned Ernest Beaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2012/feb/20/brief-history-of-chanel>
 – who had been the perfumier to the Russian tsar – to concoct a new type of 
perfume that broke with the strict rules of the day about what kind of scent 
was “proper” for a woman to wear. “I don’t want any rose or lily of the valley 
perfume; I want a more elaborate scent,” she said.

Chanel had been introduced to Beaux on the Riviera close to Grasse by her then 
lover, Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich Romanov, the man who had murderedRasputin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/1917/jan/07/life1.lifemagazine>, the 
notorious Russian mystic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/1917/jan/07/life1.lifemagazine>.

The fragrance became the most famous perfume of the 20th century, worn by 
Marilyn Monroe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2011/nov/15/marilyn-monroe-film-costume-designer>
 among others, with a bottle sold every 30 seconds, according to Vogue magazine.
 