
Millions of families who are being charged hundreds of pounds by agencies to 
cover the supposed administrative costs of renting will be offered relief when 
Philip Hammond promises toban letting fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/jun/25/letting-agency-rip-off-high-fees-england-wales>
.

The chancellor will unveil the measure in the autumn statement on Wednesday 
alongside a £1.4bn investment in affordable housing as he tries to deliver on 
Theresa May’s promise to help families who are “just about managing” – or 
“Jams”.

Will rents go up if unfair letting fees are banned?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/rents-unfair-letting-fees-tenants-charges>
The boost for housing, in addition to a fund that is already worth £4.7bn, is 
expected to help build 40,000 new homes and would allow providers more 
flexibility to offer people lower rents.

The eye-catching ban on letting fees, which would come into place after a 
consultation, follows campaigns byboth the Labour party  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/02/labour-help-9m-renters-save-600-pounds-ed-miliband>
and a Lib Dem peer, Olly Grender.

They claimed that renters were being asked to pay hundreds of pounds for 
questionable reasons such as inventory checks.

However, just two months ago the housing minister, Gavin Barwell, tweeted that 
such a move would be a “bad idea – landlords would pass cost to tenants via 
rent”.
Gavin Barwell MP (@GavinBarwellMP) 
@insidehousing <https://twitter.com/insidehousing> Bad idea - landlords would 
pass cost to tenants via rent. We're looking at other ways to cut upfront costs 
& raise standards
 <https://twitter.com/GavinBarwellMP/status/777852917013512192> September 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/GavinBarwellMP/status/777852917013512192> 
Other measures designed to target the so-called Jams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2016/nov/20/jam-the-new-government-acronym-just-about-managing-to-make-sense>
 include:

 * Ploughing over £1bn into universal credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/millions-affected-by-universal-credit-cuts-to-be-partly-compensated-by-chancellor>
 over five years by reducing the rate at which benefits are taken off people as 
they progress through work, following demands for action by Conservative 
backbenchers.

 * Increasing the national living wage from £7.20 to £7.50 an hour from April 
2017, slightly below the £7.60 estimate by the independent Office for Budget 
Responsibility (OBR).

 * Allocating £4.3m a year towards strengthening minimum wage enforcement.

Hammond is also expected to use the first major financial statement of a 
chancellorship likely to be dominated by Brexit to announce sharply weaker 
forecasts for GDP growth and the public finances.


The figures from the OBR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/office-of-budget-responsibility-to-tear-up-forecasts-for-uk-growth>
 follow predictions from City forecasters that economic growth will slide from 
around 2% this year to little more than 1% in 2017.

Meanwhile, the city credit ratings agency Moody’s warned that just managing 
families may find themselves unable to service their car loans and mortgages as 
a result of by rising inflation caused by Brexit.

The ban on letting fees comes despite Barwell’s comments and the fact that the 
Conservative government led by David Cameron fiercely resisted calls by the 
Labour party for the change just six months ago.

The Conservative party press office put out a statement saying that Ed 
Miliband’s policy would “lead to higher rents” while the same message was 
delivered by the local government minister, Marcus Jones, who is still in 
position.

He told MPs in the House of Commons: “Banning or capping letting agent fees 
would not make renting any cheaper for tenants – tenants would still end up 
paying but through higher rents.”

The issue is disputed with National Landlords Association chief executive, 
Richard Lambert, agreeing that the cost would “boomerang” back on to private 
tenants.

While he admitted that some unscrupulous agents have got away with excessive 
fees, Lambert said: “Agents will have no other option than to shift the fees on 
to landlords, which many will argue is more appropriate, since the landlord 
employs the agent. But adding to landlords’ costs, on top of restricting their 
ability to deduct their business costs from their taxable income, will only 
push more towards increasing rents.”

He said Hammond “lacks an understanding of how the whole sector works”.

However, Shelter – which found letting fees are on average £300 but can reach 
more than £500 – insisted that the evidence from Scotland, where a ban is 
already in place, is that rents did not rise.

The charity welcomed the moves on housing in the autumn statement but said the 
“devil will be in the detail”.

“At Shelter we see the impact of our chronic shortage of affordable homes 
every day, with increasing numbers of people left with no choice but to fork 
out most of their hard-earned wages on expensive private rents, and wave 
goodbye to the chance of a stable home,” said the charity’s chief executive, 
Campbell Robb.

The shadow housing secretary, John Healey, added that his party had long 
backed “ending sky-high letting fees for renters” and pointed out that 
Conservative MPs, including May and Hammond, had voted against the move.

Lady Grender, who is the author of a private members bill on renters’ rights 
that proposed the change and was being discussed in parliament as recently as 
Friday, said: “Our relentless campaigning to get tenants’ letting fees banned 
has finally paid off and the government has recognised this is the right thing 
to do. The upfront costs of renting are far too high, pushing many people into 
debt just to pay the fees, and stopping others from being able to move into a 
rented home.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphilip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F031de9ddb434453caca42052a6c321ed2ceca994%2F0_151_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chancellor%20to%20crack%20down%20on%20letting%20fees%20in%20autumn%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphilip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chancellor%20to%20crack%20down%20on%20letting%20fees%20in%20autumn%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphilip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F031de9ddb434453caca42052a6c321ed2ceca994%2F0_151_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Philip Hammond’s speech is expected to be significantly shorter than those of 
his predecessor, George Osborne. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
She wrote to the prime minister to highlight the issue when she first came 
into office, and received a response in which May said: “I appreciate your 
comments regarding the private rented sector and I agree that tackling concerns 
about housing will be an important part of building a country that works for 
everyone.”

Sources said the chancellor was expected to spend Tuesday evening putting the 
finishing touches on his speech at No 11, having moved into the Downing Street 
flat less than a fortnight ago.


'Just about managing' families to be £2,500 a year worse off by 2020 – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/20/just-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study>
Hammond’s speech will start at 12.30pm after prime minister’s questions and is 
likely to be significantly shorter than those of his predecessor, George 
Osborne. The so-called red book of fiscal measures will also be slimmer, 
reflecting a desire to focus on broad-brush headline measures rather than 
micromanaging the spending of departments.

Ahead of the event, Hammond has spoken to more than 100 businesses and 
organisations to get a sense of their perspective on the post-referendum 
economy. His big theme on the day will be boosting spending on infrastructure 
and productivity, as well as the string of small measures to help families that 
are just managing.


After the speech, David Gauke, the chief secretary to the Treasury, will be 
sent out on to the airwaves to explain the overarching points of the statement. 
He is a veteran of the Treasury and was often used in a similar way by Osborne 
after big announcements.

 