
Apple HQ have announced the launch of an iPad with a pencil, and an iPhone 
that takes “emergency selfies” [sic] – but let’s cut to the chase, because the 
new Apple Watch Hermes, which goes on sale 5 October, is clearly the most 
interesting news from Cupertino. In the story of fashion-tech partnerships, 
that of Apple with Hermes,home of the Birkin bag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2014/oct/15/are-hermes-birkin-bags-putting-the-stink-in-stinking-rich>
, is the most glamorous couple to date.

The original Apple Watch is a good-looking watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/28/apple-watch-jess-cartner-morley-phone>
, but the Hermes Cape Cod is more elegant, more refined. This watch is Hermes 
on the outside, Apple on the inside. Look at the slightly deco font of the 
numerals, the lozenge-shaped face, stirrup-style connection to the leather 
strap, the second hand in Hermes’ signature orange. The price for the 
double-strap version (which is The One) is $1,250 (£808), which is considerably 
less than you’d pay for anon-Apple Watch original Hermes Cape Cod 
<http://uk.hermes.com/watches/cape-cod.html>. A bargain? Well, bear in mind 
that internally this is an Apple product, and unlike luxury watches, Apple 
products do not last for decades.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fchic-or-not-chic-the-apple-watch-hermes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441895691433%2Ff2efb01b-d281-4ed7-8612-befc4bff473b-2060x1365.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chic%20or%20tech%20geek%3F%20The%20Apple%20Watch%20Hermes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fchic-or-not-chic-the-apple-watch-hermes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chic%20or%20tech%20geek%3F%20The%20Apple%20Watch%20Hermes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fchic-or-not-chic-the-apple-watch-hermes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441895691433%2Ff2efb01b-d281-4ed7-8612-befc4bff473b-2060x1365.jpeg>
 Jeff Williams, Apple’s senior vice president of operations, speaks about the 
Hermes watchband for the Apple Watch. Photograph: BECK DIEFENBACH/REUTERS 
So, what’s the Apple strategy here? The huge excitement around the launch of 
the Apple Watch seems, anecdotally, to have cooled. I think this was because it 
wasn’t quite Apple enough, while also not being quite fashionable enough. Let 
me explain. It wasn’t quite Apple enough because it was glitchy, in a 
first-generation way.I roadtested it, and while I loved how it looked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/28/apple-watch-jess-cartner-morley-phone>
, after a while I found I didn’t use it for much more than a watch, because the 
maps and the weather took so long to load that I would give up and get my phone 
out of my bag. Charging things is the most tedious part of modern life – I 
mean, seriously, I know our ancestors had to collect firewood and draw water 
from a well but you can’t tell me this isn’t basically as annoying – so it has 
to be more than a watch, or you can’t be bothered to charge it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fchic-or-not-chic-the-apple-watch-hermes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441895831710%2F7956cd27-f3cf-4fc6-b41f-3a329cb27e5b-2060x1413.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chic%20or%20tech%20geek%3F%20The%20Apple%20Watch%20Hermes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fchic-or-not-chic-the-apple-watch-hermes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chic%20or%20tech%20geek%3F%20The%20Apple%20Watch%20Hermes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fchic-or-not-chic-the-apple-watch-hermes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441895831710%2F7956cd27-f3cf-4fc6-b41f-3a329cb27e5b-2060x1413.jpeg>
 The Apple Watch Hermes is unveiled. Photograph: JOSH EDELSON/AFP/Getty Images 
The watch also wasn’t quite fashionable enough because the Apple brand isn’t a 
luxury brand.Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> stands for a 
purity of design which is democratic in its simplicity, and it does that 
brilliantly, but it lacks the lush, covetable depth of a luxury brand, the 
magnetic pull that makes people spend crazy money on, say, a Birkin. It’s too 
early to say if the glitches are fixed, but the new Hermes aesthetic and 
association certainly makes the watch more beautiful, and more desirable. 
Hermes has just announced its own launch of the watch on 4 October, during 
Paris Fashion Week: we will report back from that.
 