
When I published my novel, The Fishermen 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fishermen.html>, last year, one of the most 
common – and most surprising – questions I received was about my intended 
audience. This question, I came to discover, is frequently asked of writers who 
have a similar provenance to mine. In the past few years, writers have 
responded in various ways. One reaction comes from a group of writers – 
includingTaiye Selasi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/04/taiye-selasi-stop-pigeonholing-african-writers>
 – who have sought to nix the idea of the “African” writer’s identity. Others, 
many of whom live in Africa, have argued that the solution is to play up their 
identity to an extreme – seeking to be read chieflybecause of their origin 
rather than in spite of it.

In a recent article, Nigerian writer Eghosa Imaseun argued that provincial 
writing is always political, objecting to the way things are explained 
unnecessarily for international audiences. For example: “If you write ‘He 
dipped his hand into theeba’, a phrase will follow to explain that eba is ‘that 
yellow globular mashed potato clone made from Cassava chippings’.” His 
frustration is evident: “You’re like, ‘Arrghhh, don’t explain it, they can 
Google it!’”

Chigozie Obioma: the ghosts of my student years in northern Cyprus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/chigozie-obioma-booker-nominee-haunted-student-years-northern-cyprus>
Contrast this with Wole Soyinka <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wolesoyinka>
, writing in the introduction to his new translation of Yoruba novelist DO 
Fagunwa’s work. Soyinka describes how he translated the phrase “Mo nmi ho bi 
agiliti” as “my breath came in rapid bloats like the hawing of a toad”. This 
aroused a protest from a Yoruba critic who complained about Soyinka’s choice, 
noting thatagiliti is a lizard not a toad. Soyinka concedes the point, but 
asserts:

But neither toad nor lizard is the object of action or interest to the hero 
Akaraogun or his creator Fagunwa at this point of narration. Fagunwa’s concern 
is to convey the vivid sense of event, and a translator must select equivalents 
for mere auxiliaries where these serve the essential purpose better than the 
precise original. In what I mentally refer to as the “enthusiastic” passages of 
his writing, the essence of Fagunwa is the fusion of sound and action. To 
preserve the movement and fluidity of this association seems to be the best 
approach for keeping faith with the author’s style and sensibility.

To me this is, in many ways, a precise thesis on creative writing, a 
rephrasing of the most cardinal of all writing rules: show don’t tell. When we 
compare Soyinka’s view with Imaseun’s argument, we see glaring disparities. 
Writers who are most concerned with provincialism – with pleasing a particular 
base of readers – are probably not concerned with conveying “the vivid sense of 
event”. Such a writer will almost always falter in his writing, and yield, more 
often than not, to telling rather than showing.

Suppose the African author wants to write about the molue, the iconic Lagos 
bus, and simply refers to it mid-sentence. He might praise himself, or be 
praised by defenders of this kind of politicised provincialism, for having been 
brave or authentic. But what does a reader see? Just a bus. There is no doubt 
that a reader who lives in Lagos might be at an advantage. But if a writer 
describes it as “a beat-up squeaking yellow-painted bus with a constant 
metallic rattle”, everyone, including the Lagos reader, will have a clear image 
of such a bus, as it has been rendered in vivid detail. All readers – Ibekwe in 
Lagos, Ataman in Kayseri, Lars in Bremen, Abhinav in Assam, or Jane in Ann 
Arbor — will see and hear this bus and capture it in their minds. I’m not 
convinced that this can be achieved by merely using the word “molue”.

What is more baffling is that not even the defenders of provincialism believe 
they would be able to convey such a vivid sense of something by simply 
mentioning it without describing it to the reader. Imaseun provides an answer: 
“Google it.” Thus, a writer, in the name of political defiance, has abstained 
from his duty and tasked the reader with research. In an age when we complain 
of short attention spans and books compete with variegated media, some 
contemporary writers compel their readers to be distracted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fhow-african-writers-can-bring-local-language-to-life-for-all%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80b3a062fe3e74efc744c36e3e7823b45d82d67a%2F1446_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chigozie%20Obioma%3A%20who%20should%20I%20write%20for%20%E2%80%93%20Nigerians%2C%20Africans%2C%20or%20everyone%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fhow-african-writers-can-bring-local-language-to-life-for-all%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chigozie%20Obioma%3A%20who%20should%20I%20write%20for%20%E2%80%93%20Nigerians%2C%20Africans%2C%20or%20everyone%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fhow-african-writers-can-bring-local-language-to-life-for-all%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80b3a062fe3e74efc744c36e3e7823b45d82d67a%2F1446_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
 Chigozie Obioma. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Even if we assume that everyone reading our books will have access to Google 
at the time they read, one could still argue that if a reader looks upmolue, 
they may not get the picture of amolue bus in all its eccentricity. The 
description of amolue cannot be complete until there has been a description of 
its unique sound. For this, the reader might need to consult YouTube as well. 
The writer’s work, which should have been self-sufficient, would have failed in 
this most important of missions. It would have been aided by the work of 
another artist – a photographer, or a blogger, or a cinematographer. But if the 
writer had chosen to simply describe the bus, every one of the writer’s readers 
— Ibekwe, Ataman, Lars, Abhinav, Jane – would see, feel and hear themolue, and 
so would Chinaza in Lagos, even if it pricks his ego that the account does not 
defer only to him. But that would not, should not, matter.

Labels are of little consequence to my work: I could be an Igbo writer, a 
Nigerian writer, or Nebraskan
Chigozie Obioma 
Labels are meaningless or of little consequence to my work. I could be an Igbo 
writer, a west African writer, a Nigerian writer, a black writer, or even a 
Nebraskan writer. But suppose I’m asked to select a particular audience and 
write for them as some writers claim they do. Then who will this audience be? 
Will it be the people of Nigeria? If so, why? Why am I thinking in terms of 
national borders? Do I even believe they exist? Nigeria, to me, is a foreign 
idea, which, as I have consistently maintained, needs to be rethought. Can one 
pick and choose what one wants to accept from the fallout of colonisation?

Even if I choose to say that I write for Nigerians, this term is too 
encompassing to reach down to everyone. Can I claim that my grandmother would 
know what amolue is? I doubt if she does. If I say that I write for Igbo 
readers, this audience still does not include everyone, for even within that 
tribe, there are a lot of differences in dialects. And, then, why write in 
English, if my work is for the Igbo people? Why not write in Igbo? Suppose I 
choose to write in Igbo for the people of Umuahia in eastern Nigeria, will that 
suffice? Because then, I gain my granny as an audience. How then can I 
comfortably define my provincial base? Bear in mind, also, that I was not born 
in Igboland, but in Akure where another language, Yoruba, is spoken. So, how 
might I feel about leaving out the people of Akure by selecting a provincial 
base? Does it feel right? I think not. And to succeed, one must make the best 
and right decision in all circumstances, for “writing is decision-making”, as 
the American writer Steve Almond once said.

An American writer writing about New York need not think about provinciality, 
and is less constrained by such encumbrances simply because most people know 
what and where New York is. As a child of nine, I’d learned all the 50 states 
in the US and their capitals by heart. I can guarantee that unless the child is 
born to a Nigerian immigrant family, you will not find an American child with 
any geographic knowledge about Akure. Akure is simply, in a global context, 
unimportant. In truth, most Americans know close to nothing about Nigeria, but 
no Nigerian, even in the remotest of villages, can make a similar claim about 
the US. Thus, because of the obscurity of the nation, it would be foolhardy to 
set your book in Lohum, or Tse-Agberagba, with no explanation of its geography, 
and dare your American or Serbian reader to consult Google. Even most people in 
Abuja or Lagos do not know where those places are.

By the time I had finished a first draft of The Fishermen, I had moved to the 
United States. I began to wonder how the book would be received in this age of 
societal prickliness, of adopting the position of the marginalised as the most 
gracious vantage, and in which it takes so little to offend people. In writing 
about a madman, would I be accused of stigmatising mental illness? If people in 
the west were going to read the book, would they be turned off by the familial 
“violence”? How about women – might most western women not worry that the 
subservient position of the mother in the novel is misogynist? And, as for 
Nigerians who have a national culture that somehow prohibits or sneers at any 
negative portrayal or criticism of their country to outsiders (As an Igbo 
proverb puts it: “We do not speak ill of our father’s farm to a stranger”), how 
would they receive my argument that Nigeria has failed? The list was endless.

In the end, I asked myself, what is true about what I know? What is honest? 
Isn’t the familiar “violence” of corporal punishment a norm in Nigeria? Why, 
then, should I be afraid to capture it so? Wouldn’t it be false to do 
otherwise? If I know of women, most women of my childhood, who are wholly 
subservient to their husbands, why then should I worry about offending western 
women? And if I believe that, when compared with other countries with similar 
resources, Nigeria has failed, why should I be concerned that some Nigerians 
think otherwise? I came to the conclusion that I should not care about any of 
these potential concerns. I should write only what seems to me to be honest, 
and aim to craft a novel with the grace of the novels I admire. To me, this 
should be the aim of great fiction. To do otherwise is to negate the very 
nature of literature.

Short story by Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o translated into over 30 languages in one 
publication
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/29/jalada-africa-short-story-ngugi-wa-thiongo-translated-over-30-languages-publication>
Activist intrusion into the writer’s imagination always interferes with 
literary truth. I believe that fiction, with its untrammelled nature, speaks to 
no one, and by so doing, speaks to all. It must transcend boundaries, time and 
space, like Eleanor Catton’sThe Luminaries, Ben Okri’s The Famished Road, or 
Arundhati Roy’sThe God of Small Things. In these books, these writers produce 
images of worlds rendered in the most vivid of details that become recognisable 
to any percipient reader no matter where they live, have lived, or what their 
level of geographical exposure. A memorable chapter in Roy’s novel begins with 
this astonishingly detailed description of “May in Ayemenem”:

May in Ayemenem is a hot, brooding month. The days are long and humid. The 
river shrinks and black crows gorge on bright mangoes in still, dustgreen 
trees. Red bananas ripen. Jackfruits burst. Dissolute bluebottles hum vacuously 
in the fruity air. Then they stun themselves against clear windowpanes and die, 
fatly baffled in the sun. The nights are clear, but suffused with sloth and 
sullen expectation …

A provincialist might ask, does someone in Ayemenem not know this is how the 
weather and seasons are? Why then does Roy need to tell us? She must be aiming 
it at a western audience. Yet she has artistically magnified the ordinary to 
anyone who lives in Ayemenem or Kerala. She has transformed the ordinary into 
art. The Ayemenem she describes is now both a real and a fictional place. 
Through this duality of vision, Roy achieves the height of her craft. This is 
what an African writer who is constrained by a demand for provincialism 
prevents himself from achieving.


Matthew Arnold, in his seminal essay “The Literary Influence of Academies”, 
referred to provincial prose as “second-rate”. A work tending towards 
provincial prose is defective, he said, and work done after writers have 
transcended provinciality is “classical; and that is the only work, which in 
the long run, can stand”. The non-western writer whose work exudes 
provincialism for the mere sake of protest rather than some artistic impulse is 
a radical without a cause.

• Chigozie Obioma’s The Fishermen, now out in paperback, is published by ONE.
 