
New parents may struggle to find childcare places over the next three years as 
the number of children accessing subsidised care swells by nearly 300,000.

Figures in the government’s midyear budget update, released in December, show 
the number of children accessing subsidised childcare isexpected to grow by 
almost 300,000 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2016-17/content/myefo/download/2016-17-MYEFO-combined.pdf>
 by 2020, from 1.7 million in 2016-17 to 2 million in 2019-20.

Labor has warned the extra demand would require up to 1,600 new long daycare 
centres, or 2,300 new outside school hours care services, and said the Turnbull 
government’s proposed childcare changes would do nothing to boost the supply of 
places.

Labor's Kate Ellis urges radical overhaul of childcare system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/19/labors-kate-ellis-urges-radical-overhaul-of-childcare-system>
“Despite knowing about this looming crisis, Malcolm Turnbull has no plans to 
help families struggling with chronic waiting lists,” Kate Ellis, Labor’s 
spokeswoman on early childhood education warned.

Childcare workers are underpaid because we’re women. We are the working poor | 
Margaret Carey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/childcare-workers-are-underpaid-because-were-women-we-are-the-working-poor>
“If parents can’t get a childcare place, they can’t return to work,” she said 
on Monday. “It’s one thing to fund places but if the services don’t exist then 
that is of no assistance to any parent.”

But the education minister, Simon Birmingham, blasted Ellis’s characterisation 
of the expected growth in subsidised places as a looming crisis.

He said his reforms would encourage the private sector to build more childcare 
centres to cater for the influx.

“It’s absolutely correct that around 300,000 additional places are budgeted 
[and] forecast to be created, and that means new centres,” he said.

“I’m not going to predict how many new centres that will be, but we can be 
absolutely confident based on the fact there have been many new centres in the 
last two years ... that if we can get our childcare reforms through the 
parliament ... there will be new centres built in the future to fill those 
300,000 spots.”

Ellis told the National Press Club in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/19/labors-kate-ellis-urges-radical-overhaul-of-childcare-system>
 that the government should consider abandoning the childcare subsidy system in 
favour of alternatives including universal childcare or the government directly 
purchasing places.

The government had no “levers of control” over the costs and availability of 
places, and there was no mechanism to cap parents’ out-of-pocket costs nor to 
make sure that places were available in areas of undersupply, she said.

She also questioned whether the $10bn the federal government contributed to 
childcare was well spent considering the industry made $1bn of profit.

But Birmingham said the rate of growth in childcare prices had decreased to 
about 5.2% in the year to September 2015 
<http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Latest-News/ID/3166/Keeping-pressure-on-child-care-prices>
, well below the 10-year September quarter average of 6.7%, and 7.4% during 
Labor’s last term in office.

He said his reforms 
<http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Latest-News/ID/3189/Paying-for-Australias-child-care-reforms>
 would end the midyear cut-out of childcare assistance that plagued many 
families, while putting in place new measures to constrain fee growth.

“If the Labor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> 
is seriously concerned about helping Australian families access affordable 
childcare then they would support our solutions in the parliament as soon as 
possible,” he said.
 