
Average childcare costs have risen 6.8% in a year, prompting Australia’s 
education minister, Simon Birmingham, to renew calls for cuts to family tax 
benefits to fund a restructured childcare rebate.

On Sunday the education department released an update of childcare costs 
<https://docs.education.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/eccc_in_summary_mar_quarter_2016.pdf>
 that shows in March 2016 the average childcare fee for all service types was 
$8.50 an hour, up 6.8% since 2015.

The average hourly fee for long day care was $8.80, an increase of 6% from 
March 2015 to March 2016. Long day care costs have increased by an average of 
7% a year since 2007.

Childcare shortage fears as demand for subsidised places to swell by 300,000
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/02/childcare-shortage-fears-as-demand-for-subsidised-places-to-swell-by-300000>
According to reports 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/childcare-costs-to-soar-past-200-a-day-unless-government-steps-in-analysis-warns/news-story/85b595a187ec032b86c0fda0a7c289ec>
, the department believes that childcare costs will continue to grow by more 
than 5% a year for the next four years.

Cost increases of that size would mean that by 2020 families in Sydney would 
pay $223 for a day’s care. Rates will hit $175 in Melbourne, $157 in Brisbane, 
$152 in Canberra and $138 in Adelaide.


In 2017 the federal government hopes to pass a $3bn childcare package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/21/childcare-coalition-to-push-labor-to-support-its-3bn-package>
 to abolish the $7,500 cap on childcare subsidies for families with incomes of 
$185,710 or less. It would increase the cap to $10,000 for families earning 
more than $185,710.

The government plans to pay for the package with $2.8bn in family tax benefit 
cuts.

Responding to the reported increases on Monday, Birmingham called on Labor to 
support savings measures linked to the childcare package, accusing it of 
“weeping crocodile tears” over increasing costs.

Birmingham said the package would pay for 85% of the lowest income families’ 
childcare costs, up from 76%. He said 1 million Australian families would be 
better off.

The education minister said the family tax benefit cut was designed to 
“[shift] what is a passive welfare payment … to one that actually supports 
people to engage in the workforce … by helping them to access and pay for their 
childcare costs”.

The education department report said in the March 2016 quarter the federal 
government paid a total of $1.6bn in childcare subsidies, $1bn of which is 
spent on long day care.

Childcare costs account for 45.8% of a family earning $35,000 a year’s weekly 
disposable income but fall to 12.1% after federal government subsidies.

For families earning $215,000 a year, childcare costs 14.7% of their weekly 
disposable income but fall to 9.9% after subsidies.

Labor’s leader in the Senate, Penny Wong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/penny-wong>, said Birmingham should 
“stop making excuses and instead start to do something about making childcare 
more accessible and more affordable”.

Australia should follow the research and provide free universal childcare | 
Edward Melhuish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/29/australia-should-follow-the-research-and-provide-free-universal-childcare>
Wong said Labor was concerned the government’s policy would leave one in three 
families worse off but did not rule out supporting the package when it came 
before parliament.

“We have got concerns about the activities test, concerns about kids in 
country areas and about Indigenous kids, and it’s up to the government to 
address those concerns.”

Birmingham said the government was prepared to negotiate the package with the 
Senate crossbench but the simplest way for it to pass was with Labor support.

The education department report also showed that in the 2016 March quarter, 
17,656 approved childcare services operated in Australia, an increase of 4.1% 
(690 services) since the March quarter of 2015.
 