
Three of China’s dominant weightlifting team from the Beijing Olympics have 
been caught doping by the International Olympic Committee’s programme of
retesting samples from the 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/failed-drug-tests-beijing-2008-olympics-ioc>
 and 2012 Games.

Liu Chunhong (69kg category), Cao Lei (75kg) and Chen Xiexia (48kg) have 
tested positive for human growth hormone-releasing peptide GHRP-2 and now lose 
the gold medals they won in Beijing.

The three women were part of the China team who won eight of the 15 
weightlifting medals on offer, with Chunhong also winning gold at the 2004 
Olympics in Athens, a medal she will keep despite this positive test. The trio 
have also won several world titles.

IOC announces 16 more positive doping cases from 2008 Beijing Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/failed-drug-tests-beijing-2008-olympics-ioc>
This will cause deep embarrassment in China, which topped the medal table for 
the first time in 2008, and increase the calls for weightlifting to be thrown 
out of the Olympics.

The sport has provided by far the most cases in the IOC’s reanalysis of doping 
samples from Beijing and London, with three more weightlifters revealed as 
cheats from London 2012: Turkey’s Sibel Simsek, Intigam Zairov of Azerbaijan 
and Armenia’s Norayr Vardanyan.

Of those three, the four-times European champion Simsek came closest to the 
podium, finishing fourth in the women’s 63kg category.

The batch of positives on Thursday should also spell the end of the Belarusian 
shot putter Nadzeya Ostapchuk’s controversial career as she has now lost the 
bronze medal she won in Beijing. She has already been stripped of the gold 
medal she won in London and the world title she won in 2005, so this is her 
third fail.

Ostapchuk’s compatriot Darya Pchelnik, who came fourth in Beijing 2008’s 
hammer competition, has also been caught using the steroid turinabol.

As of last month, the IOC’s programme of retesting samples from the 2008 and 
2012 Games using the latest detection methods had resulted in 101 new positives.
 