
In the short term Chris Froome expects to start next Sunday’s Ride London 
Classic on his way to the Olympic Games, while in the long term he intends to 
return to theTour de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> 
until he is deep into his 30s, raising the possibility he will aim to match the 
likes of Eddy Merckx and Bernard Hinault on five wins. “I will keep coming back 
for the next five or six years to give it my best shot, to fight for victory 
again. I’ve won three and I can’t say the novelty is wearing off.

Chris Froome on the brink of claiming his third Tour de France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/chris-froome-four-minutes-clear-tour-de-france-jon-izaguirre>
“It’s an amazing feeling of relief now the race is done and dusted, just 
amazing, I feel as if I could have won my first Tour,” Froome said after
crossing the finish line here to put his third Tour de France victory in the bag
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/23/tour-de-france-stage-20-live>
 with only the stage on the Champs Élysées on Sunday to come. Froome said that 
reaching Morzine with four of his team-mates clustered around him was 
“incredible”, adding: “They have been here all through the Tour, every step of 
the way, I couldn’t have asked for more.”

“It feels like it has been a rollercoaster. There have been amazing moments 
when we took on the race and made the racing – the descent of the Peyresourde, 
the stage in the crosswinds, sprinting with Peter Sagan. You can’t script 
moments like that. It was bike racing at its best and it’s incredible to have 
shaped the Tour in that way.”

Froome said he did not believe that the Tour might be lost when he fell on a 
white line on a slippery descent on Friday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/22/tour-de-france-2016-stage-19-live>
“There was never any doubt. But yesterday evening I was so mentally drained, I 
slept incredibly well in spite of being sore. Something like that can turn the 
race around in the blink of an eye. If I hadn’t had that team support I might 
have lost a minute or two, I’d have had to chase all the way to the finish 
alone and it could have been a very different scenario.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20France%3A%20Jon%20Izaguirre%20wins%20final%20mountain%20stage%20to%20Morzine%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20France%3A%20Jon%20Izaguirre%20wins%20final%20mountain%20stage%20to%20Morzine%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video&media=>
Tour de France: Jon Izaguirre wins final mountain stage to Morzine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video>
As a result, the slippery descent to the finish here was stressful, the 
31-year-old said, while conceding that with a four-minute advantage he at least 
knew he could ride at his own pace. “It’s there at the back of your mind but 
you know if any rivals go for it they will have to take risks and you’ve got 
four minutes, so you can go at your own pace and pick your own lines. I think 
in that weather no one wanted to take risks; they saw what happened on Friday 
when everyone started taking risks and there were crashes everywhere.”

In fourth place, 4min 46sec behind Froome is 23-year-old Adam Yates, who could 
well prove a rival for Froome in future after becoming the first British 
cyclist to win the white jersey of the best under-25 rider. Asked if he felt he 
could win the Tour in future, the Bury racer said: “That’s hard to say, but I 
will keep working hard and will be back to try and go one step further. I’ll 
take fourth in the Tour de France, I’m pretty happy with that.”

The 20 photographs of the week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/23/the-20-photographs-of-the-week>
Yates said it had been virtually impossible for any of Froome’s rivals to 
attack due to the difficult weather conditions during the stage. “It was so 
dangerous, you could risk everything and not make any time up. This is the 
first grand tour I’ve ridden for the overall standings, I’ve had one bad day 
and I managed that quite well. It’s all about gaining experience, suffering but 
not losing concentration when you are tired.”

Froome’s victory was hailed by the Tour organiser Christian Prudhomme, who 
said that he felt the race had seen, “the same Froome but different” over the 
three weeks. “When he attacked on the descent from the Peyresourde and followed 
Peter Sagan on the stage to Montpellier, one made for the sprinters, those were 
big surprises for me. We saw the sameTeam Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> as before, as powerful as ever, 
like a Paris Saint-Germain of cycling.”
 