
As the finish line on Place de l’Office du Tourisme beckoned, Chris Froome’s 
face broke into a broad grin of relief.

Like the other survivors of this relatively short but extremely tough Alpine 
stage, he was soaked to the skin, and like many others he was carryingabrasions 
and bruises from a recent crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/tour-de-france-2016-romain-bardet-chris-froome>
 to remind him of the risks he had to run on the four major descents.

Chris Froome says he could race for six more years in the Tour de France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/chris-froome-emotional-relieved-third-tour-de-france-win-adam-yates>
The Kenyan‑born Briton’s relief was understandable: after negotiating the 20th 
stage, his third Tour win in four years was in the bag.

Froome can expect to join a very small elite group of cyclists on Sunday 
evening on the Champs Élysées. Apart from the five‑time winners Hinault, 
Merckx, Indurain and Anquetil, only three men can boast three victories in the 
world’s toughest bike race: Greg LeMond, Louison Bobet and, back in the heroic 
era, Philippe Thys of Belgium.

There were no attacks on the yellow jersey during the 146 kilometres, merely a 
little jockeying for the minor placings – the Spaniard Joaquim Rodríguez moved 
from 11th to seventh after a late attack – but for most mere survival in the 
hellish conditions down the final nerve‑racking descent of the Col de Joux 
Plane was more than sufficient.

After his crash the previous day Froome looked nervous and stiff on his bike, 
but all he had to do was remain upright.

The little circle of top-10 contenders who have clung on to the coat-tails of 
Froome and his Sky team-mates remained largely the same behind a constantly 
evolving contest for the stage win, which eventually went to the Basque Jon 
Izaguirre, who gave Nairo Quintana’s Movistar team some reward in a Tour where 
they had largely disappointed.

Izaguirre was a member of the day’s early escape group; in more propitious 
times he would have been there to act as support when Quintana or Alejandro 
Valverde attacked behind, but Movistar’s hopes of victory had evaporated on 
Wednesday.

Chris Froome set for Tour de France hat-trick after surviving stage 20 – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/23/tour-de-france-stage-20-live>
On the final Alpine stage, the big loser was last year’s Vuelta a España 
winner Fabio Aru, who slipped back relatively early on the Joux Plane, lost 
almost 18 minutes and dropped down from sixth to 12th.

Great Britain’s Adam Yates hung on to his fourth place overall behind Froome, 
Romain Bardet and Quintana, and with it the white jersey of best young rider. 
The 23-year-old from Bury had just one relatively minor off-day – Friday’s 
stage to Saint Gervais – in the three weeks which looks to have cost him a 
place on the podium in only his secondTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>.

The old saying at the Tour used to be that the riders could see Paris from 
l’Alpe d’Huez, as the Alpe was so frequently the final climb of the race. On 
Saturday barely a single chalet in Morzine was visible from the top of the Joux 
Plane, so thick was the cloud as the rain poured down, leaving the tarmac 
inch-deep in water and rivulets running off the fields.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20France%3A%20Jon%20Izaguirre%20wins%20final%20mountain%20stage%20to%20Morzine%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20France%3A%20Jon%20Izaguirre%20wins%20final%20mountain%20stage%20to%20Morzine%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video&media=>
Tour de France: Jon Izaguirre wins final mountain stage to Morzine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video>
But Sunday’s Tour finish on the Champs Élysées could be sensed, adding an 
extra frisson to the final descent to the ski resort. One slip and all would be 
lost.

This was a stage with a constantly evolving scenario as a lead group of a 
dozen fought out the lead between them, with the ascendancy changing as often 
as the weather, which switched every few minutes from chilly rain to warm sun 
as thunder rumbled around the Alps and the cloud cover moved up and down the 
mountain slopes.

Descending in the mountains calls for quick reactions and split‑second changes 
of trajectory at the best of times; doing so in a cloud of spray is 
nightmarish, with every white line or join in the tarmac a possible pitfall.

The 20 photographs of the week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/23/the-20-photographs-of-the-week>
On the descents, at times Froome and his Sky team-mates could be seen taking 
the hairpins at walking pace with their brakes locked. The British team 
controlled the race to perfection, with Geraint Thomas putting in a massive day 
at the coalface, leading the yellow jersey group up the Joux Plane and 
negotiating the descent with Froome firmly tucked in his wake.

As the organisers had hoped, the destiny of the stage and the yellow jersey 
came down to the final climb and the last nine downhill kilometres. Uphill, the 
Joux Plane is one of the toughest Alpine cols, because of the unremitting 
nature of the gradient; barely a few metres respite in all its 12 kilometres, 
beginning in the town of Samoëns, and ending up on a mountain ledge with 
glimpses of the houses looking like toys 1300 metres below.

The descent is worse, however, winding like a child’s Scalextric track laid 
out over a steep hillside – down to the over and under loop in the final 
kilometre – with no decent camber on the tightly packed hairpins.

The surface varies from old and bumpy, with the tarmac cracked by winter snow, 
to new and smooth, with pine-trees casting shadow, trees, barbed wire and 
concrete barriers to fall into if the tyres lose grip.

The descent did play a key role, but not in the fight for the overall 
standings. Izaguirre had timed his effort up the climb to perfection, catching 
the leading duo of Jarlinson Pantano, the Culoz stage winner, andthe 2014 Tour 
winner Vincenzo Nibali, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2014/jul/28/vincenzo-nibali-marcel-kittel-stage-21-tour-de-france-2014>
who had gone ahead in the same support role as the Spaniard, and had made his 
bid for the stage win once he had been told that Aru was history.

On one of the first hairpins, Pantano came close to grief, being forced to 
take his foot out of the pedal to remain upright as his tyres lost adhesion; 
Nibali was behind him, Izaguirre in front, and so it stayed to the finish.
 