
Sir Dave Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> says 
Team Sky have a responsibility to try to answer their fiercest critics after 
Chris Froome was subjected to independent physiological testing.

After winning a second Tour de France  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/chris-froome-tour-de-france-second-win-legends>
title amid scrutiny of his performance in the post-Lance Armstrong era, Froome 
took it on himself to undergo independent testing to determine the 
characteristics that make him such an exceptional athlete.

GlaxoSmithKline performed the tests in its human performance laboratory, with 
the results to be announced in Esquire magazine on Thursday, the 2013 and 2015 
Tour champion last month announced on Twitter. The results will also be 
submitted to a scientific journal for publication.

Chris Froome joins legends of Tour de France with second win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/chris-froome-tour-de-france-second-win-legends>
While Brailsford knows little of the testing – as it is independent from Team 
Sky – he supports Froome’s bid for transparency and believes the Briton needs 
to show his displays are natural and credible,rather than a result of 
performance-enhancing drug use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/chris-froome-tour-de-france-through-rain-abuse-urine-to-victory>
.

“There are opportunities to do what we can to make the unbelievable 
believable,” said Brailsford, speaking at London’s Royal Institution in an 
event hosted by the blood cancer charity Bloodwise. “I’ll find out when 
everyone else finds out. Otherwise for me I’d be part of the process and I 
didn’t want to be part of the process.

“I don’t know what the results are going to be but I can pretty much bet the 
results are going to be the physiology of aTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> winning champion. We know that.

“I think the independence thing is a good thing. And why not? I can’t see the 
negative in it. There’s a lot of talk about transparency these days, trying to 
have a leadership role. He’s won the Tour twice, we should make the effort.

“It’s not a panacea. It’s not going to solve everything, but I can’t see the 
harm in it. You can never stop every single doubter. You can’t do that. 
However, what you can do is try - there’s no harm in trying.”

The Armstrong saga, when the American who won seven successive Tours from 1999 
to 2005 was found to have doped in August 2012, was a major low for cycling, 
which has long been marred by the spectre of drugs.

Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics>, with Sebastian Coe 
now head of the IAAF, has plumbed to similar depths of late. Lord Coe faces a 
Commons select committee to discuss blood doping in athletics on Wednesday.

Brailsford’s advice, having gone through tough times in cycling as recently as 
three years ago, is to face up to the problems, address them and move forwards.

The former British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> 
performance director said: “It was very painful at the time for cycling when we 
went through that, but actually it served a purpose. A lot of good has come out 
of it.

“The opportunity to do something [in athletics] is huge at the minute, there’s 
an appetite to do something, so they just need to get on and execute and do 
something.

“It’s like anything when you’re on a downward spiral, as it were. You get to a 
point where, whether you like it or not, you have to look at yourself in the 
mirror.

“You look at the situation, warts and all, and you look at it and go: ‘OK, 
this is where we’re at – now we can start rebuilding.’

“If you don’t do that, you’re kind of papering over cracks a little bit. 
That’s the situation they found themselves in. Get on with it, get amongst it, 
get everything out, as much as you can, lance every boil that you can and start 
building again. Life goes on.”
 