
Chris Froome <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> has pointed to 
“questions” overSir Bradley Wiggins’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> use of therapeutic use 
exemptions (TUE) for the corticosteroid triamcinolone to treat pollen 
allergies, claiming it is impossible to say if he is operating in a “grey 
area”. In an email interviewwith cyclingnews.com 
<http://www.cyclingnews.com/news/froome-impossible-to-say-if-wiggins-operated-in-a-grey-area/>
, Froome said: “It’s a great shame for the sport that we’re once again debating 
the validity of a Tour de France victory.”

Wiggins was granted the TUEs shortly before the 2011 and 2012 Tours de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> and 2013 Giro d’Italia. They 
were given with the consent of the governing body, the UCI, and he broke no 
rules. The TUEs have raised questions because of their proximity to major race 
dates on the 2012 Tour winner’s schedule and the head of the UCI, Brian 
Cookson, has said he felt in this instanceTeam Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> may have gone close to the limit 
of the rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/brian-cookson-team-sky-pushed-rules-to-limit-british-cycling-tues>
 extant at the time while staying within the bounds of what was permitted.

Tour de France 2017 route is good news for Chris Froome and Mark Cavendish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/tour-de-france-2017-route-early-climbs-team-sky>
Relations between Froome and Wiggins are already tense, having hit a low 
during the 2012 Tour when the pair fell out after Froome went against Team Sky 
ordersand attacked his team leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/12/tour-de-france-2012-bradley-wiggins>
 on a mountain stage, prompting Wiggins to initially withhold his team-mate’s 
share of the prize money after he won the Tour.

Froome, who won the Tour in 2013, 2015 and 2016, told the website he had no 
knowledge of Wiggins’s pollen allergies when they were team-mates from 2010 to 
2015 – “it was the first I had heard of them” – although he knew his former 
team leader had asthma. He added: “Without knowing the exact details of 
[Wiggins’] medical condition, it’s impossible to say if he was operating in a 
grey area.”

Froome added his use of the corticosteroid prednisolone in tablet form in 2014 
– which, like Wiggins’s TUEs,was leaked by the Fancy Bears hackers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-defends-use-tues-wada-hacking-leaks>
 – should be seen in a different light to Wiggins’s triamcinolone injections. 
“In 2014, I had an asthma exacerbation following the prologue at the Tour de 
Romandie. I had serious trouble breathing, which was visible to everyone, 
including journalists who tried to interview me after the stage.

“The team applied for an emergency TUE for a short course of prednisolone. 
This is the standard treatment for post-infection inflammation in asthmatics 
that cannot be controlled by standard inhalers. I don’t believe that there are 
any alternative treatments, … and performance enhancement is negligible.

“With regards to Wiggins’s TUEs, questions remain over his symptoms, the 
choice of treatment and the related performance benefits from that treatment.”

When news of Froome’s TUE emerged in 2014, the UCI said: “Under the applicable 
rules any rider with the same symptoms ... would have received a similar TUE.”

A spokesman for Wiggins said: “Brad’s already talked to the Guardian in some 
detail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues> 
about his symptoms, his allergy to pollen and the treatment he was given.”

Chris Froome calls for urgent action on the use of TUEs in cycling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/chris-froome-urgent-action-tues-cycling-bradley-wiggins>
Meanwhile, at the launch of next year’s Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>, the race’s organiser praised 
a major anti-drugs body. As a television camera panned to Roger Legeay, head of 
the Mouvement Pour un Cyclisme Crédible, the Tour’s Christian Prudhomme, hailed 
the organisation and its philosophy, saying: “The MPCC’s raison d’être still 
remains. Self-imposed regulations, stricter than international ones, can avoid 
many concerns, debates or controversial issues. I like the watchword of the 
MPCC: to leave the light on. This is the key to our future.”

Sir Dave Brailsford was asked recently about the organisation and stated that 
he “did not agree with the MPCC” and never had, but that this was specifically 
over its stance on a zero-tolerance policy on hiring staff with doping pasts, 
which is less strict than Team Sky’s. Brailsford explicitly stated he would not 
have an issue with cortisol testing and would welcome its introduction by the 
UCI.Prudhomme praised the MPCC’s philosophy on being stricter than the 
governing body albeit on a voluntary basis as “fully justified”, and said its 
stance was as a means of avoiding “debate and questioning”.

Froome backed Brailsford on the MPCC, stating, “I don’t believe that Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> joining the MPCC will solve the 
problems in our sport. Only a third of WorldTour teams are currently members of 
the MPCC, and when rules are broken the teams simply leave without any 
repercussions. It is up to the UCI to address the issues.”

Team Sky may have pushed rules to ‘very limit’ on TUEs, says UCI chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/brian-cookson-team-sky-pushed-rules-to-limit-british-cycling-tues> 