
Sir Dave Brailsford has written to the UCI suggesting it works with 
professional teams towards giving public access to a range of power and 
physiological data from all their riders. His move comes in the wake of the 
controversy during last year’s Tour de France aboutwhat power the double winner 
Chris Froome might be producing on his bike and what it may mean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/21/team-sky-data-chris-froome-tour-de-france>
.

Chris Froome: Olympic Games are overwhelming but Tour is foremost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/chris-froome-olympic-games-tour-de-france-rio-2016>
In the past Brailsford has said the release of data across the board would not 
be helpful because the raw material would merely provide grist to the mill of 
conspiracy theory, and that it may well, in some cases, give rivals a 
competitive edge.

Speaking at Team Sky’s season-opening media day on Tuesday, he said: “I’ve 
actually written to [the UCI president] Brian Cookson about this because it 
strikes me on the whole releasing of data – data in terms of power, the key 
climbs – it seems to me that’s a sport-wide issue, it’s not aTeam Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> issue or an issue for one rider.

“It’s obviously impacting the sport and impacting a lot of people in terms of 
how they’re interpreting a rider and the sport. That’s why I wrote to Brian. It 
should be standardised. If we all agree, what I want is to take away the 
element of: ‘Well, Team Sky are willing to do this or they’re not willing to do 
this.’ If we all agreed as teams that here is the disclosure model that we’re 
all going to do, all going to buy into, it takes away that discretionary 
decision of we’re willing to or not willing to [and hence] they’re open or 
they’re not open.

“Brian has written back to say he thinks it’s definitely worth discussing but 
it’s not easy to do. I’d like to think we could get to a position where we 
recognise this is not something that’s going to go away but as a sport we could 
address it rather than leaving it to one rider or one team. I think it would 
help the sport.”

Brailsford added: “We feel under a lot of pressure. We get asked more than any 
other team about data. Our riders, particularly Chris, get asked more about 
data. The onus falls on us and whatever decision we make and how people 
interpret that in terms of our willingness to be open or not. But if we all had 
an agreement that ‘right, this is what we are going to do as a sport in 
general’, that’s a better way of thinking about it.”

To some extent Sky have had their hand forced because other teams such as 
Giant-Alpecin have made data public either officially or through the website 
Strava, which publishes riders’ power data as well as their times for climbs. 
Ironically, it almost mirrors the position taken by one of Sky’s main critics, 
the former Festina trainer Antoine Vayer, who called for teams to release data 
across the board ina Guardian interview in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/15/chris-froome-team-sky-video-tour-de-france>
: “Everyone asks if they are clean. If I say yes, they laugh and say ‘prove 
it’. To say riders are clean, you need the data.”

Sport picture of the day: the long and winding road in Majorca for Team Sky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/jan/13/sport-picture-of-the-day-the-long-and-winding-road-in-majorca-for-team-sky>
By the second rest-day of the Tour, after speculation on French television 
over Froome’s figures, Brailsford, the rider and Sky had decided to make a 
limited amount of his data public. At the time, Froome said he would be willing 
to release more, providing all other teams did the same; the double Tour winner 
went one step further in early December byputting on view the findings of 
independent physiological tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/04/chris-froome-tour-de-france-data>
 carried out immediately after the Tour at the GSK Human Performance laboratory 
in London.

Brailsford added that in his view, the controversies in athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/11/uk-athletics-calls-for-world-records-to-be-reset-due-to-doping-crisis-athletics>
 were leading that sport into a similar situation faced by cycling in 1998 
after the Festina scandal revealed widespread doping. “If you compare it to our 
sport a point in time came with an event that was the straw that broke the 
camel’s back. Something now has to be done [in athletics],” he said. “While 
that felt pretty tough at the time for our sport, it is in a much better place 
now. Better than maybe it ever has been.

“My experience would say don’t wait. Look in the mirror. Warts and all. Get it 
all out. The sooner the better. If you really want to get over those hurdles 
now you increase your chances of being able to move forward. I think now they 
have an opportunity, as tough as it may seem.”
 