
Chris Froome has called for the World Anti-Doping Agency and cycling’s 
governing body, the UCI, to urgently address the controversial use of medical 
exemptions in the sport. In comments that could be interpreted as criticism of 
his former team-mateSir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> and current employer, Team 
Sky, the three-times Tour de France winner said the system is “open to abuse”.

Sir Dave Brailsford puts up stout defence but questions hang in the air
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/sir-dave-brailsford-stout-defence-team-sky-bradley-wiggins>
Froome, who was also part of Team GB’s squad at the Rio Olympics, was revealed 
by the Fancy Bears hackers to have been issued with two therapeutic exemption 
certificates for prednisolone, which is used to treat a variety of inflammatory 
and autoimmune conditions.

The day after the Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> 
principal, Sir Dave Brailsford, defended the team’s use of TUEs and insisted 
they had done nothing wrong, a statement published on Froome’s Twitter account 
on Tuesday attempted to distance the 31-year-old from the controversy. Posted 
under the heading ‘My View’, Froome made it clear he had not cheated but 
suggested that the rules need closer examination.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-use-of-tues-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dave%20Brailsford%20defends%20Bradley%20Wiggins'%20use%20of%20TUEs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-use-of-tues-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dave%20Brailsford%20defends%20Bradley%20Wiggins%27%20use%20of%20TUEs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-use-of-tues-video&media=>
Dave Brailsford defends Bradley Wiggins’ use of TUEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/27/dave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-use-of-tues-video>
“I take my position in the sport very seriously and I know I have to abide by 
the rules but also go above and beyond that to set a good example both morally 
and ethically,”he wrote 
<https://twitter.com/chrisfroome/status/780714696651440128/photo/1>. “It is 
clear the TUE system is open to abuse and I believe this is something the UCI 
and Wada need to urgently address. At the same time there are athletes who not 
only abide by the rules that are in place but also those of fair play.

“I have never had a ‘win at all costs’ approach in this regard,” Froome added. 
“I am not looking to push the boundaries of the rules. I believe this is 
something athletes need to take responsibilty for themselves, until more 
stringent protocols can be put in place.”
Chris Froome (@chrisfroome) 
My view pic.twitter.com/A7fGX6nDxU <https://t.co/A7fGX6nDxU>
 <https://twitter.com/chrisfroome/status/780714696651440128> September 27, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/chrisfroome/status/780714696651440128> 
Froome had formerly defended his use of TUEs, saying he had “no issues” with 
the leaks, pointing out he has spoken publicly about being granted TUEs. He was 
prescribed exemptions for five days during the Critérium du Dauphiné in May 
2013 at and seven days during the Tour of Romandie in April 2014.

Wiggins’s use of TUEs in 2011, 2012 and 2013, before his biggest race of those 
seasons,has come under more scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/bradley-wiggins-andrew-marr-unfair-advantage>
, particularly the injections of the powerful corticosteroid triamcinolone 
before his Tour win. There is no suggestion either rider has done anything 
wrong.

Yet Froome’s comments may be interpreted in the context of his fractious 
relationship with his former team-mate. Froome, who acted as Wiggins’s key 
lieutenant during the 2012 Tour de France, has frequently clashed with him – 
not least onstage 17 of the 2012 race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/19/tour-de-france-bradley-wiggins-chris-froome>
 when he briefly appeared to defy team orders on the slope of the Peyresourde 
and took off without Wiggins in tow.

The Team Sky sports director, Sean Yates, later claimed Wiggins had come close 
to quitting the Tour because he believed he had been “stabbed in the back” by 
Froome.
 