
Perhaps it’s something to do with Interstellar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interstellar>’s failure to light up the 
awards season, as one might have expected from a Kubrickian space adventure 
arriving just a year after the multiple Oscar-winning Gravity. Or maybe the 
current fondness for brash and boisterous Marvel superhero movies has simply 
persuaded film fans that a new dawn is in sight for comic book fare. Either 
way, just about everyone seems to have it in for Christopher Nolan and his once 
vaunted Dark Knight trilogy right now.

First there was the revelation that Michael Keaton, the star of the Tim 
Burton-era Batman films,had never bothered to watch the later movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/10/why-michael-keaton-should-watch-christopher-nolans-batman-movies>
. Then the novelist Christopher Priest, whose book The Prestige formed the 
basis of a very fine magician-themed Nolan thriller in 2006, described the Dark 
Knight films as“boring and pretentious” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/28/prestige-novelist-christopher-nolans-batman-movies-boring-and-pretentious>
, expressing incredulity at the film-maker’s decision to “add” psychological 
realism to the superhero genre. Hetold Skript.fr 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0ZUVdrQZGs#t=28>: “I don’t like his other 
work, I think it’s shallow and badly written … It’s a wrong move to take a 
superhero and give it psychological realism. There is no psychological realism. 
He’s a bodybuilder who jumps off buildings.”

Now Matthew Vaughn, the British director of Kick-Ass and X-Men: First Class, 
has waded into the debate. In thelatest issue of SFX magazine 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/matthew-vaughn-dark-superhero-films-761096>
 he argues that audiences are fast turning their backs on darker superhero fare 
in favour of more light-hearted material.

“People want fun and escapism at the moment,” said Vaughn. “Look at the 
success of Guardians of the Galaxy. I think Nolan kick-started a very dark, 
bleak style of superhero escapism, and I think people have had enough of it.”

Guy Ritchie’s erstwhile producer might be right in terms of highlighting a 
shift in the cultural zeitgeist. Man of Steel, Zack Snyder’s somewhat sombre 
Superman reboot, might have benefited from a little more cheer and all-American 
bombast, while you have to wonder if the stark and atmospheric Dredd (which I 
loved, by the way) might have connected better with US audiences had Alex 
Garland not chosen to delve into deliciously dark and visceral territory when 
adapting the iconic 2000 AD antihero.


But none of this is Nolan’s fault, and suggesting that there is something 
wrong with the British director’s excellent trilogy of films just because 
Hollywood has shifted towards a rather more throwaway style of superhero rather 
misses the point.

Nolan chose to make movies about Batman because he felt the dark knight was by 
far the most fascinating comic-book hero out there, a superhero whose only real 
power is extreme wealth – and who would be a psychologist’s dream if he were 
real. The film-maker has not expressed any particular interest in shooting 
further superhero movies, and it seemshighly unlikely he will do so in the 
foreseeable future 
<http://uproxx.com/gammasquad/2014/10/no-dc-comic-return-nolan/>.

Batman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman> also suited Nolan’s taste 
for spiky, cerebral thrillers that balance on the borderline between the real 
and the imagined. To suggest his comic-book films were somehow an attempt to 
make cinematic superheroes darker is myopic in the extreme: the director was 
simply indulging his own tastes as an auteur with an unusual willingness to 
delve into mainstream and genre territory.

For those of us who happen to enjoy these types of movies, the departure of 
Nolan for more obviously cerebral territory – where Priest hints he belongs – 
is dismaying. Moreover, Vaughn should bear in mind that his own Kick-Ass movies 
might easily have tanked had Nolan’s pioneering work not proved that there is a 
place for big-screen superhero fare not aimed at kids.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7WKqc-bxiHY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7WKqc-bxiHY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7WKqc-bxiHY&media=>
It’s true that comic-book films took a turn away from primary-coloured 
silliness towards a starker, furrow-browed aesthetic bedded closer to reality. 
(This partly explains why we got a bizarrely moody Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
movie last year, when viewers might have been expecting another fun-time romp 
in the company of everyone’s favourite wisecracking, pizza-munching reptilian 
crime fighters.) But that doesn’t mean that the success of Guardians of the 
Galaxy, The Avengers et al means every superhero movie from hereon in is going 
to riff off self-referential banter and 70s pop razzle-dazzle. Guardians of the 
Galaxy’s ingenious use of Blue Swede would not have worked on, say, the 
forthcoming remake of The Crow, the gothic supernatural themes of which are 
probably more suited to a bit of Marilyn Manson.

The comic-book world is a vast and mercurial one, and we can only hope that 
film-makers will continue to produce movies that reflect this. Guardians of the 
Galaxy andThe Dark Knight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight> 
are both excellent in their own way precisely because each has the confidence 
in its tone to take it into fresh, uncharted territory.

Nolan’s Batman movies will remain thrilling totems of the genre for decades to 
come. They will perhaps take the same blunt and brutal place in the comic-book 
milieu as Sam Peckinpah’s down and dirty early 70s films do in the western 
pantheon – even if they are not flavour of the month at present.
 