
Five British athletes, include the Tour de France winning cyclists Chris Froome
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> and Bradley Wiggins, are 
among the latest batch of names alleged by a group of Russian hackers to have 
taken banned substances for which they had received a therapeutic use exemption 
(TUE).

Late on Wednesday night the cyber-espionage website Fancy Bears published 
documents it obtained from illegally hacking into the World Anti-Doping 
Agency’s database that also included 10 American athletes, among them the 
gold-medal winner shot putter Michelle Carter, as well as five Germans, a 
Russian and a Danish athlete.

Chris Froome defends use of TUEs after latest Wada hacking leaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-defends-use-tues-wada-hacking-leaks>
On Tuesday it leaked the personal files of several top American athletes, 
including the tennis stars Serena and Venus Williams and the gymnast Simone 
Biles, and promised that it would soon publish “sensational proof” of famous 
athletes taking doping substances.

The latest batch of documents suggest that Froome had a TUE for prednisolone, 
which is used to treat a variety of inflammatory and autoimmune conditions, for 
five days in May 2013 at the Critérium du Dauphiné and seven days in April 2014 
during the Tour of Romandie. The latter TUE has been widely reported but the 
2013 Dauphiné, which Froome won, has not been. In both cases the TUE was 
approved by the InternationalCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling>
 Union’s Mario Zorzoli. Wiggins, meanwhile, is claimed to have had a number of 
TUEs for salbutamol – a medication that opens up the medium and large airways 
in the lungs – dating back to June 2008, as well as the asthma medications 
formoterol and budesonide. Triamcinolone acetonide, given because of Wiggins’ 
lifelong allergy to pollen, was also approved by Zorzoli.

The British golfer Charley Hull was alleged to have been given a TUE for 
salbutamol while Heather Fisher, who has competed in both the bobsleigh and 
rugby union, had TUEs for the drugs methylprednisolone, triamcinolone and 
dexamethasone. The British Olympic rower Sam Townsend was also claimed to have 
been allowed a TUE for asthma medication.

Wada hacking scandal: debate turns to the use of powerful legal drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/wada-hacking-abuse-debate-theraputic-use-drugs>
There is no suggestion that any of the athletes named has done anything wrong 
but the documents will inevitably raise further questions about the use of such 
drugs and TUEs to improve sports performance in the coming days.

In response to the earlier Fancy Bears leak Wada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> admitted that the hackers had gained 
access to its Anti-Doping Administration and Management System (Adams) database 
via a phishing attack using an International Olympic Committee created account 
for the Rio 2016 Games. Its director general, Olivier Niggli, insisted he 
“deeply regretted” the violation and was “very conscious of the threat that it 
represents to athletes whose confidential information has been divulged through 
this criminal act”.
 