
British high streets endured a fourth Christmas of falling sales as shoppers 
switched to buying gifts online from the comfort of their sofa. Underlying 
sales dipped 0.1% in December, after a 5.3% fall in the same month in 2015, as 
clothing retailers had a particularly tough year, said the consultancy firm BDO.

Sophie Michael, head of retail at BDO, which surveyed more than 70 retailers 
including several mid-sized chains, said: “December 2015 was the worst trading 
month since 2008 and anything below that was always going to be a big 
disappointment.”

Black Friday takings soar 16% in online bonanza
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/black-friday-takings-soar-16-in-online-bonanza>
Sales in clothing stores open for more than a year were down by just over 1%, 
as mild weather for most of the month put shoppers off stocking up on knitwear 
and new coats. The fall in that part of the market was partly offset by a 2.6% 
increase in sales of homewares, while surging sales of bicycles, wrapping paper 
and cards contributed to a 2.4% rise at “lifestyle” retailers.

The biggest winners were online retailers with sales of all goods up 19% in 
December. Week by week upswings in growth culminated in a massive 51% 
year-on-year jump in online sales in the final week before Christmas.

BDO said online trade had been lifted by UK shoppers being more certain that 
last-minute purchases would be delivered on time, as well as international 
shoppers taking advantage of the weak pound to snap up bargains.
. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-05T17:16:06/embed.html>
Michael said: “We have seen a shift towards online for a number of years but 
it was more pronounced in December partly because the weak pound drew spend 
from overseas. It’s also the convenience and comfort of being able to shop from 
your own home, and we have got a very savvy shopper benchmarking sale prices.”

Tony Shiret, an analyst at Haitong Research, said sales in December and early 
January were also likely to have been affected by the “Black Friday” discount 
day in late November. “Black Friday is part of a structural change which is 
displacing profitable pre-Christmas sales with unprofitable sales in November,” 
Shiret said.

BDO said high-street shoppers had also left buying late. “The slump in sales 
could have been considerably worse were it not for a stellar performance in the 
week leading up to Christmas Day,” it said in its report.

Planning applications for new shops fell 9% in past year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/planning-applications-new-shops-fell-nine-per-cent-past-year>
The latest indication of tough times on the high street comes after the 
fashion and homewares chainNext revealed disappointing sales over the Christmas 
period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
; it said high streets had been quieter than anticipated. Some analysts believe 
the retailer also lost out because its website had not kept pace with 
consumers’ growing demand for shopping via their mobile phones or tablet 
computers.

Springboard, a company that analyses retail performance and counts the number 
of people visiting shopping centres and high streets, alsowarned that footfall 
was down on both New Year’s Day and Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/brexit-worries-and-online-stores-hit-shopping-centre-sales>
, traditionally big sales days. Analysts said worries over the economy combined 
with the growing ease of shopping online had kept people from stores.

The slowdown could mean store closures as retailers invest more in developing 
mobile apps and other online shopping tools, and try to reduce high-street 
space.

Marks & Spencer has recently announced plans to close 30 UK stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/m-and-s-marks-spencer-close-80-stores-major-overhaul>
 while B&Q, the electricals retailer Currys/PC World, and the Topshop/Dorothy 
Perkins group Arcadia, have all scaled back their store estate in recent years. 
In contrast online retailers, including Amazon, Asos and Boohoo.com, have all 
enjoyed rapid growth.
 