
Saudi Arabia will roll out the red carpet on Friday for its second film 
festival <http://www.arabnews.com/saudi-film-festival-turning-point-industry> 
in seven years, despite cinemas being banned in the deeply conservative country.


More than 60 short films will compete for Golden Palm Tree trophies crowning 
the best drama, documentary and student film at a gala event attended by film 
and television celebrities from around the Arab world.

The kingdom practises an austere version of Islam that does not permit 
conventional entertainment venues such as cinemas, so screenings will take 
place in an arts centre in the Gulf coast city of Dammam.

Organisers say they hope the five-day festival will open eyes in Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> to the possibilities of film, 
despite objections from some conservatives that cinema will westernise the 
kingdom or corrupt its morals.

“I think we in Saudi Arabia have beautiful culture to tell the world,” said 
Abdullah al-Eyaf, a film-maker and head of the festival jury. “Why should we 
wait for this country or that country … to tell stories about Saudi Arabia?”

Most of the film-makers showcased are under the age of 25, said the festival’s 
director Ahmed al-Mulla, who sees his role as helping them to develop.

As well as screening films, the festival will include workshops on 
scriptwriting, music and directing, and talks by industry figures from around 
the region. Thirty-four scripts that have not yet been made into films will 
also vie for a Golden Palm Tree trophy.

The winning scriptwriters and film-makers will get grants to help fund future 
projects, from a prize pool totalling 180,000 riyals (£31,000).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fsecond-saudi-arabia-film-festival-opens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424348415381%2Fbcba8afc-bfd7-4b96-a5fa-2bd276242ca3-2060x1505.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinemaless%20Saudi%20Arabia's%20second%20film%20festival%20opens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fsecond-saudi-arabia-film-festival-opens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinemaless%20Saudi%20Arabia%27s%20second%20film%20festival%20opens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fsecond-saudi-arabia-film-festival-opens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424348415381%2Fbcba8afc-bfd7-4b96-a5fa-2bd276242ca3-2060x1505.jpeg>
 A Saudi man holds up his entrance ticket to see the Saudi comedy film Manahi 
in Jeddah in 2008. Photograph: Omar Salem/AFP/Getty Images 
Among the films to be shown is Grand Marriage, a documentary directed by 
Faisal al-Otaibi that tells the story of a two-week wedding ceremony in the 
archipelago nation of the Comoros.


Haifaa al-Mansour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/jul/14/haifaa-mansour-wadjda-saudi-arabia>
, Saudi Arabia’s first female film-maker, has been invited to attend but she 
lives abroad and is unlikely to show up. In 2013 her film Wadjda became the 
kingdom’s first to be listed as a candidate for a foreign-language Oscar, but 
did not make the final shortlist. It told the story of a rebellious girl who 
dreams of owning a bicycle in a country where women’s rights are restricted and 
the sexes strictly segregated.

Without cinemas, Mulla said, “sadly there is no way” to show such films 
publicly in Saudi Arabia, though many end up on websites such as YouTube. 
Others are sometimes featured at small, special screenings.

Mulla also directed the first Saudi film festival, in 2008. He was vague about 
why so many years had passed between events, but said this year’s festival had 
been organised “in the right way” by the Society for Culture and Arts, an NGO 
where he volunteers. He expects an overflow audience at the society’s 
600-capacity screening hall on Friday’s opening night.

The festival received more than 120 submissions, of which around 66 met the 
requirements to be shown, including that they are less than 59 minutes long and 
have not been shown on YouTube or on television. “We received a lot of nice 
films,” Mulla said, adding that 10 would have their premieres at the festival.

He said the festival entries covered a wide range of subjects, including 
crime, society and history. There was one animated movie, and a “very strong” 
film about human rights.


He said that while the festival must ensure it respects Saudi Arabia’s culture 
and traditions, there was no formal censorship. “I think we can screen anything 
political,” he said.

Mulla said he hoped that one day cinemas would open in the kingdom, because 
film was “part of culture, part of loving life”. But first, he said, film 
lovers would need to convince “people who are scared of art and culture”.
 