
Reversals of fortune do not come much sharper or more symbolic than that 
suffered by Dilma Rousseff <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dilma-rousseff> 
over the past year.

Last December, she was still in the early stages of her second term as 
Brazil’s first woman president. Unbeaten in elections, she lived in a palace, 
commanded Latin America’s biggest bureaucracy, joined summit banquets alongside 
Barack Obama, Vladimir Putin and Angela Merkel, and went on her morning bicycle 
ride in Brasília with the full protection given to a head of state.

A warrior to the end: Dilma Rousseff a sinner and saint in impeachment fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/09/dilma-rousseff-brazil-impeachment-fight-congress-vote>
Today, however, after being levered from power by her running mate and 
impeached by Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeached-president-brazilian-senate-michel-temer>
, Rousseff lives in her mother’s apartment, buys her own groceries at the local 
supermarket, has a one-man security detail and rides her bike along the 
seafront of Rio de Janeiro with the rest of the crowd.

There can be few more striking personifications of the demise of the political 
left in the past 12 months. But even though it may seem that the world has 
moved backwards in terms of gender, race and income equality, Rousseff – who 
has arguably lost more than anyone – says that for her, this is by no means 
rock bottom.

“Every day has been difficult,” she tells the Guardian during an interview 
near her residence in Rio de Janeiro. “But this is not the worst year I have 
experienced. Not at all.”

That distinction belongs to the period 1970-1972, when she was imprisoned and 
tortured for belonging to a clandestine Marxist guerrilla organisation that was 
committed to overthrowing the military dictatorship.She suffered beatings, 
electric shocks and other forms of abuse without ever giving up the names of 
her collaborators. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/09/dilma-rousseff-brazil-impeachment-fight-congress-vote>

In comparison, she said, even the bleakest moments of the past year have been 
bearable.

Among the worst was on 17 April, when her fate was effectively sealed by a 
rowdy lower house impeachment vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/dilma-rousseff-congress-impeach-brazilian-president>
. Her alleged wrongdoing – window dressing government accounts – was far less 
severe than the accusations faced by more than 100 of the deputies who rose in 
judgment against her, but she was damned nonetheless, putting her on a course 
that later led to her removal from the presidency and the negation of the 54m 
votes that put her in power.

How did she feel that night? “It’s hard to say. There is such a kaleidoscope 
of memories,” she says, pausing at some length to find the right words, “I felt 
sadness, despair and indignation.”

Expressions of emotion do not come easily to Rousseff in sharp contrast to her 
Workers’ party mentor and predecessor as president,Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva>. The two of them 
watched the impeachment vote together on a TV in the presidential palace.While 
he sobbed, she ordered popcorn. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/04/brazil-ex-president-luiz-ignacio-lula-da-silva-interview>

“He cried, and he hugged me, and he said to me ‘cry Dilma, cry!’ But I don’t 
cry when I’m moved. That’s not how I am,” Rousseff said. Asked if she had 
always been like that or whether it was a mental hardening that occurred during 
her torture, the former prisoner pauses again.

“I think it goes back to that time. You can break at any moment so you have to 
keep fooling yourself. You have to keep kidding yourself that it’s nearly over 
or else you fold. You tell yourself, it’s just 10 more minutes. Then, 10 
minutes later, you persuade yourself it’s just another 10.”

Dilma Rousseff taunt opens old wounds of dictatorship era's torture in Brazil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/dilma-rousseff-impeachment-comments-torture-era-brazil-history>
Those old scars were reopened during the impeachment debate by ultra-right 
deputy Jair Bolsonaro, who dedicated his pro-impeachment vote to the military 
dictatorship – specifically to the army colonel who tortured Rousseff.

“I was shocked he could say that in congress,” she recalls. Bolsonaro, who 
plans to stand for the presidency himself in 2018, was never punished for his 
comments – a sign of both the impunity and the conservatism that characterise 
Brazil’s congress.

Rousseff believes misogyny is partly to blame for her downfall, as well as the 
election defeat in the United States ofHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> – who the Brazilian 
describes as a “friend despite our differences”. As she has noted on numerous 
occasions, there are double standards for women politicians, who tend to be 
called “hard” rather than “strong” when they take tough decisions.

“The fact that I was the first woman president was a factor in what happened 
to me. It is hard to quantify. It wasn’t 100% because of that. But it was a 
component,” she says. “I think it will be easier for the next woman president.”

Her critics say she brought about her own downfall. Enemies on the right say 
she ruined the economy (now in its deepest recession for decades). The 
disaffected on the left believe her budget cuts were a betrayal of her election 
promises. Many across the political spectrum suspect that she knew about – and 
politically benefited from – a massive bribery and kickback scheme at the 
state-run oil giant Petrobras, even if she wasn’t directly involved or 
personally enriched.

Even allies who praise her for being unusually honest and well-intentioned 
admitshe tends to be secretive and a dire communicator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/09/dilma-rousseff-brazil-impeachment-fight-congress-vote>
.

Freed from the responsibility of office, Rousseff is now more loquacious. She 
appears to be on a mission to clear her name. The senate acknowledged her 
relatively modest individual guilt by not stripping her of her political rights 
afterejecting her from office on 30 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeached-president-brazilian-senate-michel-temer>
. But she wants her side of the story told and – like Lula – has probably 
granted more interviews in the past few months than in the previous five years.

She blames Brazil’s dire economy on a global storm of falling commodity 
prices, weakening Chinese demand, a debilitating drought and the after-effects 
of the 2008 financial crisis.

Behind the political turmoil, she sees a cabal of plotters – led by current 
president Michel Temer, her former deputy who she says engineered her downfall, 
and former lower house speaker Eduardo Cunha – who have dragged the 
traditionally centrist Brazilian Democratic Movement party to the right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/09/dilma-rousseff-brazil-president-impeachment-pmdb>
. Allied to oligarchical interests in the financial sector, she said they 
turned against her with greater strength after she cut real interest rates for 
the first time in more than a decade and achieved almost full employment.

Complicating the whole situation, she says, is the increasing fragmentation of 
political parties, which has created a climate for corruption. In the 1990s, 
thenpresident Fernando Henrique Cardoso needed the support of only three 
parties to secure a simple majority in congress. In the following decade, Lula 
had needed eight. By the time Rousseff left office, this had increased to 12.

“It’s every day. Everything is a negotiation. It’s the only way to get power,” 
she said. “People say I don’t like politics, but that is not true. What I don’t 
like is the buying and selling … It’s always existed, but not to this degree.”

This is somewhat disingenuous. Rousseff was at the apex of this system for 
close to a decade, first as chief of staff for Lula and then as president. 
Unlike many of her accusers, she may not have gained personally (as she says, 
“I don’t have secret Swiss bank accounts, I didn’t rob anything”) but she was 
unwilling or unable to push a meaningful clear-up on her party and coalition 
allies. Instead, she left prosecutors and the courts to do the job, while 
focusing her government on its social and political goals.

Asked if she regretted winning in 2014 – just as this system started to come 
crashing down along with the economy – Rousseff shakes her head. “Not for one 
moment. If I hadn’t won, things would be much worse now. We would already have 
an austerity and privatisation package like that of [President Mauricio] Macri 
in Argentina.”

Although she credits her short-lived second administration for delaying and 
reducing the impact of the neoliberal tide now sweeping Latin America, she is 
not optimistic about the near-term prospects for progressive politicians in
Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> or elsewhere. Brexit and the 
election of Donald Trump are, she says, a cause for wider concerns.

Dilma Rousseff might be gone, but Brazil’s political crisis certainly isn’t | 
Paulo Pinheiro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/dilma-rousseff-brazil-political-crisis-conservatives-corruption>
“With the increase once again of inequality, especially in developed 
countries, it creates the conditions for disbelief in democracy. If the demands 
of the population cannot be met by governments, then politics becomes 
irrelevant. Then, it won’t be projects or proposals, or even utopias, that will 
move people. Instead, people will focus on symbols, slogans and scapegoats. 
That’s when the right rises and intolerance grows.”

For most of her life, Rousseff has been fighting these trends. But for now, 
she plans to step back and study her enemy. Her immediate plan is to research 
the concept of “states of exception” – the term coined by Nazi jurist Carl 
Schmitt to justify dictators who bypass national laws in the name of the public 
good.

With these justifications creeping back – for example with the Patriot Act in 
the US, the criminalisation of the poor and the treatment of refugees – 
Rousseff says the memoirs will have to wait.
 