
Mr. Hugh Dalton, President of the Board of Trade, in a war commentary at 
Caxton Hall, Westminster, yesterday, said that we must make our clothes and all 
our household goods last longer. “It is inevitable thatas the war continues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/series/from-the-archive+world/secondworldwar>
 there should be an increasing shortage of civilian supplies,” he said, “The 
nearer we approach the hour of final victory the greater will the shortage be.


“At this stage of the war, we can no longer justify any production which does 
not serve a real war purpose, including the maintenance of necessary civilian 
supplies. I have therefore taken steps to bring all inessential production to 
an end, and to transfer the labour and materials involved to more essential 
uses.

“Fair shares, with the reduced clothing ration, mean extra coupons for those 
with special needs – growing children and industrial workers, – but there 
should be all possible economy in clothing, and people should not use their 
coupons unless they must. It is now bad form to appear in clothes that look too 
new.”

Mr. Dalton said it was hoped soon to have utility cutlery and suitcases, and 
perhaps a few more articles of utility furniture, which should be of sound 
construction within the limits of the materials available, agreeable design, 
and sold at reasonable prices, he said the “first edition” had had an 
encouraging reception.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclothes-fashion-second-world-war-rationing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F636b68032a0a33828d8bfad712098572ce2e310d%2F0_700_2627_1575%2F2627.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Civilians%20told%20to%20make%20their%20clothes%20last%20longer%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%204%20November%201942&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclothes-fashion-second-world-war-rationing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Civilians%20told%20to%20make%20their%20clothes%20last%20longer%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%204%20November%201942&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclothes-fashion-second-world-war-rationing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F636b68032a0a33828d8bfad712098572ce2e310d%2F0_700_2627_1575%2F2627.jpg>
 A lone woman stands on an empty platform waving goodbye to a departing troop 
train, 1942. Photograph: Bert Hardy/Picture Post/Getty Images 
“This furniture will be sold only to those who really need it and hold special 
buying permits, such as newly married people and people who have been bombed 
out.”

“I am aiming at ‘fair shares’ not only as between consumers but also as 
between traders. I have now set up the three committees I promised to organise 
the fair distribution of clothing, pottery, andhollowware 
<http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hollowware>.”

Under the stress of war, said Mr. Dalton, the nation knew that it must plan or 
perish. To this end, if our people were satisfied that justice was being done, 
they would cheerfully endure great shortages. “But from our experience of 
war-planning and from the lessons we are learning now a pattern for the future 
is emerging. We must find a way, in peace, when abundance shall have succeeded 
scarcity, to retain our war-time gains of fair shares, fair prices, and a 
healthy simplification in the ways of living and in the design of goods in 
common use.”
 