
The government is to intervene to encourage companies to scrutinise their 
supply chains for evidence of worker exploitation or child labour, the 
international development minister will announce this coming week.

Detailing a £1m grant from the aid budget towards a campaign to lobby 
businesses to take more responsibility for the labour practices within their 
supply chains, international development secretaryPriti Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel>, said she wanted to clamp 
down on global child exploitation.

Patel is to sit as a member of the first-ever government taskforce on modern 
slavery, which will be chaired by the prime minister, Theresa May, who 
announced in July that this was a priority for her government. Reducing modern 
slavery within supply chains will be a core focus of that work, putting the 
onus on companies to clean up their act.

Before the national day against slavery on Tuesday, Patel outlined an increase 
in support for women and girl refugees in Jordan, Iraq and Lebanon, and for 
vulnerable people at risk of trafficking in north Africa and Europe.

Child labour: the issue that won’t go away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/nestle-sustainable-cocoa/2016/may/31/child-labour-the-issue-that-wont-go-away>
“The international response to modern slavery, human trafficking and child 
exploitation has been far too slow,” she said, “which is why I am making 
eradicating these crimes a priority. As a member of the first government 
taskforce on modern slavery, I will … work with international governments, 
civil society, religious leaders and businesses to stamp out modern slavery and 
end all forms of violence, abuse and exploitation against children.

“As a globally engaged, outward-looking Britain we will keep our promises to 
the world’s poorest by protecting victims and ending these vile crimes for 
good.”

Child labour <https://www.theguardian.com/law/child-labour> – both forced and 
not – involves close to 170 million children around the world, while 45 million 
people work in conditions of forced labour. Children are most commonly used in 
agriculture – the cotton, coffee and clothing industries are often pointed to 
as particular offenders – and in some of the poorer African countries, for 
example, up to 50% of under-14s will be in some kind of work, usually low-paid. 
But child labour it is not always a clear-cut issue – in some cases children 
may be working in order to attend school or help their family feed itself, 
while a study in the Netherlands suggested a third of Dutch 12-year-olds had a 
part-time job.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fchild-labourers-helping-luxury-cars-sparkle-india-mica-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20child%20labourers%20helping%20luxury%20cars%20sparkle%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fchild-labourers-helping-luxury-cars-sparkle-india-mica-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20child%20labourers%20helping%20luxury%20cars%20sparkle%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fchild-labourers-helping-luxury-cars-sparkle-india-mica-video&media=>
The child labourers helping luxury cars sparkle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/jul/28/child-labourers-helping-luxury-cars-sparkle-india-mica-video>
Patel said DfID will prioritise work with sectors including mining, tourism 
and agribusiness to improve transparency in labour practices and supply chains 
around the world as part of her new role as a founding board member of the 
Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children, a group lobbying 
governments, multilaterals, civil society, religious leaders and businesses to 
end all forms of abuse and exploitation of children.

The secretary of state’s focus on this agenda comes on the back of existing 
work which, DfID said, has already reached over 200,000 women in south Asia and 
the Middle East through the Work in Freedom programme, which trains women in 
their communities and works with businesses and recruiters to tackle 
trafficking.

Other grants being announced are £4mn for the Women and Girls Protection Fund 
for Europe and North Africa, which supports vulnerable groups at risk of 
trafficking or violence along migration routes, including by giving them access 
to legal and psychosocial services, and a £1mn extension to the UN Trust Fund 
to End Violence against Women, which will protect girls and women and support 
survivors of violence across seven key countries: Egypt, FYR Macedonia, Iraq, 
Jordan, Lebanon, Serbia and Turkey. The focus will be on providing funding to 
smaller women’s rights and civil society organisations addressing the issue of 
sexual and gender-based violence experienced by women and girl refugees, said 
DfID.
 