
Years before penning Metamorphosis, considered by some to be the greatest 
short story ever written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/18/franz-kafka-metamorphosis-100-thoughts-100-years>
, Franz Kafka hoped to make his fortune writing a series of budget European 
travel guides.

Kafka conceived a business plan for the books, dubbed “on the cheap”, while 
travelling across the continent with his friend Max Brod in the summer of 1911. 
This detail was revealed in volume three of Reiner Stach’s biography,Kafka: The 
Early Years <http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10818.html>, published in 
translation (by Shelley Frisch) last month.

The ahead-of-its-time idea (considering the popularity of budget travel tips 
today) sought to take on the traditionalBaedeker travel guides 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Baedeker_Guides>, which then consisted 
primarily of hotel and restaurant listings, but lacked the insider knowledge 
Kafka felt was truly valuable to a traveller.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffranz-kafka-hoped-to-write-budget-travel-guides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1505532fc9397530769ea0ee7d7edfdc78dafd9a%2F0_188_3614_2169%2F3614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clean%20room%2C%20no%20beetles%20wanted%3A%20how%20a%20young%20Kafka%20hoped%20to%20write%20budget%20travel%20guides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffranz-kafka-hoped-to-write-budget-travel-guides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clean%20room%2C%20no%20beetles%20wanted%3A%20how%20a%20young%20Kafka%20hoped%20to%20write%20budget%20travel%20guides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffranz-kafka-hoped-to-write-budget-travel-guides%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1505532fc9397530769ea0ee7d7edfdc78dafd9a%2F0_188_3614_2169%2F3614.jpg>
 Max Brod, pictured here in 1937, was Kafka’s travelling companion across 
Europe in 1911. Photograph: Getty Images 
Questions that his guides proposed to address are ones that tourists still 
seek answers for now. On which days do museums have reduced fees? Are there any 
free concerts? Should you travel by taxi or tram? How much should you tip? 
There was also a suggestion to include advice on where to find erotic and 
sexual entertainment for a fair price.

Stach writes: “Kafka and Brod were convinced that a travel guide that answered 
all these questions candidly and supplied a select few reasonable and reliable 
recommendations would instantly beat out the competition … With a series of 
this kind, they could earn millions, especially if it was published in several 
languages.”


Inspiration struck during a tour of Switzerland, the lakes and cities of 
northern Italy and the Adriatic, during which their relative naivety when it 
came to travel was exposed. As Stach puts it: “They knew quite a bit, but often 
not what they needed to know.”

For example, after discovering that Zurich’s city library was closed on 
Sundays, the pair believed they could still gain entry by asking at the tourist 
office.

Meanwhile, a swimming trip to Lake Zurich to go swimming meant Kafka having to 
uncomfortably undress in a public changing area, while Brod got “attacked with 
a hose” by the pool attendant and a group of boys.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffranz-kafka-hoped-to-write-budget-travel-guides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7acb435e99d5c72625a6a199cfecf19dd0e11a4a%2F82_0_3191_1915%2F3191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clean%20room%2C%20no%20beetles%20wanted%3A%20how%20a%20young%20Kafka%20hoped%20to%20write%20budget%20travel%20guides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffranz-kafka-hoped-to-write-budget-travel-guides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clean%20room%2C%20no%20beetles%20wanted%3A%20how%20a%20young%20Kafka%20hoped%20to%20write%20budget%20travel%20guides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffranz-kafka-hoped-to-write-budget-travel-guides%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7acb435e99d5c72625a6a199cfecf19dd0e11a4a%2F82_0_3191_1915%2F3191.jpg>
 Lake Zurich … where Kafka’s plan for a swim didn’t go smoothly. Photograph: 
Anthony Anex/EPA 
Despite this, Kafka retained a relative loftiness, looking down on traditional 
souvenir-collecting tourists. He “poked fun at amateur photographers”, a hobby 
he felt could never compare with writing as a means of documenting a trip, 
which raises the question: what would Kafka have thought about selfie sticks 
and Instagram?

But perhaps it was the pair’s own arrogance that explains why the book series 
never came to fruition. Despite writing a five-page business plan, as well as 
extending the idea for each book in the series to include a “conversation 
guide”, the pair were so afraid that their idea would be stolen that they 
wouldn’t reveal the full details of their pitch to a publisher without first 
securing an advance.

This, writes Stach “effectively sealed the fate of their ambitious plan, and 
the millions in earnings returned to the realm of the imaginary”.
 