
When politicians meet in Paris next week to negotiate a global climate deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/23/historic-opportunity-end-poverty-will-be-lost-if-we-dont-tackle-climate-change>
, their commitments will have far-reaching consequences. Pastoralist 
communities in Somaliland are among those who have a vital stake in the talks, 
as a changing climate continues to have a devastating impact.Clár Ní Chonghaile 
visited Somaliland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/23/somaliland-climate-change-drought-cyclones-life-or-death-challenge>
 and met people reeling from drought and cyclones in a region that “could be 
considered the canary in the mine of a world that is getting hotter, and where 
extreme weather is becoming more common”.

Meanwhile in Kenya, climate funds have been mobilised to create programmes to 
help farmers become more resilient in the face of changing weather patterns.
Read about the projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/16/kenya-climate-frontline-female-farmers-building-secure-future-drought-samburu>
 helping women regenerate trees, harvest rainwater and grow more diverse crops.

Elsewhere on the site

 * For Colombia’s Emberá, telling outsiders about FGM is worse than cutting 
girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/19/colombia-embera-female-genital-mutilation-mystery-myth-misgiving>
 * Calls for Ireland to double number of permits to protect migrant fishermen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/23/irish-fishing-industry-calls-for-ireland-double-number-permits-issued-migrant-fishermen>
 * South Africa’s notorious Pollsmoor prison joins the global battle against TB
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/19/turberculosis-south-africa-pollsmoor-prison-world-health-organisation-tb>
 * World toilet day: from South Sudan to Russia, where not to get caught short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/19/world-toilet-day-south-sudan-global-sanitation-wateraid>
 * Nepal border blockade ‘threatens the future of the country itself’, says UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/18/nepal-border-blockade-india-threatens-future-un-unicef>
 * Discontent rife in Afghanistan: 40% of people keen to leave, survey says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/18/afghanistan-survey-discontent-40-per-cent-people-keen-to-leave>
Opinion

To mark universal children’s day, 14-year-old Oscar writes about fleeing his 
war-ravaged home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/20/oscar-child-14-democratic-republic-of-congo-refugee-uk>
 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and his hope for other children living 
in conflict areas. “I am desperate to help these children and to help make a 
world where children can have a happy childhood, a place where they can feel 
comfortable, have a safe home, access to education, and enjoy a life that is 
taken for granted around much of the world,” he writes.

And on the refugee crisis, Helen Clark, UN Development Programme 
administrator, and Erik Solheim, chairman of theOECD development assistance 
committee, <http://www.oecd.org/dac/> argue that spending aid money on taking 
in refugeesposes a threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/16/refugee-crisis-must-not-deflect-us-from-our-long-term-development-aims>
 to long-term development. They write that investing in thesustainable 
development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 will help to alleviate such crises and reduce the likelihood of them occurring 
again.

Multimedia

Gallery: Desert schools bloom in Sahrawi refugee camps  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/nov/21/desert-schools-sahrawi-refugee-camps-morocco-western-sahara-in-pictures>

Gallery: Bucharest – drug users in sewers and squats around Gara de Nord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/nov/14/bucharest-hiv-aids-gara-de-nord-romania-sewers-squats-in-pictures>

Video: ‘Female genital mutilation? I use the word killer’: Maasai speak out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/nov/12/warriors-movie-maasai-cricket-female-genital-mutilation-killer-video>

Event – ending violence against women

One in three women worldwide faces violence in her lifetime. To mark the final 
day of this year’s16 days of activism to end violence against women 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-focus/end-violence-against-women>, Guardian 
Global development ishosting an event 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/fearless-policy-panel-event?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=article&utm_campaign=pac_vawgcampaign>
 organised byActionAid <http://www.actionaid.org.uk/> to discuss what needs to 
be done to ensure global commitments to end violence are upheld. Among the 
speakers is Rashida Manjoo, former UN special rapporteur on violence against 
women. The event will be held from 10am to 1pm on Thursday 10 December 2015 at 
the Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. If you would like to 
attend, email Lizzie Gerrard at ActionAid:lizzie.gerrard@actionaid.org 
<mailto:lizzie.gerrard@actionaid.org>.

Take part

Education on sexual and reproductive health varies greatly across countries 
and cultures. We’d like to hear from you about the delivery of sex education in 
your country. What kind of programme did you have at school, or if you are the 
teacher or parent of a school-aged child, what type of education is now being 
delivered?Fill out a form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/12/sex-education-classes-you-received-at-school>
 to contribute to our coverage. You can do so anonymously.

What you said

On the piece Maasai Cricket Warriors determined to hit female genital 
mutilation for six 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/12/maasai-cricket-warriors-female-genital-mutilation-movie-last-man-stands-championship>
,xianyork wrote:

A fantastic story. Change is always easier to bring about if it comes from 
within a culture rather than being promoted or pushed from outside. This can 
bring hope to many that the Maasai will move on and that FGM will disappear 
with this generation.


Highlight from the blogosphere

From poverty to power: Reading the tea leaves – what the women’s movement can 
learn from a victory in India 
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/reading-the-tea-leaves-what-the-womens-movement-can-learn-from-a-victory-in-india/>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 