
One of Guinness World Records’ more unusual awards was presented at the 
National Maritime Museum yesterday. After a 100-day trial, the timepiece known 
as Clock B – which had been sealed in a clear plastic box to prevent tampering 
– was officially declared, by Guinness, to be the world’s “most accurate 
mechanical clock with a pendulum swinging in free air”.

It was an intriguing enough award. But what is really astonishing is that the 
clock was designed more than 250 years ago by a man who was derided at the time 
for “an incoherence and absurdity that was little short of the symptoms of 
insanity”, and whose plans for the clock lay ignored for two centuries.

The derision was poured on John Harrison, the British clockmaker whose marine 
chronometers had revolutionised seafaring in the 18th century (and who was the 
subject ofLongitude by Dava Sobel). His subsequent claim – that he would go on 
to make a pendulum timepiece that was accurate to within a second over a 
100-day period – triggered widespread ridicule. The task was simply impossible, 
it was declared.

But now the last laugh lies with Harrison. At a conference, Harrison Decoded: 
Towards a Perfect Pendulum Clock, held at Greenwich yesterday, observatory 
scientists revealed that a clock that had been built to the clockmaker’s exact 
specifications had run for 100 days during official tests and had lost only 
five-eighths of a second in that period.

“It is a quite extraordinary achievement and a complete vindication of 
Harrison, who suffered ridicule over his claim to be able to achieve such 
accuracy,” said Rory McEvoy, curator of horology at the Royal Museums 
Greenwich. “This is a wonderful device.”

Harrison was a self-educated carpenter and clockmaker who achieved 
considerable fame in the mid-18th century for the marine chronometers that he 
designed to solve the problem that sailors then faced in determining their 
longitude while at sea. Pinpointing where they lay on the notional lines that 
run vertically on a map proved extremely difficult for navigators. However, 
Harrison – in response to a government challenge – developed watches that 
contained a pair of counter-oscillating weighted beams connected by springs 
that turned out to be remarkably precise and allowed navigators to determine 
their position accurately. This was done by measuring local time and then 
comparing it with the time at Greenwich (which was provided by the chronometer).

Harrison was eventually awarded a considerable sum of money for his efforts 
and he died a rich man. Not long before his death, however, he produced a book 
in which he lambasted some of his rivals and proclaimed that he could build a 
timepiece for use on land that was more accurate than any built by his rivals. 
This machine – which would have a large pendulum arc, relatively light bob, and 
a recoil grasshopper escapement – would be able to keep time to within a second 
over 100 days (though it would need to be wound regularly).

Unfortunately for Harrison, the book was savagely criticised, with The London 
Review of English and Foreign Literature describing it as “one of the most 
unaccountable productions we have ever met with”. Harrison’s claim that he 
could build such a clock were also ridiculed.

As a result, his ideas for his super-accurate pendulum clock were forgotten 
until the 1970s, when interest in the clockmaker and his remarkable timepieces 
was re-awakened. The artist and clockmaker, Martin Burgess, – working on 
attempts to decipher Harrison’s plans – produced two versions of his great 
clock. It is the second of these, Clock B, that has been the focus of attempts 
to bring it to its maximum accuracy in the past year. “Essentially we have been 
fine-tuning the clock so that we can bring it to its full potential and 
accuracy,” said McEvoy.

Last year, the first trial of the clock –overseen by the Worshipful Company of 
Clockmakers and the National Physical Laboratory – was carried out at the 
Observatory. This showed it was capable of performing to the standard that 
Harrison claimed. “This year’s final test began on 6 January, when the clock 
was sealed in a clear plastic container that had been made tamper-proof by the 
application of wax seals across wires that lock the case’s fixing bolts shut 
and is the official trial of its accuracy,” added McEvoy.

At the start of the trial, it was noted by witnesses that the clock was 
running quarter of a second behind Greenwich Mean Time. At the end of the trial 
yesterday morning, the clock read 7/8ths of a second behind GMT. It had lost 
5/8ths of a second in the 100-day trial.

Given that mechanical clocks of this accuracy were not developed until the 
20th century, Harrison’s remarkabledesign can now be seen for what it was: a 
masterpiece. “What is particularly exciting about this trial is the fact that 
it presents history in a physical and not a verbal or theoretical manner,” 
added McEvoy. “It brings real immediacy to a historical issue: in this case the 
measurement of time.”
 