
It was a balmy 17C in London on Friday as unseasonably warm weather persisted 
in large parts of the country. Wearing shorts as the clocks go back may be 
pleasant for most people, but it’s a nightmare for clothes shops. Clothing made 
up less than half of Debenhams’ annual sales for the first time, partly due to 
warm weather, and the department store grouphas hired  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/debenhams-targets-bhs-customers-with-new-lighting-departments>
BHS’s former lighting buyers to help make up for falling fashion sales.

On Wednesday, we’ll hear from Next, which vies with Marks & Spencer to be 
Britain’s biggest clothes retailer. It’s only a month or so since Next reported 
its half-year results. Then, chief executive Lord Wolfson saidtrading was 
unpredictable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/next-expects-higher-profits-despite-tougher-trading-conditions>
 as customers in the south stuck with their summer gear while autumn came to 
Aberdeen. Squeezed consumer incomes, and the trend for people to spend any 
spare cash on a night out instead of new threads, added to fashion sellers’ 
problems, he said.

If things aren’t going well at Next <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next>
, investors can’t say they weren’t warned, and some of Next’s problems, such as 
lack of stock, have been of its own making. The shares of what was once seen as 
a rock-solid performer have fallen from £8 to less than a fiver in the past 12 
months, but Wolfson’s words still have the potential to cause a stir in the 
industry before the important Christmas trading season.

FTSE 100 still a no-go area for minorities

How many black Britons have risen to become a FTSE 100 chief executive? The 
answer is none. The industrialist Sir John Parker will address this state of 
affairs when he publishes his report on Wednesday into representation of ethnic 
minorities in business.

Two black FTSE 100 bosses come to mind: Tidjane Thiam, who left Prudential for 
Credit Suisse last year, and Arnold Donald at Carnival. That is progress of 
sorts but Thiam is from Ivory Coast and Donald is from the US. Things aren’t 
much better for other minorities. A study by recruiter Green Park last year 
found just four non-white FTSE 100 chief executives, and the proportion of 
ethnic minority executive directors had fallen to 4% from 5.2% in a year.

Companies will argue that barriers to advancement lie in wider society, the 
education system and all that. Parker will no doubt acknowledge those problems 
but surely more pressure is needed. As with women on boards, where progress has 
been made, companies should start by recruiting non-executive directors from 
minority backgrounds – and preferably from Britain. Companies should also 
report what they are doing to bring ethnic minority employees into the ranks of 
senior managers. Strong backing from the government would help.

Marmite madness at Morrisons

Oh, Morrisons, what were you thinking? On Friday it emerged that the 
supermarket chain had put up prices on 92 Unilever brands, including … Marmite. 
Only a couple of weeks ago, Tesco hit the front pages when it ran low on the 
nation’s favourite yeasty spread in a spat with Unilever over price increases. 
Tesco played a blinder and reached an accommodation with Unilever over the 
dispute, which was depressingly but predictably called Marmitegate. So why 
didn’tMorrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> leave Marmite 
alone while bumping up the prices of less emotive Unilever brands? When you’re 
in a war with Aldi, Lidl and Tesco for shoppers, headlines about price rises 
aren’t welcome.

Morrisons publishes a trading statement on Thursday. When the Bradford-based 
grocer reported on progress last month, things seemed to be picking up under 
David Potts, who took over in March 2015 when sales were plunging. Sales at 
established stores have now risen for three quarters. Potts has cut prices, but 
he’s also been improving service and products – especially pies –encouraging 
customers to trade up to premium ranges and doing simple things like putting 
food on the go near the door. If there’s more encouraging news this week, let’s 
hope it’s not overshadowed by the Marmite episode.
 