
The Co-operative Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/co-operative-group> has confirmed the 
sale of its travel division to Thomas Cook, its joint venture partner, securing 
an £82m windfall.

Fellow mutual Central England Co-operative <https://www.centralengland.coop/> 
will receive £5.8m for its 3.5% stake in the ventureunder a deal agreed six 
years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/oct/08/thomas-cook-cooperative-travel-merger>
.

The Co-op group will receive £50m for its 30% stake in the business by 
November next year and £32m in dividends in two payments between January and 
April next year.

The mutual has already received £5m of £37m in dividends that it was 
originally promised between October and December this year. It plans to spend 
the cash on its revival plans including revamping grocery stores and improving 
its membership scheme

The anticipated windfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/07/co-op-unwinds-joint-venture-with-thomas-cook>
 comes at a useful time for the group, which is halfway through a three-year 
turnaround programme after its bank came close to collapse in 2013, threatening 
the existence of the entire group. Pre-tax profits more than halved to£17m in 
the first six months of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/co-operative-group-pre-tax-profits-fall-by-more-than-half-to-17m>
 after restructuring costs and price cuts amid a competitive grocery market.

Rod Bulmer, chief executive of consumer services at the Co-op, said: “We have 
enjoyed a successful partnership withThomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> through the joint 
venture. Going forward, having a minority stake in a travel business does not 
fit with the strategy of the Co-op.”

Thomas Cook said it would take full control of the venture’s 764 high street 
travel agencies next November. Some of the stores are branded Thomas Cook and 
some Co-operative Travel. The travel group said it would all now move under its 
banner. It has the right to use the Co-op brand until November 2018 but even 
after that point the Co-op Travel brand will not completely disappear from the 
high street.

There are dozens of travel agencies run by regional co-operative groups around 
the country which are still entitled to use the name. Central England 
Co-operative operates 20 travel outlets which are not included in the joint 
venture with Thomas Cook, and these will continue to operate.
 