
The Greens senator Rachel Siewert has accused the human services minister, 
Alan Tudge, of “cherry-picking” data to feature in the government’s six-month 
progress report on the cashless welfare card trial – amid a rise in some crime 
categories during the test period.

The trial of the card began in the South Australian town of Ceduna on 15 March 
and in the West Australian towns of Kununurra and Wyndham on 26 April, when 
welfare recipients began receiving 80% of their payments into a restricted 
debit card. The rest is available in cash, but the card cannot be used to buy 
alcohol or gambling products.

The six-month progress report, published in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/cashless-welfare-card-could-benefit-other-communities-says-turnbull>
, contained anecdotal evidence of the card’s success, along with statistics 
from South Australia police.

Cashless welfare card treats Aboriginal people 'as third-class citizens'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/cashless-welfare-card-treats-aboriginal-people-third-class-citizens>
The number of people arrested for public drunkenness in Ceduna, a seaside town 
on the west coast of the Eyre peninsula, was 54% lower between March and June 
last year compared with the same period in 2015, the report said. It also found 
reports of domestic violence received in July last year were 13% lower compared 
with April.

Sexual assault, robbery and other offences against the person had been 
“generally decreasing” in the Eyre western area since the trial’s 
implementation, the report found.

But at the time of compiling the report, the department also had police data 
showing a 71% increase in aggravated robbery for the area in the period from 
October 2015 to October 2016 compared with the same period the previous year. 
Non-aggravated robbery increased 200% in the same period.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fcoalition-cherry-picking-data-to-support-cashless-welfare-card-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3399757d862be146044a046983e30ec966e0844%2F0_0_4506_3002%2F4506.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coalition%20'cherry%20picking'%20data%20to%20support%20cashless%20welfare%20card%20trial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fcoalition-cherry-picking-data-to-support-cashless-welfare-card-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coalition%20%27cherry%20picking%27%20data%20to%20support%20cashless%20welfare%20card%20trial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fcoalition-cherry-picking-data-to-support-cashless-welfare-card-trial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3399757d862be146044a046983e30ec966e0844%2F0_0_4506_3002%2F4506.jpg>
 Rachel Siewert says the government is ‘cherry picking’ data to make the case 
for the welfare card. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP 
“It is odd how this did not make it on to the minister’s top lines when he was 
spruiking the card to media,” Siewert said.

“When it comes to the cashless debit card trial progress report, we knew that 
the government was cherry-picking data to shine the card in the best possible 
light, but to ignore SA police statistics that show an increase in aggravated 
and non-aggravated robbery is worrisome.”

The 12-month trials of the card will conclude this year, at which point there 
will be an independent evaluation. Siewert questioned why the department 
released its six-month progress report, given it was not independent and that a 
proper evaluation was being conducted.

'Ration days again': cashless welfare card ignites shame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/ration-days-again-cashless-welfare-card-ignites-shame>
“I urge the minister to allow the trial to finish before he starts trying to 
pre-empt the outcome with premature ‘progress reports’,” she said.

Tudge did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia, which were instead 
answered by a spokeswoman from the department of social services. She said the 
use of anecdotal data in the progress report was justified because “anecdotal 
feedback offers an insight into people’s thoughts and experiences about the 
trial and what is being observed on the ground”.

One anecdote in the report said there were more children walking around with 
cleaner, newer clothes, and another citeda perceived reduction in violence.

“The progress report is not a replacement for the independent evaluation and 
was released in the interests of transparency in data reporting on the trial,” 
the spokeswoman said.

“The full, independent evaluation, which is due to be completed in late 2017, 
will provide a more robust analysis of the trial’s impact.”

The additional police data was not included in the report because it compared 
the total number of crimes in the past 12 months with the previous 12 months, 
she said. While this was a useful statistic for measuring long-term trends, the 
department believed it did not provide the most accurate picture of crime 
during the trial period.

Cashless welfare card could benefit other communities, says Turnbull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/cashless-welfare-card-could-benefit-other-communities-says-turnbull>
“As the trial began less than 12 months ago, a significant amount of pre-trial 
data will be mixed with the rolling year variance data,” the spokeswoman said.

“When reporting on crime data, the department of social services prefers to 
compare the most recent data with an equivalent point in time from before the 
trial commenced. This makes for a more accurate representation of changes since 
the trial began.”

Welfare recipients in the trial towns are largely Aboriginal. On Tuesday, the 
president of the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation, 
Pat Turner, said the card  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/cashless-welfare-card-treats-aboriginal-people-third-class-citizens>
“reminds Aboriginal people every day that they are treated as second- and 
third-class citizens in their own land”.

But the department said the trial has been developed in close partnership with 
community leaders, including Aboriginal elders.

• Do you know more? melissa.davey@theguardian.com



 