
When Joe Hockey, as treasurer, delivered the Coalition’s first budget in May 
2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2014/may/13/budget-2014-the-six-graphs-that-matter-for-australia>
, he framed the government’s policy agenda around budget deficits of $10.6bn in 
2016-17 and just $2.8bn in 2017-18. The budget was to swing into surplus in 
2018-19 and every year beyond that.


With two-and-a-half years of Liberal–National party economic policy settings 
since that Hockey budget, today’s treasurer,Scott Morrison, has outlined the 
results of that plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/dec/19/deficit-over-four-years-worsens-but-myefo-wont-change-credit-agency-thinking-politics-live>
, plus the impact of new policies and economic changes in today’s midyear 
economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo). Morrison has confirmed that the current 
projections are for budget deficits of $36.5bn in 2016-17 and $28.7bn in 
2017-18, meaning the 2017-18 deficit alone is some six times larger than 
projected by Hockey.

The Hockey framework meant that Australia’s sovereign triple-A credit rating 
was assured with all three major ratings agencies noting the fiscal trajectory 
and underpinnings of solid economic growth as reasons for this favourable 
assessment. Helping also was the projection that net government debt would peak 
at low level of 14.6% of GDP under the Hockey 2014 budget scenario.

Scott Morrison extols virtues of 'good debt' in face of threat to credit rating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/scott-morrison-extols-virtues-of-good-debt-in-face-of-threat-to-credit-rating>
Alas, the strategy outlined in 2014 is in tatters.

In addition to blowing the budget deficits out by tens of billions of dollars 
a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/australia-budget-deficit-beyond-2021-scott-morrison>
, Morrison has pushed out the return to surplus to 2020-21, some two years 
later than Hockey and is now forecasting net government debt to reach a 60-year 
high of 19% of GDP. Recall that 1% of GDP on 2020 dollar terms is about $20bn.

The question now is not whether the ratings agencies will downgrade Australia 
but whether there will be numerous downgrades over the next few years.

The curious thing about the debt and deficit widening of the last few years is 
that it has been driven by a rise in government spending together with a 
shortfall in revenue.

Government spending as a share of GDP under the Morrison Myefo forecasts is 
projected to be 25.2% of GDP in both 2016-17 and 2017-18, respectively, 
compared with the Hockey 2014 estimates of 24.7% and 24.8%, respectively. 
Accordingly, government spending is an average 0.5% of GDP higher each year 
than projected by Hockey.

At the time of the 2014 budget, government revenue as a proportion of GDP was 
forecast to be 24.4% in 2016-17 and 24.9% in 2017-18. The Morrison Myefo 
forecasts are for revenue to be 23.3% and 23.8%, respectively, a shortfall of 
an average 1.1% of GDP in each year.

Morrison has failed to address either spending, which is significantly higher 
than in the 2014 budget, nor revenue, which is clearly lower.

There is one other big picture issue on the economic management credentials of 
theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> government.

Why government debt isn't the biggest threat to Australia's credit rating | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/23/why-government-debt-isnt-the-biggest-threat-to-australias-credit-rating>
One critical lesson from the 2008 to 2011 financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/28/australia-global-economic-crisis>
 is that fiscal policy can be used to manage the economic cycle – running 
budget deficits to support economic growth has virtues, as does tightening 
fiscal policy to lower the deficit, move to surplus and preserve the credit 
rating. It is a simple trade-off.

The Coalition has neither supported growth nor repaired the budget. When Labor 
“blew the budget deficit” to above 4% of GDP during the financial crisis, they 
could gain comfort in the knowledge that their policy choices meant Australia 
avoided recession and the unemployment rate peaked at 5.9%. There were 
significant benefits from that particular budget deficit blowout. It should be 
noted that it was after these budget measures were taken that, in 2011, 
Australia achieved the coveted triple-A rating, with a stable outlook, from all 
three major ratings agencies.

Now, as 2016 draws to a close, GDP growth is stalling, the unemployment rate 
is stuck nearer 6% than 5%, underemployment is near record highs and wages 
growth has fallen to a record low.

These are the core reasons for the likely credit rating downgrade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/moodys-adds-to-standard-and-poors-warning-about-credit-rating-downgrade>
. Had fiscal policy been used to support growth, the ratings agencies would 
have seen the pro-growth strategy. Had the budget been repaired, albeit it at 
the cost of growth, the rating agencies would have rewarded that strategy.

Blowing out the budget with falling GDP is a mark of policy ineptitude. 
 