
Serious labour rights violations have taken place at Brazilian farms linked to 
some of the largest international coffee certification systems, including 
Rainforest Alliance and UTZ, according to an investigation byRepórter Brasil 
<http://reporterbrasil.org.br/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Cafe%CC%81_ING_Web.pdf>
.

The report by the civil society organisation, published this week, found that 
monitoring systems at so-called sustainable coffee plantations failed to spot 
irregularities.


These include workers’ pay packets being falsely docked resulting in some 
receiving less than half Brazil’s minimum wage, and workers being hired 
informally and without mandatory medical tests.

One farm even promoted its output with a Fairtrade certificate it was not 
entitled to use.

Brazil is the largest coffee producer <http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4985e.pdf> in 
the world, with about one-third of all coffee consumed planted in the country.

Jorge dos Santos Filho, a regional coordinator for the Union of Rural Workers 
in the south of Minas Gerais state, the coffee-producing area where the farms 
investigated are located, said the report exposes weaknesses in certification 
systems in an area notorious for labour violations.

Underpaid coffee workers

In 2014, workers at the Monte Verde farm in Carmo de Minas in Minas Gerais 
state, south-eastBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, complained 
to their local Union of Rural Workers that deductions were being made to their 
pay packets for absences that never happened, advances they never received and 
days off they should have been paid for.

Kenya's coffee thefts blamed on organised cartels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/29/kenya-coffee-theft-organised-cartels-blame-farmers>
Most of the workers were seasonal. Some got less than half of what they were 
due, putting them beneath Brazil’s legal minimum wage, then R$724 (£181) a 
month, dos Santos Filho said.

“If you look at the life of rural workers, they are poor people,” he said. 
“Even though this is routine it revolts us because it is the rich taking from 
the poor.”

Dos Santos Filho’s union negotiated an out of court settlement with the farm’s 
controllers, the Saudi group Fal Holdings, who paid R$37,000 in outstanding 
wages in a settlement.

Byron Holcomb, a director of Fal who took part in the settlement, said the 
dispute arose because farm had been changing its tax status at the time. “Some 
of the old service providers did not provide accurate counsel during our first 
harvest,” Holcomb said in an email. “We paid all that was due to the workers 
and the workers suffered no losses.”

The report also cites a 2015 investigation by Brazil’s labour ministry which 
found 13 seasonal workers had not been registered at a nearby farm, Rancho São 
Benedito. They had been working without having undertaken medical tests 
required by law. Five had been in that situation for more than 20 days. The 
farm owner was served notice and paid a fine.

Rainforest Alliance failings

Both Monte Verde and Rancho São Benedito are members of a group managed by 
Eisa (Empresa Interagrícola S/A) – a Brazilian subsidiary of global coffee 
traders Ecom Agroindustrial – that collectively carries the international 
Rainforest Alliance certificate.

The green frog logo of the certification scheme indicates environmental, 
social and economic sustainability, and two to three farms from the Eisa group 
are audited each year, regularly scoring more than 90%.

Luis Pinto, manager of agriculture certification at Imaflora, the company that 
handles certification for the Rainforest Alliance, said their audits had not 
found the problems highlighted by Repórter Brasil. They had identified similar 
labour issues, which had been “improved”, he said, but details of these were 
confidential.

“In this group we have had non-conformities with labour issues since the 
beginning. Since the beginning there has been a need for improvement,” Pinto 
said. However “non-conformities” are not enough to cost a certificate.

“They were not fundamental failures. They don’t represent a critical fail,” he 
added.

Following Repórter Brasil’s findings, Imaflora audited both farms in October 
and found the problems had been resolved. “Certifying is about recognising good 
performance and good practice but it is also about recommending improvement,” 
Pinto said. Imaflora’s audits have begun including previously-confidential 
information on non-conformities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcoffee-rainforest-alliance-utz-brazil-pesticides-exploited-workers-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9284f7f3fe0594292c0c5f7ac52e6410419ec150%2F0_139_791_989%2F791.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coffee%20from%20Rainforest%20Alliance%20farms%20in%20Brazil%20linked%20to%20exploited%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcoffee-rainforest-alliance-utz-brazil-pesticides-exploited-workers-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coffee%20from%20Rainforest%20Alliance%20farms%20in%20Brazil%20linked%20to%20exploited%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcoffee-rainforest-alliance-utz-brazil-pesticides-exploited-workers-pay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9284f7f3fe0594292c0c5f7ac52e6410419ec150%2F0_139_791_989%2F791.jpg>
 Screenshot from the website for Dona Mariana’s website showing a sack of 
coffee with the UTZ logo. Photograph: http://cafedonamariana.com.br/galeria 
Coffee farms using UTZ logo

Until 2015, Rancho São Benedito also held the UTZ seal – the Netherlands-based 
sustainable farming certificate found on more than 20,000 products in 135 
countries. Repórter Brasil bought the farm’s Dona Mariana coffee in August 2016 
with a UTZ logo on it. On January 3 2016, the farm had a sack of coffee with 
the UTZ logo on itswebsite <http://cafedonamariana.com.br/galeria>.

However, Niccolo Sarno, a spokesman for UTZ, said in an email that Rancho São 
Benedito lost its UTZ certificate in June 2015 because of “non-conformities to 
our strict code of conduct”. He did not provide details.

He also said that UTZ had discovered Rancho São Benedito was one of a group of 
farms using the UTZ certification but that had been removed after an audit in 
2016.

“UTZ finds it very worrying that a farm that was decertified because of 
non-conformities to our strict code of conduct was able to use the UTZ seal, on 
a group license, for one more year and we are now tightening our systems to 
ensure that this type of situation can’t happen in the future,” he said.

Repórter Brasil also bought a package of Rancho São Benedito’s Dona Mariana 
brand of coffee in August 2016 with a Fairtrade International seal. “This farm 
is definitely not a Fairtrade farm,” Susannah Henty, a Fairtrade spokeswoman, 
told the Guardian in an email.

The farm owners told Repórter Brasil the labour issue had been resolved. “We 
had a violation in 2015 and we corrected what was wrong before the deadline,” 
said Marcio Junqueira, son of the farm’s owner Mariana Junqueira. He did not 
respond to emailed questions from the Guardian.

André Campos, who authored Repórter Brasil’s report, said the certification 
system lacked transparency. “In general it has had a positive impact on farms,” 
he said. “But an important point of the investigation is that the 
certifications failed to spot problems.”


 * This content is editorially independent. Read more about content labelling 
here <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>

 * This article was amended on 16 January 2017 to make clear that R$37,000 was 
paid to workers in an outstanding wages settlement, not R$300,000 as originally 
claimed by dos Santos Filho.  