
Cities that mimic forests, bricks made from converted carbon dioxide and 
highways lined with wind turbines powered by traffic. These are ideas that, for 
now, still belong to a distant, brighter future – when the world’s focus can be 
turned from halting runaway climate change to actually reversing it.

Yet these were among the innovations showcased in a two-day Commonwealth 
brainstorming session 
<http://thecommonwealth.org/media/event/regenerative-development-reverse-climate-change-workshop>
 in London, attended by leading climatologists. As the worldenters an ominous 
new era of “climate change reality,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/24/new-era-of-climate-change-reality-as-emissions-hit-symbolic-threshold>
 the organisation is now seeking to inject them into the policy debate days 
before a potentially pivotal COP 22 summit in Marrakech from 7-18 November.

World Food Day: coping with the climate's impact on food security – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/oct/16/world-food-day-coping-with-the-climates-impact-on-food-security-in-pictures>
For an organisation that has sometimes appeared to be searching for a purpose, 
it may now be finding one – as a pioneer for the game-changing solutions some 
of its 52 members are desperately crying out for.

“This is exciting. It’s possible, and for once our children are going to be 
proud of us,” the Commonwealth secretary general, Patricia Scotland, told the 
gathering.

“Instead of saying we are a load of geriatric no-hopers who have ruined their 
world, we will be the pathfinders who can say we have repaired the building and 
we are really sorry for screwing up.”

 US biologist Janine Benyus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/blog/green-guru-janine-benyus-biologist-leading-business-sustainability>
 said: “If we can put pilot projects down on the ground in Commonwealth 
countries it will be like piloting the sort of regenerative world we need to 
create, making use of different biospheres, countries with different profiles.” 
Benyus is credited with popularising the theory of “biomimicry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/blog/biomimcry-nature-human-problems-sustainability>
” or how nature can provide the design inspiration for solving humanity’s 
problems.

“The normal climate-change conversation has been about large utilities solving 
the problem,” she said. “What’s an individual to do? They are not going to put 
up a large solar power utility, for example. But they do have homes and farms 
which, in aggregate, can make a big difference as part of a framework, and 
that’s where an organisation like the Commonwealth can come in.”

Ideas and emerging trends exciting Benyus include carbon-absorbing concrete, 
ways of making ecologically destroyed landscapes flourish again by getting 
carbon back into the soil and new agricultural practices that mimic the 
ecosystems of wild, untended land.

In separate huddles at the Commonwealth’s London headquarters, thinkers 
envisaged buildings designed like termite mounds with the means to ventilate 
themselves with cool air, and groups of wind turbines that gather momentum by 
being arranged in tight formations, like schools of fish.

Aside from technology, other suggestions took shape around more specific 
policy options – such as intensive investment in education of girls, which is 
seen as vital in mitigating the effects of climate change.

Katherine Wilkinson is a climate change scholar working with environmentalist 
and entrepreneur Paul Hawken on a compendium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/22/first-look-environmental-entrepreneur-paul-hawkens-long-awaited-new-book>
 of strategies designed to reduce greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. She said: 
“Essentially what we see is that girls’ education has a direct line of impact 
[on] reproductive choices and rates of fertility.

“So, while there are obvious benefits to educating girls, and the fact that 
[it helps] women and girls to survive the shock effects of climate change, such 
as natural disasters, it’s also important in that they are, for example, 
increasingly managing small-scale agricultural resources.”

Poor countries urge fast action on Paris deal to stop catastrophic warming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/07/poor-countries-urge-fast-action-paris-climate-deal-to-stop-catastrophic-warming>
Through high commissioners or senior diplomats representing each Commonwealth 
country, the organisation is aiming to promote ideas for climate-change 
reversal with their governments at home. Member states will also convene next 
year for what the organisation describes as a“climate-change reversal lab” 
<https://royalsociety.org/about-us/international/commonwealth-science-conference-2017/>
.

For some countries, the stakes are higher than others. As Lady Scotland told 
the workshop on Friday, some of the organisation’s island states in the Pacific 
and the Caribbean will behit first and hardest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2015/mar/17/pacific-islands-losing-way-of-life-to-climate-change-in-pictures>
.

“I am offering myself as the advocate for climate regenerative change,” she 
told the workshop, calling on participants to come up with the solutions that 
could deliver a “quantum shift” in each of the Commonwealth’s member states 
when it came to climate change policy.

“So often in the past people have said, ‘But I can’t get to speak to the 
politicians. I can’t get to speak to the scientists. I can’t get to speak to 
the money.’ So, in the Commonwealth we have a platform.”

She hoped the meeting in June would create an individual roadmap for change 
for each of the 52 countries.

“We will start with some of the most vulnerable ones, the ones that will 
disappear, and we will see if we can’t drag the rest of the world with us,” she 
said.
 