
A highly-anticipated initiative to limit tax loss in developing nations, 
launched by theOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
<http://www.oecd.org/> – known as the “rich countries’ club” – has been 
undermined by serious conflicts of interest, claims a study published on 
Thursday.

The report <http://www.eurodad.org/TIWB> by the European Network on Debt and 
Development (Eurodad), a group of 47 civil society organisations, analysed the 
pilot phase of the Tax Inspectors Without Borders programme, under which 
foreign financial experts are deployed to work on tax administration in poor 
countries. The authors found that the scheme, which was not always solicited by 
the countries where it was introduced, resulted in wealthy donor countries 
engaging in the tax systems of countries where they had clear business 
interests. The report also identified a failure to meet international 
principles on how the process should be led.

'A system of privilege and benefits': is a global tax body needed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/system-privilege-benefits-global-tax-body-oecd>
The programme, which began in 2013, was intended to help stem the $240bn 
(£197bn) lost annually in tax revenues through avoidance schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/10/were-losing-240bn-a-year-to-tax-avoidance-who-really-ends-up-paying>
. The issue has a disproportionate effect on developing countries, whereabout 
10% of government revenues 
<http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/wir2015_en.pdf> are generated by tax 
on multinational corporations, so boosting tax income would build self-reliance 
and lessen reliance on foreign aid.

Tax Inspectors Without Borders works on the premise that tax audit experts 
from OECD countries transfer their knowledge and skills to auditors in 
developing countries, using guidelines laid down in a dedicated guide –or 
“toolkit” 
<https://www.oecd.org/tax/tax-global/tax-inspectors-without-borders-toolkit.pdf>
 (pdf) – to provide a framework on auditing issues including confidentiality, 
conflict of interest and indemnity.

Crucially, according to official OECD guidelines 
<https://www.oecd.org/ctp/tax-global/tax-inspectors-without-borders-summary.pdf>
, the host country must request the intervention. However, Tove Maria Ryding, 
tax coordinator at Eurodad and co-author of the report, said research suggested 
that was not the case.

“There is little publicly available information about Tax Inspectors Without 
Borders, but the little information that we have found – particularly within 
internalOECD <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> documents that have 
not been published before – is very worrying,” Ryding said.

Those documents indicated that developing countries failed to either 
understand or engage with the pilot projects, Ryding added.

The Eurodad report focused on three pilot schemes involving the UK and Rwanda, 
France and Senegal, and the Netherlands and Ghana.

“In all three cases, the developing country was not leading the project,” said 
Ryding. “There was a certain scepticism towards the idea and a low-level 
understanding about what was happening.

“In all three cases, we also saw that the donor country, which was sending the 
expert, had very substantial corporate interests in the developing country. In 
other words, many of the multinational corporations that were being taxed by 
the developing country’s tax administration, were from the [same] countries 
that were funding these projects and sending these experts.”

The report found that in the case of the 2014 UK-Rwanda pilot, led by the 
Department for International Development (DfID), PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) 
played a “central management role” despite the global accountancy firm’s 
commitment to“lobbying for tax changes with governments and revenue authorities 
on behalf of our clients” <http://www.pwc.com/rw/en/services/tax-services.html>.

The UK government’s “business guide” to Rwanda clearly states that about 150 
British companies are registered in the African nation, with bilateral trade 
worth £21m in 2014. PwC is alsolisted as one of the British companies 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/rwanda-business-guide/uk-rwanda-commercial-relationship>
 “leading the growth” of Rwanda’s financial services sector.

Engaging the private sector – which has clear conflicts of interest – in 
tax-management issues or advice is “inappropriate in every way”, said director 
John Christensen of theTax Justice Network <http://www.taxjustice.net/>.

Christensen, who sits on the governing board of Tax Inspectors Without 
Borders, said: “This was definitely a UK government initiative through DfID, 
and by and large I would prefer not to see this being handled bilaterally 
country to country. This kind of [tax] support … has to be triggered and led by 
the country that wants it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fconflicts-of-interest-poor-countries-curb-loss-tax-inspectors-without-borders-eurodad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62784d028b12a90bd7bb9bff5f9254291763a8ff%2F0_197_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conflicts%20of%20interest%20mar%20scheme%20to%20help%20poor%20countries%20curb%20tax%20loss%2C%20claim%20NGOs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fconflicts-of-interest-poor-countries-curb-loss-tax-inspectors-without-borders-eurodad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conflicts%20of%20interest%20mar%20scheme%20to%20help%20poor%20countries%20curb%20tax%20loss%2C%20claim%20NGOs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fconflicts-of-interest-poor-countries-curb-loss-tax-inspectors-without-borders-eurodad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62784d028b12a90bd7bb9bff5f9254291763a8ff%2F0_197_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Tax headquarters in Guédiawaye, in Senegal’s Dakar region, are seen following 
a 2011 raid by demonstrators protesting against power cuts. Photograph: 
Seyllou/AFP/Getty Images 
DfID did not respond to requests for comment on the UK-Rwanda pilot. 

PwC said in statement: “PwC was engaged by DfID to carry out an administrative 
role in supporting government departments, including HMRC, in supporting 
post-conflict countries, with investment climate short-term projects. This 
included Rwanda. We managed the coordination, administration and logistics of 
these assignments. We did not at any time give tax advice and there was no 
conflict of interest. We were only contracted to provide logistical support.”


Tax Inspectors Without Borders was relaunched in 2015 and is now jointly 
managed by the OECD and the UN Development Programme. The programme is 
currently active in 15 countries and has so far helped participating nations 
recover more than $300m in additional tax revenue, according to James Karanja, 
who heads the scheme’s secretariat.


Karanja said conflicts of interest are taken “extremely seriously”.

“TIWB does not use private sector auditors to undertake audit assignments 
under any of its programmes. The TIWB toolkit contains extensive advice and 
provides host administrations with detailed guidance on how conflicts of 
interest can arise, as well as how they should be avoided.”

With a worldwide deployment of at least 100 tax experts expected by 2019 
Christensen said the international community must shift its thinking on tax and 
sustainable development.

“We need to move away from the idea that poorer countries need tax breaks – 
the sweetheart deals, the lower tax rates – to attract investment. Investments 
attract because of the market, a good labour force, good infrastructure, and 
all of that takes tax dollars,” said Christensen.

“If we want to look beyond aid dependency – because no one wants to have aid 
be such an important part of government revenue – then tax has got to be that 
support. It boosts capacity and provides a passport to greater economic 
independence.”
 