
When Eve* walked into the courtroom to face her father, who had raped her 
since she was 13, his family was waiting. As she made her way to her seat, they 
got up and stood in her path. They scratched her, yanked her long hair back, 
and hit her.

A relative, Lydia*, who had also been repeatedly raped by Eve’s father, had 
agreed to testify on her behalf. That gave her courage.

When it was Eve’s turn to give evidence, her father’s relatives – who were her 
relatives too, but were there to support the richer, more powerful party to the 
case – began to shout over her. “They were yelling at me, insulting me,” she 
said. “The lawyers had to calm them down.” Finally, they were brought to order 
and Eve was able to tell the court her story.

No sleep for Congolese mothers trying to save their girls from rape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/07/democratic-republic-congo-drc-mothers-trying-to-save-girls-rape-sexual-violence>
The first time her father raped her she had not met him many times. Until that 
point, Eve had lived with another relative in theDemocratic Republic of the 
Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> (DRC). Eve’s family were not 
well-off, but she was a happy little girl. Then, her father came back.

“It started with [Lydia],” she said. “She told me she had to have sex with [my 
father] and I had to do it too, and he would give us everything we wanted. I 
was scared. They did it in front of me. When they finished, my father started 
touching me. I was very scared and felt weak. He made me lie on the bed and 
began doing that to me. I started bleeding.” That was the beginning of an 
ordeal that would go on for five years.

Thousands of girls and women are raped each year 
<http://www.un.org/sexualviolenceinconflict/countries/democratic-republic-of-the-congo/>
 in DRC. In the east, a region that has beenat war on and off since 1996 
<http://www.enoughproject.org/blogs/congo-first-and-second-wars-1996-2003>, 
many of the rapists are armed rebels, soldiers and police officers, using 
sexual violence as a weapon to keep local communities subdued.

Respect for elders, however, is still a cornerstone of Congolese society. So 
Eve was unusual in that she stood up to her father from the beginning. “I asked 
him: ‘Why do you do this to your own daughter?’ He said he was scared of 
catching diseases from other girls. I told him I would tell [someone]. He 
ordered me not to, and he bought [me and Lydia] phones and clothes.”

For a few years, Eve’s father carried on raping her intermittently. Then, one 
day, he told Eve he was taking her back to his home to go to school. The rapes 
became much more frequent.

“If I could find a way to escape, I would, but if not, he just did it,” she 
said. “It carried on like that. Then, one day, I said I couldn’t continue. When 
I refused he would beat me. People wondered why he beat me so much.”

Eve thought about trying to tell her relatives, but something happened that 
made her change her mind. Her father was raping another young relative, who 
told her family what had happened. “They talked about it,” Eve said. “But then 
they calmed things down and blamed my [relative], not my father, because she 
was younger.”

'I've seen things that nobody, especially a child, should ever have to see' | 
Oscar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/20/oscar-child-14-democratic-republic-of-congo-refugee-uk>
Women and girls are often blamed for “seducing” their rapists. In a recent 
survey 
<https://wewillspeakout.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Transforming-masculinities-English-FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf), more than 80% of men and women thought that some women “ask to be 
raped” by the way they dressed or behaved. Very often, rape survivors are 
abandoned by their families, which in the Congolese context of poverty and war, 
where family and community are the only support systems, means they are left to 
starve.

Escape finally came when Eve’s father beat her in public. A staff member at 
her school noticed her crying and, after years of abuse, Eve told someone her 
story.

Her father was arrested and imprisoned and Eve had to decide whether to press 
charges. Despite getting no support from her family, she decided to take him to 
court.

The country’s legal framework has been strengthened in recent years, but the 
system is notoriously ineffective. Officials are paid off, and a weak jail 
system means many prisoners escape or pay their way out.

Successful prosecutions are few and far between. Most sexual violence 
survivors do not even try to pursue their rapists through the courts, according 
to Julienne Lusenge, a grassroots women’s rights activist who foundedSofepadi 
<http://www.sofepadirdc.org/>, an organisation that helps rape survivors. “Not 
all women go to the authorities,” she said. “Some women come for medical help. 
Others don’t come at all. They don’t think it’s worth it because it takes so 
long and there aren’t any reparations, and they risk being ostracised by their 
families and societies.”

According to Lusenge, some people live hundreds of kilometres from their 
nearest court. Mobile hearings, where a court visits a village for a few days 
to hear local cases out in the open – so that villagers see justice working in 
person and witness their neighbours being publicly punished – have been shown 
to work well.

“It’s not just about sentencing, it’s about education,” said Charles-Guy 
Makongo, director of the American Bar Association (ABA) in DRC. “It creates 
positive fear in a community, where people will understand they’re not allowed 
to rape.” But mobile hearings are difficult to organise and expensive. 
Moreover, because they are funded by NGOs and the UN rather than the 
government, they are not sustainable.

There is no such thing as legal aid, and bringing a case costs upwards of $300 
(£240) – an unimaginable sum for women unable to afford $10 for a sack of flour.

Amid these obstacles to justice, impunity reigns.

Eve was fortunate that the magistrate referred her to the ABA, which provided 
a lawyer. The ABA is one of a few organisations helping rape survivors to get 
justice in the DRC. It has provided legal counsel toroughly 21,500 survivors 
<http://www.americanbar.org/advocacy/rule_of_law/where_we_work/africa/democratic_republic_congo.html>
, of whom about half have filed cases. Of these, about 2,000 have gone to 
trial, with 1,300 convictions so far.

Fighting yellow fever in the Democratic Republic of the Congo – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/aug/26/fighting-yellow-fever-in-the-democratic-republic-of-congo-in-pictures>
While Eve’s testimony was powerful, her father’s was weak: he often 
contradicted himself, denying things he had already admitted to the magistrate. 
She felt sure she would win. She knew not to hope for reparations, as they are 
seldom paid in DRC. But she hoped to be able to get on with her life. She 
dreamed of training to be a lawyer, and helping other girls in her position.

The trial proceedings ended, but there was no verdict. For months she heard 
nothing, and presumed her father was still in prison. She then got a phone call 
from her father. “Wherever you are, I will kill you,” he said.

The ABA told her he had been acquitted. He may have paid off court officials.

“I’m disappointed with the Congolese justice system,” Eve said. “My case was a 
clear case. I can’t understand how he got out of prison. Instead of giving 
rights to the person who needs it, they give them to the person in the wrong – 
to the rapist.”

Nadine Saiba, a lawyer at the ABA, agreed: “We have stories upon stories, but 
this one just revolts you. All this for money.”

Receiving this blow after a long, lonely fight for justice made Eve even more 
determined to become a lawyer. “Seeing the work the ABA has done for me, I want 
to do it for others,” she said.

A local organisation is considering giving her a bursary to study law. Even if 
the bursary comes through, though, it will not cover the cost of the first 
year, which at roughly $1,500, would be unaffordable for Eve, who has gone into 
hiding. “I know I am a strong woman,” she said. “I told my secret because I had 
courage. But I am still afraid that my father will come back and find me.”

He has fled abroad, but she believes that one day, he will be brought to 
justice. “Even if he denies it now, one day he’ll accept his crime, that he did 
these things. The ABA will support me and it will end. It can’t stay like this. 
I have confidence in the God I pray to.”

*Names changed to protect identities
 