
Toys <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/toys> are getting smarter. 
Whether they are racing cars that “read” the track, robots that teach coding or 
ground-drones controlled with the swipe of an iPad, these “connected” 
playthings have been proclaimed as the future of the toy industry.

For parents concerned about the amount of time their kids spend in front of a 
screen, connected toys offer a welcome and reassuring physicality: the toy is 
the focus, the app merely the control panel. For their children, it means 
(effectively) getting a pet robot. Which is why brands such as Sphero and Anki 
are set to dominate 2016 Christmas lists. But the question remains: how muchfun 
are these digitally driven playthings? We asked Louis (10), Phoebe (10), Eliza 
(eight) and Max (seven) to help us find out.

Dash (pictured top)

Wonder Workshop, £149.95, 5+ 
<http://www.apple.com/uk/shop/product/HJYC2VC/A/wonder-workshop-dash-robot?fnode=a3>

It feels incongruous that the robot aimed at the youngest children should also 
be the most expensive, but Wonder Workshop’s Dash certainly boasts production 
value with its hard, polished chassis andMinion-esque features and 
vocalisations, even if all our kids bar one (Eliza) deemed these “creepy” 
rather than rather than appealing.

There is further cost in the peripherals (sold separately) that clip on to its 
body, such as a ping-pong-ball-catapulting launcher or a xylophone, but it does 
come with building-block attachments that Eliza delightedly discovered could 
shoulder homemade Lego-constructed add-ons.

There is also an impressive array of apps that you can download in addition to 
the control panel that allow for coding, path-making and “guided challenges”. 
The boy/girl divide was notable with Dash; Louis and Max were dismissive, while 
Eliza was positively charmed.

Eliza’s verdict: “He looks really cute, a bit like a Minion and a blueberry 
mixed together. I liked playing with him, especially the coding game, which 
made him move around the room. I think people my age would like him as he’s 
very funny, especially in disco mode, when he turns all sorts of colours and 
starts grooving.”

Jimu Robot Meebot Kit

Ubtech, £109.95, 8+ 
<http://www.apple.com/uk/shop/product/HK962ZM/A/ubtech-jimu-robot-meebot-kit>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0213a88a095b8fe783d5d4cd42655c7f929537a0%2F0_1456_3746_2834%2F3746.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Connected%20toys%20for%20Christmas%20on%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Connected%20toys%20for%20Christmas%20on%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0213a88a095b8fe783d5d4cd42655c7f929537a0%2F0_1456_3746_2834%2F3746.jpg>
 Max with the Jimu Robot Meebot Kit. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer
Well, this one isn’t going to win any beauty contests, that’s for sure. The 
Meebot starts its artificial life as a construction kit, which requires a 
patient older child or adult to snap its components together, carefully 
connecting up a sextet of servo motors.

On its first test drive, our Meebot shuffled along like a drunk with his 
trousers around his ankles, then fell over and started making distressing 
clacking sounds. But after one misaligned leg servo was eventually sorted out, 
it was able to waddle along without its grey box-head butting the floor, even 
pulling off dance moves like a stiff-limbed Cossack. Until the kids rapidly and 
unanimously lost interest.

Max’s verdict: “I don’t like it when people say something bad about him. It 
makes me feel really sad, because he’s so cute. But there aren’t that many 
things you can do with him. The coding was fun at first, but then it does get a 
little bit boring. And I don’t really like the way he moves around.”

Anki Overdrive Super Truck

Anki, RRP £49.99-59.99, 8+ 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Anki-Overdrive-X52-Super-Truck/dp/B01FM8ZGPI/ref=sr_1_2?s=kids&ie=UTF8&qid=1480517575&sr=1-2&keywords=anki+overdrive+supertrucks>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc489ed0793a387130d4241f4e2a4cc71fe711850%2F407_1036_3300_4126%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Connected%20toys%20for%20Christmas%20on%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Connected%20toys%20for%20Christmas%20on%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc489ed0793a387130d4241f4e2a4cc71fe711850%2F407_1036_3300_4126%2F3300.jpg>
 Louis with the SPRK+ robotic ball and Anki Overdrive Super Truck. Photograph: 
Karen Robinson for the Observer 
Anki’s smart racing cars have already proved a hit with children since they 
first arrived in late 2013 and with good reason: they offer the ideal blend of 
the physical and the virtual. As their artificially intelligent autos battle it 
out on modular tracks (which can be bought as a starter set with two cars for 
about £140), players can customise their driver avatar, level up their 
vehicles’ abilities and weaponry and interact with non-player-character rivals, 
all through the slickly designed Anki app.

The Super Truck, then, is simply a new vehicle for the existing system. Both 
models, the X-52 and the Freewheel, bring a new control system and game mode 
(called Takeover) to the Anki experience, though, as Phoebe notes, they do 
little to encourage more girls to play. “If you watch the advert it’s only got 
one girl using it,” she points out. “All the rest are boys.”

Louis’s verdict: “I think Anki Overdrive is brilliant for families – adults 
and children – and unlike Scalextric it will never get boring for me. The 
addition of the Super Trucks is brilliant, too.”

SPRK+ (pictured above)

Sphero, £119.99, 8+  
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Sphero-K001ROW-SPRK/dp/B01GZ1S7OS/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1480514817&sr=8-3&keywords=sphero+sprk>

Sphero made an impact on Xmas budgets last year with its app-controlled BB-8 
toy and here’s the latest iteration of its own robotic ball of fun, the SPRK+. 
Even without theStar Wars trimmings and with its circuitry on display through a 
transparent plastic shell (which can be covered up with a protective sheath, 
sold separately), our testers quickly warmed to it as it whirled and tumbled 
around the play area.

The SPRK+ is versatile and, thanks to its engaging, Scratch-like block-based 
computer coding system, it was the toy that held attention longest. Louis soon 
had it autonomously zipping around and yelling “ouch!” on impact with 
obstacles, then downloaded another user’s program via Sphero’sLightning Lab app 
 <http://edu.sphero.com/>to turn it into a fortune-telling ball giving yes or 
no answers.

Louis’s verdict: This is so much more fun than coding with Scratch, because 
you’re coding a real object. And I like how you can go online and take other 
people’s programs. It’s a really nice design, too, and overall the best toy 
we’ve got here. Totally worth the money in my opinion.”

Jett Jumping Race Drone

Parrot, RRP £99.99, 14+ 
<https://www.parrot.com/uk/minidrones/parrot-jumping-race-jett#parrot-jumping-race-jett->
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3d20e37294d09014f9da938bc2c3769cc04010%2F45_866_3472_4173%2F3472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Connected%20toys%20for%20Christmas%20on%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Connected%20toys%20for%20Christmas%20on%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fchildren-test-connected-toys-for-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3d20e37294d09014f9da938bc2c3769cc04010%2F45_866_3472_4173%2F3472.jpg>
 Phoebe with the Jett Jumping Race Drone. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the 
Observer 
Parrot specialises in entry-level flying drones, but has here brought things 
down to kid-friendly ground level. The box advises it’s a 14+ toy and there was 
an initial wariness among our junior testers of its jittery, insect-like 
manoeuvres, electronic growls and skull-like face. But once they’d got hands-on 
with the app’s simple touchscreen controls (which connect via its own Wi-Fi 
network rather than Bluetooth), it wasn’t long before the zippy and thankfully 
durable machine was being joyfully directed to use its floorboard-thumping 
“foot” to bound over and on to furniture in a series of impressive stunts. In 
very brief bursts, though: the big drawback here is the Jett’s limited battery 
life – only 20 minutes.

Phoebe’s verdict: “It’s my favourite out of all the toys here. I was quite 
scared of it at first – when we were testing the robots it started hitting all 
the others – but now I think it is in some ways charming. It’s light on its 
feet and quite bouncy and it’s really cool because you can film things with its 
camera.”
 