
The col de la Core is not a famous climb – in cycling, or any other sport. 
There are no champions’ names spray painted on the ground, no monuments at the 
top to riders past or present. It has no especially beautiful scenery or harsh 
gradients. It is a simple, two-lane road, and on a Saturday morning last month, 
it nearly killed me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b9559c2d2aeb0f6a3c4bce477113582625862e%2F917_1391_5602_3361%2F5602.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b9559c2d2aeb0f6a3c4bce477113582625862e%2F917_1391_5602_3361%2F5602.jpg>
 Challenge riders climb early one morning in the High Pyrenees. Photograph: 
Jered Gruber/Gruber Images 
The Cent Cols Challenge <http://centcolschallenge.com/story/> is sometimes 
described as the hardest amateur cycling event in Europe. It is a 10-day, 
10-stage journey, in one of a handful of the continent’s mountain ranges; the 
Alps, the Dolomites, or - in September this year - the Pyrenees. The task is 
brutal in its simplicity: climb 100 mountain passes (cols). The reality is 
overwhelming.

On an any given day a rider must spend 12 hours on their bike, eat and burn 
more than 8,000 calories, and ride more than 200km in conditions from dark and 
wet to scorching heat, and sometimes over farm tracks. They must ignore saddle 
sores, knee and neck pain, back pain, wrist and foot pain, freeze and 
dehydrate, ride until their chain breaks or their tyres deflate, until their 
eyes are bloodshot and they are numb. Then they eat, wash and go to bed – with 
the knowledge it all starts again in a few short hours, on repeat for 10 days.

The Sarto Seta review: a frame pretty close to perfection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/nov/19/the-sarto-seta-review-a-frame-pretty-close-to-perfection>
It is not surprising that of the 30 or so riders who attempt the challenge, 
less than a third complete every kilometre of the route.

The challenge, now in its eighth year, was created by Phil Deeker, a former 
fireworks technician. The 59-year-old started riding for the second time (like 
so many others he rode in his youth and rediscovered the sport years later) in 
1998, on his daily commute. Nine years later, he set himself a daunting 
challenge: to ride through the Alps, and across the Pyrenees, summiting 300 
mountain passes in just 26 days. He finished in July 2007 and the challenge was 
born.

By autumn this year Deeker had shepherded close to 500 riders through 
thousands of kilometres in 24 editions of the journey. Last month, I was one of 
the latest batch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcea12ba24a5f957313cbd60f0e45392dacea0b3%2F2581_0_5409_3247%2F5409.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcea12ba24a5f957313cbd60f0e45392dacea0b3%2F2581_0_5409_3247%2F5409.jpg>
 Tackling the epic Tourmalet on stage five. Photograph: Jered Gruber/Gruber 
Images 
 “Forget where you have come from, or where you are going,” the challenge’s 
briefing starts. “What counts is the here and now. It will be tougher for some 
riders than others, your mind will almost certainly play games with you, and 
there will be days when the cycling gods choose to keep some of the mountains 
for themselves.”

The numbers are staggering. The Pyrenees edition – one of the first routes 
devised by Deeker almost 10 years ago – is more than 2,000km long and climbs 
just over 50,000 metres. Its longest stage, from St-Lary-Soulan to Oloron, is 
226km, tackles 6,000m of uphill roads and comes after four days of punishing 
cycling. According to Strava, a social network for athletes, in 10 days I 
logged 97hr and 24min pedalling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6724bdda318dfbad7cd9f2afcc65a2d6c0fd2b11%2F0_285_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6724bdda318dfbad7cd9f2afcc65a2d6c0fd2b11%2F0_285_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 ‘Feed three’ offers something savoury as a change from energy bars and gels. 
Photograph: Gruber Images 
To mask the true scale of the challenge, Deeker suggests breaking it down as 
follows: the trip goes in two halves, the halves break down into days, and the 
days into four chunks. Those quarters are: a 7.30am start and 50km to feed one, 
the same distance to lunch, the same again to feed three and one more 50km drag 
to that night’s hotel, dinner and bed. The first quarter of the day was almost 
always cold and wet, and as the event progressed, legs took longer to flush out 
the lactic acid and heart rates refused to rise.

But ask riders about the daily routine and you’ll get a different answer every 
time – each one subtly shifting the timeline to emphasise the section that 
offered them the most compelling reasons to quit. But it will almost always 
involve food.


With legs still swollen from the previous days’ efforts and the lingering 
remnants of a dehydration headache, the mornings were especially hard. They 
felt like enduring a bad hangover, and, just like the recently inebriated, we 
would struggle with the idea of hauling our protesting bodies out of bed, 
pouring them into kit still damp from the previous night’s hotel-sink wash and 
filling them with more muesli than seems plausible. To then force them to scale 
an endless succession of French mountains was – from stage three onwards – 
enough to make anyone swap our metaphorical hangovers for a real one. What 
difference, we would joke, could it possibly make?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a1890ba2050339512750629363c84455e2a161c%2F0_210_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a1890ba2050339512750629363c84455e2a161c%2F0_210_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Oliver Duggan prepares for a cold morning before sunrise. Photograph: Gruber 
Images 
During the event, Jered Gruber, a former professional cyclist who has become 
one half of the renowned photography team Gruber Images, made a habit of 
pointing out at lunchtime that the morning’s endeavours amounted to a 
substantial achievement in their own right, and repeating them in the afternoon 
seemed a little unnecessary. “That was a big ride,” he’d say. “On any other 
day, I’d be happy with that.” The prospect of repeating that feat immediately, 
riding through the afternoon and well into the evening was a daily torment.


But there is one character trait that unites every rider who attempts the 
challenge: they are comfortable with discomfort. “You needs to know what 
climbing for two hours non-stop means. It’s about that ability to endure,” 
Deeker says. But if that familiarity with pain is universal, then so to is an 
appreciation that there is something rejuvenating, even restful, in that pain.

Jennifer Burtner works as an A&E doctor in a Seattle hospital that is often as 
short-staffed and underfunded as those of the NHS. Despite holding down such a 
demanding job, her holidays for the last six years have involved flying halfway 
around the world to ride her bike to the point of exhaustion.

Riding with her husband, Tim, she often finished well after dark, by which 
time the stronger riders had showered, rested and, at least once, were already 
starting the evening meal. But determined to ride every inch of the route, and 
despite having less time to recover than many others, she would wake up earlier 
and set off the next day, riding by torchlight to get a jump start on the 
climbs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8df4830f2bbeb80b6d29aef764289a8b91a40951%2F777_0_4912_4912%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8df4830f2bbeb80b6d29aef764289a8b91a40951%2F777_0_4912_4912%2F4912.jpg>
 Ashley Gruber climbs at dawn in the Pyrenees. Photograph: Jered Gruber/Gruber 
Images 
“No trip has come close to what you do on the Cent Cols,” Tim says. “By day 
three, you have pretty much ridden what you might ride in any typical bike 
trip. But it is the kind of riding, and the people that are riding with you, 
that make it so special. Everyone is taking on something much bigger than 
themselves.”

That refusal to quit is infectious, and the few riders who did stop before the 
end did so after serious injury or mechanical failure. Howard Dyson became the 
first casualty after hitting a patch of gravel on a tight bend leaving 
Saillagouse. He collided so hard with a stone wall that it split his helmet. 
Jeff Wills, 47, one of the event’s strongest riders, crashed on stage seven. He 
too split his helmet, fracturing several vertebrae in his neck in the process. 
Having recovered from a broken collar bone three months earlier, he went back 
into surgery to have pins inserted in the breaks and spent five days immobile 
in a Lourdes hospital. “It was very upsetting to stop like that,” he recalls. 
“Until that point, stopping never crossed my mind.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ccc0c7ea8198f314c56e510f6fb988b3ef6eab0%2F692_0_3477_3477%2F3477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ccc0c7ea8198f314c56e510f6fb988b3ef6eab0%2F692_0_3477_3477%2F3477.jpg>
 Australian Tim Robertson tries to cool down after a wet morning of harsh 
climbs. Photograph: Gruber Images 
“Everyone shared this idea of ‘the challenge’: no one wanted to stop; no one 
was whining; no one was lazy. Every day the group was up for it. I like being 
with people like that. Although it could take a year for my injuries to heal, I 
have already signed up for 2017.”

Others arrived back in Perpignan battered and bruised, nursing swollen limbs 
and road rash (myself included). The fatigue, though, is universal. Every 
rider, weeks after the event had finished, spoke as if they had only just 
caught their breath. Some still mentioned recovery as some far-off destination 
that might be reached with a few more days and a few more espressos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07fb6731a3ad8eb0e8d0d2e7a0e200c0a07fff5b%2F0_226_5079_3047%2F5079.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07fb6731a3ad8eb0e8d0d2e7a0e200c0a07fff5b%2F0_226_5079_3047%2F5079.jpg>
 The road to the ski station at Peyregoudes, close to Bargneres-de-Luchon. 
Photograph: Gruber Images 
For all that turmoil, and more than a century after they debuted in the Tour 
de France, the Pyrenees still feel like an undiscovered playground. The 
mountains, which form a natural border between France and Spain, are mostly 
pastoral. In a full day’s riding, a group could pass more cattle than cars, and 
for most riders, who train in cities and on turbo trainers, it was a luxury so 
rare it made up for the hardship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fd4a5cbffae6f109129214571d2231402212f99%2F0_141_3296_1977%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fd4a5cbffae6f109129214571d2231402212f99%2F0_141_3296_1977%2F3296.jpg>
 A rider is surrounded by sheep - a common hazard. Photograph: Jered 
Gruber/Gruber Images 
Mike Bluett, a trader in London, said the views of valleys conquered and peaks 
to come made stage five his best and worst day on the bike. “Riding up La 
Hourquette d’Ancizan, seeing the ragged mountain in front of me, a slight 
smattering of snow near the summit, that was the best moment,” he says. “But I 
was exhausted and hadn’t eaten enough. I was reduced to tears and felt 
overwhelmingly lucky to be on my bike and where I was.”

That determination bordering on stupidity, and respect for the sport and its 
setting, bears close resemblance to the greataudax 
<http://www.cyclinguk.org/uk-cycling-events/audax-uk> riders and racers of 
cycling history, and the Pyrenees is the perfect setting to see it thrive. 
According to Pierre Chany, a cycling correspondent at L’Equipe for 35 years, 
the area was included in the Tour de France on the insistence of another 
cyclist and writer, Alphonse Steinnes. Chany says Steinnes was the driving 
force behind the tour’s notoriously long stages and jagged profiles, and in 
1907 he made an audacious bid to have the Tourmalet climb added to the race.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dddbbe7d2458c28d22e10bd7222f4f10b58f073%2F1691_0_3648_3648%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dddbbe7d2458c28d22e10bd7222f4f10b58f073%2F1691_0_3648_3648%2F3648.jpg>
 Rasmus Poulsen, from Denmark, climbs through driving rain on stage four. 
Photograph: Gruber Images 
He took the race organisers to examine the 2,115m summit but 16km up the road, 
their driver could go no further and Steinnes was forced to start walking the 
remaining distance to the top. Freezing and alone, he became disorientated, 
fell twice as he stumbled up the icy path and was eventually found by a search 
and rescue team. After a hot bath, Steinnes dispatched a telegram: “Crossed 
Tourmalet. Very good. Perfectly feasible.”

At the base of the Col de la Core, that unremarkable stretch of Pyrenean road 
that nearly killed me, nothing felt perfectly feasible. Blue-lipped, teeth 
chattering and hands so cold it hurt to hold the bike, I punctured. We had 
descended for 20 minutes in ice-cold rain and joined a single-lane track – the 
kind with weeds, mud and stones down the centre. By the time Deeker caught up, 
I was sheltered under a tree, sopping wet – despite two waterproofs, a jacket 
and two jerseys – and shaking. I was on a back road through a valley in 
southern France that I might never visit again but will always remember as the 
place where I asked the most basic questions of myself and came back 
empty-handed. I was ready to quit.

Every rider who has completed a Cent Cols challenge has had a moment like 
this, one that made them ask whether they could possibly keep turning the 
pedals. But they have also had moments of complete freedom, unencumbered by the 
stresses of home or work and – if only fleetingly – convinced they can master 
whatever comes next.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56739cce1323e3bc943d8bf3f5e342bd62f64aea%2F0_252_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56739cce1323e3bc943d8bf3f5e342bd62f64aea%2F0_252_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Duggan at the end of the last climb on the final day. Photograph: Gruber Images
For me, they came on the Hourquette D’Ancizan, climbing through cloud and fog 
on stage five to see for the first time, up close, the snow-capped peaks of the 
High Pyrenees. They came at the end of the same day, struggling up the Aubisque 
after 6,000m and knowing we’d reached halfway. And they came with the laughter 
on a particularly hard morning, having realised one rider was so tired they had 
ridden for 60km with their bib shorts inside out and not noticed. They came on 
the rest day, ordering more food for six people than could be eaten by 60. They 
came on stage eight – the back road stage – when the weather finally turned in 
our favour, and then again on stage nine as the sun set over the valley at the 
ancient thermal baths of Ax-Les-Thermes. They came as we remembered stage one, 
so long ago, when we were new and fresh and still oblivious to the roads that 
lay ahead. And they came off the bike too, when we couldn’t sleep for the sound 
of wheels still whirring in our ears, when we couldn’t swing our legs over the 
seat because our bodies had grown so used to the hunched frame of a cyclist, 
and when we couldn’t believe – at lunch on the final day, having ridden all but 
every bit of this challenge – that it was all about to be over.

They came, in the end, as a torrent of panoramic moments made memorable by the 
effort they cost.

The Cent Cols Challenge demands enormous mental and physical effort. It 
creates a fatigue that can last for weeks, even months, after crossing the 
finish line. But in return, it delivers the most breathtaking cycling, the 
richest kinship and the deepest confidence that, if asked, we could get back on 
our bike, point it uphill and climb one more col.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe399ddb06e825bdfe5a84d8550a5edd2fd348afa%2F0_34_3798_2280%2F3798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conquering%20the%20Cent%20Cols%20Challenge%20in%20the%20Pyrenees%3A%20from%20despair%20to%20defiance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fconquering-the-cent-cols-challenge-in-the-pyrenees-from-despair-to-defiance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe399ddb06e825bdfe5a84d8550a5edd2fd348afa%2F0_34_3798_2280%2F3798.jpg>
 Phil Deeker, creator of the Cent Cols Challenge, summits the Hautacam at dusk. 
Photograph: Gruber Images 
Essentials

Oliver Duggan cycled the Cent Cols Challenge with Rapha Travel - 13 days for 
£3,500, cycling through the mountains of southern France and Spain. The trip 
includes food and accommodation, physio, massages, training and mentoring, as 
well as a team of support vehicles. Flights are not included. For more 
information, visitCent Cols Challenge <http://www.centcolschallenge.com/> or go 
torapha.cc <http://www.rapha.cc/gb/en/travel/trip/newtravel>
 