
A consumer group is seeking a judicial review of Peterborough Trading 
Standards’ handling of the “fiasco” of potentially dangerous tumble dryers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/24/killer-tumble-dryer-faulty-whirlpool-machine-product-safety-scandal>
, claiming that it has failed millions of consumers across the UK by not 
enforcing product safety laws.

The trading standards arm of Peterborough city council has been dealing with 
the alert – which involves an estimated 5.3m faulty dryers made by Whirlpool 
brands Hotpoint, Indesit and Creda – because its UK head office is located 
there.

Which? is taking the unusual step – the first time it has made a formal legal 
move involving trading standards – in order to assess the lawfulness of its 
decision to allow householders to continue to use faulty machines, despite the 
risk of them bursting into flames.

Almost a year after the fire safety issue affecting millions of consumers was 
announced inNovember 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/24/indesit-and-hotpoint-issue-fire-risk-warnings-over-tumble-dryers>
, an investigation by the London Fire Brigadeconcluded  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/06/whirlpool-told-to-do-more-to-ensure-safety-after-tumble-dryer-blaze>
that an Indesit tumble dryer was to blame for a serious blaze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/19/fire-crews-tackle-blaze-at-shepherds-bush-tower-block-london>
 in an 18-storey tower block in Shepherd’s Bush, west London.

The fire chiefs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/06/whirlpool-told-to-do-more-to-ensure-safety-after-tumble->
 – along with Which? and the Chartered Trading Standards Institute 
<https://www.tradingstandards.uk/consumers> – urged Whirlpool to change its 
advice to customers <https://safety.hotpoint.eu>so that any dryers waiting to 
be modified are not used – advice rejected by the company. They also warned of 
the lack of a robust national system of product recalls in emergency 
situations. The judicial review will ask the high court to assess whether 
Peterborough Trading Standards’ handling of the case since the London Fire 
Brigade’s report has been lawful.

“We believe that the way Whirlpool has handled the tumble dryer safety issue 
is absolutely appalling and to add insult to injury Peterborough Trading 
Standards has failed to do its duty to protect consumers” said Alex Neill, 
managing director of home and legal services at Which? “We have decided to step 
in and take legal action because we want Peterborough Trading Standards to 
properly protect Whirlpool customers and carry out its role as an enforcer of 
product safety laws.”

Which? has published a list <http://www.which.co.uk/whirlpool.> of the 127 
affected tumble dryers – which include certain models of Hotpoint, Indesit, 
Creda, Proline and Swan machines – along withconsumer advice <http:// certain 
models of Hotpoint, Indesit, Creda, Proline and Swan tumble dryers> for those 
who find they have a faulty model. Owners are invited to apply for modification 
of their machines or the opportunity to buy a new machine at a discounted price.

The consumer group claims that Peterborough Trading Standards has failed 
consumers by not properly carrying out its role as an enforcer of product 
safety laws. It believes that the handling of this case highlights problems 
with the current product safety system and the difficulties local Trading 
Standards branches face standing up to big business as effective enforcers.

Legal papers have been filed against Peterborough city council in the high 
court to kick-start the process. If the high court grants Which? permission to 
proceed with its judicial review, a court hearing is expected to begin in 2017.

“Every responsible safety body from the London Fire Brigade to the Chartered 
Trading Standards Institute thinks Whirlpool and the government have got it 
wrong in saying these dangerous machines can continue to be used,” said Andy 
Slaughter, MP for Hammersmith and in whose constituency the fire broke out. “I 
hope this legal action by Which? will now force them to do the right thing.”

A Peterborough city council spokesman said: “An independent review, which 
began earlier this month, is currently taking place and we would expect the 
company to fully comply with the outcome. We will strongly defend our position 
if Which? is granted a judicial review and bearing in mind the ongoing 
independent review we consider that this action is premature.”
 