
Australia’s healthcare system faces some daunting challenges over the coming 
years and decades.

With an ageing population and rising incidences of chronic disease, current 
healthcare resources and funding models are already buckling under the strain, 
demanding that policy makers and health professionals develop new ways of 
thinking and problem-solving.

According to Philips Australia and New Zealand managing director, Kevin Barrow 
the immediate challenge facing healthcare systems is how to develop proactive, 
rather than reactive, approaches to patient care.

Typically, the older people get the greater the chances they will require 
hospitalisation when they are ill. This is one of the biggest cost burdens on 
Australia’s healthcare system, while the rising incidences of chronic diseases 
like diabetes and heart disease across the board, put further pressure on the 
system.

Data from the US Department of Health and Human Services, and other sources 
<http://www.philips.com.au/healthcare/solutions/enterprise-telehealth/home-telehealth/complex-care-management/eiac>
, reveals that in developed countries, as little as three per cent of patients 
are deemed sufferers of chronic disease. Yet this group uses up to half the 
available healthcare resources.

This should come as a wake-up call for Australia’s healthcare industry, which 
has so far been slow to adapt, Barrow says. “Most of our healthcare systems 
haven’t changed in 100 years in terms of how healthcare is delivered.”

Many health facilities and organisations are still bogged down in proprietary 
legacy systems that can’t talk to each other.

For instance, there are several different imaging and health record systems in 
Australia, meaning that hospitals and clinicians waste time trying to access 
patients’ medical histories.

Most of our healthcare systems haven’t changed in 100 years in terms of how 
healthcare is delivered.”
Kevin Barrow, Philips Australia and New Zealand 
This helps to explain why the fax machine remains an essential – yet extremely 
wasteful – tool for hospitals and health professionals. Delegates to the recent
Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) eHealth Forum in 
Melbourne <http://www.racgp.org.au/your-practice/ehealth/racgp-ehealth-forum/>, 
were told that some 1 billion pieces of paper are generated by Australia’s 
healthcare system each year.

Barrow says that often when patients are admitted to hospital, or visit a 
doctor, the issue is something that could have been dealt with without a 
physical consultation, if the right systems were in place.

Strong telehealth - or telemedicine platforms - allow patients and doctors to 
interact and engage remotely. Combined with robust, secure digital systems 
supporting easy access and sharing of patients’ health records, a picture 
begins to emerge of a more efficient, cost-effective system able to support 
true continuity of care.

In mid-2016, Philips published the Future Health Index 
<https://www.futurehealthindex.com/> (FHI), a comparative international study 
analysing the readiness of healthcare operators around the world to meet the 
challenges of the future. Some 200 healthcare professionals, and 2,000 patients 
were surveyed in Australia.

All respondents revealed a strong desire for systems supporting better 
interaction and data sharing between doctors and patients. However, the survey 
also showed there’s quite a long way to go.

Most notably, almost three-quarters (70 per cent) of patients said they were 
having to repeat information about their health each time they visited a 
different health professional. Other data revealed frustrations around 
accessing health records, both for patients themselves and people trying to 
provide homecare to sick relatives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-marked-moments%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcontinuity-of-care-via-digital-platforms-is-the-future-of-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F081b8bcc0f09b19ba0a3997ca378d9c85d691b3d%2F0_16_1080_648%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Continuity%20of%20care%20via%20digital%20platforms%20is%20the%20future%20of%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-marked-moments%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcontinuity-of-care-via-digital-platforms-is-the-future-of-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Continuity%20of%20care%20via%20digital%20platforms%20is%20the%20future%20of%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fphilips-marked-moments%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcontinuity-of-care-via-digital-platforms-is-the-future-of-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F081b8bcc0f09b19ba0a3997ca378d9c85d691b3d%2F0_16_1080_648%2F1080.jpg>
 Photograph: Image provided by Philips 
As one of the world’s leading providers of healthcare innovation, Philips has 
been involved in a number of important initiatives helping chronic disease 
sufferers better manage themselves.

Mid-2016, Philips published the results of a three-year ‘self-supported care’ 
programme involving almost 2,000 patients in UK city Liverpool living with 
chronic, or long-term conditions (LTCs) including diabetes, heart failure and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

The trial sought to improve patient awareness and emotional well-being by 
combining innovative telemonitoring equipment with a ‘clinical hub’ and a 
program of case management, monitoring, education and coaching for patients 
with varying levels of long-term disease. The results included reductions in 
emergency admissions and secondary care costs ranging from 22 to 32 per cent.

In late 2014, Philips and US-provider Banner Health, commenced a six-month 
‘at-home’ telehealth trial for patients with multiple chronic conditions, which 
saw a 45 per cent drop in hospitalisations, 32 per cent drop in acute and 
long-term care costs, and a 27 per cent reduction in the total cost of care.

“One of the key themes we see emerging in the sector is the needs of patients 
becoming increasingly linked with those of the clinician,” Barrow explains, 
adding that connected digital tools coupled with improved clinical capabilities 
are driving better collaboration and improved ways to manage health.

How big data will disrupt the future of healthcare

Healthcare is an extremely data-intensive industry, with no one expecting the 
deluge to abate anytime soon.

Added to the huge volumes of conventional patient information, such as x-rays, 
CT scans, pathology reports and the like, personal health records will 
increasingly contain genetic, proteomic, 3D and other complex data sets, in 
turn bringing the promise of personalised medicine closer to reality.

Massive shared, or ‘cloud’ computing grids are increasingly able to process 
and correlate these sorts of data sets with those charting family histories, as 
well as data on drug compounds, allowing clinicians to finely calibrate 
treatments in ways undreamt of five or 10 years ago.

As one of the leading innovators in the personalised health space, Philips is 
working with New York cancer specialists, WMC Health, to build a large-scale 
informatics platform designed to create individually-targeted oncology 
treatments based on each patients’ specific genome. The solution features 
Philips’ IntelliSpace Genomics Solution which will integrate large-scale genome 
analysis with large patient clinical data sets.

As big data technologies continue to improve, the possibilities for developing 
even deeper insights into the factors influencing human health and our 
environment appear vast.

Getting a good night’s sleep: an interactive journey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/philips-marked-moments/ng-interactive/2016/oct/25/getting-a-good-nights-sleep-an-interactive-journey>
For instance, healthcare organisations are now realising the potential to 
correlate data on chronic or communicable disease with factors such as 
geography, climate and pollution, socio economic background, age, ethnicity and 
family history to develop more targeted, cost-effective and measurable 
healthcare solutions.

The huge amounts of data already being generated within healthcare are set to 
increase by orders of magnitude over the coming years as the expansion of the 
Internet of things (IoT) gathers pace, potentially linking billions and 
billions of electronic devices and sensors.

These digital devices and sensors will generate and share still more data, and 
with them will come more opportunities for discovery. New and emerging systems 
will add further impetus, morphing and adapting environments as they evolve.

As one of the world’s leading makers of high-end medical devices and 
solutions, Philips sees IoT as a critically important driver of healthcare 
innovation moving forward, with implications at the individual level as well as 
the macro level helping us develop a better understanding and better strategies 
to prepare for the healthcare challenges that lie ahead.
 