
“Last December we had temperatures of 25C. Normally it is 1 or 2C at that time 
of year,” says Mohammed Ibrahimi, a farmer with one hectare of apple trees in 
Boumia, a village near Midelt inMorocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco>.

“These trees need at least 1,200 hours of near-freezing temperatures in the 
winter to help them to regenerate. This year they flowered very late; the 
harvest was a month late and I harvested just 20 tonnes when I’d expected 40 
tonnes.”

Southern Africa appeals for billions to cope with El Niño devastation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/26/southern-africa-appeals-for-billions-el-nino-devastation-drought>
The town of Midelt sits 1,600m above sea level on a vast barren plain 
sandwiched between the Middle Atlas mountain range to the north and the High 
Atlas to the south. One of the highest mountains in northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, Jbel Ayachi, looms snow-clad over 
the town. Due to its altitude, Midelt is well-suited to apples, and plantations 
are scattered all over the plains. But farmers are already abandoning their 
orchards.

“When we were kids the mountains had snow on them until at least June, 
sometimes even all year. We had ample underground water sources. We used to 
have to dig about 4m down to find water – now it can be [many times deeper]. 
How can we irrigate our crops with that?” says Ibrahimi.

Like most African countries, Morocco – where 40% of the population still works 
the land – is already feeling the impacts of climate change on its agricultural 
production. Last year, during the exceptional season Ibrahimi describes – 
caused in large part by the regularEl Niño weather pattern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/18/el-nino-has-passed-peak-strength-but-impacts-will-continue-un-warns>
 – Morocco went without rain for more than two months. Overall it received 
42.7% less rain during its main planting season than in an average year. The 
impact on the harvest was catastrophic, particularly on the “zone bour” (dry 
zone) areas where crops such as wheat, barley and maize are planted.Ministry of 
Agriculture estimates 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiBnOe5wZbQAhUDwBQKHeX7Ar4QFggdMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgain.fas.usda.gov%2FRecent%2520GAIN%2520Publications%2FGrain%2520and%2520Feed%2520Annual_Rabat_Morocco_3-30-2016.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFB82NNGxFNfA6vi-7ltE0LIR9DUQ&sig2=2qlxFMH_CGL8yYV5beMnNg&bvm=bv.137904068,d.d24&cad=rja>
 predicted total output falling 70% on the 2015 season.

“Starting from the early 1990s, we’ve seen on average 15% to 20% less rain 
annually than previously,” says Mohamed Ait Kadi, president of Morocco’s 
General Council of Agricultural Development. “The rain now comes in showers 
instead of sustained downpours, and we see arid areas spreading.”

As the host country for the COP22 climate change talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/marrakech-climate-talks-giving-the-fossil-fuel-lobby-a-seat-at-the-table>
, whichopen in Marrakech <http://cop22.ma/en> on Monday, Morocco is determined 
to make this meeting the “African COP”.

Explaining its own experience and acting as an advocate for other African 
countries, Morocco wants to put the impacts of erratic weather patterns on 
agriculture at the heart of the discussions.

No-one is underestimating the challenges. Water stress, land degradation, 
rising temperatures and deforestation are all playing a role. Areas such as the 
Sahel – including Chad, Niger and Mali – have experienced recurring droughts 
every few years since the 1980s, devastating harvests, economies and 
traditional farming ecosystems. In2010 at least 7 million people across the 
Sahel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/aug/03/eastern-sahel-food-crisis-aid>
 were threatened with severe hunger and needed emergency food aid from 
humanitarian organisations.

According to the journal Nature, the viability of all crops in the Sahel belt 
<http://www.nature.com/nclimate/journal/v6/n6/full/nclimate2947.html?WT.feed_name=subjects_agriculture>
 will become questionable, with maize being the worst affected. By 2090 some 
60% of land available for bean production will become unsuitable. Southern and 
eastern Africa have all sufferedcatastrophic droughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/21/drought-southern-africa-heavy-toll-students-fainting-malawi-zimbabwe>
 over the last few years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fcop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f322d05b7db33453e55025ed63644768a73ae2f%2F0_125_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=COP22%20host%20Morocco%20launches%20action%20plan%20to%20fight%20devastating%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fcop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=COP22%20host%20Morocco%20launches%20action%20plan%20to%20fight%20devastating%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fcop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f322d05b7db33453e55025ed63644768a73ae2f%2F0_125_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Farmer Mohammed Ibrahimi examines apples on his plot in Boumia. This year’s 
harvest was a month late, and brought only half the expected yield. Photograph: 
Celeste Hicks for the Guardian 
Morocco is using the COP22 conference to formally launch its “Adaptation of 
African Agriculture <http://www.aaainitiative.org/initiative>” (AAA) 
initiative. As food security becomes increasingly challenged by erratic weather 
patterns, the initiative proposes measures such as improved soil management, 
water and irrigation management and better weather forecasting and insurance 
programmes for farmers affected by drought.

Although the initiative has received some criticism as some of its focus 
appears to replicate the work already being done by other pan-African 
agriculture programmes, Morocco believes its main contribution can be to 
persuade world leaders to sign up to a concrete plan of how to divide up the 
$100bn (£81bn) promised to support adaptation and mitigation projects in 
developing countries.

Drought and rising temperatures 'leaves 36m people across Africa facing hunger'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/drought-high-temperatures-el-nino-36m-people-africa-hunger>
“We have to translate the big ideas written in western offices about responses 
to climate change into something that actually changes the lives of small 
farmers,” said Morocco’s minister ofAgriculture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/agriculture> and Fisheries, Aziz 
Akannouch, at a recent conference launching the AAA. “It’s about pragmatic 
responses – things like irrigation projects, developing oases, improving access 
to fertilisers and credit.”

For Bruce Campbell, director of the global programme on climate change, 
agriculture and food security, better management of water sources will be 
crucial. Just3.3% of arable land (approx 6 million hectares) in sub-Saharan 
Africa is irrigated 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02508060.2013.821644>, compared to 
37% in Asia. In Morocco too, despite huge gains in increasing commercial 
agricultural outputs through mechanisation and improved use of fertilisers, an 
estimated85% of agricultural land <http://www.yieldgap.org/morocco> is still 
dependent on the skies. “One of the things which could really make a difference 
for small-scale farmers is better weather forecasting information in local 
languages,” says Campbell. “All farmers should have known that an El Niño event 
was expected in 2015-16, and they could have saved their seeds and inputs for a 
better year.”

 Back in Boumia, as we warm up with a mint tea and msmen – a traditional 
Moroccan flatbread served with honey – after a bracing walk in the fields, the 
apple farmers chew over what all this can mean for them. “I don’t think we’ll 
ever return to how it was before,” says Ibrahimi, “but it’s not too late. The 
most important thing is to stop any further damage immediately. And then we 
need developed countries to take responsibility for the damage they have done.”
 