
To the soundtrack of a clubbed-up, remixed Clockwork Orange, fashion label 
Sacai unveiled its spring/summer 2017 menswear collection and within the 
references toBreaking Bad-like jumpsuits and Rab C Nesbitt-esque string vests 
there was a clear message: pink for men is back.

Related: Stylewatch: The Strokes in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/21/stylewatch-the-strokes-in-2001>

Alongside layered pale pink suits accessorised with white string gloves, there 
were boilersuits in harsh lilac-pink worn with James Bay-style hats and 
pineapple print jumpers worn with rave trousers and strapped-up black brogues.

But Sacai’s attempt to turn heads with bursts of pink was not a one-off. At 
the men’s shows this summer, muted pinks of coral and salmon have dominated, a 
trend that is expected to be reflected on the high street in the spring and 
summer of 2017.

Pink popped up on garments across the board. There were suits (Bottega 
Veneta’s bowling suit), jackets (Tiger Of Sweden’s opulent field jacket and 
John Elliott + co’s taut leather jacket) and trousers (Robert Geller’s hot pink 
felt to Gucci’s Jarvis Cocker-ish pair).

“Buyers across the high street and high end will embrace colour in 2017 – pink 
included,” says men’s style director at Matchesfashion.com, Simon Chilvers.

This move towards a brighter, more boundary-pushing tone is a reflection of 
the sense of confidence following the continued growth of the menswear market, 
which has traditionally been a naturally conservative arena. It has expanded 
22% in the past five years and sales are expected to reach £14.1bn in Britain 
this year, according to the British Fashion Council.

The daring of the catwalk seldom makes its way directly to the high-street 
store. In retail, trends reveal themselves gradually and subtly rather than in 
a tumult of glitter and feathers. But 2017 could prove an exception.

Pink, a colour with a controversial history in menswear, is set to become the 
new neutral tone. It is likely to surpass the current red carpet-favoured tone 
of mid blue which has been a favourite at the Baftas (Idris Elba), Grammys 
(Mark Ronson) and Cannes (Lucky Blue Smith).

When colour authority Pantone named rose quartz (the kind of candyfloss shade 
you associate with cards for baby girls) as one of their colours of the year, 
they weren’t wrong. John Kerry, the US secretary of state, last week squared up 
to the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson,in a coral pink tie 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36839721>, while rapper Drake caused a minor 
pre-Euros skirmish when heposed on Instagram in a ballet-slipper pink Juventus 
top <http://hypetrak.com/2016/06/drake-reps-pink-juventus-jersey-instagram/> 
and matching tinted shades.

As Kanye West <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>, a man whose pink 
polo shirt became his sartorial trademark early on in his career, said: “Why 
would anyone pick blue over pink? Pink is obviously a better colour.”
 Rapper Drake takes his pink lead from John Wayne Composite: instagram/Getty 
Images 
The status of the colour in the business and political worlds is evident when 
you look at the catalogues of TM Lewin or Charles Tyrwhitt (transport secretary 
Chris Grayling is wearing a pink shirt in therecent photograph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/19/theresa-may-takes-charge-of-brexit-economy-and-social-reform-committees>
 of Teresa May’s new cabinet), but it still has a shaky relationship with 
menswear, as it has traditionally been closely aligned with femininity.

We have overlapped with the near anniversary of a Life magazine article from 
1955 entitled The Year Of Pink, which traces the history of the colour’s 
popularity in menswear. The piece claimed the department store Brooks Brothers 
ushered the “pretty pastel” into the male wardrobe.

“Sole responsibility,” the journalist writes, “lies with New York’s Brooks 
Brothers whose pink shirt, introduced in 1900 but long unnoticed, was 
publicised for college girls in 1949 and caught on for men too.”

As early as 1925, pink on a man was a joke, a sartorial no-no. “An Oxford man! 
Like hell he is! He wears a pink suit!” squawked Tom Buchanan inThe Great Gatsby
. “I could think of nothing except the luminosity of his pink suit under the 
moon.” Jay Gatsby, the eloquent and charismatic charlatan, was pinned under the 
microscope for his sartorial choice.

But there is another revisionist version of fashion history which sees a batch 
of alpha male icons wearing pink: John Wayne,Mad Men’s Don Draper, Sonny 
Crockett fromMiami Vice.

“I just don’t think men have the same hang-ups about wearing pink any more,” 
says Rob Nowill, senior menswear editor at Style.com. “The idea that it’s a 
‘feminine’ colour is outmoded: most men have cottoned on to the fact that it’s 
an incredibly flattering colour on almost anyone.”
 