
Fancy bears. It sounds like a new range of jelly sweets, or a Victorian circus 
act. Thanks to some Fancy Bears leaking confidential therapeutic use exemption 
(TUE) information online, these have been dark days for cycling. Suspicion has 
been thrown over the achievements of several British athletes – not least Sir 
Bradley Wiggins, the first ever British winner of the Tour de France, and his 
use of triamcinolone acetonide – a powerfulcortisone 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sportacademy/hi/sa/treatment_room/features/newsid_2251000/2251353.stm>
 that David Millar described as the “most potent 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/cycling/2016/09/19/drugs-used-by-sir-bradley-wiggins-should-be-banned-says-david-mi/>
” drug he used in his career.

Sky broke no rules, apparently, though they have not so much butted up against 
their own thin blue line as fully stress tested its elasticity.For now, 
questions remain unanswered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/package-bradley-wiggins-doctor-2011-criterium-du-dauphine>
. Sky have promised to release details of further TUEs, with riders’ consent – 
this is confidential medical information, after all – a move that WADA has been 
quick to condemn.

The system, it seems, is broken and it needs fixing. In 2009, WADA removed the 
need for a TUE for Salbutamol, the most common asthma treatment drug, and 
application numbers tumbled. Salbutamol is not a one-size-fits-all solution for 
asthma – where Wiggins had a number of TUEs for Salbutamol before 2009, fellow 
sufferer Chris Froome did not – but Wiggins’use of a different treatment 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/what-drugs-have-sir-bradley-wiggins-chris-froome-been-permitted-use-1581552>
 before his three major assaults on Grand Tours can’t help but raise eyebrows. 
Not least because it is the same substance for whichLance Armstrong infamously 
tested positive in the 1999 Tour 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/othersports/article-2310723/Lance-Armstong-tested-positive-drugs-times-1999-Tour-France-UCI-admits.html>
.

In 2011 L’Équipe released the UCI’s leaked “Index of Suspicion 
<http://www.cyclingnews.com/news/ucis-suspicious-list-leaked-from-2010-tour-de-france/>
” for the previous year’s Tour de France, detailing their view of every rider 
in the event. The list was widely ridiculed for presenting the information out 
of context, but what went unremarked was an accompanying column by Gerard 
Guillaume, team doctor at theFrancaise des Jeux 
<http://www.equipecyclistefdj.fr/> team. Cycling, he said, was now running not 
atdeux vitesses but three – PEDs, pan y agua 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/othersports/cycling/lancearmstrong/9603204/Shocking-evidence-from-former-team-mates-that-led-to-the-downfall-of-Lance-Armstrong.html>
 and cortisone.

Cortisone use – and abuse – in cycling isn’t new. Cortisone was first isolated 
in the 1930s, then synthesised in 1949 at theMayo Clinic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mayo_Clinic> in the US as an exceptionally 
effective treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. In 1950,the Nobel prize in 
Physiology or Medicine 
<https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1950/> went to 
Philip Hench, Edward Kendall and Tadeus Reichstein for “discoveries relating to 
the hormones of the adrenal cortex, their structure and biological effects.”

A naturally occurring hormone released by the body’s adrenal glands to combat 
stress, cortisone – and other corticosteroids such as prednisone – suppress 
inflammation and release energy necessary for the “fight or flight” reflex, and 
are widely used in the treatment of asthma and injury. Cortisone injections are 
not uncommon in other sports –Andy Murray 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/tennis/nadal-and-injured-elbow-are-too-much-for-murray-2268986.html>
 has openly discussed having an injection in his arm before a match against 
Rafa Nadal, andSteven Gerrard 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/football/international/to-inject-or-not-to-inject-that-is-the-question-for-gerrard-and-mcclaren-401483.html>
 andJohn Terry 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/football/international/5078296/Footballers-on-anti-inflammatories-play-with-their-health.html>
 were bothprescribed the treatment 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/tennis/nadal-and-injured-elbow-are-too-much-for-murray-2268986.html>
 to get them on to the pitch.

But cycling is different. Cycling has been the test bed for unlicensed 
products and therapies, the early adopter of anything that might give a rider 
an edge sinceMaurice Garin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maurice_Garin> and his
confrères lined up outside the Reveil-Matin in 1903 for the first Tour de 
France. By 1960, only 10 years after Hench et al were shaking hands in Oslo, 
Tour de France race doctor Robert Boncour was warning that cortisone presented 
“appalling dangers threatening the life of the champion-guinea pig turned into 
the champion-suicide.” In 1969, Dr Lucien Maigre was singing the same tune, 
declaring that numerous riders were routinely using cortisone in their 
preparation for the Tour. Just two years afterTom Simpson’s amphetamine-fuelled 
death 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/columnists/brendangallagher/2316933/Tom-Simpson-haunts-Tour-40-years-on.html>
 on Mont Ventoux, the peloton had already moved on to the next big thing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcec404181d7af5bd57b4d346e2d333336c1b7f78%2F0_0_4024_3071%2F4024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cortisone%20in%20cycling%3A%20from%20the%20Nobel%20prize%20to%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20via%20Lance%20Armstrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cortisone%20in%20cycling%3A%20from%20the%20Nobel%20prize%20to%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20via%20Lance%20Armstrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcec404181d7af5bd57b4d346e2d333336c1b7f78%2F0_0_4024_3071%2F4024.jpg>
 Eddy Merckx and Bernard Thévenet racing at the Tour de France in 1975. 
Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
When Bernard Thévenet was rushed to hospital in 1977, after winning the Tour 
de France for a second time, he was suffering from a catastrophic failure of 
the renal glands. A year later, the Peugeot rider revealed that he had been 
using cortisone since 1975 – the year he comprehensively thrashed Eddy Merckx 
at the Tour. His team-mate,Jean-Pierre Danguillaume 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Pierre_Danguillaume>, later told cycling 
journalist Pierre Chany: “Bernard found himself alone in hospital and he was 
scared. That’s what drove him to speak out.”

François Bellocq <https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fran%C3%A7ois_Bellocq>, the 
Peugeot team doctor from 1974 until 1979, was infamous for dishing out 
prescriptions even thoughhe was not a qualified doctor 
<http://www.podiumcafe.com/2011/2/23/2010343/LeMaillotJauneBlanchi> – he used 
his father’s stationery and was thrown off the FFC medical commission for his 
pains – and for the development of hormone rebalancing therapy. In his 1991 book
Sport et Dopage <https://www.amazon.fr/gp/product/2866450841>, Bellocq expanded 
on his theories. He likened riders to car engines running on water, oil and 
gas: “The human body needs an electrolyte balance, metabolic and hormonal, to 
run at its best.”

Over the course of a race, a rider’s levels of hormones will naturally fall. 
Bellocq advocated rebalancing those levels. If the body couldn’t replace what 
was lost quick enough, he thought it was permissible to top that level up to 
its natural state. Hormone rebalancing therapy would replenish the reserves 
that the demands of professional sport had depleted.

Was it doping? Bellocq was emphatic: “Doping brings to a body what it does not 
have in its natural state, or that he has naturally but in doses that pass all 
understanding.” The use of cortisone, which had brought Thévenet so low he said 
he was in no fit state to even get on a bike, was merely to delay fatigue in 
riders who were already putting their health at risk by facing the demands of a 
Grand Tour.

Cortisone sits at that uncomfortable intersection between recovery and doping 
to win, situated on the graph somewhere between unethical and not quite 
illegal. But the question remains: should a doctor administer drugs to a 
healthy individual? And does a line exist between helping riders recover from 
the demands of bike racing (even in the modern era) and using drugs to create a 
super-athlete who can deal with the rigours of the sport?

Should cortisone be seen as treatment or a licence to cheat? It’s the thinnest 
of lines, asJoe Harris and Steve Maxwell <http://www.theouterline.com/about-us/>
 point out in an opinion piece forthe Outerline 
<http://www.theouterline.com/treating-or-cheating-the-tue-question/>: “Pro 
cycling has tended to focus on what is best for its economics rather than what 
is best for the affected or ill individual,” they argue. “And this in turn 
tends to push TUEs in the direction of sanctioned doping.”

When the UCI first made concerted efforts to control EPO abuse with the 
introduction of the 50% hematocrit rule in 1997, which required riders whose 
hematocrit was above that level to take an eight-day “rest” or have a sound 
medical explanation for why it was that high. In the new guidance on TUEs, a 
similar rest period has been proposed. TheMPCC 
<https://www.mpcc.fr/index.php/en/mpcc-uk> (Mouvement Pour un Cyclisme Credible
) introduced an eight-day “health break” for use of intra-articular corticoids 
as part of their platform of anti-doping measures when they formed in 2007. 
They’ve subsequently added cortisol testing to their armoury, requiring riders 
from MPCC teams to pull out of competition if their levels fall too low –Chris 
Horner fell foul of the cortisol test in 2014 
<http://www.cyclingnews.com/news/chris-horner-out-of-vuelta-a-espana-due-to-low-cortisol-levels/>
 and was forced to withdraw from the Vuelta, and the opportunity to defend his 
crown. If a rider is ill enough to require emergency corticoid therapy, runs 
the argument, then they are too ill to race.

As Sky’s critics are quick to point out, the British team who championed “zero 
tolerance” and marginal gains have never soughtmembership of the MPCC 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/othersports/cycling/10918773/Team-Sky-insist-they-follow-the-rules-and-ride-clean-following-Chris-Froomes-use-of-glucocorticosteroids.html>
. As MPCC doctor Armand Mégret said in arecent interview 
<http://www.cyclingnews.com/news/now-we-understand-why-team-sky-never-joined-says-mpcc-doctor/>
, had Sky been a member of the MPCC, Wiggins would never have started the Tour 
de France. The eight-day rest period is an attempt to eliminate the grey areas 
associated with TUEs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50286dfe3ceae258574333a110511a0c7479f5a5%2F0_130_4203_2522%2F4203.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cortisone%20in%20cycling%3A%20from%20the%20Nobel%20prize%20to%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20via%20Lance%20Armstrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cortisone%20in%20cycling%3A%20from%20the%20Nobel%20prize%20to%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20via%20Lance%20Armstrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50286dfe3ceae258574333a110511a0c7479f5a5%2F0_130_4203_2522%2F4203.jpg>
 Bradley Wiggins stands on the podium with Chris Froome and Vincenzo Nibali 
after his victory in the 2012 Tour de France. Photograph: Jerome Prevost/AP 
After Thévenet’s revelations in 1978, a string of riders also revealed they 
had used cortisone.Roger Pingeon <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roger_Pingeon>, 
winner of theill-fated 1967 Tour 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1967_Tour_de_France>, told L’Équipe: “We take 
products that dope the surrenal glands and we feel great and we can push a big 
gear, and we forget that the surrenal glands no longer work properly and the 
secondary effects are terrible.”Jacques Anquetil 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacques_Anquetil>, the man who said “everybody 
takes dope” and that he’d had so many injections “my arse looks like a sieve”, 
declared he had tried cortisone twice.Luis Ocaña 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luis_Oca%C3%B1a>, whose one positive test in 
1977 was for the stimulant pemoline, declared that cortisone abuse was “very 
serious”, saying: “It was 10 times better, a thousand times better to take 
amphetamines. It was infinitely less dangerous”.

Despite the warnings, cortisone refused to go away. In 1984, Dr Freddy Safar 
told Medicale magazine “I have 16-year-old kids who inject cortisone before a 
local race, all that to win a salad bowl.” Its use was alleged across a raft of 
sports – in gymnastics to hold back growth, in alpine skiing to combat fatigue 
and in athletics to speed healing. After a red-eyed, hyper-muscularBen Johnson 
decimated the world record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/25/ben-johnson-seoul-olympics-1988> 
at the 1988 Seoul Olympics and then tested positive for anabolic steroids, it 
was revealed he had alsoused cortisone to heal an old leg injury 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=4blLAQAAQBAJ&pg=PA214&dq=cortisone+ben+johnson&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjQ2prlz9XPAhVMORQKHbTSDfYQuwUIITAA#v=onepage&q=cortisone%20ben%20johnson&f=false>
.

But while athletes were prepared to play fast and loose with their long-term 
health – the known side effects of prolonged cortisone use include 
osteoporosis, cataracts, muscle weakness, mood swings and psychosis, diabetes, 
high blood pressure, ulcers, necrosis of the hip and thinning of the skin – 
cortisone use was not formally proscribed for competition until 1987, when it 
appeared on the IOC banned list under “substances subject to certain 
conditions”.

Before WADA became the umbrella organisation for anti-doping in 1999 and 
published their code and banned list, cycling had dealt with cortisone in its 
own way. The French “loi Herzog 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre_Dumas#The_Loi_Herzog>” of 1966 – a law 
that Tour de France doctorPierre Dumas 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre_Dumas> had been so instrumental in 
achieving after a string of doping near misses at the race – classified oral 
corticoids as “toxic” and banned their use in competition outright. But 
enforcement of the law – the first real attempt at anti-doping legislation in 
France – was negligible at best.

In 1968, the UCI placed “hormones and hormonoids” on the B list: to be used 
only with a doctor’s certificate. By 1970, the category was dropped – only 
detectable products would face a ban. In 1978, the UCI recognised 
corticosteroids as a distinct category and restricted their use for Olympic 
competition. The IOC did not agree, citing the impossibility of distinguishing 
between naturally produced and artificially introduced cortisone in laboratory 
testing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77871e1e531447963a1c1ad2990f915f7960e810%2F0_114_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cortisone%20in%20cycling%3A%20from%20the%20Nobel%20prize%20to%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20via%20Lance%20Armstrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cortisone%20in%20cycling%3A%20from%20the%20Nobel%20prize%20to%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20via%20Lance%20Armstrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F100-tours-100-tales%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcycling-history-cortisone-wiggins-lance-armstrong-nobel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77871e1e531447963a1c1ad2990f915f7960e810%2F0_114_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Lance Armstrong wearing the yellow jersey in 1999. Photograph: Joel Saget/EPA 
All that changed in 1999. At the start of the 86th Tour de France at the Puy 
de Fou, that extraordinary historical theme park in the west, Hein Verbruggen – 
who was head of the UCI at the time – announced at a press conference: “This 
year, the National Laboratory for the Detection of Doping will give the results 
of its research concerning the detection of natural and synthetic corticoids.”

Testers were now able to employ the technique of mass spectrometry on a 
rider’s urine sample and better analyse its chemical make-up. Armstrong was 
unlucky – caught out by the new test, he returned a positive for triamcinolone 
acetonide and then produced a hastily backdated doctor’s note to explain its 
presence. It was a cream for saddle sores, he argued, and the UCI, still 
smarting from the Festina affair, were happy to agree. In fact, Armstrong 
returned four positives in the race – but thanks to the opaque rules regarding 
cortisone use in force at the time, he avoided further sanction.

And there’s the rub. Since 1999, the use of glucocorticoids by oral, 
intravenous, intramuscular or rectal routes has been prohibited by the UCI, IOC 
and under French anti-doping law, prohibitions written into the WADA code. But 
the test cannot distinguish between administration routes, it simply knows that 
the substance is there. According to Dr Conor McGrane, fellow of the faculty of 
sports and exercise medicine at the Royal College of Surgeons, it is hard to 
differentiate synthetic corticoids from natural ones, “also cortisone levels 
fluctuate throughout the day as well – they’re lowest in the morning - so 
depending on what time you test you will get a different level.” This, McGrane 
believes, is one of the reasons that cortisone use has never been banned 
outright.

To regulate the way corticoids are administered, the simple doctor’s note has 
morphed into the Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE). In theUCI’s anti-doping 
regulations for 2012 
<http://d3epuodzu3wuis.cloudfront.net/UCI+Anti-Doping+Rules+2012-02-01.pdf>, 
articles 46.4 and 47 bear examination. Between them they state that, when a TUE 
is granted, there should be “no reasonable therapeutic alternative” to the 
proposed therapy and that it should not “produce enhancement of performance” 
beyond a “return to a state of normal health”.

Dr McGrane points out that the British Association of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology say injections should only be used as a last resort and even then 
the side effects may outweigh any benefits.NICE guidelines for rhinitis 
treatment <http://cks.nice.org.uk/allergic-rhinitis#!topicsummary> do not 
mention intramuscular corticoid therapy at all, instead advocating the use of 
orally or nasally administered cortisone.

The evidence on performance enhancement is anecdotal – a chorus of convicted 
dopers fromMillar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/david-millar-triamcinolone-drug-use-banned-wada-hacking-scandal>
 toJorg Jaksche 
<http://cyclingtips.com/2016/09/jaksche-on-skys-tue-controversy-we-used-the-same-excuse-in-my-era/>
 toMichael Rasmussen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-former-doctor-questions-use-banned-steroid>
 have all raised doubts about using such a powerful drug – but for clarity, it 
should be stated that triamcinolone,which was prescribed to Wiggins before 
three major competitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-former-doctor-questions-use-banned-steroid>
, is a performance-enhancing drug and sits on WADA’s banned list. Besides its 
therapeutic usage, it causes rapid weight loss with no loss of power, a sense 
of euphoria and effectively deadens pain. This is why its use is only 
acceptable, therapeutically, with a TUE. Yet the regulations seem purposely 
vague, allowing for considerable wiggle room and unscientific value judgements. 
Who can honestly say what is one rider’s “state of normal health” and another’s 
“enhancement of performance”? We have no way of evaluating either.


More troubling is whether the UCI followed its own rules concerning approval 
by theTUEC <http://www.uci.ch/clean-sport/therapeutic-use-exemptions/> – the 
three-person committee who are charged with signing off TUE applications. When 
I contacted the UCI in the wake of the controversy surrounding the approval of
an emergency TUE for Chris Froome 
<http://cyclingtips.com/2014/06/uci-reacts-to-tue-criticism-in-froome-case-promises-changes/>
 at the 2014 Tour of Romandie, I was told by a UCI spokesperson that “it was 
common practice that, for straightforward cases such as asthma, allergic 
reactions, post-infectious coughs, sinusitis, the UCI’s doctor was making the 
decision.” That doctor was Mario Zorzoli.

Followers of the darker back alleys of the sport will recognise Zorzoli’s name 
from the UCI-commissionedCIRC report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/100-tours-100-tales/2015/mar/13/circ-cycling-report-doping-depressing-ignored-women>
, which contained quotes from Rasmussen in which he alleged thatZorzoli and 
Leinders had colluded 
<http://www.cyclingnews.com/news/uci-suspends-zorzoli-from-anti-doping-work/> 
to ensure that the Rabobank team would sidestep all doping-related issues. 
Leinders was banned for life in 2015 but, after the UCI investigated Zorzoli 
and found no evidence to support the claims against him, he was reinstated to 
his position.

As for mismatching dates on Wiggins’ leaked TUEs, his biographer William 
Fotheringhamoffers an interesting explanation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-tues>, 
presenting a picture of a Team Sky greatly at odds with the methodical, 
micro-managed unit familiar from team PR. It raises some interesting questions 
about Sir David Brailsford – is he the meticulous Blofeld of international 
cycling as his detractors paint him, or a somewhat naive cycling aficionado so 
in love with the sport he is blind to its faults, unaware of Thévenet’s story 
and the long, murky past of cortisone abuse?


Dave Smith, the former Olympic coach who trained the French star Pascal Lino 
at the end of his career, is forthright in his condemnation of the current TUE 
system, calling the controversy around Wiggins “an embarrassing shit-show for 
Sky.” He questions whether Brailsford, who raced for a French amateur team in 
the 1980s and has lived through the Armstrong era, “is fit for the position he 
finds himself in if he lacks such insight.”

Bradley Wiggins operated within doping rules – but rules may be wrong | 
Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-doping-rules-fancy-bears-tues>
The answer may be moot, with news that UKAD are investigating Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-ukad-investigate-wrongdoing-allegations>
 for receiving medical products at the 2011 Critérium du Dauphiné – the same 
race where Dr Richard Freeman picked up the phone and wasgranted an emergency 
TUE for Rigoberto Uran 
<http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/all-aboard-the-magic-bus-3974> by Dr 
Zorzoli. There is a sense of panic and disarray around the Death Star, with the 
usually slick PR operation in crisis after being caught out in somefundamental 
mistruths 
<http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/racing/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-face-ukad-investigation-delivery-suspicious-package-288919>
, particularly their Brailsford mistakenly suggested that Simon Cope had 
travelled to La Toussuire to meet Emma Pooley, who had been hundreds of miles 
away racing in Spain. She called his claim “silly and careless”, though one 
wonders how her reputation might have suffered had she not had a cast-iron 
alibi.

Meanwhile, UCI president Brian Cookson, the man who oversaw the development of 
Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> as the head of British 
Cycling, has absolved the team of any wrongdoing. The UCI have promised a full 
review of the TUE process but, while the ethical grey area remains and the Venn 
diagram of cheat and treat remains unresolved, the TUE process will continue to 
be seen in the same light as the old 50% haematocrit level – as a licence to 
cheat by those who are happy to cross the line.

• This article is from 100 Tours 100 Tales 
<http://100tours100tales.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Suze Clemitson on Twitter <https://twitter.com/festinagirl>
 