
The mystery package at the centre of a UK Anti-Doping investigation contained 
the decongestant Fluimucil, Team Sky principal SirDave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> has revealed. Here is a 
short overview of the drug and its status in the UK:

• An over-the-counter decongestant described by makers as “an effective 
mucolytic which helps to get rid of sticky and thick mucus that is obstructing 
the airway, resulting in coughing”.

• Contains the active ingredient N-acetylcysteine, which is one of the 
precursors of Glutathione (GSH).

Mystery package contained Fluimucil, Brailsford tells select committee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/mystery-package-fluimucil-dave-brailsford-cycling>
• Makers describe GSH as the body’s “master antioxidant” which helps prevent 
damage to cells.

• Trade name Fluimucil typically refers to the oral version which comes as a 
lemon-flavoured effervescent tablet taken with water.

• According to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), 
Fluimucil is unlicensed in the UK, but there have been licensed acetylcysteine 
tablets since July 2016. It costs €8 in France.

• The regulatory body says an unlicensed medicine can be supplied in the UK as 
“specials”. These are products which have been specially manufactured for the 
treatment of an individual patient after being ordered by a doctor, dentist, 
nurse, independent prescriber, pharmacist independent prescriber or 
supplementary prescriber.

From Fancy Bears to Fluimucil: a timeline of events



15 September Sir Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome are among five British 
athletes whose medical records are leaked by cyber espionage group Fancy Bears, 
believed to be from Russia.

17 September Wiggins denies that the Belgian doctor Geert Leinders had any 
involvement in the decision to apply to use a banned steroid. Wiggins, who 
appeared on the BBC’s Andrew Marr show a few days later to protest his 
innocence, used triamcinolone, the same drug Lance Armstrong tested positive 
for at the 1999 Tour de France.

7 October UK Anti-Doping says it is examining an “allegation of wrongdoing 
within cycling”. The announcement comes as the Daily Mail alleges a package was 
delivered toTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> in France on 
12 June 2011, and it reports Ukad is looking at what that contained.

28 October Damian Collins, chairman of the culture, media and sport select 
committee, announcesBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> will be asked to explain 
the use of TUEs at a parliamentary hearing.
 