
British political attitudes to compulsory minimum wages have undergone an 
astounding transformation. A generation ago, any sort of minimum was viewed 
with suspicion not just by free-market economists, but also by many in the 
labour movement. The former argued that unaffordable wages would cost jobs. The 
latter knew that negotiation through collective bargaining had a better track 
record in improving pay for groups of workers than relying on public bodies to 
set minimum rates. Some trade unionists also feared a narrowing of 
differentials in a “levelling down”.

But by 1999, when the national minimum wage 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Minimum_Wage_Act_1998> (NMW) was 
introduced by the Labour government, the decline of unions and collective 
bargaining made this a valuable win. The Tories stillvigorously opposed it 
<http://www.politics.co.uk/reference/national-minimum-wage>, and arguments that 
it would cost jobs caused it to be set at a ridiculously cautious, low level, 
policed for any sign of economic unsoundness by the Low Pay Commission.

John McDonnell announces £10 an hour living wage plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/26/john-mcdonnell-10-an-hour-living-wage-plan-labour-conference>
Seventeen years on, and politicians are involved in an unexpected bidding war. 
First, Ed Miliband’s Labour party started to make a big increase in the NMW, to 
£8 by 2020, a key plank of the2015 election manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/13/labour-manifesto-pledges-to-boost-minimum-wage-and-cut-deficit>
. A few months later, George Osborne stole Labour’s clothes bypromising £9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/reality-check/2015/jul/08/george-osborne-budget-national-living-wage>
 and calling it the national living wage, even though it was not calculated in 
relation to living costs like the real, accredited voluntary living wage. Now 
Labour’s shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, is trying to steal them back by
promising a compulsory “real living wage” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/26/john-mcdonnell-10-an-hour-living-wage-plan-labour-conference>
 of at least £10, again by 2020.

So what is going on? One reason is that these wages promises seem so 
attractive to politicians in a time of austerity is that they can make people 
better off without obviously requiring extra public money (although how to fund 
additional taxpayer costs when care workers are paid properly remains an 
unanswered question). Crucially, theLow Pay Commission 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/low-pay-commission> has found that 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-minimum-wage-low-pay-commission-report-spring-2016>
 so far, raising the minimum wage has not cost jobs as the economists 
predicted. There’s a wealth of evidence from the US to confirm this.

But hang on just a second. Just because cautiously set minimum wages have been 
affordable so far, this doesn’t mean there’s scope for unlimited increases 
without some negative impacts.

The calculation of a living wage <http://www.livingwage.org.uk/calculation>, 
based onour research at Loughborough <http://www.lboro.ac.uk/research/crsp/mis/>
, helps both to put the national minimum in context and to show employers who 
can afford it what is an adequate benchmark. But making such a minimum 
compulsory, with no reference to the Low Pay Commission’s assessment of labour 
market impacts, could be seriously risky.

Imagine that a government went doggedly ahead with such a policy, drawing on 
moral arguments and ignoring any economic evidence. At some point, major 
layoffs by businesses citing excessive wage costs may ensue. Eventually, the 
link with living wages would then be modified or abandoned by the government, 
and the reputational damage to setting wage floors would affect such policies 
for years to come.

It may seem slightly perverse that I am therefore cautioning against 
recklessly imposing a standard that is the product of my own research about 
what people need to live on. But I would argue that there are two ways in which 
you can start to integrate the concepts of minimum wage and living wage that 
are not reckless.

Think only low–paid workers get the Sports Direct treatment? You’re wrong | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/low-paid-workers-sports-direct-university-staff-rights-mike-ashley>
The first is to integrate the aim of moving to a “real living wage” into 
policy, while retaining an emergency brake if job losses do result. This would 
involve retaining the Low Pay Commission and its focus on labour market effects 
of the NMW, but requiring it to move in steps towards the living wage unless 
clear evidence of harm was emerging.

The second way this could all be made more feasible is by committing to set 
policies for living wages and tax credits in a joined-up way. The living wage 
is set to be enough to cover minimum living costs once any top-ups such as tax 
credits are taken into account. In a scenario where a living wages becomes too 
high for the market to bear, more generous family benefits of this kind would 
help bring its level down. This involves working out a fair division between 
the state and employers in assuring family living standards.

McDonnell is therefore right that we can think of the role of the state in 
supporting living standards in a new way. The important point in doing so is to 
devise a sustainable strategy of combining wages with other incomes to ensure 
that workers have a decent living, and to be cautious of rash promises that 
will be hard to keep.
 