
Court of session (Outer House)
Argyllshire Weavers LTD. And Others v. A. Macaulay (Tweeds) LTD.
Before Lord Hunter

The name “Harris Tweed” can only be used to describe a hand-woven tweed wholly 
made, manufactured, and produced in the Outer Hebrides from 100 per cent pure 
Scottish virgin wool.

Lord Hunter gave judgment in favour of the defenders A. Macaulay (Tweeds) Ltd, 
the finishers of“Harris Tweed” 
<http://www.harristweedscotland.com/our-heritage/the-history-of-the-harris-tweed-trademark.php>
 and the Harris Tweed Association Ltd. in this action brought by the 
Argyllshire Weavers Ltd. and three other companies who produce, process and 
market, and dispose of cloth described by them as “Harris Tweed,” which is hand 
woven in the Outer Hebrides, but whose other processes have been performed in 
their mills on the Scottish mainland.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fharris-tweed-scotland-court-ruling-1964%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1905cee7dc7bde244efd2c5c2fb598c9866280c%2F0_1766_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Court%20ruling%20on%20Harris%20Tweed%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2018%20July%201964&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fharris-tweed-scotland-court-ruling-1964%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Court%20ruling%20on%20Harris%20Tweed%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2018%20July%201964&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fharris-tweed-scotland-court-ruling-1964%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1905cee7dc7bde244efd2c5c2fb598c9866280c%2F0_1766_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
 Traditional hand woven Harris Tweed. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian

The action was brought to obtain a declarator from the Court that the pursuers 
were entitled to produce, process, and market “Harris Tweed,” and market it as 
“Harris Tweed.” The pursuers further wanted the Court to grant aninterdict 
<http://legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/interdict> to prevent the Harris 
Tweed Association Ltd., which administers the“Orb” 
<http://www.scotlandnow.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/harris-tweeds-trademark-orb-symbol-7344605>
 certification mark, from asserting that tweed not wholly produced in the Outer 
Hebrides was not “Harris Tweed.”

The Court refused to grant either the declaration or the interdict, and 
assoiled the defenders from the conclusion of the action. The defenders in the 
action maintained that in order to be properly described as Harris Tweed, such 
cloth must have been made of pure virgin Scottish wool which had been dyed, 
spun, and finished in the islands of the Outer Hebrides and hand-woven by the 
islanders at their homes.

Trade mark
The language of the declarator and interdict sought by the pursuers was, in 
substance, borrowed from an interpretative clause contained in the memorandum 
of association of Independent Tweed Producers Ltd., a company incorporated in 
1958, and of which the pursuers were members. The defenders’ definition of 
Harris tweed was derived from a definition contained in amended regulations 
governing the use of what was referred to as the “Orb” trade mark, a 
certificate trade mark which was entered in the relative regulations “The 
Harris Tweed Trade Mark.”
 