
One of the makeup industry’s largest brands took a big step forward on 
Tuesday. CoverGirl announced its newest spokesperson is actually a cover boy.

The brand announced that James Charles, a 17-year-old makeup artist from New 
York, is its newest model. The news was fittingly announced via Instagram, 
where Charles regularly posts his makeup looks and has nearly half a million 
followers after creating an account last year.

Singer Katy Perry, another of the company’s brand ambassadors and current 
CoverGirl, was the first to break the news. “Just wrapped another great 
@COVERGIRL shoot. Honored to have the pleasure to announce the very first 
COVERBOY, James Charles!” she wroteon Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BLaV3V3Ay99/?taken-by=katyperry>.

CoverGirl’s Instagram posted a video of Charles speaking about his new role. 
“Today I’m living out one of my biggest dreams and I’m currently on set of my 
first ever TV commercial with CoverGirl,” he said with a huge smile. “That’s 
right, I am a new CoverGirl.”

Charles will be appearing in advertisements for CoverGirl’s newest mascara 
called So Lashy, according to theHuffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/cover-girl-boy-james-charles_us_57fbf36ee4b0b6a43034bd60?>
.

In a statement, the makeup brand said that all of their CoverGirl models are 
“role models and boundary-breakers, fearlessly expressing themselves, standing 
up for what they believe, and redefining what it means to be beautiful”.

“James Charles is no exception. One year ago, he boldly chose to launch his 
Instagram to the world, using transformative, dynamic makeup looks to showcase 
the many facets of his personality, serving as an inspiration to anyone who 
might have been afraid to do the same,” the statement said, according to the 
Huffington Post.

Singer and actor Zendaya became one of the brand’s spokesmodels earlier this 
year 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/zendaya-covergirl-announcement-january-2016>, 
joining the ranks of women such as Queen Latifah, Ellen DeGeneres, Rihanna and 
Taylor Swift.

Many on Twitter praised CoverGirl for choosing Charles to be the face of their 
brand and congratulated the young makeup artist using #CoverGirlJames.

Charles retweeted a few supportive messages himself. “Find a more iconic 
moment … I’ll wait,” musician and makeup artistTalia Mar wrote 
<https://twitter.com/TaliaMarMusic/status/785912891916611585> alongside 
Charles’s photo.
lara (@itismelara) 
hopefully all the young people who are afraid to wear makeup will gain 
confidence from this@jcharlesbeauty <https://twitter.com/jcharlesbeauty> 
@COVERGIRL <https://twitter.com/COVERGIRL> #COVERGIRLJames 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/COVERGIRLJames?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/itismelara/status/785951476824899585> October 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/itismelara/status/785951476824899585> alex (@dancemomalex) 
this is such a great day for men in the makeup industry, congratulations 
@jcharlesbeauty <https://twitter.com/jcharlesbeauty> #COVERGIRLJames 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/COVERGIRLJames?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/dancemomalex/status/785844954799144961> October 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/dancemomalex/status/785844954799144961> spooky b🌩 
(@glowwXo) 
The love and support for @jcharlesbeauty <https://twitter.com/jcharlesbeauty> 
#CovergirlJAMES <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CovergirlJAMES?src=hash> is 
amazing. Sometimes the world is a beautiful place
 <https://twitter.com/glowwXo/status/785913405257289728> October 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/glowwXo/status/785913405257289728> 
There were some negative responses to CoverGirl’s Instagram post, with a few 
people threatening to boycott the brand.

A photo of him retaking his senior portraits in his makeup racked up tens of 
thousands of likes and retweets last month.
James Charles (@jcharlesbeauty) 
So I retook my senior photos & brought my ring light with me so my highlight 
would be poppin. I love being extra 💀pic.twitter.com/7Qu1yu8U2P 
<https://t.co/7Qu1yu8U2P>
 <https://twitter.com/jcharlesbeauty/status/772883439733338112> September 5, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/jcharlesbeauty/status/772883439733338112> 
In an interview earlier this year, Charles told Marie Claire 
<http://www.marieclaire.com/beauty/a20197/the-beauty-boys-of-instagram/#> that 
makeup is an art form for him. He said it “took a lot of thorough 
conversations” with his parents to make them understand that it wasn’t an 
expression of his gender identity. “I’m still confident as a boy and I will 
always be a boy. I can be confident with bare skinand with a full face,” he 
told the magazine.

Charles expressed his excitement for his new gig on his Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BLbIGxUAi71/?taken-by=jcharlesbeauty> and Twitter.

“It’s only 12 and today has already been so crazy. I am so thankful/excited 
for everything in store and the support has been amazing,” hetweeted 
<https://twitter.com/jcharlesbeauty/status/785926078237847552>.
 