
The building that houses Agora, tucked away in a small side-street in 
residential Neukölln, in an old lock-making factory, is easy to ignore.

Outside a handful of people in their late twenties and early thirties are 
milling about, smoking, working on their MacBook Airs, chatting. On the short 
walk from the front gate to the front door snippets of three different 
conversations in English can be heard. Inside is a sea of laptops on desks, 
with workers fuelled by cortados, flat whites and a daily changing menu, 
written in English; a woman with a strong German accent orders a coffee in 
English, because the woman behind the counter doesn’t speak German.

Dani Berg manages Agora’s “food platform” (which includes pop-ups and 
“performance series”), as well as the cafe. She moved to Berlin just over a 
year ago, after spending a decade inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

“The first time I visited Berlin was eight years ago. People told us not to 
come to the district I now work and live in, Neukölln, as it was considered to 
be dangerous, and it wasn’t even in the guidebooks or anything. Now it’s filled 
with tourists and expats.”

Her decision to leave London was mainly a financial one. “I was working seven 
days a week and paying £800 for a shared flat in Lewisham. We kept moving 
further and further into south-east London, until I felt I needed to leave 
entirely. I’m part of a big exodus; I know many people who have moved from east 
London to south-east London and then to Berlin. The New Cross to Neukölln 
Express.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438431744343%2F444d7813-2384-4a3b-b4d3-6d60b488ecda-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creative%20young%20Brits%20are%20quitting%20London%20for%20affordable%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creative%20young%20Brits%20are%20quitting%20London%20for%20affordable%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438431744343%2F444d7813-2384-4a3b-b4d3-6d60b488ecda-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Dani Berg, one of Berlin’s British expatriate community. Photograph: Johanna 
Kamradt 
Agora is one of many “co-working hubs” that have sprung up in the city, 
created for the ever-growing startup community (by 2020 an estimated 100,000 
jobs are set to be generated by Berlin startups). Agora is one of many expat 
bubbles, catering to the ever-growing number of digital nomads.

Berg is well aware that she and the people surrounding her are contributing to 
the change that Berlin is currently undergoing, something that some Berliners 
aren’t too pleased about.

“Occasionally, you get, ‘What are you doing here, you’re ruining everything,’ 
when people overhear you speaking English. I do feel bad about it, all the 
time; I’m part of the problem, doing to Berlin what forced me out of London. 
But not bad enough to leave. I didn’t have that much time to ‘be’ much of 
anything in London. I was just exhausted all the time. You go home to your 
expensive flat, but end up just sleeping in it, and then go back to work. 
There’s just more time here.”

Berliners are noticing how rapidly the city is growing and changing, and how 
much rents are increasing (despite a recent price cap). Berlin is now the third 
most visited city inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
having surpassed Rome, with only London and Paris ahead of it; many of these 
visitors are deciding to stay for good. With 45,000 new inhabitants in 2014, 
Berlin’s population is now more than 3.5 million, marking the 10th year in a 
row that the city has grown by a similar amount. In 2013 an estimated 10,000 
Brits were living in Berlin – this number increased by 35% within a year, 
rising to just under 13,500 as of November 2014.

Scott van Looy, a technical architect from the East End of London, moved to 
Berlin in 2012 to work for a British company. “[In Berlin] there’s a sense of 
people doing things for themselves, for all the right reasons. In London, it’s 
office work, bars, sleep, repeat.”

In the last three years, however, he too has noticed the city changing, with 
chain shops edging out small independent stores, and it becoming easier to 
navigate life in the city without speaking German. “The problem is this: people 
like myself are moving over from London, and snatching up flats swiftly after 
seeing what they think is a bargain. But in reality what we perceive to be a 
bargain is still an inflated price for locals, so prices are being driven up.”

According to Numbeo <http://www.numbeo.com/cost-of-living/>, the online 
cost-of-living database, you can maintain the same standard of living in Berlin 
(£2,177) for half the price of London (£4,200), assuming that you rent in both 
cities. The consumer prices in Berlin are 30% less, and the rental costs are 
almost 70% lower than in the UK’s capital.

A Berlin colleague of Van Looy, art director Jonathan Stuart, moved from 
Dalston to Hackney, Clapton and then Forest Gate in the space of 12 years. He 
concedes: “I don’t think I’m going to go back to London. It’s so cheap to live 
here. It feels like the parents have gone away, and left the kids to do what 
they want. It’s perfect for young, creative people. London has a real buzz to 
it, but when you live there that buzz can turn into pressure.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438431879815%2F42fdb63f-78b9-46ff-8801-12b78b0f653d-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creative%20young%20Brits%20are%20quitting%20London%20for%20affordable%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creative%20young%20Brits%20are%20quitting%20London%20for%20affordable%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438431879815%2F42fdb63f-78b9-46ff-8801-12b78b0f653d-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Kavita Meelu: finding room to breathe in Berlin. Photograph: Johanna Kamradt 
This lack of pressure is what convinced Kavita Meelu to stay in Berlin, too: 
after initially planning to only stick around for a six-month jaunt, she’s now 
been here for more than six years. “I moved here thinking it would be a nice 
little break – London was very much the centre of the universe for me and I had 
no interest in leaving.”

After working in politics and advertising in London, she is now a successful 
street-food entrepreneur, having founded and developed some of Berlin’s most 
frequented culinary events, including Street Food Thursday andBurgers & Hip Hop 
<http://burgersandhiphop.com/>. “I always had a dream that I wanted to do 
something with food, and in London there are just too many restrictions, both 
financial and social. The idea of failure exists much more in London than it 
does here.”

Meelu and her fiance now rent a 110 sq metres apartment in a sought-after 
district that costs the same amount as her 9 sq metres room in Notting Hill 
once did. She once calculated that, if she were to move back to London and have 
the same quality of life as she does in Berlin, she would need to earn £230,000.

“Capitalistic pressures are an issue in London, and that changes your quality 
of life. I didn’t realise that money and status were an important thing for me 
until I moved here. You just become a part of that system – you’re not even 
aware of it. In London, within 30 seconds of meeting someone, you ask them what 
they do, because you think their job is going to define them and you’ll be able 
to categorise them. After some years here, I’ve learnt that you just don’t ask 
people that, because anybody could be anything, but it doesn’t tell you who 
they are.”

Michael Salu moved to Berlin in part to be able to wear many professional (and 
creative) hats. After working as the artistic director atGranta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/granta> in London, he now works for himself, 
running a creative consultancy, an event series, writing and working on films. 
He moved to the city six months ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438431980779%2F03e610b5-b072-40be-ab6c-9ecb1f63f66b-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creative%20young%20Brits%20are%20quitting%20London%20for%20affordable%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creative%20young%20Brits%20are%20quitting%20London%20for%20affordable%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fcreative-young-brits-quit-london-affordable-berlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438431980779%2F03e610b5-b072-40be-ab6c-9ecb1f63f66b-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Michael Salu: London will become ‘a ghost town’. Photograph: Johanna Kamradt 
“Coming to Berlin has given me room to breathe. When you work for yourself in 
London, it’s very stressful. It takes away your ability to be creative.” In the 
last two years, London had become unrecognisable to him. Community spirits 
vanished, neighbours were replaced by out-of-towners who made him feel 
unwelcome in his own neighbourhood, people on the street stopped making eye 
contact.

“I always thought I would be the last person to leave London. But the city 
started to feel very one-dimensional. I was watching a cultural vacuum – my 
environment was disappearing in front of me. The variety of the London I grew 
up with and loved doesn’t exist any more. The city has gorged on itself; people 
are being sold a lifestyle that they’ll never be able to afford. I think it 
might end up as a very expensive ghost town.”

He, too, feels that Berlin will be changing rapidly in the near future, going 
in the direction that Dalston and Hackney were heading towards over a decade 
ago. “We’re taking advantage of Berlin’s economic status. Since the wall came 
down, it’s been trying to regenerate itself, and a lot of people take advantage 
of that, myself included.”

The last mayoral election was a huge factor in Salu’s decision to leave 
London: “I don’t feel a part of the country I grew up in. It’s a lot more than 
just rent prices. I’d rather be an alien in another country than be an alien at 
home.”
 