
The cricket commentator Mark Nicholas is recovering at home after being taken 
to hospital suffering abdominal pains during theBoxing Day Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/26/australia-v-pakistan-boxing-day-test-day-one-live>
 match between Australia and Pakistan in Melbourne.

A Nine spokesperson said Nicholas was discharged from hospital on Monday night.

“While he wants to return to the Nine Commentary team [on Tuesday], his bosses 
have insisted on a day’s rest.

“He has again thanked everyone for their good wishes and support.”

Nicholas, 59, was taken from the Melbourne Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Ground by paramedics shortly after 
the lunch break on Boxing Day while working for Channel Nine’s commentary team. 
He was not on air at the time.

A Channel Nine <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel-nine> spokeswoman 
said Nicholas had been experiencing abdominal pains.
Dale Cox (@dcox23) 
@wwos <https://twitter.com/wwos> Is Mark Nicholas okay ?? #paramedicrequired 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/paramedicrequired?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/dcox23/status/813230672147935232> December 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/dcox23/status/813230672147935232> 
“During a break today, Mark Nicholas had some abdominal pains,” she said. “He 
has gone to hospital for appropriate checks.”

A fellow commentator, Michael Slater, confirmed the news during the tea break 
without adding further details of Nicholas’s condition.


“Normally Mark Nicholas would be sitting here at this time of the day,” Slater 
said. “Just to let you know, he’s fallen ill with abdominal pains and he’s been 
taken to hospital for testing. I’m aware it is out there online, so we will 
keep you up-to-date with the latest news when we receive it. So we wish him 
well.”
Wide World of Sports (@wwos) 
"We wish him well." - Michael Slater on Mark Nicholas. #9WWOS 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/9WWOS?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/ooWi3jXST0 
<https://t.co/ooWi3jXST0>
 <https://twitter.com/wwos/status/813236458018328576> December 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/wwos/status/813236458018328576> 
The Channel Nine spokeswoman issued an update about 6.30pm on Monday, saying 
Nicholas was recovering well. No further details were provided.

“Mark is doing much better this evening and is in good spirits,” she said. “He 
wants to thank the MCG staff for all of their help, and the Channel Nine 
viewers and cricket community for their good wishes.”

News Corp reported 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/sport/cricket/channel-9-commentator-mark-nicholas-taken-to-hospital-from-the-mcg-during-boxing-day-test/news-story/f932dd45b1bb81ff4e673536c895f6ee>
 that Nicholas had been sweating profusely and visibly struggling, and was 
taken from Channel Nine’s broadcasting box on a stretcher.
 