
Last year Tony Perry made mice that would have been brown-furred grow up white 
instead <http://www.nature.com/srep/2014/141223/srep07621/full/srep07621.html>. 
That Perry, a molecular embryologist at the University of Bath, tweaked their 
coat colour isn’t new – scientists have been making so-called knock-out mice, 
in which certain genes are disabled, since the technique was invented in 1989. 
It is a long and cumbersome procedure that involves combining pieces of DNA in 
embryonic stem cells and mouse breeding.

But Perry, who published his study in December, didn’t use this method. 
Instead he used a new genome-editing technology that has been taking the 
scientific world by storm since it wasfirst developed from the bacterial immune 
system <http://www.sciencemag.org/content/337/6096/816.abstract> in 2012, and 
shown towork in human cells <http://www.sciencemag.org/content/339/6121/768> in 
2013.

The powerful tool, known as Crispr, allows the precise and easy manipulation 
of the DNA in the nucleus of any cell. Make the manipulations in sperm, egg or 
a one-cell embryo, which is just about to start replicating its DNA, and they 
can become permanently sealed in the so-called germ line, to be inherited by 
future generations. Using the procedure on the germ line, Perry inactivated a 
key gene for mouse coat colour.

But Perry’s work added a unique flourish. He did the editing not in a one-cell 
mouse embryo – which is how most animal germ-line editing by Crispr has been 
done to date – but earlier, during the process of fertilisation, by injecting 
the Crispr components and the mouse sperm into the mouse egg at the same time. 
It is the same technique – intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) – widely 
used in IVF. And it worked. “This or analogous approaches may one day enable 
human genome targeting or editing during very early development,” notes the 
paper published in the journalScientific Reports. If human germ-line editing 
were ever to be used clinically, incorporating Crispr into the ICSI phase of 
IVF is how it might be.

That prospect tantalises Perry because it raises the possibility of generating 
offspring that carry either no risk or a reduced risk of some genetic diseases. 
Perry suggests it might one day be possible to correct a harmful mutation in 
the BRCA1 gene and stop someone inheriting that predisposition to breast 
cancer. “You will be able to eradicate it from your descendants,” he says.

Crispr can be thought of as a pair of molecular scissors guided by a satnav. 
The scissors are a DNA-cutting enzyme; they snip at a precise point in the 
cell’s DNA specified by researchers using a customised guide molecule, a single 
short piece of RNA, DNA’s chemical cousin. The DNA-cutting enzyme is known as 
Cas9, hence the technique is often written Crispr-Cas9.

Since the 70s there has been a consensus that human germ-line modification is 
off bounds

The genome editing occurs as the cell rushes to naturally repair the break 
made by the scissors. The cell’s repair often isn’t exact enough for the gene 
that has been cut to keep working and the gene is effectively knocked out or 
turned off. More complex to accomplish, though more precise, genes can also be 
corrected or whole new genes added if a new piece of DNA is included along with 
the Crispr machinery. It becomes patched in during the cellular repair process.

Germ-line genome editing is highly controversial, even for medical purposes. 
Since the development of genetic engineering in the 70s there has been a 
“fairly undisturbed” consensus that human germ-line genetic modification – with 
the worries it raises about “playing God” and “designer babies” – is off 
bounds, says Peter Mills, assistant director of the UK Nuffield Council on 
Bioethics and the council’s lead on genome editing. According to Unesco’s
Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights, 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/social-and-human-sciences/themes/bioethics/human-genome-and-human-rights/>
germ-line interventions “could be contrary to human dignity”.

The UK government’s decision this February to allow mitochondrial substitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/feb/03/william-hagues-speech-on-english-votes-for-english-laws-evel-politics-live-blog#block-54d0ecade4b0e18c5df0270f>
 in the clinic to prevent embryos developing with mitochondrial diseases, a 
form of germ-line therapy, was premised on the basis that the small amount of 
DNA mitochondria contain is found outside the cell nucleus. There is no 
modification to the DNA in the nucleus, the real stuff that makes us who we are.
 Crispr co-developer Jennifer Doudna. 
But there has also never before been a tool shown to be sufficiently effective 
or reliable enough to seriously consider conducting human genetic engineering. 
Other precise genome editing tools – Zinc Finger Nuclease (ZFN) and Talen – 
have been around longer but Crispr is much easier and cheaper to use, 
accelerating the science and potential applications. “The revolution is in 
access,” says Dana Carroll, a biochemist at the University of Utah who works on 
improving the tools. “The technology is developing very rapidly.”

The potential for modifying humans weighs on the minds of some scientists, 
particularly since thepublication last month of a Chinese paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/23/scientists-genetically-modify-human-embryos-in-controversial-world-first>
 which reported using Crispr to genome-edit human embryos for the first time. 
(The aim was to correct the gene defect that causes the blood disorder 
beta-thalassaemia and non-viable embryos, which couldn’t have resulted in live 
birth, were used.)

In an opinion piece published in the journal Science in March, a group of US 
scientists led by the Crispr co-developer Jennifer Doudna from the University 
of California, Berkeleyrecommended steps be taken to “strongly discourage”  
<http://www.sciencemag.org/content/348/6230/36.summary>any attempts at 
germ-line modification therapy that would produce genome-edited humans while 
the social and ethical implications are considered. They are calling for an 
international meeting to consider the appropriate way forward for use. “Lets do 
this now before the technology is applied in ways which people might feel very 
uncomfortable about,” says Doudna.

A second group writing in the journal Nature went further, suggesting a 
moratorium on research 
<http://www.nature.com/news/don-t-edit-the-human-germ-line-1.17111> where human 
germ cells are edited for fear of where it might lead. The backlash should a 
modified human be born could, they warn, harm work to develop genome-editing 
therapy for adults and children where the modifications aren’t passed on. 
“People might not prise apart the nuances,” says Edward Lanphier, the president 
and CEO of California-based Sangamo Biosciences, which is pursuing that work.

Indeed, using Crispr in non-reproductive cells – somatic cells – could cure 
many diseases. Researchers believe it is likely to make it to the clinic 
sooner. Those modifications can be permanent to the individual’s cells in so 
far as those cells multiply or remain alive a long time, but they aren’t 
inherited by future generations. “It has none of the ethical burdens these 
steps towards germ-line modification would be shouldering,” says Dana Carroll.

The downside is that using Crispr on somatic cells is far more complex: humans 
have trillions of cells and many different cell types. The genome-tinkering 
machinery has to be delivered to a sufficient proportion of the specific 
problem cells to bring about a therapeutic effect.

Thus far, Crispr is too new for any somatic cell editing therapy to have 
entered clinical trials. But Jennifer Doudna expects them to begin within a few 
years. “If they go well, I think we could see approved therapeutics within a 
decade,” she says. In the lab meanwhile, using both human somatic cell cultures 
and animal models, researchers are experimenting with treating diseases 
including sickle cell anaemia, severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), 
beta-thalassemia, haemophilia, muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis. (The 
approach for these single gene disorders is based on adding a new piece of DNA 
to correct the faulty gene.)

New companies – Editas Medicine, Crispr Therapeutics and Intellia Therapeutics 
– have sprung up, licensing Crispr technology to develop somatic cell editing 
for the clinic. None have yet announced which diseases they are pursuingand a 
legal battle 
<http://www.technologyreview.com/news/536736/crispr-patent-fight-now-a-winner-take-all-match/>
 around who exactly owns the rights to Crispr technology rages. But Intellia 
has a deal with pharmaceutical giant Novartis to focus on cancer and genetic 
disorders arising in blood cells.

Somatic cell editing is a sort of upgrade to an earlier technique for curing 
single gene disorders known as gene therapy. That was first tried in the 90s 
and hit setbacks. But in 2012 the first gene therapy in Europe – to treat a 
disease in which a person lacks a protein needed to break down fat molecules – 
was approved.

Gene therapy introduces a whole new working copy of a gene, which randomly 
incorporates into the genome to do the job of the faulty one. Genome editing is 
different in that it precisely targets the existing faulty gene for knock-out 
or correction. That means the gene’s setting doesn’t change, so doctors neither 
have to worry that it will incorporate somewhere that causes other genes to be 
inadvertently turned on, nor that the gene won’t work as normal, for example by 
not producing the right amount of protein.

“You are keeping everything natural,” says Jennifer Puck, a SCID expert at the 
University of California, San Francisco, who is exploring the potential of 
Crispr to treat the disease. Notoriously, in an early trial to treat SCID using 
gene therapy, the replacement gene incorporated in an unfortunate location and 
caused leukaemia in five of the 20 patients treated. That problem has been 
fixed, but the technique can still be tricky to get right.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fcrispr-genome-editing-dna-upgrade-technology-genetic-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431013611720%2Fa87cd79d-c8b4-4492-92c6-ff78a386dd14-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crispr%3A%20is%20it%20a%20good%20idea%20to%20%E2%80%98upgrade%E2%80%99%20our%20DNA%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fcrispr-genome-editing-dna-upgrade-technology-genetic-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crispr%3A%20is%20it%20a%20good%20idea%20to%20%E2%80%98upgrade%E2%80%99%20our%20DNA%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fcrispr-genome-editing-dna-upgrade-technology-genetic-disease%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431013611720%2Fa87cd79d-c8b4-4492-92c6-ff78a386dd14-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Human embryos in the lab. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
One challenge shared by Crispr and gene therapy is how to get the gene – or 
Crispr machinery – inside cells. Methods being adopted from gene therapy to 
encapsulate and deliver it range from modified viruses to nanoparticles. All 
are still far from perfect. “People are working hard on delivery and it is 
problem that will be solved,” says Doudna. “But it is not solved today.”

The Guardian view on the latest genetic engineering techniques: we need to 
talk about this, Professor | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/09/guardian-view-genetic-engineering-crispr-cas>
Delivery is made easier, however, when the cells can be removed for editing. 
Once outside the body they can be purified, expanded in culture, and checked 
via genome sequencing to ensure the editing has been successful. That means the 
early clinical impact of Crispr is likely to be in treating genetic diseases 
arising in blood cells such as sickle cell anaemia, SCID and beta thalassemia. 
Doctors are adept at extracting blood and bone marrow (rich in blood stem 
cells, which give rise to all other blood cells), isolating particular cells 
for manipulation, and then re-implanting them. Diseases where the cells can’t 
be removed for treatment will require more work. That includes haemophilia, 
muscular dystrophy, and cystic fibrosis, which predominantly arise in the 
liver, muscle and lung cells respectively.

A sense of what Crispr’s future might hold can be seen in the progress of 
Sangamo Biosciences, which is clinically trialling a somatic cell editing 
therapy for HIV with efficacy data anticipated by the end of the year. “The 
goal is to have a functional cure for HIV,” says Edward Lanphier. That would 
let a patient stop taking antiretroviral drugs for a number of years.

The trial uses the older ZFN technology, for which the company holds the 
intellectual property rights. The aim, based on replicating a rare naturally 
occurring mutation that makes some people resistant to HIV infection, is to 
turn off the CCR5 gene in patients’ T-cells – a type of white blood cell 
important in the immune system. That gene produces a protein that HIV uses to 
enter those cells and cause infection.

The ZFNs are put to work outside the body on cells extracted from the 
patient’s blood. The edited cells are returned in the hope of creating a 
population of HIV-resistant T-cells that can fight the virus. Just like with 
Crispr, the custom-designed ZFNs, which come as a pair where a protein 
structure containing zinc molecules does the guiding, cut the DNA in a precise 
location – the CCR5 gene – before the cell’s natural but inaccurate repair 
process kicks in, knocking out the gene. “It really illustrates the power of 
the approach for treating disease,” says Jennifer Doudna.

Meanwhile, whether editing the human germ line has any clinical future will 
depend on being able to do it accurately and safely enough, and also whether 
society finds it acceptable. The conclusion of the Chinese study was that there 
are still significant technical challenges to be solved before clinical 
application of Crispr for editing embryos is possible. Problems include 
“off-target” effects, where the DNA is also snipped at places it shouldn’t be, 
and “genetic mosaicism”, where the result has a mixture of modified and 
unmodified cells. Nonetheless, many believe things will improve with more 
research. It is not safe enough yet, says Robin Lovell-Badge, a researcher who 
studies germ-cell biology at the Francis Crick Institute, but “it is going to 
get there fairly soon”.

What specific therapeutic uses might be envisaged? For Lovell-Badge there 
aren’t many. Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) – embryo screening to 
select those that don’t carry certain disease risks – is already in use for a 
long list of genetic conditions including the BRCA1 gene, he points out. But he 
concedes Crispr could have a place when multiple embryos are affected, such as 
in the case of men who are infertile or sub-fertile because of mutations on the 
Y chromosome. Any male embryos (produced by IVF) will also have that same 
mutation.

However, others see wider use. Unlike embryo screening, germ-line editing 
would not require multiple embryos, which some couples don’t have. It could 
deal easily with multiple genetic conditions where finding unaffected embryos 
is a challenge. And it wouldn’t involve discarding any embryos, which some 
people feel uncomfortable with. “There is an argument for genome engineering in 
embryos to repair genes that clearly predispose to disease,” says Perry.

Some may think it important to use Crispr to make better humans, not just 
stamp out disease

Some people may even think it important to use Crispr to make better humans, 
not just preemptively stamp out disease. There are gene variants which confer 
extra-strong bones, low Alzheimer’s risk or viral resistance such as to HIV. 
Beyond that, what about enhancements such as living longer, improved cognition, 
or altered physical attributes? “I am sure there are broader human 
characteristics that people would like to be able to modulate,” says Dana 
Carroll. But he adds that presently those kind of multi-genetic traits would be 
difficult to edit in because we don’t fully understand their basis, let alone 
what unintended consequences might result.

The UK has a cautiously progressive regulatory system that would apply to 
developments in human germ-line editing. Any research on germ cells needs to be 
licensed by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA). 
Parliamentary approval would be needed for therapeutic use. According to a list 
of research projects using human embryos currently being carried out in the UK 
provided by the HFEA, none appear to involve genome editing. But Lovell-Badge 
says he is aware of “several groups” in Britain interested in using it to 
“answer some basic research questions”. (Meanwhile the main public funder of 
research in the US - the NIH - saysit won’t fund any use of gene-editing 
technologies 
<http://www.nih.gov/about/director/04292015_statement_gene_editing_technologies.htm>
 in human embryos.)

It is possible the consensus against modifying humans could change, says Peter 
Mills, adding that the Nuffield Council is planning a report to consider the 
ethics of human germ-line editing. There was a new social understanding reached 
in the UK with the mitochondrial decision; a move from simply selecting human 
embryos to modifying them. “You can treat [nuclear DNA] as a limit that you 
don’t cross or a threshold that you very carefully step over,” he says.

If it can be done accurately and safely, human germ-line therapy is a 
possibility Doudna says she is certainly open to. “People get comfortable with 
technologies,” she says, citing how over time society has become relaxed about 
the use of IVF. “I suspect this will be the same.”
 