
Under a crescent moon and starry sky, a crowd dance to the ambient electro 
beats of Floating Points in a stone amphitheatre – it’s an idyllic setting for 
a gig. I’m on Obonjan, a previously uninhabited Croatian island that aims to be 
both a summer-long festival and a wellness retreat – and the atmosphere is 
upbeat yet relaxed.

Things hadn’t started quite so well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/obonjan-organisers-delay-opening-croatian-island-festival>
. Obonjan was slated on social media when it failed to open for its six-week 
season on 28 July, citing water and electricity supply issues. People had to 
abandon holiday plans at short notice. Refunds and rebookings were made, but 
the burning question when I join the island’s first guests is whether this 
ambitious project is now ready to party.

“It was devastating to let people down and not open after working on this for 
four years, but we’d no choice,” says co-founder Dan Blackledge, the man behind 
Croatia’s Unknown and Hideout festivals, who blames contractors for last-minute 
failures. It is a shame, because a lot of passion, creativity and hard graft 
has obviously gone into this truly exciting idea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe286ab2caeff5f48a674ec1d5205546b0c761c42%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Croatia%E2%80%99s%20summer-long%20Obonjan%20festival%20finally%20gets%20going&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Croatia%E2%80%99s%20summer-long%20Obonjan%20festival%20finally%20gets%20going&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe286ab2caeff5f48a674ec1d5205546b0c761c42%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A DJ playing at one of the bars. 
It’s a 40-minute boat trip (20 by speedboat) from Šibenik, 80km from Split, to 
Obonjan, past uninhabited isles and an abandoned island fort. A DJ is playing 
on the deck of Drift bar as we arrive and people are swimming in the 
translucent Adriatic and lounging on oversized beanbags sipping cocktails. So 
far, so cool.

Accommodation for up to 445 guests is in bell tents or safari-tent style 
“lodges” sleeping from one to four, scattered among the pretty pine forests 
(you can’t bring your own tent). All have wooden decks, air-conditioning, 
electricity, proper beds, towels and sheets. I’m impressed with our lodge, 
which has a fridge and en suite too. It’s all very tasteful with thoughtful 
touches – deckchairs on the terrace, gorgeous rugs and bed covers, hampers with 
cutlery and crockery, even hanging baskets with plants.

Finishing touches are still being added (the Zen Den’s healthfood cafe has 
opened since I left) and there’s landscaping to be done, but it already feels 
magical. There are hidden coves to discover, paths winding through the woods, 
chirping cicadas a constant soundtrack. Eden Labs (the international creative 
partner of the Eden Project) advised on all sustainable development, helping to 
keep the environmental impact to a minimum – and the sense of untamed nature is 
tangible. We explore the 136-acre island, struck by how wild it all still 
feels, and then head to The Kitchen, the main restaurant and bar by the vast 
saltwater pool for dinner. The vibe is relaxed Ibiza, the view amazing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c6e807e84e1731c462c4219fc5ffd64ba491d46%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Croatia%E2%80%99s%20summer-long%20Obonjan%20festival%20finally%20gets%20going&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Croatia%E2%80%99s%20summer-long%20Obonjan%20festival%20finally%20gets%20going&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c6e807e84e1731c462c4219fc5ffd64ba491d46%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Bell tent accommodation. 
It’s here, though, that teething problems start to show, with long waits and 
chaotic service, despite the lovely staff. The food, however, is delicious and 
faultless: spicy tempura shrimp (£5), dorado with red pepper (£14).

Wellbeing is central to Obonjan’s philosophy and I’m up early for a yoga class 
on a shaded platform. There are several classes a day, led by inspiring 
teachers, and an ever-changing programme of holistic workshops – from 
“manifesting magic” to group hypnosis (all activities are included in the 
price, except spa treatments and excursions). Besides satisfying dedicated 
yogis, the aim is to appeal to newbies who might want to dip in between gigs 
too. “My sister’s the festival lover, but I’m here for the yoga,” said Sabrina, 
a headteacher from Shrewsbury. “The combination works really well for us.”

For party action, the Forest Bar is a fun spot, with DJs playing under 
illuminated trees in front of a giant mural. It seems less messy than many 
festivals (maybe due, in part, to the small scale) with a grown-up vibe, the 
international crowd mostly mid-twenties up (under-18s aren’t allowed). “I think 
we’ll attract people who’ve done their hardcore partying,” says Dan. “You can 
have fun but chill too, and you don’t need to cram it into three days.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536f2594fab3486a505853260ae8dbb2069c3648%2F0_181_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Croatia%E2%80%99s%20summer-long%20Obonjan%20festival%20finally%20gets%20going&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Croatia%E2%80%99s%20summer-long%20Obonjan%20festival%20finally%20gets%20going&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536f2594fab3486a505853260ae8dbb2069c3648%2F0_181_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A yoga session. 
Comedian Sara Pascoe and spoken-word artist Kate Tempest are on the bill later 
in the week, Gilles Peterson is among dozens of visiting DJs, and talks, film 
screenings, kayaking, stand-up paddle boarding and sailing trips start soon. 
Visiting artists will be leaving their mark on the island, too, with paintings, 
sculptures and installations popping up over the summer. Plans for the future 
are yet more ambitious: treehouses (capacity will grow to 800), family weeks, 
an eco research centre with Eden Labs, marine conservation projects, banquets – 
and opening will be extended, from June to October. “There are so many big 
ideas and great people involved. We want Obonjan to be a platform for 
connection and community,” says Dan.

But the major problem during my trip is the food – not quality but quantity. 
Bok, the lovely waterfront restaurant serving delicious small plates, can’t 
cope with demand one lunchtime and closes the kitchen, and there’s confusion 
over what’s open when. The Pavilion pizza takeaway is a back-up, and the Corner 
Shop has basic supplies, but some guests take trips to the mainland to stock 
up, and others complain of high prices.

True, an unexpected storm contributed to the chaos, and more staff start this 
week, but things need to improve rapidly. If you’re thinking of visiting, 
perhaps it’s safest to wait until late in the season or even next year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f27580aeb08321e07932d2aeb66168b2afd00c3%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Croatia%E2%80%99s%20summer-long%20Obonjan%20festival%20finally%20gets%20going&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Croatia%E2%80%99s%20summer-long%20Obonjan%20festival%20finally%20gets%20going&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcroatia-obonjan-island-summer-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f27580aeb08321e07932d2aeb66168b2afd00c3%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A tarot card reader ‘manifesting magic’. 
“Things did go wrong, particularly on the food side, but you forgave it 
because it was the first week and overall it’s amazing,” said Grant from 
Melbourne. “It’s sure to be a big hit – we loved the mix of yoga and partying. 
I’m hoping to come back for my 40th.”

• The trip was provided by Obonjan (obonjan-island.com 
<http://www.obonjan-island.com/>), which runs until 7 September. Bell tents 
from €72pppn and lodges from €97pp; transfers €14 each way. For further 
information visitcroatia.hr <http://www.croatia.hr/>
 