
“Sounds like hell,” said my friend when I told her my plan.

These words ring around my head as I drive past a sign telling me I’m about to 
cross the Acheron – in Greek mythology, the river of pain which dead souls had 
to cross to reach the underworld. Its namesake in rural Victoria is merely the 
river you must cross to reach the Australian Alps, but it still makes me wonder 
what I’ve let myself in for.

I’ve decided to take part in the 7 Peaks Ride 
<http://www.7peaks.com.au/about-the-7-peaks/> – seven climbs up some of 
Australia’s highest and steepest mountains spread across the Alpine national 
park. The challenge is open from October to March each year, and riders can 
complete the climbs in any order over that period. Once you’ve climbed all 
seven, you’re eligible to buy a commemorative jersey. Of course, the real 
reward – and the reason I’m doing this – is the warm glow of achievement. A few 
tough people each year also cycle between the climbs, but I am nowhere near 
brave enough for that, so I have a hire car.

I’ve decided to do it over seven days in February, in what happens to be the 
hottest week of the year. By the time I start, I can’t really remember what 
motivated me to sign up. I’ve enjoyed riding up mountains in the past while 
touring, but always with the motivation of reaching whatever’s on the other 
side – never just for the sake of it. I’m pretty unfit, have a heavy bike and 
have done no training whatsoever, so am rather daunted by what lies ahead.

Marysville, my first destination, is a two-hour drive from Melbourne airport. 
As I approach the town, a craggy mountain looms out at me through tall, ghostly 
eucalyptus trees. When I arrive at my motel and put my bike back together, I 
realise I’ve forgotten to bring a bike pump. Neither of the two bars in town 
have one to lend me, so I go to bed and cross my fingers, hoping to have more 
luck in the morning.

My alarm wakes me at 7am. I’ve been advised to start the rides early as the 
temperatures in the middle of summer can quickly become overwhelming. Still 
needing a pump, I visit every shop and cafe I can find as soon as they open, 
but have no luck until the tourist office opens at 9am and lends me one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1aff409631319c58e4f4091ce6531e05b9faa44%2F0_326_4896_2939%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossing%20the%20Acheron%3A%20cycling%20Australia's%20Seven%20Peaks%20Ride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossing%20the%20Acheron%3A%20cycling%20Australia%27s%20Seven%20Peaks%20Ride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1aff409631319c58e4f4091ce6531e05b9faa44%2F0_326_4896_2939%2F4896.jpg>
 Cyclists on the climb to Mount Hotham in the Alpine national park. Photograph: 
Mark Watson/Tourism North East 
Already, my planned schedule is looking wildly optimistic. I ride out of town 
and start climbing Lake Mountain. On paper, it seems like the easiest ascent of 
the seven. If I struggle with this one, it’s going to be a very long week.

At first, unencumbered by the usual locks or panniers, I feel as though I’m 
flying up the hill, but the wind is taken out of my sails a bit when a 
purple-clad man at least 20 years my senior sails past effortlessly. The first 
four kilometres are the hardest grind, averaging about 8% gradient, but after 
that the slope becomes more manageable and I can admire the views.

Five years ago to the day the area was ravaged by the Black Saturday 
bushfires, some of the worst in Australia’s history. Vast swaths of forest have 
yet to recover and the silver skeletons of the trees cover whole hilltops. 
Skinks scurry across my path on the lower slopes, replaced by butterflies from 
around the 1,000-metre altitude mark. I make my way through the forest and 
emerge at the ski resort at the top.

The wind is taken out of my sails a bit when a purple-clad man at least 20 
years my senior sails past effortlessly

I’d forgotten to bring a water bottle, but luckily there’s a cafe at the top 
of the mountain (though disappointingly, no lake). Reinvigorated by a ham 
sandwich, I coast back down the mountain, relieved not to have fallen at the 
first hurdle.

I drive to Mount Buller, where I get an early start the next day. I’m not the 
only one – there seem to be quite a few local cyclists out for their Sunday 
rides. I try not to be jealous of their triple chainsets as they glide past me.

Fewer of Buller’s trees have fallen to bushfires, so there’s a relatively 
thick canopy of foliage protecting me from the sun. A series of switchbacks 
means I find myself looking back on the ground I’ve covered, and it’s 
satisfying to see how quickly I’m gaining altitude. The gradient is steady, and 
only becomes difficult in the final kilometres when I reach a short, sharp 13% 
turn, appropriately named Hell Corner. They seem to have a thing about the 
underworld in these parts.

It’s a little chilly at the top, but by the time I return to the valley after 
a coffee at the ski resort, it’s incredibly humid and I’m relieved to get back 
into the air-conditioned car. I drive on. The easiest two climbs are over, and 
as I head towards my next motel in Bright, I pass the intimidating sheer face 
of tomorrow’s climb, Mount Buffalo. From the road, it just looks like a wall of 
rock. I can’t imagine how the road will take me to the top, but I’m pretty sure 
it’ll be painful. Time for a real test.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4f0d003f5e7f32ddfcca764dcebde09c4ed2003%2F0_171_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossing%20the%20Acheron%3A%20cycling%20Australia's%20Seven%20Peaks%20Ride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossing%20the%20Acheron%3A%20cycling%20Australia%27s%20Seven%20Peaks%20Ride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4f0d003f5e7f32ddfcca764dcebde09c4ed2003%2F0_171_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Cyclists making their way from Mount Beauty to Bright along the Bright-Tawonga 
Road, with Mount Buffalo in the background. Photograph: The AGE/Fairfax Media 
via Getty Images 
Even though it’s early on a Monday morning when I start, there are plenty of 
local cyclists about, most of them much older than I am – but that doesn’t stop 
them passing me. After a consistent grind for 10km, the road flattens for a 
bit. Suddenly, the sedimentary rock is replaced by granite and the tall, 
healthy-looking eucalypts replaced by gnarled snow gums. The climate changes 
swiftly as well – I turn a corner and within seconds the dry heat on the sunny 
north face has been replaced by rainforest humidity on the south face.

As I grind towards the top the road twists and turns up a ridge before 
suddenly appearing in a mossy, marshy clearing on a plateau. One fork goes 
left, signposted “to the chalet”, another right to the official finish at Dingo 
Dell. I head right. Just over a small hill, I find the enormous Lake Catani. 
Unsure what lurks within, I only dare enter the water as far as my knees, but I 
am later assured by a park ranger that nothing nasty would have bitten me if 
I’d taken the plunge.

Dingo Dell turns out to be an unremarkable marshland, so I turn around and 
return to the beautiful Swiss-style chalet. Closed since 2006, it’s in the 
process of being renovated. Just in front of it is a gorge with several vantage 
points offering spectacular views across the valley, including of Mount Bogong, 
Victoria’s highest peak, and in the distance the summit of Mount Kosciuszko, 
Australia’s highest.

Haute Route highs and heartbreak - what motivates cyclists on tough rides?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2015/sep/17/haute-route-horses-heartbreak-what-motivates-cyclists-tough-rides>
The Ovens river, which runs through Bright, has several natural swimming 
holes, so I spend the afternoon cooling off in one under the blazing sun before 
spending a few hours in the town’s microbrewery. The residents of Bright are a 
mixture of older people who have lived there for years and a younger generation 
who have moved to be close to the winter sports resorts in the area, which 
creates a strange atmosphere. A chintzy tea shop sits next to an internet cafe. 
The brewery seems to attract both types of resident for the performance of a 
folk band, and several locals see me examining my map and come over to offer 
advice.

The next morning, after a short but scenic drive to Mount Beauty, I begin the 
climb to Falls Creek. It’s relatively gentle, at an average gradient of 4%, but 
at 30km it’s still a daunting proposition in the summer heat. At first, I wind 
upwards through the gum trees before they suddenly lead out into an area badly 
burned by bushfire. The bare, grey trees look like an old man’s stubble. There 
are some signs that the area is beginning to recover, but the living plants 
won’t cover the dead for many years.

It’s the hottest day yet, about 36C, and as I reach the exposed slopes near 
the ski resort, I begin to flag. Fortunately, I stumble upon a mountain stream. 
I splash myself with the water and drink as much as I can, and it gives me 
enough energy to carry on to the village – and beyond.

It’s worth continuing on. Three kilometres past the resort the terrain becomes 
flat as you reach the Bogong high plains and the road skirts an enormous 
artificial reservoir. I go in as far as my knees, but only for a few seconds. 
The water is so cold that I lose the feeling in my toes all the way down the 
descent to Mount Beauty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe633ec2fab3053d96746b8e61706e145f54052f1%2F0_286_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossing%20the%20Acheron%3A%20cycling%20Australia's%20Seven%20Peaks%20Ride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossing%20the%20Acheron%3A%20cycling%20Australia%27s%20Seven%20Peaks%20Ride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe633ec2fab3053d96746b8e61706e145f54052f1%2F0_286_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The view over the Alpine national park on the ride up Mount Hotham. The bare 
trees were burned by bushfires and are slowly recovering. Photograph: Alan 
Evans for the Guardian 
The climb to Mount Hotham on day five is brutal. With a total elevation gain 
of 1,347 metres over its 32.4km and a maximum gradient of 18%, it’s a 
terrifying prospect, but I’m far enough in that I can’t turn back.

The first 10km are a tough grind through narrow, winding rainforest roads. The 
glimpses of scenery are rare, but suddenly I reach a false flat and the valley 
opens up in front of me, with Mount Hotham itself looming in the distance. The 
middle third of the ride is easy, with a mild gradient on open, exposed roads 
giving me plenty of time to admire the spectacular peaks and valleys on every 
side. But the final third of the climb is one of the toughest rides I’ve ever 
done.

There are three summits, each tougher than the last and with minimal respite 
between them. All three provide breathtaking views in every direction, and I’m 
more than happy to pause for a few seconds to take them in and regain my 
breath. Once I pass about 1,700 metre altitude, the flora changes completely 
and becomes reminiscent of the European Alps, with scrubby grass and small 
flowers. Birds of prey hover nearby, their eyes trained on the valley below.

Motorists coming the other way give me looks of pity or bafflement

I slowly grind my way to the summit. Motorists coming the other way give me 
looks of pity or bafflement. My tongue hangs from my mouth like a dog’s, my 
lungs desperate for every breath of oxygen. Even at this altitude, the sun is 
uncomfortably hot. But suddenly, I turn a corner and see the village ahead of 
me. Fortunately, the resort also contains Australia’s highest pub, where I 
devour an enormous pie and a large plate of garlic bread before an incredibly 
enjoyable descent back to Harrietville.

It’s almost a relief that the next day’s ride to Dinner Plain is overcast. I 
begin in Omeo, and struggle up the steep first five kilometres, which are 
bordered by pastoral farmland. After that the gradient is mild, but the road 
surface is heavy and the scenery monotonous. I eventually make my way up into 
clouds so thick I can only see about 30 metres ahead of me. I keep my ears 
pricked for the sound of cars, but mostly hear cows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9a1acc6cae460b7cc0458708e5961508ae7c8e9%2F0_357_4977_4743%2F4977.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossing%20the%20Acheron%3A%20cycling%20Australia's%20Seven%20Peaks%20Ride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossing%20the%20Acheron%3A%20cycling%20Australia%27s%20Seven%20Peaks%20Ride&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossing-the-acheron-cycling-australias-seven-peaks-ride%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9a1acc6cae460b7cc0458708e5961508ae7c8e9%2F0_357_4977_4743%2F4977.jpg>
 Dicksons Falls in Mount Buffalo national park. Photograph: Auscape/UIG via 
Getty Images 
A few kilometres from the summit, I emerge from the cloud line into clear blue 
skies. The scenery is still not very exciting, though, and I’m relieved when I 
reach the resort at the top and can turn around. Several sections of the 
descent are being resurfaced and as a result are covered in loose stones, 
meaning I have to ride extremely cautiously – but I get safely back to Omeo and 
into my car to drive to Mount Baw Baw, my final challenge.

And what a challenge! Baw Baw is apparently the steepest paved road in the 
southern hemisphere, and Australia’s onlyhors catégorie (“beyond 
categorisation”) climb. It’s only 6.5km long, but at an average gradient of 
11.3% and a maximum of 20.6%, it’s hard to imagine how I will haul my body up 
it.

It’s also extremely remote. After a night in Traralgon, I spend two-and-a-half 
hours driving through narrow roads in lush rainforest, when suddenly I crawl 
around yet another blind corner – and there it is in front of me, like a wall. 
I park the car, get the bike out, take a deep breath and try not to think too 
hard about what’s about to happen.

From the outset, I employ a technique I later learn Australians call 
“delivering the mail”. I zigzag from side to side up the road to reduce the 
gradient – one short tack against the camber, then one long one up the easier 
side of the road. It’s like sailing upwind.

Before too long, I see someone has spray-painted the number 6 on the road. 
Half a kilometre down. My postman routine works well, and it’s not too long 
before I hit a painted 5.

The gradient is unrelenting, I fight my bike all the way up

A brief flatter stretch gives me a moment to breathe, but only a moment as 
it’s back to steep gradients again after a couple of hundred metres. As I gain 
altitude, the views get better and more rays of sun pierce the gum trees. A car 
passes me and gives me a thumbs up.

I continue to grind, tacking uphill all the way. How much further can it be? 
Where the numbers spray-painted on to the road earlier offered comfort, here 
some joker has painted a question mark to taunt me. The gradient is 
unrelenting, and I have to fight my bike all the way up.

A series of punishing switchbacks, and I can see daylight on both sides. It 
can’t be too much further. The gradient gradually gets easier, and then 
suddenly I look up and find that it’s almost flat. I glide into the village, 
both exhausted and exhilarated.

As I drink bottle after bottle of ice-cold water at the summit cafe, I look 
out across Victoria. A tough week in the saddle has left my body aching, but my 
mind feels clear and sharp. All week, while suffering up the mountains, I’d 
been wondering how I’d feel if I made it to the end. Relieved? Tired? Proud? 
Hungry?

All of them, as it turned out.

• The Guardian’s transport and accommodation were supplied by Tourism North 
East and partners.The Seven Peaks Challenge <http://www.7peaks.com.au/#> is 
open until 31 March 2016.
 