
Anti-racism campaigners have called for the return of an Australia Day 
billboard in Melbourne which was taken down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/17/australia-day-billboard-featuring-women-in-hijabs-removed-after-threats>
 after the company allegedly received threats over the inclusion of a photo 
showing two young Muslim girls.

The billboard, which advertised an RACV-sponsored festival in Kings Domain 
Gardens, included rolling photographs: one showed two young girls wearing 
hijabs and holding Australian flags.

The picture was taken at last year’s Australia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day> event in Docklands, 
but a photograph of it on the billboard was posted to the Facebook page of the 
far-right group United Patriots Front, sparking hundreds of complaints and 
bigoted comments.

After threats were received, the billboard was removed by the outdoor media 
company which hosted it, according to the Victorian minister for multicultural 
affairs, Robin Scott.

Related: Australia Day billboard featuring girls in hijabs removed after 
threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/17/australia-day-billboard-featuring-women-in-hijabs-removed-after-threats>

“There were a series of complaints, some of which were of an abusive and 
threatening nature, that were made to the organisation QMS that put the 
billboard up,”Scott said 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-17/australia-day-billboard-featuring-women-in-hijabs-taken-down/8187914>
.

A spokesman for QMS said the company would not be making any comment in 
relation to threats that “may or may not have been made”. The spokesman 
referred questions to Scott and refused to comment on whether the alleged 
threats had been investigated or referred to police before the decision was 
made to remove the billboard.

Scott did not respond to requests for comment, and Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> police said it was unable 
to comment for privacy reasons.
 The digital Australia Day ad which featured rolling images of people from 
various cultural backgrounds, including a picture of two Muslim girls in front 
of the Australian flag. 
On Wednesday a crowdfunding campaign <https://www.gofundme.com/aus-day> by the 
Campaign Edge advertising agency called for the girls’ photograph to be 
reprinted on posters and in a campaign. Within seven hours, the campaign had 
raised its initial $50,000 target and increased it to $100,000 to fund 
“multiple billboards across Australia”.

“People are amazing,” campaign organiser Dee Madigan tweeted late Wednesday 
night as multiple donations per minute continued, before the increased $100,000 
target was reached and overtaken 12 hours after the campaign launched.

Any leftover money will be donated to the Asylum Seeker Resource Centre.

“The same groups who complain ‘Muslims don’t assimilate’ complained about the 
photo of Australian Muslims celebrating Australia Day,” the fund’s page said. 
“Due to this pressure the poster was removed.”


The girls in the photo and their family were well aware of the incident and 
the furore it sparked, a lawyer and community rights advocate, Mariam 
Veiszadeh, told Guardian Australia.

Veiszadeh said the whole thing came as a “shock and surprise” to the family, 
who were unaware the 12-month-old photograph was on the billboard until this 
week.

She said the family were concerned about the impact the response from 
far-right groups was having on the girls, who were old enough to understand 
what was happening, but were heartened by messages of support from the public.

“Would they have rathered this never happened? Yes. But now it has they’re 
cognisant of the fact the images are already out there and they don’t have any 
control over that.”

The family supported the campaign to have the girls’ picture returned to the 
billboard or included in another campaign, said Veiszadeh.

“From my perspective I explained we could associate those images with 
something positive, and the girls’ time in the media spotlight would be 
accompanied by thousands speaking up against Islamophobia, gathered around them 
to stand in support and solidarity,” she said.

A local community activist group, Casey Against Racism, launched a petition 
calling for the billboard to be returned 
<https://www.change.org/p/qms-media-reinstate-the-cranbourne-billboard>, and 
had gathered more than 4,500 signatures by Wednesday afternoon.

Related: Fremantle Australia Day row: citizenship ceremonies on 28 January 
barred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/australia-day-row-fremantle-barred-from-citizenship-ceremonies-on-28-january>

“We will not allow rightwing extremists to set the tone and define what is and 
isn’t Australian,” said a spokeswoman for the group. “People who are afraid of 
smiling little girls need to take a serious look at themselves. Cranbourne is a 
very diverse suburb in a multicultural country.”

Most of the responses to the United Patriot Front’s Facebook post suggested 
the inclusion of the two girls’ photograph was not a depiction of Australian 
culture.

They also included various accusations the young girls were “the enemy”, 
unsubstantiated claims that Anzac Day commemorations were being cancelled in 
the Blue Mountains, and suggested Australia Day was an event akin to the 
Islamic observance of Ramadan.

Some threatened to pull the sign down themselves if it was seen in their 
state, despite it advertising a localMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> event.

The vast majority responded apparently unaware that the image was one of 
several that rolled through on the billboard.

The minister for multicultural affairs said on Tuesday it was disappointing to 
see a small minority attacking people for their love of the country. “Anyone 
who considers this a victory needs a refresher on the true meaning of Australia 
Day,” Scott said.
 