
A prize designed to reward “brave, bold and brilliant” literature from small 
presses that raised its purse from crowdfunding has announced its inaugural 
shortlist of eight titles.

The Republic of Consciousness prize was set up by award-winning novelist Neil 
Griffiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/22/new-award-fiction-small-presses-republic-of-consciousness-neil-griffiths>
 with a personal donation of £2,000. Open to imprints based in the UK, 
Commonwealth and Ireland, short-form and long-form fiction is eligible for the 
award, which splits the prize money between the winning authors and their 
publishers.

On eve of Costa awards, experts warn that top books prizes are harming fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/on-eve-of-costa-awards-experts-warn-that-top-books-prizes-are-harming-fiction>
The prize, unlike many larger awards, did not charge publishers an entry fee, 
in the hopes of encouraging publishers that would not normally step forward. 
Earlier in January, several literary agents and publishing figurestold the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/on-eve-of-costa-awards-experts-warn-that-top-books-prizes-are-harming-fiction>
 that independent publishers willing to take risks on “difficult” works were 
unable to experience the commercial benefits of being listed for awards because 
of prohibitive entry costs.

An even mixture of novels and short-form fiction features on the eight-book 
shortlist, which was announced by Griffiths at an event at Waterstones 
Piccadilly in London on Wednesday evening.

Judged by booksellers, the four shortlisted novels range from the “deceptively 
simple”Born on a Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/28/born-on-tuesday-by-elnathan-john-review>
 by Elnathan John, published by Cassava Republic, to Anakana Schofield’sMartin 
John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/05/martin-john-by-anakana-schofield-review>
, an And Other Stories book that Griffiths called “a novel of formal 
ingenuity”. Paul Stanbridge’sForbidden Line 
<http://galleybeggar.co.uk/store/books/forbidden-line-mass-market-paperback-edition>
, published by Galley Beggar, was described by Griffiths as Don Quixote meets 
Wittgenstein and late Heidegger and shortlisted alongside Irish author Mike 
McCormack’s “unassertively profound”Solar Bones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/04/solar-bones-by-mike-mccormack-review>
, published by Tramp Press.

Diane Williams’s Fine, Fine, Fine, Fine, Fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/21/fine-fine-diane-williams-review> 
(CB Editions) led an equally diverse choice of short-story collections. 
Griffiths said of the Williams: “No other writer so convinces us that none of 
us really sees the world as others do.”

Last year’s BBC national short story prize winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/04/bbc-national-short-story-award-goes-to-kj-orr-hilary-mantel>
 KJ Orr’s debut collectionLight Box 
<https://www.dauntbookspublishing.co.uk/products-page/book/light-box/> (Daunt 
Books) was compared toJames Salte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/20/author-james-salter-dies-aged-90>
r’s work, while John Keene’sCounternarratives 
<https://fitzcarraldoeditions.com/books/counternarratives> (Fitzcarraldo 
Editions) was deemed “a work of great distinction, a once in a generation 
addition to short-form fiction”.

The final pick was Treats 
<http://www.freightbooks.co.uk/treats-by-lara-williams.html> by Lara Williams 
(Freight Books), a series of stories about women in their mid-to-late 20s. 
“Every story has an edge, an unexpected slant, a truth-seeking glance that 
forswears easy answers and creates a subtle ambiguity that forces us to doubt 
that happiness and contentment is around the corner for anyone,” Griffiths said.

Griffiths founded the prize to acknowledge the role of small presses in 
keeping alive high-end literary fiction that operated outside genres and 
struggled to find homes in large conglomerate publishers.

The Costa-shortlisted author had initially tried to fund the prize through 
crowdfunding website Kickstarter, but was unable to as the site “does not 
support causes”. The final £7,000 prize pot wasraised by raffling £10 tickets 
online 
<http://www.republicofconsciousness.com/2016/10/the-great-literary-raffle/>. In 
return for a £10 pledge, donors could win a bundle of books by British and 
Irish presses.

Announcing the award last year, Griffiths said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/22/new-award-fiction-small-presses-republic-of-consciousness-neil-griffiths>
: “These small presses are doing it often for the love of super-niche books, 
whether they’re in translation or highly literary … We always hear about 
independent booksellers being under threat, but it’s essentially the same story 
for these publishers, [and] they’re even more vulnerable.”

The winner of the prize will be announced in March.
 