
Turn your forward-planning failures into a financial boon

Chronic ditherer? Social butterfly? Lazy sod? You may be perpetually skint but 
student life at least allows room for spontaneity. Live events keen to fill up 
unsold seats often court student patrons with substantially discounted rates, 
such as London’sBFI <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi> on the South Bank, 
where under-25s can access £3 tickets if they rock up 45 mins before the movie 
starts. Theatres are worth checking out, too: in Edinburgh, the Festival and 
King’s playhouses offer £10 student tickets from 12noon on the day of 
performances, while the Bristol Old Vic throws up a last-minute bat signal to 
local students via its free Arts Ping app.

Avoid paying full whack for new tracks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fculture-hacks-game-of-thrones-netflix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e23a9a450fdc4d31cf758ab5b2d75da5b2275e4%2F0_0_3073_1844%2F3073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Culture%20hacks%3A%20the%20ultimate%20guide%20to%20going%20out%20and%20staying%20in%20on%20the%20cheap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fculture-hacks-game-of-thrones-netflix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Culture%20hacks%3A%20the%20ultimate%20guide%20to%20going%20out%20and%20staying%20in%20on%20the%20cheap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fculture-hacks-game-of-thrones-netflix%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e23a9a450fdc4d31cf758ab5b2d75da5b2275e4%2F0_0_3073_1844%2F3073.jpg>
Music streaming companies aren’t daft (or punks). They know students are a key 
demographic: time-rich tastemakers who can add some invaluable cachet to their 
product. That’s probably whyApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> offers a 50% discount to 
UK students for up to four years, while Spotify Premium will do the same. If 
you sign up for Amazon Prime – which offers a desirable six-month student-only 
free trial – the bundled-in Amazon Prime Music can access more than a million 
songs, with karaoke-friendly lyrics on its app.

Swap beans on toast for Bizet

Skip the indie disco and Carmen feel the noise: opera is the most grandiose 
art form ever devised and you will never be able to experience it as cheaply as 
you can while being a student. The ENO’s Access All Arias scheme offers 
discounted tickets for performances at the London Coliseum, while a Royal Opera 
House student membership is free to join and gets you tickets as cheap as a 
quid. Beyond the Watford Gap, Scottish Opera andOpera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> North also offer £10 tickets for 
students. Maybe indulge in some pre-drinking before your Parsifal, though: 
opera house bars are not bargainous.

When it comes to TV, cross the streams
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fculture-hacks-game-of-thrones-netflix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae2464b43facdb2878bedd059d21d4c4ef60d22%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Culture%20hacks%3A%20the%20ultimate%20guide%20to%20going%20out%20and%20staying%20in%20on%20the%20cheap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fculture-hacks-game-of-thrones-netflix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Culture%20hacks%3A%20the%20ultimate%20guide%20to%20going%20out%20and%20staying%20in%20on%20the%20cheap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fculture-hacks-game-of-thrones-netflix%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae2464b43facdb2878bedd059d21d4c4ef60d22%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Photograph: Mike Blake/Reuters 
As of this month, you legally require a TV licence even if you’re just using 
iPlayer. After that outlay, you’ll want to try to save when it comes to premium 
streaming. Taking a disciplined approach to free trials – diary those end 
dates! – is a good way to see which service suits your tastes. BothNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> and Amazon Prime allow two 
different streams to be accessed simultaneously from one account, so it might 
pay to be extra-nice to your flush flatmate. Of the rest, Now TV offers a 
decent package – 13 pay TV channels and 250 box sets, including Game Of Thrones 
– that, crucially, is also easy to cancel.

Console yourself with free-to-play gaming

Xbox Scorpio v PS4 Pro: with both Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> and Sony recently confirming 
wallet-melting updates to their consoles it is a pricey time to be a gamer. 
Thankfully free-to-play gaming is in ruder health than ever, from MOBAs 
(multiplayer online battle arenas) such as Dota 2 and League Of Legends on 
PC/Mac, to dreamy arthouse baubles like PS4’s The Tomorrow Children and 
addictive iPad and Android timekillers such as Slither.io.
 