
The chant ‘the customer is king’ is one of the hoariest old chestnuts of 
business and marketing.

But with so many different channels, technologies and platforms available to 
buyers today, companies are under growing pressure to ensure this is not just 
paid lip service, but actually built into the foundations of their operations.

It’s a message that business leaders are heeding in growing numbers, with many 
executives now finding customer satisfaction targets woven into their 
performance KPIs and bonus structures.

For instance, Telstra CEO Andy Penn recently revealed 40 percent of all 
‘variable remuneration’ at the telco is linked to ‘customer advocacy’, while 
Medibank boss Craig Drummond has flagged moves to factor the company’s net 
promoter score (NPS) in the creation of short-term incentives for senior 
executives. NPS measures how likely a customer would be to recommend your 
company to someone else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcustomer-experience-is-re-orientating-entire-businesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc93b2458c239bc1ee1c7497d9bc3eaddab6d689%2F0_0_7488_4493%2F7488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Customer%20experience%20is%20re-orientating%20entire%20businesses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcustomer-experience-is-re-orientating-entire-businesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Customer%20experience%20is%20re-orientating%20entire%20businesses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcustomer-experience-is-re-orientating-entire-businesses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc93b2458c239bc1ee1c7497d9bc3eaddab6d689%2F0_0_7488_4493%2F7488.jpg>
 Australia Post is moving from physical to digital postage systems to keep up 
with customer demand. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Then there’s fellow iconic Aussie brand, Australia Post. It’s in the process 
of a remarkable transformation as its customer base evolves from the world of 
envelopes and stamps to managing the delivery of virtually all of Australia’s 
online shopping.

In a further reflection of the times, it recently appointed its first CCO 
(chief customer officer), charged with overseeing its relationship with 
customers.

Efforts to boost customer satisfaction aren’t just restricted to carrots 
either; the NSW Department of Fair Trading recently embraced the stick 
approach, launching a ‘complaint register’, which will publish a monthly shame 
list of businesses in NSW receiving 10 or more complaints.

The catalyst for this boom in empowering customers is the explosion of online 
commerce.

Whether they’re browsing online via a smart phone or tablet over cellular, 
public Wifi hotspot or wondering around a physical store, today’s shoppers 
demand instant information and attention. And they have come to expect 
everything from 24-hour customer support, to delivery progress updates, product 
guarantees and flexible return policies, not to mention a vast array of choices.

This means that to thrive in today’s marketplace, businesses must have a 
strategy for exploiting digital tools to create highly personalised experiences 
for their customers.

Lee Hawksley, Senior VP and GM of Salesforce Marketing Cloud JAPAC, said the 
rise in customer expectations was the consequence of consumers pushing back 
against being treated as though they’re just a number or a transaction.

In fact, 58% of respondents to the company’s ‘2016 Empowered Shoppers Report’ 
cited this as one of the top reasons that would drive them to switch brands.

The reason most cited was security breaches (76%), followed by difficulties 
processing sales at checkout (70%) and having inconsistent experiences each 
time they deal with the business (60%).

Vitally, Hawksley said these challenges are most evident at bricks-and-mortar 
stores, most of which are well behind the online world in terms of fast service 
and access to information.

“The most important customer interaction happens in retailers’ stores every 
day.” Hawksley said. “And that’s being done badly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcustomer-experience-is-re-orientating-entire-businesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67ac88b92f5dc1ba4655294fe8073db1c79e3772%2F0_245_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Customer%20experience%20is%20re-orientating%20entire%20businesses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcustomer-experience-is-re-orientating-entire-businesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Customer%20experience%20is%20re-orientating%20entire%20businesses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcustomer-experience-is-re-orientating-entire-businesses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67ac88b92f5dc1ba4655294fe8073db1c79e3772%2F0_245_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
 Shoppers now expect convenience, a great deal of choice and 24-hour customer 
service from their shopping experience. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
AI is opening up a Pandora’s box that will trigger a revolution in computing 
and customer service
Lee Hawksley 
Traditional businesses need to lift their game in terms of tracking who their 
customers are. Remembering birthdays, tailoring special offers to past buying 
histories, and suggesting complementary products are just the beginning.

Those companies able to effectively collect and interpret customer and other 
data will be better able to deliver consistent experiences across all channels 
and touchpoints, something experts view as the foundations for business success 
in the future.

Sydney-based online shoe retailer Shoes of Prey exemplifies this approach.

The company allows buyers to curate their own footwear designs, which meant 
the ability to collect and interpret detailed personal data was a priority from 
the beginning.

Now the value of that personal data has been greatly amplified with the 
opening of a number of physical stores. This means customers now have the 
value-added benefit of being able to touch and feel products if they wish, 
while Shoes of Prey sales staff are able to serve customers knowing exactly who 
they are, their individual tastes and of course their buying history.

And in the backend, Shoes of Prey has deployed clever digital solutions to 
track and report on all aspects of the business, including order processing, 
supply and scaling up and down to manage busy periods.

One of the most important considerations for companies looking to create 
better customer experiences is the so-called ‘customer journey’. With so much 
data being generated and better technologies to interpret it, companies now 
have the opportunity of reaching that holy grail of business: keeping customers 
forever.

Australian superannuation provider Mercer illustrates how this can be achieved 
by having the right systems in place not only to understand customers in the 
here and now, but over their entire lifetimes, as they and their needs change.

With more than $50 billion worth of funds under management, Mercer recently 
decided it was time to replace its old CRM systems with a data-driven approach 
supporting better customer engagement and a higher success-rate converting new 
business.

Mercer’s consumer marketing lead, Campbell Holt, said a key focus was 
unlocking data insights to make customers feel more valued. The impact has been 
marked, with sales conversions jumping by up to 40%, and return on investment 
soaring.

Similarly, in the real estate business, popular online business Domain.com.au 
is driving big changes in how people think about property, said Tony Blamey, 
Chief Commercial Officer at Domain Group.

“The process for home buyers hasn’t really changed in over 20 years as far as 
the open-for-inspection process goes. You still see agents on the weekends with 
clipboards and pens, stopping home buyers at the front door to gather their 
details,” he said.

In response, Domain developed an app called Homepass, allowing agents to 
connect directly with potential clients who have visited the website and to 
access any data they have entered that might help build better profiles and 
tailor offerings.

Homepass can also be configured to link agents and customers with digital 
‘beacons’ fitted to ‘for sale’ and ‘for lease’ signs, collecting valuable data 
on individuals and buyer patterns to make more accurate assessments of things 
like market demand.

How do the most valued brands in the world meet customer expectations?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/salesforce-the-unfair-advantage/2016/sep/27/how-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations>
It’s solutions like these that are leading the way in driving big changes to 
how people, industries, governments and even whole economies function and work 
together.

Of course, no matter how this new world pans out, it seems certain that 
ambitious companies will continue to innovate and find new ways to cater to 
their all-important customers. This means they can expect to enjoy vastly 
improved experiences as technologies for collecting, interpreting and 
integrating large data sets evolve.

Already we are seeing glimpses of this brave new world with technologies such 
as AI (artificial intelligence) evolving to complete the transition from 
traditional systems designed first to be responsive, then reactive, and now 
ushering a world of ‘predictive’ intelligence.

“This is very much uncharted territory,” says Salesforce’s Hawksley. “AI is 
opening up a Pandora’s box that will trigger a revolution in computing and 
customer service.”

Learn more about Customer Service Excellence: An Interview with The Customer 
Service Institute of Australia (CSIA) CEO Anouche Newman 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/312157676;139917654;s>
 