
One of Britain’s largest estate agencies has called on the government to cut 
stamp duty as it revealed that a sharp decline in interest from buyers had led 
to a fall in house prices in September.

Haart, which has more than 100 branches across England, said UK house prices 
had dropped by 1.1% in September compared with a month earlier. Warning of 
sluggish activity in the market, haart urged the government to reverse recent 
changes to the stamp duty tax, which have increased the upfront costs of buying 
second homes and properties costing more than £937,500.

UK house price growth slows as demand cools after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/uk-house-price-growth-slows-demand-cools-brexit-vote-nationwide>
However, campaigners for private renters backed changes to tax which have made 
it more expensive for landlords to buy property.

Paul Smith, haart’s chief executive, said: “Although we are seeing more 
positive consumer confidence materialising [since the EU referendum], the UK 
housing market is still marked by a number of negatives, as prices and 
transactions continue to fall on the month.

“Action needs to be taken to reverse the sluggish pace of activity, to turn 
these initial engagements with the property market into transactions. A greater 
injection of confidence and stability is also important for housebuilders, in 
order to reassure them they will get good margins on the potential sale price 
of new homes if they start building again.”

Using its own data and adjusting figures to reflect the whole market, haart 
said the number of homes exchanged during September was down by almost a fifth 
year on year, and by 2.9% on August’s figure, to 49,357. On a year-on-year 
basis, the average price of a property was 2.7% higher than in September 2015, 
at £226,229.


The agency said the number of homes for sale was down by 2.3% on September 
2015’s figure, while viewings had fallen by 10.3% over the same period.
House prices in September 2016 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-10T16:07:46/embed.html>
Since April, anyone buying a property other than their main home has faced a 
three-percentage-point increase in the stamp duty they pay on completion. The 
increase followed an overhaul of the entire system in late 2014, which cut 
bills for most buyers, but increased costs for those at the top of the market.

Both changes were introduced by the then chancellor, George Osborne, in an 
attempt to cool the property market and make it easier for first-time buyers to 
get on the ladder.

A change to how much tax relief landlords can claim on mortgages on rental 
properties is to come into effect from next April, after a case taken by 
investors was rejected last week.

Estate agents and developers in central London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/18/berkeley-stamp-duty-luxury-housing-market-property-tax>
 have reported that the higher duty on expensive homes has reduced activity and 
prices at the top of the market. “These [stamp duty] charges are without doubt 
causing a logjam – no wonder when buyers have to fork out an extra 3% on top of 
the 7% they are already paying,” Smith said.

However, Dan Wilson Craw, policy manager at the lobby group Generation Rent 
<http://www.generationrent.org/>, said the extra three-percentage-point duty 
for investors and other second homebuyers was a good way to help would-be 
first-time buyers.


“Property speculation has helped fuel house price inflation and trap people in 
the unstable rented sector, so the government is quite right to discourage this 
behaviour through the stamp duty system. We hope the surcharge will divert 
capital into alternative investments that actually create jobs and build 
houses,” he said.

“The stamp duty rates on expensive homes should remain as a mechanism to 
deflate house prices in central London which is increasingly off-limits to 
ordinary Londoners.”

Recent figures from HMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/30/stamp-duty-revenue-up-london-hmrc-tax-rates>
 show the higher tax rate on expensive homes, introduced in 2014’s autumn 
statement, has resulted in more money for the Treasury. In the 2015-16 tax 
year, receipts for properties costing more than £500,000 rose, with the 
greatest increase in properties sold for between £1.5m and £2m, where revenue 
increased by 26% despite a 7% fall in the number of transactions.


It is not yet clear what impact the higher rate on second properties has had. 
In the month before it was introduced, there was a spike in transactions as 
landlords attempted to beat the new fee.
 