
When the world’s biggest bike race finally reaches the Champs-Élysées on 
Sunday afternoon, most British eyes will be on Chris Froome as he attempts to 
win his thirdTour de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>.

But the members of one cycling club in north-west England are less interested 
who ends up in yellow than which rider crosses the line with thewhite jersey 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young_rider_classification_in_the_Tour_de_France>
 awarded to the best young rider. Bury Clarion Club will celebrate one of their 
own, 23-year-old Adam Yates, who will be given that honour when he crosses the 
line after spending much of the race in podium position.

Yates dropped to fourth place after a gruelling day in the mountains on 
Friday, and maintained that position yesterday. But back home in Bury, his 
clubmates are keeping the faith, hopeful he will make it on to the steps in 
Paris alongside Froome in only his second attempt at the Tour.

“I can’t wait to know the final result,” said membership secretary and club 
oracle Peter Roscoe, who has been with the club since 1949. “I’m 82 years old, 
but I’ve not been watching it sitting down this year – it’s been that agonising.

“I’m exhausted. I want to know how it ends, so that I know if I’m going to 
feel deflated or on top of the world.”

Riding the wave of cycling’s increasing popularity, with the membership of 
British Cycling leaping from 50,000 to 123,500 in the four years sinceBradley 
Wiggins became the first Briton to win the Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-cavendish>
, Bury Clarion Club has never had so many members in its 115-year history. A 
record 112 people have paid their £10 subs for the current season, including 
many young people inspired by Yates and his unfortunate twin, Simon, who is 
serving adoping ban 
<http://www.cyclingnews.com/news/simon-yates-handed-four-month-non-intentional-doping-ban/>
 after an exemption certificate for his asthma inhaler was not obtained.

Whatever his end result, Adam Yates would not show off about it, said Roscoe. 
“The twins don’t do the celebrity thing. Years ago I proposed them both for 
junior sportsman of the year and they came to the club presentation, but 
afterwards I got the message: ‘Don’t do that again, Peter.’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwJDhVtJCig&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwJDhVtJCig>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwJDhVtJCig&media=>
100 years of Bury Clarion 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gwJDhVtJCig&feature=youtu.be> 
Bury Clarion Club <http://www.buryclarion.co.uk/about/> was formed in the 
first cycling boom at the beginning of the last century. One January day in 
1901 seven fearless women saddled up, adjusted their flowing skirts and straw 
boaters and pedalled slowly through Bury’s streets. They were greeted by local 
people shouting “shame” and “hussies” as well as booing children, who ran 
alongside, according to a report in theBury Times. History records 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gwJDhVtJCig&feature=youtu.be> that the women 
were followed – at a respectable distance – by 20 gentlemen on bicycles.

Together they aimed not only to found the Bury section of the National Clarion 
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> Club but also spread 
the gospel of socialism.

The national Clarion movement began in Manchester in 1891 when the journalist 
Robert Blatchford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/oct/19/manchester-women> 
walked out of his well-paid job on theSunday Chronicle to start the Clarion 
newspaper. Appalled by the state of the city’s slums, Blatchford aimed to 
inspire others to create a better society through cooperation. His enterprising 
readers set up a string of societies, among them the Clarion Cycling Club, 
Vocal Unions, the Clarion Fellowship, Clarion Handicraft Clubs, Clarion Scouts, 
Rambling Clubs and Cinderella Clubs (which organised events for children).

Originally called the Socialist Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> Club, the National Clarion Club 
issued a handbook in 1926 which listed eight objectives, including “To prevent 
domination of class over mass” and “Not to feed the shirker at the cost of the 
worker but to order that ‘he who will not work shall not eat’, whether he be 
tramp or duke.”

About two million adults in England cycle at least once a week, according to 
the lateststatistics from Sport England 
<https://www.sportengland.org/research/who-plays-sport/by-sport/>. The roads in 
and around Bury are certainly busy with cyclists emulating their local Tour de 
France hero.

Ten months ago Colin Davies and his wife, Choi, opened the Drop Off cafe 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/thedropoff_cafe> in Edenfield, a few miles up the 
road from Redvales, where the Yates boys grew up. Their father, John, often 
pops in, and Simon had a brew there during his off-season.

Sitting outside mid-ride on Friday, Phil Simcock and his daughters Iona, nine, 
and Ciara, 11, were buzzing with Adam’s success. The girls were wearing jerseys 
from Team JMC, a rapidly expanding local family-friendly club that welcomes 
allcomers.

“It does make a difference that Adam Yates is local,” said Simcock. “I’ve been 
cycling for a long time but at work people who aren’t normally into cycling 
have been coming up to talk to me about him. Things are changing. I get invited 
to take part in more corporate sportives these days than I do golf days.”

At Leisure Lakes Bikes in Bury, assistant manager Matt Chesters was a little 
less optimistic. “We’ve had the boom,” he said, the roomy shopfloor empty on a 
sunny morning. “There was the Bradley Wiggins effect four years ago, after he 
won the Tour and then gold in the Olympics, when we got all these golfers 
coming in saying they wanted to buy bikes instead. But they realised that 
cycling is actually quite a hard sport, and we don’t see as many of them any 
more.”

He added: “The cycle industry at the moment has plateaued. After the London 
Olympics our business nearly doubled in two years, but a massive spike like 
that can’t go on and on.”
 