
Controversial former British manager Shane Sutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-sutton> is among seven candidates to 
become Australian cycling’s new high performance director. Cycling Australia 
started interviewing the shortlisted candidates on Wednesday and hope their 
choice will start in the role by March.

Sutton enjoyed massive success in the British cycling system, at Team Sky and 
as British Cycling’s technical director. But heresigned as technical director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/shane-sutton-resigns-british-cycling-paralympians>
 before the Rio Olympics amid allegations of sexism and was also accused of 
making derogatory comments about paracyclists.

Jess Varnish stands by sexism allegation despite Sutton’s claims of innocence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/jess-varnish-shane-sutton-sexism-allegations>
An internal investigation found him guilty of using inappropriate and 
discriminatory language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
 towards track cyclist Jess Varnish, who alleged Sutton told her she shouldgo 
and have a baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/23/jess-varnish-british-cyling-shane-sutton-go-and-have-a-baby>
 when she was dropped from the British Olympic program. Sutton has denied the 
allegations and says he would appeal.

Sutton was then accused of calling paracyclists gimps and wobblies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/british-cycling-crisis-shane-sutton-alleged-paralympians-remarks>
, allegations he also denies.

Sutton has polarised opinion among key British cycling figures. While stars 
such as track cycling great Victoria Pendleton and Varnish are strongly 
critical of Sutton, he has also received plenty of support from current and 
former riders including Tour de France winner Bradley Wiggins and Olympic track 
champion Chris Hoy.

There is no doubt Sutton has the credentials to replace Kevin Tabotta as 
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> Australia’s performance 
boss, but it also may prompt a backlash. Speaking about the issue at the Rio 
Olympics, Pendleton said “I wish we had the older brother”.

She was referring to Gary Sutton, who coached the Australian women’s track 
endurance squad at the Games. The Suttons are Australians, with Shane working 
in British cycling since 2002.

Cycling Australia chief executive Nick Green said: “We are looking for the 
next person to be a really strong leader of a very strong cycling system. 
Australia and Great Britain are probably regarded as the two best 
high-performance cycling nations.

“Great Britain are No1 and clearly our strategy is to knock them off in four 
years’ time.”
 