
Snaking down forested hairpin bends towards the finish, just 61 riders remain 
from 201, most beaten down by a gruelling 240km and multiple climbs across some 
of Italy’s most challenging but beautiful terrain. Dubbed “la classica delle 
foglie morte” (the race of the falling/dying leaves), theGiro Di Lombardia 
<http://www.ilombardia.it/en/> recently completed its 110th edition. 

This year it traversed the glimmering waters of Lake Como before climbing up 
through cobbles into the ancient walled section of Citta Alta in Bergamo, where 
buildings glow orange, brown, red and in the autumn light. A sprint finish in 
the town’s main square saw Italy’s Diego Rosa tearfully beaten to the line by 
the ever-smiling Colombian Esteban Chaves, the first non-European ever to 
triumph here.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpy1MNjK30rw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpy1MNjK30rw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpy1MNjK30rw&media=>
 Highlights of this year’s Giro Di Lombardia, where there were only 61 
finishers out of 201 riders. 
Win this prestigious pro race and your reputation is set in stone. The giro is 
broadcast live on Italian national TV and is a key international event for 
riders, sponsors and teams to cement places for next season. Past multiple 
champions include Fausto Coppi, Eddy Merckx, Alfredo Binda, Sean Kelly and 
Bernard Hinault.

Earlier that same day, much slower, I also rode part of the course. To go in 
full Italian style, I wore a Santini jersey, and borrowed a super-slick SK 
Pininfarina model from one of the region’s great bike makers, De Rosa. I was 
guided by a couple of old professionals, the nippy Paolo Lanfranchi (a stage 
winner in the 2000 Giro d’Italia) and beefy Ermanno Brignoli, a powerhouse who 
helped Marco Pantini to his Tour De France and Giro D’Italia 1998 double. As 
our group crosses the finish line, crowds applaud and we’re broadcast on the 
news, but we’re really just a humble appetiser to the main course coming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F993c6a7354d767a7e5f1ae6b1d3ee57c0d10a17d%2F0_297_4455_2673%2F4455.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy's%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy%27s%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F993c6a7354d767a7e5f1ae6b1d3ee57c0d10a17d%2F0_297_4455_2673%2F4455.jpg>
 Peter Kimpton wearing Santini’s official Lombardia jersey, riding the part of 
the course of the Giro Di Lombardia into Bergamo on 1 October 2016. Photograph: 
Nicola Carrara 
There is mythical beauty to this race. It began in 1905, and unlike many 
historic races and tours, has only missed two editions (1943-44). It is 
absurdly difficult, including climbs such as the 11km-long Valcava that 
includes a long 17% gradient stretch. In some years the course even includes 
the notorious Muro di Sormano, which can hit 25%, forcing even the very best to 
get off and walk – truly the romantic stuff of masochistic legend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d87dacc97cb8ed730dec0eced0f48547fab056d%2F667_363_3422_2053%2F3422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy's%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy%27s%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d87dacc97cb8ed730dec0eced0f48547fab056d%2F667_363_3422_2053%2F3422.jpg>
 Giro Di Lombardia competitors struggle up the Muro di Sormano in the 1960s, as 
shown at the Museo Di Ciclismo at the Madonna Del Ghisallo, Como, Italy. 
Photograph: Peter Kimpton/Museo Di Ciclismo/museodelghisallo.it 
If you can escape town traffic, which is at times, frankly dangerous, the 
route around Como is breathtaking, autumn trees reflected exquisitely in the 
lake. Roads are a little bumpy in places, but it’s an exciting alternative for 
the travelling cyclist more familiar with well-ridden French routes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd354192d46d5fc9ac79b2c23128f13582c670e02%2F0_0_4896_3264%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy's%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy%27s%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd354192d46d5fc9ac79b2c23128f13582c670e02%2F0_0_4896_3264%2F4896.jpg>
 Riders pass the chapel of the Madonna Del Ghisallo above Lake Como on the Giro 
Di Lombardi on 1 October 2016. Photograph: Luk Benies/AFP/Getty Images 
Cycling saint

Perhaps the most iconic, and sacred peak of the race is at the chapel of the 
Madonna del Ghisallo above Como, named after a legendary medieval apparition of 
the Virgin Mary. The exquisite interior has a treasure trove of old bikes, 
photographs and jerseys from riders stretching back more than a century. If 
ever cycling is a religion, it is here, where riders come to light a candle and 
pay their respects. Beside the church is an iconic statue of a triumphant and 
fallen rider, and a museum packed with memorabilia that will make any cycling 
fan drool.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bfcb165fe2ad83294c0b8d4c67aa84a026c0346%2F0_0_4320_2880%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy's%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy%27s%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bfcb165fe2ad83294c0b8d4c67aa84a026c0346%2F0_0_4320_2880%2F4320.jpg>
 A wall of bikes, flags and photographs inside the chapel of the Madonna Del 
Ghisello, the adopted saint of cyclists, Como, Italy. Photograph: Peter Kimpton 
Skin deep

Where does Italy sit in cycling culture these days? British cycling is growing 
at a rapid rate with new talent and a raft of new customers with money to 
spend, France might be remain focus point of pro road racing, but Italy still 
has a strong claim to be a spiritual home, where it is still a working-class 
sport. But to get under the skin of Italy’s riding, I decided to also literally 
wear it. I visited another local Bergamo company,Santini 
<http://www.santinisms.it/en/>, creators of 50 years of classic Italian and 
other jerseys.

Set up by Pietro Santini and his three sisters in 1965 and now run by his 
smiling but sharply savvy daughters Monica and Paola, Santini is a true family 
firm, where 85% of the staff are women and everything is designed and 
manufactured under one roof, avoiding outsourcing to keep top-quality control. 
Materials are sourced only from other local firms, and contracts are completed 
for clubs, UCI pro teams and include the coveted world champion rainbow jersey. 
Creative director Fergus Niland shows me round the factory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4489c67f6e548bd0c1381ac1ba30490fc61f6d99%2F73_63_1290_776%2F1290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy's%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy%27s%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4489c67f6e548bd0c1381ac1ba30490fc61f6d99%2F73_63_1290_776%2F1290.jpg>
 Detail of Santini’s 2016 Giro Di Lombardia jersey colours, featuring the 
iconic dying leaves, designed by Fergus Niland. Photograph: Fergus 
Niland/Santini 
Like an art gallery of the sport, classic designs hang everywhere, in Merino 
wool to the latest sleek materials, Raleigh-Campagnelo to L’Eroica. Has jersey 
manufacture changed over the years? Pietro, now 74, is still in the office each 
day, and is full of fabulous cycling stories. He is modestly mates with all the 
greats. Back in the days of Merckx and co, he says, cyclists weren’t so 
interested in what they wore. Now it is an obsession.

The science of wind resistance is pushing the boundaries, so every pro must be 
precisely fitted, wearing kits that normal riders might find very 
uncomfortable. While your average rider might want to look good while having a 
coffee, the pros are only interested in performance in the cycling position, 
regardless of whether it’s ill-fitting off the bike. Could this be like 
supersonic jet planes that, when in the hangar, tended to leaked oil, but when 
in the air, expanded to have perfect skin for speed? The Santinis agree it’s 
exactly like this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F137c86e61a3b48a8ff6bd5b77db775ae0e1f2206%2F0_0_4320_2880%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy's%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycling%2C%20saints%20and%20Santini%3A%20Italy%27s%20legendary%20Giro%20Di%20Lombardia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcycling-saints-and-santini-italys-legendary-giro-di-lombardia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F137c86e61a3b48a8ff6bd5b77db775ae0e1f2206%2F0_0_4320_2880%2F4320.jpg>
 Some of the many treasures at Santini, leading bike clothing company in 
Bergamo, Italy. Photograph: Peter Kimpton 
Have any of their customers been especially difficult? Instantly one is named 
– Mario Cipollini. The 90s Italian sprinter notorious for wearing zebra, tiger 
and muscle suits was apparently never happy with his kit because he claimed to 
already have the perfect body. Germany’s Erik Zabel however, was “always 
friendly and hugged me after races”. Some cyclists however have been very picky 
on detail, but helpful in pushing the industry and technology further, such 
Greg LeMond, or Anna Meares. Where next for cycling kit? The female market is 
rapidly expanding.

From primi to podium, riding or taking in the flavours and culture of this 
historic race, I leave feeling an Italian job may be among the most beautiful 
in cycling.
 