
Last week, Dolce & Gabbana released its first hijab and abaya collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/dolce-gabbana-debuts-luxury-hijab-collection>
 for Muslim women in the Middle East. Catering to the Islamic requirements of 
loose-fitting clothing, the collection featured flowing, full-length dresses 
with long sleeves as well as headscarves – a striking image from a global 
fashion brand at a time where suspicion and hatred of Muslims is on the rise.

D&G is the latest of several major fashion labels to have recently created 
clothing for Muslims. DKNY, Tommy Hilfiger and Oscar de la Renta have also 
produced a clothing line targeting the Muslim market, while H&M featureda 
hijab-wearing model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/28/hijab-h-and-m-mainstream-culture-great-british-bake-off-diversity>
 in one of its 2015 advert campaigns.

Across social media, I have watched Muslim women around the world falling over 
themselves to celebrate the release of these Muslim-friendly collections. 
Though many saw it as a cultural breakthrough, I couldn’t help but take a more 
cynical position. Sales of luxury goods in the Middle East hit$8.7bn 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/clareoconnor/2016/01/06/dolce-gabbana-launches-hijabs-and-abayas-as-middle-eastern-luxury-market-hits-8-7-billion/>
 last year, and Muslims worldwide spent$266bn 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/trending/dolce-gabbana-s-new-hijab-collection-hailed-as-a-smart-move-financially-1.3396498>
 on luxury goods in 2013, it becomes clear what truly motivates these brands in 
their production of “modest” clothing.

Dolce & Gabbana launches luxury hijab collection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/dolce-gabbana-debuts-luxury-hijab-collection>
Perhaps we should remember that Dolce & Gabbana is the same brand that 
released a collection in 2012 featuring white models wearingblack women’s faces 
as earrings 
<http://jezebel.com/5946724/dolce--gabbana-shows-racist-mammy-earrings-and-fun-fabric-prints>
 and clothes, inspired by the racist depictions of black Moors in the 
13th-century SicilianOpera dei Pupi 
<http://www.unesco.org/archives/multimedia/?s=films_details&pg=33&id=8>. Given 
this, I’m reluctant to believe that only a few years later they suddenly care 
about accommodating a maligned ethnic community.

As a Muslim woman and the intended target consumer, I thought that the pale 
white model wearing the clothing served as yet another stark reminder that 
eastern culture may only be celebrated when it is glamorised by western 
society, which can in turn capitalise on it. In the context of global 
Islamophobia, there is something that makes me feel quite uneasy seeing a 
towering white woman praised for looking glamorous in the same clothing that 
often leaves Muslim women perceived as “extremist” and puts themat risk of 
being attacked or even criminalised in some western societies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/hate-crimes-against-muslims-soar-london-islamophobia>
.

How the hijab – and H&M – are reshaping mainstream British culture | Remona Aly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/28/hijab-h-and-m-mainstream-culture-great-british-bake-off-diversity>
This range rather looks like an appropriation of existing traditions without 
giving them any real recognition. The fashion industry has been hugely 
successful in Muslim countries for many years now, and Muslim women around the 
globe have been extremely inventive in creating fashionable looks that allow 
high fashion clothing to conform to guidelines of Islamic dress. Muslim women 
often seek inspiration from countless fashion blogs and social media dedicated 
to presenting modest yet stylish outfits.

D&G seems to recognise Muslim fashion, and want to profit from it too. But as 
the prominent British Muslim fashion blogger and designerDina Torkia recently 
wrote <http://www.dinatorkia.co.uk/style/designer-abbayas-whats-new/>, “I 
dreamed of being included in the mainstream of haute couture, & whilst D&G have 
managed to recognise us with this collection, they’ve also managed to exclude 
us.”

It is difficult for me to feel excited and grateful for a fashion line that 
supposedly caters to me and the requirements of my faith, when it feels as 
though the overwhelming message is that the only desirable Muslim is a wealthy 
one; that Muslim fashion is acceptable, but only when legitimised by a major 
western fashion label. And that ultimately western society will always have the 
monopoly on what is fashionable and relevant.
 