
It was with a sense of déjà vu on Tuesday that Marks & Spencer staff and 
customers at the flagship Champs Elysées store learned it was to close – again.

For 15 years, the British company has not known whether it is coming or going 
in Europe. Its French stores – including its biggest site on the world famous 
Parisian shopping street –were closed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/apr/05/worlddispatch.jonhenley> in 2001,
then reopened in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/apr/01/marks-spencer-france-paris-euro>
. In subsequent years, further French stores opened.

This week, however, M&S revealed it was closing a total of 100 stores worldwide
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/m-and-s-marks-spencer-close-80-stores-major-overhaul>
, including seven in France, all in the Paris area, throwing more than 517 
French workers out of jobs.

M&S culls clothing business as major overhaul curtails global ambition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/m-and-s-marks-spencer-close-80-stores-major-overhaul>
In the drizzle outside the Champs Elysées store, most shoppers clutching M&S 
bags were tourists visitingParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, 
many of them from China and Japan.


“I like the clothes, but I often go to London and can buy them there,” said 
André, a 55-year-old French businessman. “It’s a pity, but I’d have been much 
more upset if they were closing all the food stores.”


Christine, a regular M&S shopper, told journalists gathered outside the store: 
“It’s a shame. I come here often. It sells interesting things, good clothes at 
a reasonable price. As for the food: I find things you don’t get elsewhere.”

The news came just three years after M&S said France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> was the cornerstone of the company’s 
international expansion and just a day after a leading French food website, Le 
Fooding, named M&S one of the best places in the French capital to find 
takeaway food.

The shops that are closing are entirely owned by M&S. Five sell food and 
clothes, two are entirely food outlets. A further 11 stores, operated as 
franchises or joint ventures selling food, are to remain open.

M&S insisted the closures would take place in the next 12 to 18 months after 
consultation with staff unions and representatives. A statement said the 
targeted stores had made £19m of losses in 2015-16.

Among M&S workers, now facing an uncertain future, there was anger and tears.

Yasin Leguet, representative of the Seci-Unsa union at M&S in France, said 
staff at the Champs-Elysées store had feared it would close after the firm’s 
regional director’s fortnightly visits stopped and stock deliveries dwindled.

A union representative at another condemned store at Levallois-Perret, east of 
Paris, told journalists: “It’s a complete shock. I’ve been working here since 
M&S returned in 2011. I don’t know how I’m going to tell my colleagues, when I 
feel so bad myself.”

M&S’s remarkable volte-face comes just three years after John Herre, then 
international director at the retailer, came to France for the opening of a 
store in the 15th arrondissement and declared he was “really satisfied” with 
turnover at the Champs-Elysées store.

“It’s the best of all our shops including those in the United Kingdom,” he 
said. “It’s very positive for us and give us confidence. It’s a priority market 
for us.”


On Tuesday, it was clear the firm’s priorities lay elsewhere.
 