
Damian Collins MP, the head of the House of Commons culture media and sport 
committee, has called upon Team Sky to give more detailed information about 
their use of the antioxidant and mucolytic Fluimucil, the substance that is 
said to have been in the package delivered to the team’s then doctor Richard 
Freeman at the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011.

Following a Guardian investigation last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/chris-froome-team-sky-fluimucal> 
into the uses of Fluimucil, which showed it had been used by injection to aid 
recovery in the period before the UCI banned the use of needles in cycling in 
May 2011, Collins told theObserver: “Team Sky need to set out how they used 
Fluimucil, how often and for what purposes. British Cycling should also be in a 
position to state whether this was a drug they routinely kept in their stores 
and was it regularly supplied to Team Sky.”

Related: How a 2014 Chris Froome interview prompted fresh questions for Team 
Sky over Fluimucil use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/chris-froome-team-sky-fluimucal> 

Sky’s leader, Chris Froome, a three-times winner of the Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/chris-froome-wins-third-tour-de-france>
, confirmed that at his previous team, Barloworld, he had been given injections 
of Fluimucil to assist recovery, something that was within the rules as it was 
before the needle ban. His team doctor at the squad added that the injections 
of Fluimucil were small and given to riders because of its antioxidant 
properties.

When he gave evidence to the committee of MPs on 19 December, Sir Dave 
Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> said that he 
understood Fluimucil was administered by a nebuliser, which turns the 
preparation into an airborne solution that can be inhaled in order to loosen up 
mucus within the lungs when a rider has breathing issues.

The pressure on Brailsford was turned up a notch on Saturday morning when the 
outgoing head of UK Anti-Doping, David Kenworthy, told the BBC that his body’s 
investigation had yet to be given clear information about what was in the 
package. “There’s still no definite answer from anyone who was involved. I 
still don’t know what was in there; I’m no nearer finding out than you are,” he 
said.

“People could remember a package that was delivered to France, they can 
remember who asked for it, they can remember the route it took, who delivered 
it, the times it arrived. The select committee has got expense sheets and 
travel documents.

“So everybody can remember this from five years ago, but no one can remember 
what was in the package. That strikes me as being extraordinary. It is very 
disappointing.”

Related: Ukad chair adds to pressure on Sir Dave Brailsford over mystery 
package proof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/ukad-pressure-dave-brailsford-team-sky-david-kenworthy>

When asked about Brailsford’s explanation to MPs that the package contained 
Fluimucil, Kenworthy said: “Well that’s what Dave Brailsford came out with at 
the hearing. But actually, if you recall, he didn’t say: ‘I know that’s what it 
was’. He said: ‘I have been told that’s what it was’.

“We’re not giving up on this, and we’ll dig and delve and find out what was in 
that package”

A statement from Team Sky on Saturday said: “As we have said from the start, 
we are confident that there has been no wrongdoing. We are continuing to 
cooperate fully with Ukad and we look forward to the conclusion of the 
investigation.”

Collins has said that his committee will wait until the investigation is 
complete before calling further witnesses, who could include Freeman and the 
coach who transported the package, Simon Cope. On Saturday the MP repeated his 
concern that there may be no paper trail to confirm what was being carried.

“One question will remain until it can be determined beyond doubt what was in 
the package. That is how can you be certain that a cycling team is living up to 
its own professed high standards if there are no written records available to 
the management of what the team doctor is administering to the cyclists.”
 