
The beleaguered Team Sky head, Sir Dave Brailsford, has criticised the 
chairman of UK Anti Doping, David Kenworthy, alleging that byspeaking out last 
weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/ukad-pressure-dave-brailsford-team-sky-david-kenworthy>
, the Ukad leader may have undermined the ongoing inquiry into alleged 
wrongdoing in cycling, which is focused on a mystery Jiffy bag containing the 
mucolytic Fluimucil delivered to Team Sky at the Critérium du Dauphiné in June 
2011.

Speaking during Team Sky’s media day in Mallorca, Brailsford asserted that he 
has no intention of resigning from his post with the team, reiterated that his 
relations with his team leader Chris Froome are on an even keel in spite of the 
triple Tour de France winner’sunwillingness to back his boss last Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/chris-froome-sir-dave-brailsford-team-sky-drugs-questions-jiffy-bag>
, and added that Ukad had begun questioning riders from Sky’s squad at the 2011 
Dauphiné about the package and its contents. These are far from routine times 
at the team that has dominated the Tour de France since 2012.

“Extraordinary” and “very disappointing” were the terms used by Kenworthy to 
describe the evidence provided by Brailsford and other senior figures in British
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> about the package’s 
contents, primarily the singular lack of documentation to back up Brailsford’s 
assertion that the Jiffy bag contained Fluimucil, a substance most commonly 
ingested as a mucolytic.

Team Sky have denied any wrongdoing, as has the rider to whom the package’s 
contents were administered, the former Sky leader Sir Bradley Wiggins. 
Brailsford went a step further on Tuesday, however, stating that it was 
Kenworthy’s comments that were “extraordinary” given the context of an ongoing 
investigation and accusing him of possibly “pre-empting” its conclusion.

“I think most fair-minded people would say there is a process here, an 
investigation by a statutory organisation – most fair minded people would 
respect and wait until we get to the end [and they have] asked questions that 
need to be asked, gone to places they need to go,” he said. “For him to comment 
in the middle of that process – I’ve written to Ukad to express our concerns 
about that.

“Even this week Ukad got in touch with some of the riders who were at the 
Dauphiné. So there is work to be done – let’s wait until the end of that 
process and then we can draw some conclusions. To try to pre-empt [it] and 
comment about it halfway through that process is what everyone wants to do but 
ultimately we have to do the right thing.”

Froome seemed unable or unwilling to publicly back Brailsford’s handling of 
the affair at his pre-season press call last Friday, and Brailsford admitted 
that letting their leader have his say had been a PR blunder.

“If I’d thought about it from a PR point of view I’d have told him to go 
straight to Australia [where Froome will train and race for the next few weeks] 
because it’s my job to be answering the questions,” he said. “It’s not his 
place to have to be put under pressure and answer the questions that he was 
being asked.”

The heat will remain on the Sky principal until the Ukad report delivers its 
verdict, but Brailsford said he is determined to remain in post. “People’s 
perception of me is what it may be, I accept that totally,” he said. “I know in 
my own mind, in my own soul that I’m doing this the right way.

“Nobody continues blindly without any self-awareness. That’s not the way 
it works. My role is create an environment in which people can perform.

“Anyone who can’t do what they are meant to be doing would ask themselves 
where they are at. I look at myself in the mirror and try to hold myself to the 
highest standards. If I can no longer do what I’ve set out to do I’d think 
about that when I got there.”

As for the detail of “Jiffy-bag-gate”, Brailsford has stated that he has no 
wish to prejudice Ukad in its work, hence his inability to provide answers on 
Tuesday or at other times. It is an honest intention no doubt, but the inquiry 
seems to have been cited so often in the past three months when questions have 
been asked of those involved that its mention is acquiring the feel of Father 
Ted batting away sticky clerical issues by describing them as an ecumenical 
matter.

Brailsford confirmed that his Welsh star Geraint Thomas will target this 
year’s Giro d’Italia and that he still hopes the Mancunian Adam Yates – fourth 
finisher in last year’s Tour – and his brother Simon may one day ride at Sky.

He also revealed that the team have set up a small “delivery unit” with the 
assistance of Tony Blair’s former adviser Sir Michael Barber, to help them work 
through issues which come up in daily performance meetings, such as punctures 
in races and the like. The centre of attention for a good while to come, 
however, is likely to be a delivery of quite another kind.

Related: Ukad chair adds to pressure on Sir Dave Brailsford over mystery 
package proof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/ukad-pressure-dave-brailsford-team-sky-david-kenworthy>
 