
In 2012, I visited the V&A’s costume preservation department to see the 
preparations for the museum’s record-breakingDavid Bowie retrospective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/16/david-bowie-guide-retrospective-show>
 the following year. A curator carefully unwrapped the tissue paper around one 
garment and laid it out for me to see. It was an item as familiar to me as the 
school uniform I wore for my first five years of secondary school, and indeed, 
a picture of Bowie wearing it has been on my bedroom wall for most of that time:
a knitted jumpsuit in a bright zig-zag pattern 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/spy/celebrity-photos/2013/03/06/david-bowie-style-file---fashion-history-in-pictures/gallery/951078>
, with one leg cut off at the upper thigh and one arm cut away to reveal bare 
shoulder. It was, of course, astage outfit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/18/david-bowie-victoria-albert-museum-costumes>
 he wore during his Ziggy Stardust/Aladdin Sane tours, and the biggest surprise 
about it for me, close up, was that it was knitted, with quite thick wool in 
the most richly patterned parts.

I remarked that it must have been ridiculously hot to wear during a frenetic 
live show, and the curators laughed and said that sweat damage was one of the 
main problems they were working on with the stage clothes. (The original 
jumpsuit, for instance, had long since rotted away, and the one shown at the 
V&A had actually been recreated by its designer,Kansai Yamamoto 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/f/fashion-in-motion-kansai-yamamoto/>, 
for an exhibition in New York a few years earlier.)

Later, I got to talk to Yamamoto on the phone and he told me about the first 
time he saw Bowie wear his clothes on stage, in a 1973 show at the Radio City 
Music Hall in New York. “There’s a time difference of 13 hours between Tokyo 
and New York, but a good friend of mine phoned me in Japan many times through 
the night, saying, ‘There’s this very interesting person calledDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> here in New York. You’ve got to 
see him. Fly over immediately!’ If somebody calls you again and again at 3am, 
it must really be pretty interesting. So I cancelled all other plans for that 
week, and got on a plane to see his show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1c34a3a333d4e02034292ea6a026c3bf969b219%2F0_0_1750_2624%2F1750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%E2%80%99s%20style%20legacy%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20stole%20ideas%20from%20everywhere%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%E2%80%99s%20style%20legacy%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20stole%20ideas%20from%20everywhere%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1c34a3a333d4e02034292ea6a026c3bf969b219%2F0_0_1750_2624%2F1750.jpg>
 David Bowie in 1973 on his Ziggy Stardust tour wearing a Kansai Yamamoto 
knitted jumpsuit. Photograph: Ilpo Musto/Rex Features 
“I’d never seen a performance like it. When the show started, he came down 
from the ceiling, wearing clothes I had designed. Then there was a movement 
that often occurs inkabuki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/jun/29/theatre.japan>, which is called 
hikinuki, where somebody is wearing one costume and it is stripped off, 
immediately revealing what is underneath. So he was wearing all black and then 
all of a sudden that disappeared, and he was wearing full colour. It was very 
dramatic, and the audience all rose to their feet, so there was a standing 
ovation right at the beginning.

“My clothes were normally made for professional models – this was the first 
time they had been used for an artist or singer. It felt like the beginning of 
a new age.”

The two men became friends, and later that year met up in Tokyo to collaborate 
on more stage outfits, including the knitted jumpsuit. Yamamoto helped Bowie 
gain a deeper understanding of the Japanese culture that so fascinated him, 
taking him to dinner with the reveredkabuki actor Bandō Tamasaburō 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Bando-Tamasaburo-V>, for instance. Through 
Bowie, Yamamoto says he learned to present his designs more theatrically, and 
start a second career as a producer. “Throughout this time, we were always 
bouncing off each other, inspiring each other.”

The jumpsuit, meanwhile, has echoed through fashion ever since, from the 80s 
designs of Bodymap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/22/club-catwalk-london-fashion-1980s>
 to the knitted leggings every teenage girl was sporting last winter.

There are stories like this from almost every year of Bowie’s long career. He 
was the first, the original and the best pop chameleon, ringing the 
ch-ch-changes for every new release or tour, playing with costume, masks and 
alter egos in a way that always felt organic and interesting. He stole ideas 
from everywhere and was a great collaborator, pushing almost everyone he worked 
with to do their best work, but Bowie was always unmistakably Bowie, adding his 
own distinctive sense of style into the mix.

He and his glam-rock contemporary Marc Bolan probably did more than anyone to 
introduce androgyny into the mainstream, as well as the idea that sexuality 
could be far more fluid and flexible than we had been taught.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33965b2aed3d0ad53403133ca0f9bc8716736847%2F0_0_2004_2042%2F2004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%E2%80%99s%20style%20legacy%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20stole%20ideas%20from%20everywhere%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%E2%80%99s%20style%20legacy%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20stole%20ideas%20from%20everywhere%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33965b2aed3d0ad53403133ca0f9bc8716736847%2F0_0_2004_2042%2F2004.jpg>
 Wide-brimmed fedoras like the one Bowie wore in The Man Who Fell to Earth 
appeared on the Lanvin catwalk in 2011. Photograph: Allstar/British 
Lion/Studiocanal 
“I was living in Paris when I first experienced Bowie’s music, and the 
influence was instant and permanent,”Jean Paul Gaultier wrote 
<http://www.out.com/fashion/2013/03/13/my-bowie-jean-paul-gaultier> on Out 
magazine’s website. “He was in a dress forthe sleeve of The Man Who Sold the 
World 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412767834040/8be09e02-620a-4180-9262-c79b54424be6-1024x768.jpeg?w=1920&q=85&auto=format&sharp=10&s=e4b72870250068aac28efaae31012f0c>
 – there was a sense of ambiguity and originality that was incredible at the 
time ... I remember going to gay bars in London that Bowie was known to 
frequent and it gave many of us courage not to hide, to have confidence in 
ourselves.’

In 1975 Bowie veered off into new territory, exploring his love of Philly soul 
withthe Young Americans album 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412768706188/9bfe614f-fe9f-4ebf-8502-8e6571ed750b-620x620.jpeg?w=1920&q=85&auto=format&sharp=10&s=74528e8ccd2a8b55da2e4c6953623a5d>
, and introducing a look that has echoed through both gay clubs and soul 
weekenders ever since: the extravagant quiff or dyed wedge cut, teamed with a 
tailored shirt and baggy trousers. A year later, with Station to Station, he 
created his last great character,the Thin White Duke 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412768756681/d0de5891-75f0-4985-ae25-760650eb561a-1024x768.jpeg?w=1920&q=85&auto=format&sharp=10&s=5704df2ade9f39bef6c34039b435dcda>
, whose louche, suited look has influenced menswear ever since.

In 1980 he adopted a New Romantic pierrot guise 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412769177546/f2cd2818-8954-45f1-a54e-736a99fe29f2-1024x768.jpeg?w=1920&q=85&auto=format&sharp=10&s=c1d29316502b45065a5fceff99d3085c>
 for Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps), an album explicitly reclaiming ground 
that had been occupied by club kids who had grown up under his influence. After 
that he lost his way a little, but it barely mattered: he had changed popular 
culture indelibly.

There was no internet when I was in my teens. For us, a new Bowie album was 
not just a collection of songs, it was a doorway to new images, books, art, 
cultural references and sounds. We pored over his interviews and influences, 
and made them our own. Although I never did get the chiselled cheekbones I so 
longed for, through Bowie I learned aboutLinsday Kemp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/23/david-bowie-and-me> and Aleister 
Crowley, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/15/unseen-aleister-crowley-writings-short-story-the-drug>
 about Iggy Pop and Nietzsche, about Kraftwerk and kabuki, and all kinds of 
other things besides.

I’m not alone in this, of course. Which is why Bowie has been so influential 
across our culture, and nowhere more so than fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-key-looks-pictures>
. Bowie’s 1980 track Fashion has provided the soundtrack for more catwalk shows 
than I could ever hope to list here, and of course Bowie made a cameo 
appearance –judging a walk-off between two competing male models 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=InIxKCa3H9g> – in Ben Stiller’s brilliant 2001 
fashion spoof Zoolander. In 2014, he even appeared in a fashion ad himself,
crooning seductively to the model Arizona Muse for Louis Vuitton 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kMswI4VCdMc>. (“He was so lovely,” Muse told 
me afterwards. “Very charming, and easy to talk to, with a really nice, calm 
energy.”)

Lady Gaga makes explicit reference to Bowie in both her Applause 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pco91kroVgQ> and Just Dance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Abk1jAONjw> videos, while Kate Moss – that 
most reliable barometer of all that is best in British style –has dressed as 
Bowie twice 
<https://www.google.co.uk/imgres?imgurl=http://i-am-not-a-celebrity.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/IANAC-KATE-MOSS-DAVID-BOWIE-VOGUE.jpg&imgrefurl=http://i-am-not-a-celebrity.com/2011/11/30/french-vs-english-kate-moss-as-bowie/&h=1800&w=2781&tbnid=2mThpplPoGQD6M:&docid=jmsO_GuJuYVTmM&ei=rtuTVqfNDsTtaNCSucAN&tbm=isch&ved=0ahUKEwin3L2WmqLKAhXENhoKHVBJDtgQMwggKAAwAA>
: for British Vogue in 2003, and for French Vogue in 2011. In 2014, she did it 
again,picking up a Brit award on Bowie’s behalf 
<https://youtu.be/yX_QU2KpC68#t=1m35s> dressed in one of Yamamoto’s actual 
Ziggy Stardust costumes.

But this is mere surface, and Bowie’s influence is deep in the DNA of 
contemporary fashion. To celebrate his 69th birthday – sadly only four days ago 
– several fashion websites pointed to his influence on recent catwalk shows, 
for both men’s and women’s collections.Givenchy’s spring 2010 ready-to-wear show
 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/spring-2010-ready-to-wear/givenchy/slideshow/collection>
, for instance, featured a striped blazer that is a clear homage to a Freddie 
Burretti one sported by Bowie in 1973; a year later, Lanvin’s autumn 2011 show 
saw models dressed inwide-brimmed fedoras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-key-looks-pictures#img-5>
 like Bowie in The Man Who Fell to Earth. Balmain’s collection had an Aladdin 
Sane jumpsuit, while Walter Van Beirendonck had a blazer adorned with a clever
Aladdin Sane diagonal flash 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412768273800/4018c070-c54d-4811-9d6b-dac5794b03b6-2002x2040.jpeg?w=1920&q=85&auto=format&sharp=10&s=f7abea96a2bb035fc245d799d523ef27>
 across the lapels, andDries Van Noten 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/fall-2011-menswear/dries-van-noten/slideshow/collection>
 andAlber Elbaz <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S3N8QZTsZic>’s autumn menswear 
shows both heavily referenced the Thin White Duke.

In 2012 Emilio Pucci had jewel-bright suits with more than a hint of Bowie 
about them, while Alexander McQueen had wide trousers straight from Bowie’s 
Hunky Dory period.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a2a5cff964d2e52681d5ebb277ba0c378cfa3c%2F0_0_2797_3565%2F2797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%E2%80%99s%20style%20legacy%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20stole%20ideas%20from%20everywhere%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%E2%80%99s%20style%20legacy%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20stole%20ideas%20from%20everywhere%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-style-icon-fashion-legacy-aladdin-sane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a2a5cff964d2e52681d5ebb277ba0c378cfa3c%2F0_0_2797_3565%2F2797.jpg>
 Jean Paul Gaultier acknowledged Bowie’s inspiration by giving models flaming 
red mullets in his 2013 fashion show. Photograph: Anwar Hussein/Getty Images 
Jean Paul Gaultier, who used Diamond Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/apr/18/best-apocalyptic-albums-david-bowie-diamond-dogs>
 to open his first show for Pierre Cardin in 1975, has returned to this fertile 
creative ground again and again, paying homage to Kansai Yamamoto’scolourful 
prints in spring 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2010/oct/02/fashion-paris-fashion-week#img-39>
, and revisiting theone-legged jumpsuit 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/spring-2013-ready-to-wear/jean-paul-gaultier/slideshow/collection#65>
 in 2013, both times lovingly acknowledging the reference by sending out his 
models inflaming red mullets 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/fashion/spring-summer-2013/ready-to-wear/jean-paul-gaultier/close-up-photos/gallery/863152>
.

Hedi Slimane <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/hedi-slimane> – another huge 
fan who claimed, in 2010, “I was literally born with a David Bowie album in my 
hand” – last referenced the Thin White Duke in his spring 14 collection for 
Saint Laurent. A year later, Raf Simons made a nod to Yamamoto’s jumpsuits in 
his spring 2015 couture collection for Dior, while Jun Takahashi recreated the 
cover of Heroes for his Undercover Fall 15 menswear lookbook.

Most of all, what Bowie did was give generations of teens who didn’t feel like 
they fitted in permission to be different, and some ideas to start playing with 
while they found identities of their own. Creativity always finds an 
expression, and it would be absurd to suggest that without him, we wouldn’t 
have Boy George or Lady Gaga, Gaultier orSlimane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/21/hedi-slimane-designer-photographer>
. But had Bowie not existed, it would all look, sound and feel slightly 
different.

Speaking at the launch party for the V&A exhibition 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/blog/network/tilda-swintons-dinner-speech-opening-david-bowie>
, Tilda Swinton admitted it was the image, not the music, that first drew her 
into Bowie’s world. “When I was 12 … I carried a copy of Aladdin Sane around 
with me – a full two years before I had the wherewithal to play it,” she said.

“The image of that gingery, bony, pinky-whitey person on the cover with the 
liquid mercury collar bone was – for one particular young moonage daydreamer – 
the image of planetary kin, of a close imaginary cousin and companion of choice.

“I’m not saying that if you hadn’t pitched up I would have worn a pie-crust 
collar and pearls like some of those I went to school with. I’m not saying that 
if you hadn’t weighed in, [the London DJ and club icon] Princess Julia would 
have been less inventive with the pink blusher. Simply that you provided the 
sideways like us with such rare and out-there company, such fellowship; you 
pulled us in and left your arm dangling over our necks, and kept us warm.”
 