
The prominent anti-doping campaigner David Millar has said the in-competition 
use of triamcinolone,the drug used by Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/bradley-wiggins-denies-doctor-geert-leinders-gave-banned-steroid-tue>
 before Tour de France and Giro d’Italia races between 2011 and 2013, should be 
outlawed. Millar, a former professional cyclist who was himself banned from the 
sport in 2004 after admitting to doping, also told the Daily Telegraph there 
should be a full public disclosure of therapeutic exemptions (TUEs), thedetails 
of which have been at the heart of the widely publicised Fancy Bears website 
leaks in recent days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/tue-fancy-bears-wada-leaks>.

Bradley Wiggins faces a fight for his reputation in wake of Wada hack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
Millar argued that Kenacort, a trade name for triamcinolone, was the most 
potent drug he took and described it as performance-enhancing 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/cycling/2016/09/19/drugs-used-by-sir-bradley-wiggins-should-be-banned-says-david-mi/>
. “As I said in my book [Racing Through The Dark],” Millar explained, “I took 
EPO and testosterone patches, and they obviously produce huge differences in 
your blood and you felt at your top level … Kenacort, though, was the only one 
you took and three days later you looked different. It’s quite scary because 
it’s catabolic so it’s eating into you. It felt destructive. It felt powerful.”

He concluded: “We [athletes] shouldn’t have to face this. If it’s that strong 
we shouldn’t be allowed to take it unless there is a serious issue. And if 
we’re suffering from that serious an issue, we shouldn’t be racing. I don’t 
know how a doctor could prescribe it [before a race]. I can’t fathom it.”

Wiggins’s use of triamcinolone was revealed when the Fancy Bears hackers 
published medical data stored by the World Anti-Doping Agency (Wada)on their 
site last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-and-bradley-wiggins-targeted-in-wada-hacking-scandal>
.

Following the leaks Wiggins, the 2012 Tour de France winner and five-times 
Olympic champion, was forced to clarify comments made in his 2012 autobiography 
that he strictly observed cycling’s “no needles” policy, despite having 
injections of triamcinolone before the 2011 and 2012 editions of the Tour de 
France, with a third coming shortly before the 2013 Giro d’Italia.

There is no suggestion Wiggins did anything to break anti-doping regulations 
and that before his use of triamcinolone his team applied to the race doctor of 
cycling’s governing body (UCI), who acted according toWada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> guidelines in administering the drugs.
 