
Donatella Versace <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/versace> has described 
her brand’s autumn/winter 2016 collection as daywear, but her definition is not 
the same as other people’s.

The show on Friday evening presented fur coats with dégradé effect, so the 
colour gradually turned from palest pink to iciest blue, cocktail bar-worthy 
dresses and sequin blouses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdaywear-but-not-as-we-know-it-the-latest-versace-look%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91cb2ce5c8c311d4bb00615d53223d9946150ed9%2F678_150_700_874%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daywear%2C%20but%20not%20as%20we%20know%20it%20%E2%80%93%20the%20latest%20Versace%20look&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdaywear-but-not-as-we-know-it-the-latest-versace-look%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daywear%2C%20but%20not%20as%20we%20know%20it%20%E2%80%93%20the%20latest%20Versace%20look&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdaywear-but-not-as-we-know-it-the-latest-versace-look%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91cb2ce5c8c311d4bb00615d53223d9946150ed9%2F678_150_700_874%2F700.jpg>
 Donatella Versace in Milan this week. Photograph: Mourad Balti/EPA 
Even in a world where trends such as athevening mean categories are blurred, 
and jogging bottoms are acceptable dinner attire, it’s somewhat different to 
what the average office worker wears nine to five.

These clothes were worn by modern Insta-icons of glamour: Kendall Jenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kendall-jenner>, Jourdan Dunn and Gigi 
Hadid, who opened the show in an oversized duffel coat. The three have 65 
million Instagram followers between them.

The fans gathered outside the Milan convention centre where the event took 
place, in the hope of getting a selfie with their idols, said it all: Versace 
is a brand about dressing up, designed to be worn by women who want to be seen, 
whatever time of day it is.

Donatella explained that the collection had partly been inspired by a song 
called Ti Ricordi Di Me? (Do You Remember Me?), which was included in the 
soundtrack for the show. “These are clothes that make sure you will be 
remembered,” she said. “They are for a Versace woman, a strong woman.”


The reference to the song speaks volumes about the hip circles Donatella is 
moving in. Written by cult Belgian dance duo Soulwax, it is for a fake Italian 
electropunk band Erasmus, and will appear on the soundtrack for new film 
Belgica, an award-winner at the Sundance festival last month.

Whatever the quibbles over the right category for these clothes, the 
collection was strong – perhaps because Donatella is the kind of designer who 
works hard to reflect the zeitgeist, hence the Insta-models, her own Instagram 
account and the nod to new cinema releases.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdaywear-but-not-as-we-know-it-the-latest-versace-look%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F695f4f1c2c95e1b483338270a0abb02d267cf0ad%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daywear%2C%20but%20not%20as%20we%20know%20it%20%E2%80%93%20the%20latest%20Versace%20look&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdaywear-but-not-as-we-know-it-the-latest-versace-look%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daywear%2C%20but%20not%20as%20we%20know%20it%20%E2%80%93%20the%20latest%20Versace%20look&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdaywear-but-not-as-we-know-it-the-latest-versace-look%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F695f4f1c2c95e1b483338270a0abb02d267cf0ad%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 Donatella Versace explained that the collection had partly been inspired by a 
song called Ti Ricordi Di Me, or Do You Remember Me?, which was included in the 
soundtrack for the show. Photograph: Stefano Rellandini/Reuters 
The designs played into what young women wear now – little brightly coloured 
sequinned backpacks, lower heels, shiny shearling coats.

If there was an inherent glamour – something that Versace has in its bones – 
most of the pieces were wearable, from a printed shirt worn with matching 
trousers to oversized biker jackets in pastel colours and beautifully cut slip 
dresses with sequin trim.

The couture collection, presented in Paris last month, had one eye on the 
Oscars on Sunday night. This was more for the after-party.

Versace, a brand that has a 90s heritage packed full of supermodels and 
excess, is in prime position to take advantage of the decade’s revival in 
fashion.

That was present here in the starry model casting – Donatella described the 
likes of Hadid and Jenner as “a new generation of top models” – and the baroque 
print, a reworking of the swirls and filigree often used by Donatella’s brother 
Gianni.

Transferred on to a background of those icy colours, it felt different. “It’s 
as if they took the classic print, it exploded in the sky, and reformed,” said 
Donatella. “I always try to do something new.”

Versace, in existence since 1978, is now such a part of the Italian fashion 
establishment that Italy’s prime minister chose to wear the label for the 
opening ofMilan fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week> on Wednesday. 
Donatella, never one to miss an opportunity, made sure this was made public 
knowledge.

In a post on Instagram, she was pictured with Matteo Renzi, wearing a Versace 
suit, the two in a friendly embrace. If Miuccia Prada and Gucci’s Alessandro 
Michele are in something of an intellectual discussion in Milan fashion, 
Donatella does something different. She brings the party, day or night. It’s a 
role that suits her – and Versace as a brand.

The net profit for Versace increased by 27% in 2014 and, according to chief 
executive Gian Giacomo Ferraris, it is the target to reach €800m (£630m) for 
the group’s sales by 2017. It is understood that an initial public offering 
will follow.
 