
The use of plebiscites to settle policy questions is “dead” and the prospects 
of a cross-party vote on marriage equality are “much brighter than ever 
before”, according to the Liberal senator Dean Smith.

Smith, the first openly gay federal Liberal parliamentarian, made the comments 
to Guardian Australia in a wide-ranging interview on his contribution to the 
marriage equality and free speech debates in 2016, and the direction of the 
Coalition.

The Western Australian senator was the only Coalition MP or senator to 
publicly oppose the same-sex marriage plebiscite on the basis that it 
undermined parliamentary democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/liberal-senator-breaks-coalition-ranks-to-call-for-parliamentary-vote-on-marriage-equality>
. He called for a free vote in the life of the 45th parliament.

Liberal senator breaks Coalition ranks to call for parliamentary vote on 
marriage equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/liberal-senator-breaks-coalition-ranks-to-call-for-parliamentary-vote-on-marriage-equality>
Smith also called for a broadening of the free speech debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/28/broaden-free-speech-debate-beyond-racial-discrimination-act-says-liberal-senator>
 by advocating the joint parliamentary inquiry examine all dimensions of free 
speech, not just the curbs on expression in section 18C of the Racial 
Discrimination Act.

He rattled off a range of issues in which he split from the parliamentary 
party since he entered the Senate in 2012, including opposing the deregulation 
of Australia’s wheat marketing arrangements and being the first to oppose the 
Coalition’s bipartisan commitment to recognise local governments in the 
constitution. Smith’s independence stems from some advice from John Howard. 
Smith was an adviser to the former prime minister.

“[Howard] shared a powerful observation with me early in my parliamentary 
career at the time of the wheat debate,” he said. “I met with him in his Sydney 
office and … one thing he said has always stuck with me. He said that in his 
view, if people don’t stand up for something early in their parliamentary life, 
then they don’t usually stand up at all.”

Marriage equality

On the plebiscite issue, Smith labelled the proposed national vote, blocked by 
the Senate, “alien to our modern style of parliamentary democracy”.

Smith said he believes “the idea of plebiscites as a means of resolving policy 
issues in Australia is now well and truly dead”, despite the uncertainty about 
whether the Coalition will maintain its support for a plebiscite on same-sex 
marriage.

“At the end of the day we all have to walk with our own conscience, and I am 
very comfortable with the decision I made. I did not come to parliament to 
argue for same-sex marriage. So it does surprise me that I have become such a 
strong and clear advocate for marriage.”

Western Australia premier opposes February marriage equality plebiscite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/22/western-australia-premier-opposes-marriage-equality-plebiscite-in-february-2017>
In addition to consistently being guided by conscience, Smith said every time 
he had split from his parliamentary colleagues it was in defence of the stated 
position of the Western Australia Liberal party. “And on the plebiscite, my 
position wasthe same as the WA premier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/22/western-australia-premier-opposes-marriage-equality-plebiscite-in-february-2017>
,” he added.

He will serve on the Senate committee scrutinising the government’s same-sex 
marriage bill exposure draft, and said it was the “most significant legislative 
option on the issue of marriage to have been put up for public scrutiny”. He 
suggested that the committee inquiry could report on how to make it a better 
bill, including striking the best balance between religious freedom and 
anti-discrimination laws.

Malcolm Turnbull said the government has “no plans” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/11/same-sex-marriage-issue-wont-be-back-on-table-for-now-saysturnbull>
 to advance marriage equality since the plebiscite was blocked. But Smith says 
the prospects for a successful parliamentary vote on marriage equality, with 
religious exemptions, are much brighter than ever before.

He said dealing with such a bill through a conscience vote was the most 
defensible because it is “consistent with the customs and traditions of the 
party over many, many years”.

On the matter of whether he would support a vote for a cross-party same-sex 
marriage bill in the Senate, Smith noted only that the use of private senators’ 
bills to advance reform of section 18C “demonstrates that senators are offered 
more freedoms, and opportunities to pursue legislative change than their house 
colleagues”.

Free speech: it’s not just 18C

Government to launch 'free speech' inquiry into section 18C of the Racial 
Discrimination Act
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/government-to-launch-free-speech-inquiry-into-section-18c-of-the-racial-discrimination-act>
In the free speech debate, Smith said he was one of the first to propose 
refining section 18C after the Abbott government dropped its commitment to 
repeal the law. He’s pleased withthe terms of reference of the inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/government-to-launch-free-speech-inquiry-into-section-18c-of-the-racial-discrimination-act>
, which he says are broad and include examining the Law Reform Commission 
report on traditional rights and freedoms.

“I think to have credibility it would be prudent of the parliamentary inquiry 
to give consideration to other free speech issues that are of interest to other 
politicians and political parties, such as defamation laws. It doesn’t mean the 
inquiry has to come to a conclusive view ... but the Law Reform Commission 
report is a very important foundation on which the parliamentary inquiry can 
build.”

Smith’s thinking on the reasons for seeking refinement of section 18C is of a 
piece with his colleagues. Instances of hurtful speech should be combated not 
by “abrogating personal responsibility and putting trust in the government and 
laws” but defeated in the court of public opinion.

Elitism, the monarchy and the return of One Nation

Another issue that puts Smith in the conservative camp of his party is the 
republic. Smith describes himself as “a devoted constitutional monarchist”. 
Although Turnbull led the unsuccessful “yes” campaign in the 1999 republic 
referendum and several other senior Liberals are republicans,the majority are 
either opposed or undeclared on the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/most-mps-and-senators-want-to-ditch-monarchy-says-australian-republican-movement>
.

“People quickly forget that Australia has already had its Trump and Brexit 
moments – the defeat of the republic referendum was a triumph of the ordinary 
folk over elites, country over city, small states over the 
Melbourne-Sydney-Canberra axis,” Smith said. “And of course the media called it 
wrongly.”

Most MPs and senators want to ditch monarchy, says Australian Republican 
Movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/most-mps-and-senators-want-to-ditch-monarchy-says-australian-republican-movement>
Smith said the monarchy was a symbol of authority and unity “free from 
partisan politics”, implying a flaw in both the republican models of direct 
election or appointment of the president by parliament. “The challenge is still 
for republicans to agree an alternative model, and there is little chance of 
unanimity on that point in the near future. The crown in the Australian 
constitution has nothing to fear from republicanism for a very, very long time.”

While Smith sees the monarchy as a solid foundation of Australia’s democracy, 
little else seemed quite so solid in 2016.

The July double dissolution saw the election of four One Nation senators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/04/pauline-hansons-one-nation-wins-four-seats-in-new-look-senate>
. The Coalition and particularly its junior partner, the regional and rural 
National party, are concerned One Nation is eating into its support with its 
populist economic and anti-immigration platform.

Minor parties and independents now hold 11 crossbench seats in the Senate, or 
20 if the Australian Greens are included.

The explanation, according to Smith, is that “people detest inauthenticity and 
insincerity, and have tired and grown cynical of the talking points and the 
same old partisan games”.


Of Pauline Hanson, Smith said: “People see in her battle something they can 
relate to, and something that they can respect. Voters are looking for straight 
talking, an honest assessment of their problems and above all else someone to 
take a real interest in their local challenges and get their local issues dealt 
with.”

Pauline Hanson's One Nation wins four seats in new-look Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/04/pauline-hansons-one-nation-wins-four-seats-in-new-look-senate>
Smith told Guardian Australia the most fascinating debate in politics at the 
moment was within the conservative movement about what it means to be a 
conservative and whether cultural or economic questions should be the focus.

“Years ago, the demarcation line between conservatives and moderates in the 
Liberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> was 
the issue of the republic. Today, some try to paint the new line as being 
same-sex marriage.” But Smith warned against such a litmus test because 
conservatism “can only succeed if it grows”.

Asked how society determines which institutions should change (such as 
marriage) and which should stay the same (which Smith says includes the 
monarchy), he said Australians are instinctively conservative, but they are not 
reactionary, they are capable of embracing change on their own terms and in 
their own time.

“Anyone that says to me, or advocates, that they want time to stand still or 
to go back into time … I treat with great caution.”

Economy

Asked about the issue on which the Coalition could most improve with respect 
to these measures, Smith said the biggest challenge is the economy.

“We need to give people greater confidence in their economic future ... To 
convince them to accept the Liberal economic agenda: that free trade, smaller 
government and lower taxes is the best way for ordinary Australians to protect 
their families.”

Smith knows more than most about how to pitch that economic message. He grew 
up in a working class suburb of Perth and attended state primary and secondary 
schools. His father was a police officer for 35 years; his mother did a range 
of part-time work. Smith represents the Western Australian point of view most 
strongly on the distribution of the goods and services tax, taking aim at the 
formula that nowgives the state just 30 cents in the dollar back for tax paid 
in the state 
<https://www.theguardian.com.au/story/3074720/was-slice-of-the-gst-pie-set-to-decrease/?cs=12>
. “The GST distribution reform argument isn’t so much about geography as it is 
about basic fairness. I’m not sure that even the most parochial Tasmanian or 
South Australian can mount much of a case [for the current allocation].”

He said even the New South Wales government “is starting to bang the drum” on 
GST distribution “because they recognise that the formula as it currently exist 
actually punishes success and economic reform, and rewards mendicants”.


 