
Ben Eltham, journalist and academic 

On 1 January, the government’s new means test for the pension came into force. 
The new assets test imposes a stricter “taper” for the aged pension for 
wealthier pensioners. The taper is the rate at which the pension starts to 
reduce, as pensioners have greater assets. Very wealthy Australians are not 
currently able to claim the pension: the new system tightens that wealth test.

The changes means that some pensioners will no longer get the full rate of the 
aged pension, and some on the part pension will lose their entitlement.

New year law changes to affect pensioners, students, parents and backpackers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/new-year-law-changes-to-affect-pensioners-students-parents-and-backpackers>
All up, it’s thought about 327,000 pensioners will be affected.

The changes to the assets test were originally proposed back in 2015, and took 
many months to wind their way through parliament. The University of New South 
Wales’Rafal Chomik 
<https://theconversation.com/budget-brief-will-i-lose-my-age-pension-41447> 
crunched the numbers back then, and came up with this graph to explain what 
will happen:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdebate-is-the-new-means-test-for-the-aged-pension-fair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F346e0de06def8318ceb63d4d0b142b821ae97262%2F0_0_1276_1984%2F1276.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debate%3A%20Is%20the%20new%20means%20test%20for%20the%20aged%20pension%20fair%3F%20%7C%20Ben%20Eltham%20and%20Osman%20Faruqi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdebate-is-the-new-means-test-for-the-aged-pension-fair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debate%3A%20Is%20the%20new%20means%20test%20for%20the%20aged%20pension%20fair%3F%20%7C%20Ben%20Eltham%20and%20Osman%20Faruqi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdebate-is-the-new-means-test-for-the-aged-pension-fair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F346e0de06def8318ceb63d4d0b142b821ae97262%2F0_0_1276_1984%2F1276.jpg>
 The new assets test for the aged pension. Wealthier pensioners will lose some 
of their pension entitlement. Poorer pensioners will see no change. Data from 
DSS. Photograph: Rafal Chomik/The Conversation 
The changes are complex. They affect homeowners and renters differently. Many 
older Australians are worried about how they will be affected. Labor and some 
trade unions have criticised the new system, claiming that it will leave many 
pensioners worse off.

Threshold for pension reduction 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1Iv7LIV8O2b7qFo2n2KVgxHQ-8S2OMfDY-LrfXxzVLIA>
Cut off for pension 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1YSywVKxy6TtxBHfeUfRPQ9PBaZVf-JN3zi5wR12SeAg>
In a nutshell, the new asset test will mainly affect those who have 
significant net wealth. For example, a single pensioner who doesn’t own a home 
will still be able to get a part-pension if she has $746,000 of financial 
assets. A couple can own a house worth millions and have a combined $822,000 in 
super and still get the part-pension.


In other words, these changes are progressive. They apply the means test more 
strictly to wealthier pensioners. But they actually raise the assets test 
threshold for pensioners with more modest net wealth. The vast bulk of 
pensioners are not wealthy; they won’t be affected at all.

As I argued last year 
<https://newmatilda.com/2015/06/23/why-greens-were-right-do-pension-deal-scott-morrison/>
, except for a brief period in the Fraser years, the pension has always been 
means tested. The new changes simply return the pension wealth taper to where 
it was in the Howard years.

Osman Faruqi, journalist and former Greens candidate 

Despite Scott Morrison’s best attempts to sell these pension changes as a fair 
measure that targets wealthy retirees, I don’t think those of us on the 
progressive side of politics should throw our support behind them.

I have two main problems with the changes and the debate around them. Firstly, 
I don’t think the reform is as progressive as Ben suggests, and I’ll unpack 
that below.

These changes stripped $2.4bn out of the pension. That’s not money that was 
redirected to those who need it

Second, I think we’re making a strategic mistake by defending (and in the case 
of the Greens, actually facilitating) this kind of reform instead of 
articulating a more cohesive vision of a fair and equitable retirement system 
and a plan to fund it.

Overall these changes stripped $2.4bn 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp2/html/bp2_expense-20.htm> out of 
the pension. That’s not money that was redirected to those who need it. It was 
used by the government to fund its own priorities, including tax cuts to 
high-income earners.

Ben argues that these changes will mainly affect retirees with significant net 
wealth. I don’t think this is true. The biggest group affected are pensioners 
with savings of over $250,000 (this includes superannuation). They will have 
their pension payments tapered off at twice the current rate.

Over time, as workers who have lived under the compulsory superannuation 
system for longer start to retire, the changes will end up affecting more and 
more people.

Modelling suggests 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjC6_mAtKLRAhXGVrwKHbUWCggQFggbMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.aph.gov.au%2FDocumentStore.ashx%3Fid%3D887c273f-2b78-4a9c-aa66-3a8efd5d8e62%26subId%3D352808&usg=AFQjCNHsD-DaDRJS5PCBePKSoqBkP_XA3A&sig2=Q-gtQsgoK9aqbcxZpWBflg&cad=rja>
 that by 2055, 40% of retirees will be negatively impacted by these cuts, and a 
higher proportion of women. The real impact of these changes will be to slowly 
but steadily erode access to the public pension, forcing Australians to rely on 
their super.

The problem with super is that it discriminates against low-income earners, 
casuals and contract workers, and on gender. On average, women retire with a
just a thir 
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/publications/gender-gap-retirement-savings>d of 
the super balance of men.

As a result of these changes, people retiring with modest super balances (as 
opposed to the very wealthy, as has been argued) will see their retirement 
payments cut. Why should progressives welcome this?

Instead of welcoming changes that will cut pension payments for future 
retirees (today’s young, middle-income earners), we should we opposing moves 
that slash social services expenditure. Instead, we should be talking about the 
importance of a well-resourced, accessible public pension system and how 
necessary that is to an equal society.

BE: Osman is absolutely right to point out that superannuation is a flawed 
system that discriminates against women and the low-paid. That’s why 
Australia’s entire retirement income system needs reform, starting with the 
absurdly generous tax breaks given to wealthy superannuants.

Super should not be allowed to become the basis of Australia’s retirement 
income system, and we should continue to fight to protect a broad-based pension 
available to all that need it. The pension should continue to be the foundation 
of Australia’s safety net for older Australians.

We also agree that the savings accruing to the government from these changes 
will end up being used in “budget repair”, not in restoring Australia’s 
increasingly threadbare social safety net.

But the issue here is the pension, and I do take issue with some of Osman’s 
arguments.

Those affected are those with the most capacity to support themselves in 
retirement.

Firstly, Osman is wrong to say these changes are not progressive. In the 
context of Australia’s tax-and-transfer system, a progressive change is one in 
which those withthe most capacity to support themselves bear the greatest tax 
burden 
<http://bettertax.gov.au/our-tax-system/individuals-income-tax/progressivity/>, 
and receive the least government support.

The asset test changes to the pension are progressive in this sense. Those 
affected are those with the most capacity to support themselves in retirement. 
At the other end of the scale, those with moderate or limited wealth are either 
unaffected, or get a slight improvement.

The next question becomes adequacy. Is half a million dollars enough to 
provide a decent income in retirement? The answer is probably no. At current 
rates of return, most retirees will want to spend some of their capital, rather 
than just living off the interest from their investments.

But once they do that – and here’s the key point – they will then become 
eligible for the pension.

It’s worth repeating this, because it seems to have been lost in the debate. 
Even if the new changes result in some pensioners losing the pension, they will 
not lose it forever. Once a pensioner spends down her assets in retirement, she 
will again become eligible for the full rate.

The argument is thus really about whether you think that the state should 
oblige wealthier Australians to spend down some of their savings before 
accessing the aged pension. This is the whole point of an assets test, after 
all.

Given that those currently accessing the pension include some Australians with 
very high net worths – including houses worth millions – asking wealthier older 
Australians to rely on their own savings until such time as they again qualify 
for the pension doesn’t seem like a particularly unfair measure.

Osman rightly observes that we should be campaigning for greater expenditure 
on social services. I agree, we should. But the best place to do that is surely 
by targeting social spending to the areas where there is greatest need.

With the greatest respect to older Australians who have paid taxes and raised 
families, I don’t believe that wealthier pensioners are the citizens in 
greatest need. There are more pressing issues. I’d nominate Indigenous 
disadvantage and homelessness, just for two.

OF: If these pension changes were about taking money solely off high-income 
retirees and redistributing them to the poorest, then they’d be progressive. 
But that’s not what’s going on.

In net terms, they reduce the total pension outlay by $2.4bn. Yes, a small 
number of pensioners receive a boost, but as I’ve already argued the biggest 
chunk of those affected are middle-income earners with modest savings.

Limiting pension payment for nearly half of retirees (remember, the number of 
people impacted by these changes will continue to grow over time) isn’t 
progressive.

Let’s take another look at the argument that these changes are good because 
they impact the wealthiest. AsANU’s Tax and Transfer Policy Institute has argued
 
<http://www.afr.com/news/policy/tax/pension-cuts-a-wealth-tax-on-middle-australia-20150617-ghpyim>
, the richest retirees actually aren’t impacted because they actually don’t 
access the pension.

These changes won’t hit them at all. They won’t be forced to be draw down 
their savings, they’ll still be able to accrue vast amounts of wealth and pass 
them down to their children, perpetuating wealth inequality.

When Ben says “only the wealthiest will be impacted” he should acknowledge 
that we’re talking about the wealthiestout of those who currently access the 
pension.

If we keep reducing who accesses the pension, pensioners at the top of the 
scale will always be the “wealthiest” – as long as you ignore all those too 
rich to qualify. Therichest 20% of retirees 
<http://www.ncoa.gov.au/report/phase-one/part-b/7-1-age-pension.html> won’t 
feel a thing, and they’re the cohort we should be focusing on if we want 
genuine progressive reform, through the closure of superannuation tax loopholes 
and measures like an estate tax.

Ben is correct to say that pensioners will draw down their savings due to 
these changes. In fact,Morrison argued 
<http://www.afr.com/personal-finance/superannuation-and-smsfs/scott-morrison-tells-retirees-they-must-spend-their-superannuation-20150524-gh8gz2>
 that this was the point of the changes.

Marginal Coalition electorates among the hardest hit by pension changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/marginal-coalition-electorates-among-the-hardest-hit-by-pension-changes>
But surely the question at this point is why are we creating a system that 
rewards the drawing down of private savings? I understand why economic 
rationalists are into the idea – it privatises a bigger component of retirement 
savings.

But I disagree that the goal of progressives should be a retirement system 
that involves the minimal amount of public funding and draws more on private 
resources.

With these changes, we’ve ended up in the perverse situation where 
middle-income earners with moderate savings are forced to draw down their 
assets to have a comfortable retirement, but the richest are able to live in 
comparative luxury and pass on their full savings to their children tax free.

If we’re unhappy with wealth inequality and inequity in retirement I’d suggest 
we support measures that actually target the rich: higher progressive income 
taxes, closing downsuperannuation tax loopholes 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-29/tax-concessions-for-super-costing-more-than-gst-exemptions/7124994>
 that disproportionately benefit the wealthy and anestate tax 
<https://theconversation.com/why-we-should-put-an-inheritance-tax-back-into-the-spotlight-1634>
.

These genuinely progressive measures could be used to fund a universal public 
pension, modelled along the New Zealand system, asproposed by The Australia 
Institute 
<http://www.tai.org.au/sites/defualt/files/PB%2060%20Sustaining%20us%20all%20in%20retirement.pdf>
.
 