
Troy Henderson, PhD candidate in political economy at the University of Sydney

The progressive case for a universal basic income in Australia means providing 
an unconditional income to all Australians alongside – not as a replacement for 
– the welfare state. This case rests on UBI’s potential to reduce inequality, 
improve social security and enhance personal freedom through the introduction 
of a new universal right.

Australia has experienced rising economic inequality in recent decades. The 
top 1% saw their income share increase from6% to 9% 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/they-get-438k-you-get-just-48k-figures-show-the-uberrich-are-earning-more-and-more-20160331-gnvm8o.html>
 between 1990 and 2013, the top 10% of households holdover 50% 
<http://ppesydney.net/wealth-inequality-australia-timely-new-report/> of 
household wealth and more than13% 
<http://www.acoss.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Poverty-in-Australia-2016.pdf>
 of Australians live in poverty.

Women are more likely to work in low-wage industries, live in poverty and do a 
disproportionate share of unpaid work. UBI – set at a sufficient threshold and 
funded via an appropriate tax mix – could substantially reduce these class and 
gender-based inequalities over time. It would also result in a net transfer of 
financial resources to under-remunerated forms of work, such as caring for 
children and elderly parents.

Basic income for all: a 500-year-old idea whose time has come?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/basic-income-for-all-a-500-year-old-idea-whose-time-has-come>
UBI could reduce the levels of insecurity experienced by Australians in 
important ways. It could provide the means to bargain for better pay and 
conditions, or to leave an exploitative employer. If you lose your job, UBI 
means knowing you can pay next week’s rent or power bill without having to 
interact withCentrelink <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink>
. If you leave a violent relationship, UBI means knowing you can pay for a few 
nights in a hotel if the refuges are full.

UBI could also afford Australians greater opportunity to take a risk or have a 
break. It might provide seed capital for a small business, support while doing 
voluntary work, or some cash for a much-needed holiday.

A UBI sufficient to achieve these goals would be expensive. It would mean 
Australians accepting atax to-GDP-ratio 
<http://bettertax.gov.au/publications/discussion-paper/chart-data/chpt2/> as 
high as France (44%) or Denmark (47%) compared with our current level of around 
27%.

It’s no panacea. But implementing a progressive UBI would put some meat on the 
Australian “fair go” bone. And the fight to achieve it could help revivify our 
moribund politics.


Gigi Foster, associate professor with the school of economics at the 
University of New South Wales

The rich, relatively socially progressive country of Switzerland recently 
asked its citizens directly whether they would support a universal basic income 
scheme, andthey said no 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/05/swiss-vote-give-basic-income-every-adult-child-marxist-dream>
. Why?

A UBI means giving money universally – to everyone, or at least to every 
adult. To make a material difference to people’s circumstances, this transfer 
has to be reasonably large. I’ve heard figures floated for the Australian 
context of between $10,000 and $30,000 per adult per year. Using a mid-range 
figure of $20,000 yields a total cost of about $380bn per year, which ismore 
than twice our present welfare bill 
<https://theconversation.com/universal-basic-income-the-dangerous-idea-of-2016-70395>
. Where would this money come from?

Troy suggests “an appropriate tax mix.” Rather than sweeping the financial 
feasibility of UBI under the carpet, he should clarify exactly what he has in 
mind that would generate the required cash.

Troy and I are agreed that inequality is a problem, and that in Australia a 
big part of the problem is the super-rich.

Some proponents of modern monetary theory 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_Monetary_Theory> have suggested that the 
government could just credit people’s bank balances, rather than requiring the 
money to be raised via taxes. But this is inflationary unless Australian output 
and hence demand for our currency rises at the same rate as the money being 
created – which won’t be the case if we are paying people to do what they are 
already doing, like raising children.

Nobody wants Australians living in poverty, feeling unable to move out of bad 
domestic situations, or wasting their creative energies in dead-end, insecure 
jobs. But wrapping a UBI proposal in these heart-string-tugging images is a 
sleight of hand that distracts us away from confronting these problems in a 
pragmatic and targeted way.

Troy and I are agreed that inequality is a problem, and that in Australia a 
big part of the problem is the super-rich 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-08-26/frijters-foster-battlers-and-plutocrats/6725118>
. For political reasons, this problem is sticky and entrenched. Any reforms 
proposed to tackle it must be assessed for both economic and political 
feasibility – and universal basic income fails on both counts.

TH: Gigi’s right. UBI advocates should not sweep the cost of a substantial 
basic income under the carpet. I agree that the gross cost of a UBI in the 
$10,000 to $20,000 range would be in the order of $200-$400bn annually. The 
2016-17 federal budget was $450bn so we’re talking about a very big increase in 
taxation.

I’m currently working with ANU economist Ben Phillips to generate more precise 
estimates of the net cost.

To fund a progressive UBI, it’s likely all forms of direct and indirect 
taxation would have to increase substantially and major tax concessions would 
have to be scrapped. But the exact “tax mix” is important due to its impact on 
the post-reform distribution of wealth and income and the structure of 
incentives in relation to work and investment.

I agree with Gigi that funding UBI entirely through direct public credit 
creation would be inflationary. The purchasing power of UBI has to be held 
constant – or increased – for it to be effective.

At a time when our politicians squabble over a relatively small measure like 
the backpacker tax the short-term prospects of UBI don’t seem bright. But the 
picture looks different if we take a somewhat longer view.

The eight-hour day, the vote and equal rights for women were not won on the 
basis of dispassionate cost-benefit analysis

Australia’s tax-to-GDP ratio increased six-fold 
<http://taxreview.treasury.gov.au/content/Paper.aspx?doc=html/publications/papers/report/section_4-01.htm>
 from 5% at federation to around 30% in 2006. The massive welfare states and 
public sectors that exist in all advanced capitalist countries today would have 
been unimaginable to most people 100 years ago. In fact, many of the rights we 
enjoy today, from the age pension to universal healthcare, seemed every bit as 
utopian as UBI not so long ago.

Gigi chastised me for using emotive examples. But policy outcomes are decided 
in the political arena and politics – like life – has an affective dimension. I 
think it’s legitimate to appeal to emotionand reason in making a case for UBI. 

Pragmatism has its place. Social scientists and policymakers should subject 
UBI to rigorous critical analysis. But pragmatism also has its limits. The 
eight-hour day, the vote and equal rights for women were not won on the basis 
of dispassionate cost-benefit analysis. UBI won’t be either.

The suffragettes didn’t give up after their first petition was rejected. UBI 
advocates shouldn’t be discouraged by one failed referendum.

GF: I’m glad to see Troy acknowledge the huge cost of a UBI. But even if you 
believe that funding and implementing a UBI is a desirable long-run goal, which 
is dubious, it is morally irresponsible to allow yourself to be seduced by a 
utopian vision that does nothing to alleviate suffering today. Our citizens can 
benefit, today, from targeted reforms to Australia’s present policies that are 
within our reach.

The massive cost of a UBI is not its only problem. UBIs are also inefficient: 
not only those who need the money, but also those who do not, are paid. And 
depending on the dollar figure, people presently receiving social support might 
see a reduction in their incomes. This is why – paradoxically for its leftwing 
supporters – a UBI might well end up being areverse Robin Hood scheme 
<http://www.2ser.com/component/k2/item/26671-is-a-universal-basic-income-what-australia-needs>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdebate-should-we-be-fighting-for-a-universal-basic-income-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F868659a1d3929824cbeffdb7b562e8f33184f115%2F0_0_1311_1809%2F1311.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debate%3A%20should%20we%20be%20fighting%20for%20a%20universal%20basic%20income%20in%20Australia%3F%20%7C%20Troy%20Henderson%20and%20Gigi%20Foster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdebate-should-we-be-fighting-for-a-universal-basic-income-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debate%3A%20should%20we%20be%20fighting%20for%20a%20universal%20basic%20income%20in%20Australia%3F%20%7C%20Troy%20Henderson%20and%20Gigi%20Foster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdebate-should-we-be-fighting-for-a-universal-basic-income-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F868659a1d3929824cbeffdb7b562e8f33184f115%2F0_0_1311_1809%2F1311.jpg>
 If Australia adopted a universal basic income, even Gina Rinehart would be 
entitled to it - although she would be expected to pay more in tax than she 
received in a UBI. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP 
Paying people regardless of whether they work, train, or sit on the couch also 
invites even more social isolation for the disadvantaged, and may have negative 
long-term effects on work incentives.

Giving people money without access to markets, training, or other 
social-integration support also ducks some of the most vexing problems faced by 
our least well-off citizens.

Economic suffering in the developed world is hard to alleviate because it 
often results from multiple layers of disadvantage. Our present society tackles 
such disadvantage through the institutions of the welfare state, like the 
Department of Human Services and the Department of Social Services. Throwing 
money at complex problems while dismantling these sorts of long-established 
government departments that presently provide in-kind support for struggling 
people – often a feature of UBI proposals, allegedly to save administrative 
costs – is both morally suspect and economically nonsensical.

In fact, we don’t really know what the long-term effects of a UBI would be, 
becauseno long-term UBI trial has ever been run and properly evaluated 
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OyLJwyDDiq3QraVrpcICJ1Ytn0Tok9vFQoT1pc_-AOU/pub>
.

Let’s not get seduced by a supposed magic bullet that could end up shooting 
our country in the face.

What, then, should we fight for? A better support program for the unemployed, 
to improve upon work for the dole programs, in which the government offers 
training and productive work to anyone who wants it. Improved childcare 
quality, subsidies, and access for families Australia-wide. Reforms that hit 
the upper end of town in the back pocket, like caps on the salaries of workers 
in heavily regulated industries.

Let’s not get seduced by a supposed magic bullet that could end up shooting 
our country in the face. Let’s instead work within the present system to reduce 
economic inequality, right now.

TH: The design of a progressive UBI is clearly of critical importance. The 
ratio of net beneficiaries to net contributors will determine not only UBI’s 
effectiveness in reducing inequality and insecurity but also its capacity to 
attract and maintain political support.

Let me explain: if you had a UBI of $15,000 a year that means everyone, 
including Gina Rinehart and Jamie Packer, for example, would be paid $15,000 by 
the government. But in practice, the extra tax levied on Gina and Jamie would 
make them net contributors to funding a progressive UBI. They would be paying 
more in additional tax than they are receiving in UBI.
So why pay UBI to the wealthy if you’re just taxing it straight back? Because 
of the principle of universality. Everyone would have the same right to that 
basic income. As incomes increased above that threshold, people would pay 
higher rates of tax as they do today. A progressive UBI needs to create more 
winners (net beneficiaries) than losers (net contributors) at any point in time.

But it’s also important to stress that most people would likely fall into both 
categories at different stages of their lives. The person whose business in 
thriving could be a net contributor one year, and a net beneficiary the next 
year when that business goes bust.

I agree with Gigi that savings in administrative costs related to UBI would be 
trivial compared to the net cost of UBI itself. But the impact on individuals 
who no longer need to engage in complex bureaucratic procedures in order to 
access a means of subsistence would be very far from trivial.

I’m sceptical of the robots-will-take-all-the-jobs argument for UBI.

UBI would also free up staff in the Department of Human Services and 
Department of Social Services to focus on helping people address those multiple 
layers of disadvantage Gigi mentions instead of surveilling clients within a 
punitive workfare system. Short-term and long-term goals are not mutually 
exclusive. I think better social services, full employment and UBI can be 
pursued simultaneously.

I’m sceptical of the robots-will-take-all-the-jobs argument for UBI. And I 
know a $15,000 UBI is not an adequate substitute for a $70,000 manufacturing or 
transport job. But UBI could still function as a form of limited social 
insurance for individuals and communities that bear the brunt of technological 
and structural change.

Gigi mentioned the lack of empirical evidence from longitudinal UBI trials. 
There aremixed views 
<http://www.widerquist.com/karl/Articles--scholarly/BottomLine.pdf> on the 
usefulness of trials, including those conducted in the US and Canada in the 
1970s. The recently launched two-yearFinnish trial 
<http://theconversation.com/how-finland-could-see-benefits-from-its-basic-income-experiment-70955>
, and possible pilot studies in the Netherlands and Canada, should at least 
provide social scientists and UBI advocates with some interesting additional 
evidence to analyse.

But could Australia be more ambitious? How about we pay every working age 
Tasmanian (330,000 people) a $15,000 UBI for the next five years? That’s about 
the same as the maximumNewstart payment 
<https://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/services/centrelink/newstart-allowance>
 and would cost around $5bn a year. That’s easily affordable when you consider 
that the super tax concessions that disproportionately benefit the well-off 
cost the federal budgetover $30bn 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Publications/2016/TES-2015/Tax-Expenditures-Statement/Chapter-3>
 in 2016-2017.

Universal basic income trials being considered in Scotland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/01/universal-basic-income-trials-being-considered-in-scotland>
What would be the impact on jobs, crime rates, mental and physical health? 
Would it boost Tassie communities reliant on seasonal work like tourism and 
agriculture? Such a trial would not fully replicate a national UBI unless it 
was funded by increasing the tax burden just on Tasmanians. But it would 
certainly make for an interesting, and feasible, experiment.

Another approach to UBI suggested by political economist Ben Spies-Butcher 
would be to make the age pension genuinely universal – as in New Zealand – and 
graduallylower the age at which you’re entitled to it. 

There are many possible roads to UBI. What ultimately sets UBI apart from the 
targeted – piecemeal? – programs Gigi favours is its “universal” and 
“unconditional” nature. A progressive UBI would be an economic analogue to the 
political right to vote. It’s not a special benefit paid to “dole bludgers” and 
“welfare queens”. If Gina Rinehart or Jamie Packer fell on hard times, they’d 
get it too.

A progressive UBI would create a universal income floor beneath which no one 
could fall.

GF: The idea of trialling new types of social support is not new, but it is 
taking a long time to become embedded in the way Australians think about 
optimal policy-making. Kela, the Finnish social security agency running the UBI 
trial in Finland, expresslycalls the trial an “experiment” 
<http://www.news.com.au/finance/money/wealth/the-basic-income-experiment-that-could-revolutionise-welfare/news-story/44d7a5f1076cc2262a6b44e200374055>
 and is treating it as such: a test, to be evaluated objectively for its 
results, in the model of best-practice international social science research.

While some Australian politicians have long been fighting 
<https://agora2.bluenove.com/data/Discussion/2/documents/375/data> for rigorous 
tests of proposed social-policy adjustments, the scientific approach to social 
policy development has yet to break into mainstream public discourse.

It’s not only on the spending side that trials could be run. We could trial 
the new taxation system that Troy proposes – or custom-built flavours of 
promising existing proposals like thetransaction tax 
<http://www.tai.org.au/sites/defualt/files/P134%20Australia's%20Tobin%20Tax%20arguments%20and%20evidence_0.pdf>
 (which could be extended to cover more than just financial transactions) or the
land tax 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/turnbull-pushes-efficient-taxes-20160404-gnxqso>
. If we are going to trial a UBI, then we should also trial the new way in 
which we would pay for it.

But there are many other incremental improvements to our existing social 
support schemes that are just as good, if not better, candidates for trials 
than a UBI. I’ve mentioned above a few of these candidate improvements, like a 
government job guarantee.

Universal basic income is not a magic solution, but it could help millions | 
Anthony Painter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/universal-basic-income-welfare-employment-scotland-canada-netherlands>
We could even preface such trials with independent research in which 
struggling people are asked directly to choose between different possible 
variants of government support – and to comment on where the bureaucratic 
barriers are in our present system that make it hard to access help when they 
need it.

Troy is right to worry that a UBI could be dead on arrival politically unless 
it appeals to enough of the right people. Aswe have seen this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-exit-polls-data-us-election>
, however, politics is not a game that is won on the basis of 
carefully-calculated percentages of net gainers and net losers. The sea change 
represented by Troy’s vision for an Australia UBI needs to win people’s hearts 
before it will have a hope of passing parliament.

Like Troy, I don’t buy the argument that we need a UBI in order to make sure 
everyone can survive in a new age where robots do all the work. But neither do 
I buy the idea that a massively expensive new way of providing a safety net for 
struggling people is better than a somewhat-tweaked version of our present way 
of doing the same thing, just because the new way more comfortably wears the 
label of “universal right”.
 