
If ever we needed news to remind us of Shakespeare’s line about troubles not 
coming in single spies but in battalions, this is it.Debbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds>, one of the aristocrats of 
the Hollywood golden age and glorious star of the 1952 classic Singin’ in the 
Rain, has died.

Debbie Reynolds: her life and career – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/dec/29/debbie-reynolds-her-life-and-career-in-pictures>
She has an impregnable, unchallengeable status in the history of cinema simply 
for her part in that movie. Just watching her in it, alive with fun, with 
dance, with comedy and romance, is enough to cure any bad mood. Certainly it’s 
been like that for me.

Reynolds’s face is irradiated with an extraordinary kind of pure joy – and 
with that innocent happiness and pertness which bespoke a type of femininity 
which Hollywood and the music industry promoted in those days, but which was 
never so persuasive, or so beguiling, as Debbie Reynolds in Singin’ in the Rain.

Reynolds’s death comes just one day after the death of Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-dies-star-wars-princess-leia>
, her daughter. It is a desperately sad moment (yet another desperately sad 
moment) that marks the end of a long career of stage and screen, and the end of 
a deeply complex mother-daughter relationship that was painful, loving, 
competitive, passionate – and creative.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F878eb6c6ba11a018afa2087257b544e848c5c963%2F0_0_2384_3018%2F2384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20aristocrat%20who%20was%20a%20vitamin%20boost%20for%20the%20heart%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20aristocrat%20who%20was%20a%20vitamin%20boost%20for%20the%20heart%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F878eb6c6ba11a018afa2087257b544e848c5c963%2F0_0_2384_3018%2F2384.jpg>
 Debbie Reynolds with daughter Carrie Fisher at home in Los Angeles in 1959 
Photograph: LA Times via Getty Images 
For long periods the two were almost like sundered partners in a classic 
double act, exemplars of old and new Hollywood, falling out a great deal of the 
time, but finding common ground in an awful lot – not least being let down and 
condescended to by men. They came to be candid about the strains that Reynolds 
put on her daughter Fisher, who was often effectively the emotional caregiver 
through her mother’s failed marriages while at the same time trying to move out 
of Reynolds’s shadow.

Fisher conferred upon her mother a kind of second act in Hollywood myth, 
through Fisher’s portrayal of her in the autobiographical novel Postcards from 
the Edge. Fisher adapted it for the 1990 movie version, about a recovering 
addict forced to live with a responsible adult, her mom – greatly expanding the 
juicy role for her impossible, demanding and hilarious mother, played, of 
course, by Shirley MacLaine in the film.


MacLaine was great casting. Maybe Reynolds would have been even better. But 
this movie surely inspired one of Reynolds’s great late-career roles, in Albert 
Brooks’s comedy Mother (1996), in which Brooks starred as the failing writer 
who moves back in with his overbearing mother in an attempt to understand his 
problems with women. Brooks’s friendCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> was instrumental in 
persuading Reynolds to take the part.

Reynolds got her greatest role in 1952 at the age of 19 in Singin’ in the 
Rain, playing Kathy Selden, a gutsy wannabe stage actress in Los Angeles who, 
as the industry panics at the coming of the talkies, falls for Gene Kelly’s 
smooth star Don Lockwood. It was a superb role, and Reynolds inhabited it to 
perfection; the part transformed Reynolds’s virginal girl-scout image and, for 
all its apparent golden-age nostalgia, the movie showed a kind of genius in 
plugging Reynolds into what was, after all, the thrill of modernity. Her 
character is in the vanguard of cinema’s move away from the silent age. Singin’ 
in the Rain showcased her adorable innocence and glorious energy and life in a 
way that outclassed the relatively staid roles before and afterwards.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7771f6bc2172b1eb5f8dac305aab981e017b5d37%2F0_0_2264_1545%2F2264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20aristocrat%20who%20was%20a%20vitamin%20boost%20for%20the%20heart%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20aristocrat%20who%20was%20a%20vitamin%20boost%20for%20the%20heart%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7771f6bc2172b1eb5f8dac305aab981e017b5d37%2F0_0_2264_1545%2F2264.jpg>
 Albert Brooks and Debbie Reynolds in Mother. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
Debbie Reynolds and Carrie Fisher – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/dec/29/debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher-in-pictures>
Her meet-cute with Gene Kelly is one of the great romantic scenes in film 
history, perhaps the greatest. Kathy has given the big-headed star Don a lift 
in her car: a little conceited herself, she has given him a lecture about how 
shallow the movies are compared to the great heights to which she aspires in 
the legitimate theatre.

Later, at his swanky Hollywood after-party, Don is astonished and hugely 
amused to see Kathy pop out of the cake as part of the entertainment, to sing 
the great number All I Do Is Dream Of You. He grins and gloats: with natural 
screen-acting brilliance, Reynolds shows clearly how Kathy is by turns furious 
to see him, then embarrassed, and then deeply upset, and all while carrying on 
with the number like the hoofer and trooper she is. And of course this is the 
moment that Don falls for her. He knows how tough it is to get a start in this 
town. It is impossible not to fall for Debbie Reynolds while watching this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_RbG5hdMBHk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_RbG5hdMBHk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_RbG5hdMBHk&media=>
Watch a clip of Debbie Reynolds in Singin’ in the Rain on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_RbG5hdMBHk> 
After Singin’ in the Rain, Reynolds’s roles tended to focus on various 
constituent ingredients of that magic recipe: the gutsiness, the innocence, the 
never-say-die spirit of show business. In Tammy and the Bachelor (1957), she 
was the sweet Mississippi gal who falls in love with a big-city guy played by 
Leslie Nielsen, in his pre-ironic leading man days. The movie spawned sequels 
with, among others, Sandra Dee in the role. Reynolds in fact tended to be 
typecast in the Sandra Dee or Doris Day type of part — if not lousy with 
virginity, then a little encumbered by it.


Reynolds had an unlikely screen partnership with Tony Curtis in the darker, 
more self-consciously modern drama The Rat Race (1960), which was actually 
candid about sex. She is the struggling model and dancer who shares an 
apartment in New York with Curtis’s equally embattled sax player; she secretly 
falls for him and enters into an abusive relationship with a seedy dance-hall 
promoter so that she can loan Curtis cash. It was counterintuitive casting. In 
Divorce American Style (1967), she plays the ex-wife of Dick van Dyke in this 
swingingly modern, modishly jaded comedy. Again, it was not a natural fit for 
her talents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F752dc7ff841dac43c82e981f1088689bfd6a5d69%2F0_136_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20aristocrat%20who%20was%20a%20vitamin%20boost%20for%20the%20heart%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20aristocrat%20who%20was%20a%20vitamin%20boost%20for%20the%20heart%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-hollywood-golden-age-singin-in-the-rain-carrie-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F752dc7ff841dac43c82e981f1088689bfd6a5d69%2F0_136_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 ‘A roistering performance’ … Debbie Reynolds title role in The Unsinkable 
Molly Brown won her an Academy Award nomination. Photograph: Allstar/MGM 
What was clearly better was the boisterous musical The Unsinkable Molly Brown 
(1964), with Reynolds as the lead, based on the real-life figure of Margaret 
Brown: a saloon-singer, social climber and veritable life-force who survives 
the sinking of the Titanic in 1912. This roistering performance earned Reynolds 
an Academy Award nomination.

Debbie Reynolds obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/29/debbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor>
But it was clear that Reynolds’s persona and style were now out of fashion, 
and at the end of the 60s she withdrew from the movies, to some degrees, in 
favour of TV work and Broadway musicals and revue – itself an old-fashioned 
species of show business. But she returned to film work in the 90s with a 
much-admired lead turn in Mother, and played Liberace’s elderly mother in 
Behind the Candelabra, opposite Michael Douglas.

Maybe Debbie Reynolds never did anything to top Singin’ in the Rain, and never 
quite had the producers or directors with the imagination to use her lovely, 
subtle, intuitive gifts for romance and comedy to build her a sustained career 
in screen musicals. But her genius in that movie is worth a thousand lesser 
Hollywood careers. Debbie Reynolds was a vitamin boost for the heart.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Five-had-a-great-life-debbie-reynolds-on-65-years-in-showbusiness-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I've%20had%20a%20great%20life'%3A%20Debbie%20Reynolds%20on%2065%20years%20in%20showbusiness%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Five-had-a-great-life-debbie-reynolds-on-65-years-in-showbusiness-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ve%20had%20a%20great%20life%27%3A%20Debbie%20Reynolds%20on%2065%20years%20in%20showbusiness%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Five-had-a-great-life-debbie-reynolds-on-65-years-in-showbusiness-video&media=>
Debbie Reynolds - video obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/29/ive-had-a-great-life-debbie-reynolds-on-65-years-in-showbusiness-video> 