
Debenhams’ Christmas sales beat expectations as the department store chain 
relied less on discounts and cut stocks of coats and outerwear to take account 
of warmer winter weather.

Clothing retailers such as Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/05/next-reports-disappointing-christmas-after-mild-autumn>
 have blamed the warmest December on record for disappointing sales of winter 
clothes but Debenhams said it deliberately stocked fewer coats and winter 
jumpers after it was affected by unusually warm weather the previous Christmas. 
As a result, Debenhams had less stock left over after Christmas than a year 
earlier.

Retail Christmas: the winners and losers in the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/retail-christmasuk-uk-winners-and-losers>
Michael Sharp, Debenhams’ chief executive, said: “For the last couple of years 
we have embarked on a strategy of planning prudently. It’s quite obvious for 
everybody to see that over the last few years the weather has been somewhat 
unseasonal. We have learnt the lessons … and that has made us resilient to 
unseasonably warm weather.”

Sales at stores open a year or more rose 1.9% in the 19 weeks to 9 January, 
compared with analysts’ forecasts of a rise of just 0.3%.


Excluding currency fluctuations, like-for-like sales rose 3.5%.

Debenhams’ shares rose as much as 17% and were up 14% to 75p at 930am.

Top-selling items included lingerie, finer gauge knitwear and gifts such as 
perfume and makeup.Debenhams <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> 
sold more than half a million handbags in November and December with J by 
Jasper Conran bags in high demand.

The group had record toy sales over Christmas and sold more than 25,000 toy 
drones as stores rang up sales of 200 gifts a minute.

Debenhams has been trying to reduce its reliance on promotions after it was 
blamed for pulling down prices across the sector two years ago. Full price 
sales rose 5% in the 19-week period as the chain limited the number and size of 
discounts before Christmas and offered more competitive full prices.

Debenhams’ surprisingly strong performance stood out over Christmas as overall 
UK retail spending had itsweakest quarterly growth for more than a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/christmas-high-street-sales-brc-black-friday>
 as stores competed to lure customers.


Sharp announced in October that he would leave Debenhams  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/22/debenhams-boss-quits-shareholder-pressure-michael-sharp>
this year after shareholders agitated for a change of leadership following a
string of disappointing results and profit warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/13/debenhams-share-fall-disappointing-sales>
. He said Christmas sales showed his revamped strategy was working.


“This is a strong performance. There’s no doubt about that. The results are 
clear evidence that customers are liking what we are doing. This is not a 
one-off,” he said.

Debenhams has opened discreetly branded Sports Direct concessions  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/20/debenhams-sports-direct-concessions-mike-ashley>
in eight of its stores after Sports Direct’s billionaire founder Mike Ashley 
bought a stake in the group. Sports Directissued a profit warning last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/08/sports-direct-issues-profit-warning-poor-christmas-sales>
, blaming tough trading and warm weather for disappointing sales.

Sharp said he wanted Debenhams to increase sales of sportswear and shoes and 
that Debenhams planned to double the number of Sports Direct concessions to 16 
by August. He declined to comment on the furore caused by the Guardian’s
investigation into Sports Direct’s employment practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/sports-direct-share-price-falls-following-guardian-working-practices-revelations>
.
 