
Debenhams <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> chief executive 
Michael Sharp defended the group’s Christmas performance, after a late surge of 
shoppers buying perfume and make-up failed to make up ground lost by 
disappointing winter clothing sales earlier in the season.

Shares in the group fell 8% to 69p after it said its beauty departments had 
enjoyed a strong run in December, but a challenging season in clothing meant 
first-half profits, which are due in April, would be at the lower end of 
expectations. Retailers’ profit margins are normally much higher on clothing, 
especially heavy-duty winter jackets and knitwear.

But, along with other retailers, Debenhams was caught out by last autumn’s 
unseasonably warm weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/23/warm-autumn-uk-retail-sales-ons>
, which left many fashion chains with piles of unsold winter clothes.

“This is a good performance in a difficult and challenging period,” said 
Sharp. “Our performance steadily improved following the well-documented 
challenges in the clothing market in the autumn. We wouldn’t be immune to what 
is going on in the market place.”

The UK’s second largest department chain reported a 0.8% fall in like-for-like 
sales in the 19 weeks to the 10 January. However, in the four-week period 
covering Christmas and new year, underlying sales were up by 4.9%.

Last year, Debenhams was forced to issue a profits warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/31/debenhams-shares-christmas-trading-profit-warning>
, after heavy discounting over the festive season eroded profits. Sharp has 
been trying to wean shoppers off a regular programme of discounts and he said 
it ran 10 fewer promotional days, although it took part in Black Friday – a 
US-inspired discount day at the end of November. Online sales on Black Friday 
were up 125%, while sales over the week as a whole were up more than 10%.

Investec analyst Kate Calvert downgraded the shares to a “sell” and trimmed 
her 2015 profit forecast by £1.6m to £111.7m. “Trading and gross margin over 
the 19 weeks were weaker than expected, resulting in a nudge down in 
forecasts,” she said. “While it is encouraging that management stuck to its new 
trading stance with 10 fewer days on promotion, we continue to believe that 
Debenhams is strategically challenged.”

The company said it had seen good growth from its international franchise 
stores in south-east Asia and the Middle East. The Danish department store 
chain that Debenhams bought in 2009, Magasin du Nord, outperformed its UK 
parent, with a 9.2% increase in like-for-like sales for the four weeks to the 
10 January.
 