
Hayfever is, in fact, a seasonal form of ‘allergic rhinitis’ or allergic 
reaction in the nasal passage, which becomes inflamed on contact with allergens 
such as pollens, dander and moulds. The cause may vary, but the symptoms are 
similar, ranging from runny nose, itchy eyes and sneezing to headaches, lack of 
concentration and sleepless nights.

Hits and myths

Around 3 million Australian adults are affected by seasonal allergies, so it’s 
not unreasonable to expect some rumours and misconceptions to abound. Let’s see 
if we can dispel some of them.

Myth: I’m allergic to (those) flowers. It’s easy to think that because a 
particular flower has a strong perfume you’re probably allergic to it, but 
before you remove every flowering plant from your house and garden, check 
you’re not barking up the wrong tree.

The pollen in most flowers and indoor plants is not carried by wind or air but 
rather by pollinators such as birds and bees. The one that’s getting up your 
nose is more likely to be air-borne pollen from grasses, trees or weeds.

Inner-city dwellers may curse the gloriously-shady London plane tree for their 
allergy woes, but research[1] has found that only one in four subjects were 
actually susceptible to the plane tree itself - and all of those were also 
allergic to grasses.

Wattle trees are likewise shunned when at their flowering best. Yet according 
to the Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (ASCIA), skin 
prick tests seldom show Acacia (the scientific name for the golden wattle) to 
be the culprit[2].

Many trees, flowers and grasses have minimal allergenic impact. Find out what 
you’re sensitive to, then set about growing a different garden you can enjoy 
all year round.

Myth: Short-haired animals make better pets. People will say they’re allergic 
to pet hair, yet the source of allergens in cats is the sebaceous glands, while 
in dogs it’s most likely saliva. In most pets – dogs, cats, horses, rabbits or 
mice – the allergic reaction is caused by dead skin cells or ‘dander’; so 
choose a hairless cat or dog because you truly love it, not because you won’t 
be allergic to it.

Myth: Antihistamines make you drowsy. This has been true in the past, but 
second generation antihistamines have a different chemical structure that 
targets specific histamine receptors. Check that the pack shows non-drowsy, as 
warning labels are mandatory on antihistamines that contain sedating 
ingredients.

Myth: Allergies are harmless. We all know of people with a potentially deadly 
peanut allergy, so this one is clearly not true. Chronic rhinitis can cause 
problems such as fatigue, irritability and even work-related injuries through 
lack of concentration.

Myth: Rain washes allergens away. There’s a fine line here, because rain will 
temporarily clear pollen-laden air, yetstormy weather has the opposite effect 
<http://www.allergy.org.au/patients/asthma-and-allergy/thunderstorm-asthma> of 
breaking up pollen particles[3], making them easier to inhale. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftelfast-break-through-with-confidence%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdebunking-hayfever-myths%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5498813c99c9405929a74c525e4a003055c0770%2F0_890_3493_4360%2F3493.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debunking%20hayfever%20myths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftelfast-break-through-with-confidence%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdebunking-hayfever-myths%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debunking%20hayfever%20myths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftelfast-break-through-with-confidence%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdebunking-hayfever-myths%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5498813c99c9405929a74c525e4a003055c0770%2F0_890_3493_4360%2F3493.jpg>
 Pollen covered Bumble bee feeding on a thistle in the English countryside. 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Do natural remedies work?

Some people swear by their favourite remedies, offering you a glass of cider 
vinegar in warm water at first sight of a sneeze. But if that’s not your cup of 
tea, here are some others:

Red peppers and chilli. Peppers contain an active component called capsaicin 
which helps reduce congestion by opening the nasal passages, as anyone who has 
tucked into a bowl of steaming Laksa will know.

Herbal teas. Green tea and herbal infusions are all said to have a soothing or 
clearing effect. Whether you believe that or not, they’re possibly better than 
a milky, sugar-laden cup of coffee.

Vitamins. Supplements such as vitamins C and E, fish oil or olive leaf extract 
have not been found to have any specific effect on pollen sensitivity, but 
should boost immunity and general well-being.

Lifestyle changes. Getting plenty of exercise, consuming more water and less 
alcohol, or altering the diet to include fresh vegetables while cutting back on 
sugars, processed foods and possibly dairy, can all help to support the body’s 
natural immunity, thereby reducing susceptibility to allergies.

While various natural remedies provide symptomatic relief for some people, 
others will notice no change. Everyone’s different, so the first step in coping 
with your allergy is to find out what triggers it - have yourself tested and 
recognise when you are susceptible.

More reliable symptomatic relief comes from antihistamines, which work by 
blocking the body’s reaction to allergens. When taken orally, they allay a wide 
range of symptoms, while eye drops and nasal sprays can be used to target 
specific problems. Even if you prefer not to take medications, there will be 
times when nothing else can relieve the itchy eyes and constantly runny nose; 
at least you will be able to have a good night’s sleep or get through your 
day’s work.

When you’re finding life restricted by seasonal allergies, you’ll probably try 
anything to relieve the symptoms. Whatever you do, remember the simple 
precautionary measures: heed pollen count warnings, reduce exposure by staying 
indoors when pollen’s high and keep a pack of (non-drowsy) antihistamines handy 
at all times.

Debunking Allergy Myths - CHCANZ.CFEX.16.08.0750a

[1] US National Library of Medicine (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22123378 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22123378>)


[2] Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (
http://www.allergy.org.au/patients/allergic-rhinitis-hay-fever-and-sinusitis/pollen-allergy
 
<http://www.allergy.org.au/patients/allergic-rhinitis-hay-fever-and-sinusitis/pollen-allergy>
)

[3] Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (
http://www.allergy.org.au/patients/asthma-and-allergy/thunderstorm-asthma 
<http://www.allergy.org.au/patients/asthma-and-allergy/thunderstorm-asthma>)
 