
The wedding dress made by Mme. Headley-Seymour for Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon 
is now completed and, with the bridesmaids’ frocks, has been seen by a few 
privileged persons. But it is understood that no description will be published 
until the wedding-day.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fqueen-mother-george-vi-wedding-elizabeth-bowes-lyon-1923%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10e83f801a4d9ec793d06db3cf469574f2ea6eda%2F0_0_2140_2968%2F2140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delightful%20frocks%20for%20Duke%20of%20York's%20wedding%2C%201923%20-%20fashion%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fqueen-mother-george-vi-wedding-elizabeth-bowes-lyon-1923%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delightful%20frocks%20for%20Duke%20of%20York%27s%20wedding%2C%201923%20-%20fashion%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fqueen-mother-george-vi-wedding-elizabeth-bowes-lyon-1923%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10e83f801a4d9ec793d06db3cf469574f2ea6eda%2F0_0_2140_2968%2F2140.jpg>
 Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon and the Duke of York (George VI) on their wedding 
day, 26 April 1923. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
This stipulation does not apply to the going-away costume that Lady Elizabeth 
has chosen. Dove-neck grey is the only term that has been found to describe its 
delicate pastel shade. The frock is of marocain, almost entirely covered with 
very fine embroidery of the same shade. With it is worn one of the new little 
coats of the embroidered material. This is very short with squarecut front, 
hanging loose at the waist. At the back it is caught with a wide sash of the 
plain marocain which girdles the frock in front and is fastened in a bow with 
long ends at the side. The very pretty draped wrap coat of the same marocain to 
be worn over this is trimmed with large rosettes of the material, each with an 
open centre and each sewn on flatly at the edges. The sleeves are finished in 
an original way with a rosette pendent from the wrist and with a tassel. The 
coat is very slightly gathered at the back on either shoulder. A stole of 
blue-fox fur will be worn with this costume.

Some delightful frocks have been made by Mme. Headley-Seymour for Lady 
Elizabeth’s trousseau, most of them in the quiet colours that the bride likes 
best. One that is equally suitable for morning or afternoon wear is of beige 
crepe romain. The bodice has a square yoke and long sleeves which are finished 
with accordion pleats set in as an insertion between elbow and wrist. The front 
of the bodice is accordion pleated, and so is the apron drapery which covers 
the front and sides of the skirt. Another graceful frock of almost the same 
colour has a pleated skirt and a pouched bodice opening in front over a blouse 
of white georgette lightly embroidered with red.

FOR EVENINGS.
A pretty evening frock is of deep cream lace over cream crepe satin. The 
bodice, which has a rounded neck, has no sleeves, and is slightly pouched. The 
lace is embroidered all over with tiny coral and crystal beads and 
mother-of-pearl sequins. The girdle is of crystal and coral, and from it at one 
side a fold of the satin is draped. One of Lady Elizabeth’s evening coats is of 
brown broché satin, perfectly straight in line with a small collar of brown 
hare and wide bands of the same fur edging the cuffs and the hem.

Lady Strathmore [the bride’s mother] will wear at the wedding a frock of black 
marocain and georgette. This is embroidered with black jet and black beads, and 
here and there it has touches of blue bead embroidery on the cross-over bodice 
and on embroidered panels of the skirt. The note of blue is repeated in the 
blue chiffon which lines the almost bell-shaped sleeves. Over this gown will be 
worn a very graceful cape of black marocain with a deep flounce of heavily 
embroidered black silk lace which touches the ground behind. At the top of this 
deep flounce all round the cape are large black marocain roses, and the round 
collar is edged with huge blue silk roses matching the lining of the cape.

Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon, future Queen Mother, married the Duke of York, later 
George VI, on26 April 1923 in a wedding dress of aquamarine blue and silver 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/18/Elizabeth_Bowes_Lyon_wedding_dress_Guardian_26_April_1923.jpeg>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fqueen-mother-george-vi-wedding-elizabeth-bowes-lyon-1923%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19fc97a05df3356e99163b700e4953f59c1a1463%2F8_8_5413_2915%2F5413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delightful%20frocks%20for%20Duke%20of%20York's%20wedding%2C%201923%20-%20fashion%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fqueen-mother-george-vi-wedding-elizabeth-bowes-lyon-1923%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delightful%20frocks%20for%20Duke%20of%20York%27s%20wedding%2C%201923%20-%20fashion%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fqueen-mother-george-vi-wedding-elizabeth-bowes-lyon-1923%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19fc97a05df3356e99163b700e4953f59c1a1463%2F8_8_5413_2915%2F5413.jpg>
 The Guardian, 23 April 1923.  