
A union representing drivers for the takeaway app Deliveroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deliveroo> is requesting recognition from 
the company, in the latest battle over employment practices in the gig economy.

The Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB) has written to 
Deliveroo’s chief executive asking the firm to recognise it as a union 
representing riders in one area of London.

Currently, the riders are classed as self-employed contractors, and are not 
entitled to the rights available to workers, including sick pay and the 
national living wage. The firm’s contracteven tells those who sign up to make 
deliveries that they cannot test this status at the employment tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/25/deliveroo-workers-contracts-ban-access-to-employment-tribunals>
 – although lawyers have dismissed this as unenforceable.

What's it like working for Deliveroo?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/12/what-its-like-working-for-deliveroo>
The request for collective bargaining, which will cover only those working in 
Camden, north London, is designed to force the company to acknowledge the 
riders as workers. Independent contractors are not able to request collective 
bargaining in this way.


The letter, sent by the general secretary of the IWGB, Jason Moyer-Lee, and 
addressed to Deliveroo’s founder and chief executive Will Shu, calls for the 
company to recognise drivers working in one of its central London delivery 
zones. The letter gives the company 10 days to respond, and says that if the 
request is refused or unanswered the union will go to the central arbitration 
committee.

It adds: “Of course, for the CAC to entertain our request they will need to 
decide that Deliveroo drivers are ‘workers’ and not the ‘independent 
contractors’ you have bogusly deemed them to be.”

The somewhat unconventional approach to having riders recognised as workers 
follows a recent employment tribunal case which found that a group of drivers 
for car-hailing firm Uber should be classed as workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
.


That case, which is now expected to go to appeal, put the spotlight on other 
firms with large self-employed workforces, and may lead to new claims being 
taken to the employment tribunal.

Moyer-Lee said: “The importance of achieving a collective bargaining agreement 
for Deliveroo workers is not just the ability to negotiate pay and terms and 
conditions, but also to keep chipping away at this bogus narrative that gig 
economy workers are a bunch of independent entrepreneurs who are so lucky to 
benefit from the generous flexibility provided by the likes ofUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> and Deliveroo.


“Deliveroo drivers work for Deliveroo and as such they should be entitled to 
paid holiday, minimum wage, trade union rights, and all the other rights 
associated with worker status.”

The Guardian view on the gig economy: time to get serious about casual work | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/the-guardian-view-on-the-gig-economy-time-to-get-serious-about-casual-work>
If the request does end up with the CAC one thing it will need to determine is 
whether there is sufficient support for the union amongst the workforce. At 
least 10% of the proposed bargaining unit will need to be union members, and a 
majority of the proposed group will need to be considered likely to favour 
recognition.

If Deliveroo does agree to recognise the union it is likely to be the first 
collective bargaining agreement in the “gig economy”. Although recognition will 
only apply to riders in Camden, it could set a precedent for other people in 
insecure jobs.

John Hendy, a barrister who has advised IWGB said the application for 
collective bargaining was “a timely and vital step forward”. He said: “Those 
working in the gig economy will never see a significant improvement to their 
terms and conditions without being represented by a union in collective 
bargaining.”

The request follows successful protests by drivers in London who objected to 
the trial of a new pay structure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/16/deliveroo-announces-it-will-not-force-new-contracts-on-workers>
 which would have seen them moved from an hourly rate to a payment per 
delivery. The change affected several zones, including Camden, and some riders 
said it would mean their pay was cut.

After several days of demonstrations and some drivers refusing to work, the 
company agreed that it would allow riders who did not want to to move to 
different zones during the 90-day trial.

In a statement Deliveroo did not comment on the IWGB’s request for 
recoginition.

It said: “As Deliveroo continues to grow, we are committed to providing great 
opportunities for UK riders, with the flexible work riders value, and a payment 
model which is fair, rewarding and better matches riders’ time with our 
customers’ orders.


“We have been in close and regular contact with our riders throughout the 
trial, and as you would expect we will be writing directly to our riders to 
inform them of the next steps as the trial comes to an end. The feedback so far 
has been overwhelmingly positive and we welcome the opportunity to further 
engage with riders, policymakers and the unions as the sharing economy in 
Britain continues to grow.”

The union is set to hold a campaign meeting for drivers and supporters on 
Tuesday night <https://www.facebook.com/events/170408983411984/>.

 