
The bar for iconoclasm is pretty high at Paris fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/paris-fashion-week> these days. This 
season’s biggest debut saw Christian Dior’s first ever female designer shun the 
revered New Look in favour of feminist slogans and references to T-shirts worn 
on Sex and the City.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F185575cf6b9b8ff36f2395fd22b953ae242a48cc%2F487_276_4579_5822%2F4579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Demna%20Gvasalia%20reinvigorates%20Balenciaga%20with%20strategic%20disrespect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Demna%20Gvasalia%20reinvigorates%20Balenciaga%20with%20strategic%20disrespect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F185575cf6b9b8ff36f2395fd22b953ae242a48cc%2F487_276_4579_5822%2F4579.jpg>
 Demna Gvasalia of Balenciaga. Photograph: Willy Vanderperre/Balenciaga 
But Demna Gvasalia, the man who orchestrated a street style cult around the 
DHL logo T-shirt and disrupted traditional standards of beauty by “character 
casting” for interesting looking people to wear his clothes on the catwalk, 
isn’t about to be easily ousted from his position as high fashion’s foremost 
dissident.

Gvasalia’s power to impact fashion and pop culture was in evidence at his 
second Balenciaga show when Kim Kardashian pressed her way backstage with her
Balenciaga <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga> trenchcoat shrugged 
clean off her shoulders in exactly the way it was seen on the catwalk, to tell 
the designer how upset her husband, Kanye West, was not to be able to make the 
show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6451a4053e16711e2648f62bf3bf1f80ac061a19%2F443_120_2605_4658%2F2605.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Demna%20Gvasalia%20reinvigorates%20Balenciaga%20with%20strategic%20disrespect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Demna%20Gvasalia%20reinvigorates%20Balenciaga%20with%20strategic%20disrespect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6451a4053e16711e2648f62bf3bf1f80ac061a19%2F443_120_2605_4658%2F2605.jpg>
 Balenciaga show. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
The playbook for a new designer at an established house starts with 
celebrating history and heritage. Gvasalia is doing the opposite, 
reinvigorating Balenciaga via strategic disrespect. He revisits the archives, 
but with a bull-in-a-china-shop disregard for The Done Thing.

Balenciaga and Céline catwalk shows impress at Paris fashion week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/06/balenciaga-and-celine-catwalk-shows-impress-at-paris-fashion-week>
So in this collection, the classic Balenciaga ‘cocoon’ and ‘sack’ silhouettes, 
which in their 50s form had the delicate, soft fullness of blown glass, turned 
up as bright yellow puffa jackets with valves at the back of the neck where 
they were to be inflated, like a child’s waterwing. And as if to puncture the 
softness of these shapes, they were alternated between jackets with exaggerated 
sharp shoulders, as if the coat hanger were being worn inside them. Handbags 
were as ostentatiously utilitarian as they were unignorably enormous. Vast, 
squishy oblong bags were modelled on the clear plastic zipper bags in which 
inexpensive duvets and blankets are sold; the name BALENCIAGA was stickered in 
one corner, where you might expect it to read Buy One Get One Free.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9c9df9f6473a7e259d676747623fffc5d56f0d9%2F635_239_2138_4550%2F2138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Demna%20Gvasalia%20reinvigorates%20Balenciaga%20with%20strategic%20disrespect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Demna%20Gvasalia%20reinvigorates%20Balenciaga%20with%20strategic%20disrespect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9c9df9f6473a7e259d676747623fffc5d56f0d9%2F635_239_2138_4550%2F2138.jpg>
 Model on the catwalk during the Balenciaga show. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Spandex leggings and thigh-high boots were Gvasalia’s cheeky interpretation of 
the relationship between a couturier such as Cristobal Balenciaga and his 
clients as being borderline fetishistic. He noted “the obsessive interest in 
achieving a particular fit” and “the sensations which arise when specific 
fabrics touch skin”. That spandex thigh-high boots are a current star item in 
the wardrobe of the endlessly photographed Kim Kardashian doesn’t hurt either. 
That several of the pierced, buzzcut hip kids who Gvasalia had chosen for the 
catwalk were unused to walking in heels and wobbled perilously the length of 
the catwalk added to the drama.

Celine’s Phoebe Philo’s attempts to stand out as a maverick modern minimalist 
at Paris fashion week have been hampered by the eagerness of other designers to 
model their aesthetic on hers. Aside from the styling trick of having some 
models wear a different coloured shoe on each foot, this was for the most part 
a straightforwardly wearable collection of midi-length dresses, tailored 
jackets, trenchcoats, even snap-clasp handbags, all with just enough original 
detail (a new sleeve shape, an acid colour combination) to make it deeply 
desirable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba9b9410b34771a059a5f790b09765644eb0a159%2F288_275_2438_4394%2F2438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Demna%20Gvasalia%20reinvigorates%20Balenciaga%20with%20strategic%20disrespect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Demna%20Gvasalia%20reinvigorates%20Balenciaga%20with%20strategic%20disrespect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdemna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba9b9410b34771a059a5f790b09765644eb0a159%2F288_275_2438_4394%2F2438.jpg>
 The Balenciaga show. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
There was a sort-of debut for Pierpaolo Piccioli, now the sole designer at 
Valentino after the departure of his creative partner of two decades to Dior. 
The show’s notes talked about punk, but Piccioli’s vision of punk is sweeter 
and softer than most would recognise. In fact, it was clear from this show that 
the state of blissed-out gracefulness which Valentino stands for – wispily 
braided hair, soft narrow shoulders, slim sleeves, and a languid hemline 
beneath which a woman appears to float rather than walk – is alive and well 
after the departure of Maria Grazia Chiuri. This was no new direction for 
Valentino, but it was a sublimely beautiful show.

 