
PARIS
If something happened to our present wardrobe; if it was destroyed by fire or 
water or were it lost on a journey or stolen, how, I wonder, would we set about 
replacing it from scratch? And on limited amount of money, of course.

Let us suppose that we have insurance coverage of, say, £100* and that we plan 
to keep our wardrobe down to a minimum of basic elements. It’s quite a problem. 
Where to begin? Exactly how many pieces to plan for? What general colour scheme 
to adopt? What occasions to bear in mind? What general rules to adopt? Whose 
taste but your own to conform to?

Higher meditations and sheep failing, these are thoughts that offer an 
excellent way of wooing sleep in the small hours. Try it, with my love, and 
see... I should like to say right at the beginning that if the necessity did 
ever arise to build up from scratch I would much rather do my shopping at home 
than in France. As near as matters prices for ready-made clothes over here are 
just about a third dearer than in England. As for styling, I have discovered 
from experience that if you have your eye “in” on fashion and know more or less 
what you want you can do very well in the shops at home.
 Manchester Guardian, 25 November 1957. Photograph: The Guardian 
As our target, I suggest a six-garment wardrobe, beginning with something in 
the way of a town-tweedy ensemble (whoever it was who brought tweeds to town 
did women an incalculable service). It could be either on the lines of theHeim 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacques_Heim> suit (left) or a sheath and coat 
ensemble like the one in the Claude Riviere model in the other (below). Either 
or both would see you through the best part of the day with elegance and 
comfort; both are good mixers.

If we take the Heim model first and as our number one basic outfit (it would 
be quite all right without the belt and the fur collar – unless, of course, a 
length of beaver should have escaped the cataclysm) it could be encouraged to 
take you from autumn into winter by the addition of a temporary tack-in lining, 
either quilted or jersey. How much do we allow for this item? My guess is £25: 
a big bite out of the £100, but a winner every time.

The coat next. I should tend to settle for a straight or slightly spindling 
one with large armholes and in a plain colour that picks up one of the colours 
of the tweed outfit. It will be roomy enough to go over the jacket even if the 
latter has its extra lining inside. How much for the coat? I have seen very 
good looking ones around the £13 mark.

An extra skirt matching up to the coat will make an ensemble with it and will 
tie up with contrasting or matching sweaters and cardigans; or with blouses. I 
should be inclined, too, to have a middy-type top in the same wool as the skirt 
to give, on occasions, a slightly dressier two-piece look.

How much have we spent up to date? £25 for the suit ensemble, £15 for the 
coat, £7 for the odd skirt and middy top and, say, £8 worth of jumpers and 
cardigans. This makes £55, leaving £45 in hand. Not doing too badly.

To round off the day-time items I would suggest a one-piece jersey dress of 
some kind and in some sharply contrasting colour to the rest of the wardrobe, 
but of course in sympathy with it. For the slim and elegant one of the new 
coarse-ribbed ones, perhaps; for the plump (and still elegant, we hope) a finer 
jersey with a hint of draping in the right places.

Allowing £10 for the jersey dress we have now arrived at six o’clock in the 
evening and have still £35 to play with. Six o’clock and cocktail time – what 
are we going to wear ? This is a matter of considerable interpretation. Some go 
all gay on the principle that day clothes are of necessity prosaic. Others go 
all black and fatal. I think the wise line to take is one of non-descript 
elegance for the basic garment and to go right to town on accessories – hats, 
crazy as you like, and coquille jewellery, chunky as you will. So I would be 
inclined to settle for something dark, something plain in either wool or silk 
ottoman, and cut with as daring a décolleté as you feel you can get away with.

With wise choosing this dress will carry a woman through cocktails to dinner 
in town or will take her dancing or to the theatre. And, as it will last for 
years and give untold service – including weddings – it needs to be good in the 
first place. I would put at least £20 into that dress. It might be a good idea, 
too, to have a cashmere cardigan of exactly the same colour to cover up its 
nakedness on occasions.

So it is £20 for the all-purpose-six-o’clock-onwards dress and £6 for the 
cashmere cardigan This leaves us with £9 to spend, four hangers occupied, an 
odd skirt or two in their clips, and a drawerful of woollies. Not a madly 
exciting wardrobe you may say. But it has the valuable advantage of being 
compact, up-together, adequate for immediate needs and our times.

*Approximately £2,000 in 2016
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffashion-designing-basic-wardrobe-1957%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d64507bf67196321039c882e65c5693d2d51a9c%2F0_0_1043_1042%2F1043.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designing%20a%20basic%20wardrobe%20on%20%C2%A3100%20-%20fashion%20archive%2C%2025%20November%201957&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffashion-designing-basic-wardrobe-1957%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designing%20a%20basic%20wardrobe%20on%20%C2%A3100%20-%20fashion%20archive%2C%2025%20November%201957&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffashion-designing-basic-wardrobe-1957%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d64507bf67196321039c882e65c5693d2d51a9c%2F0_0_1043_1042%2F1043.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 25 November 1957.  