
Paddling along the densely wooded coastline, the view ahead was suddenly 
broken by asymmetrical shapes rising up from a grassy headland. Excited, we 
beached our kayaks on a thin strip of sand and went to investigate.

A few metres from the sea we found two wooden trapezium-shaped shelters, 
raised off the ground on stilts. Chest-high at the front, clad in black tiles, 
the structure had a number of openings and artfully arranged portholes. This 
was home for the night.
Shelters in Denmark's Funen archipelago 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/danish_shelters-zip/giv-12515hZKAA9hitU2o>
Along with my guide, Jakob, I was on the Danish island of Tåsinge, part of the 
South Funen archipelago that lies just south of Fyn, the large island 
sandwiched between the Jutland peninsula and Zealand (which hosts Copenhagen). 
It’s an undulating and green landscape, full of secluded beaches, nature 
reserves and historic towns.

This was the first stage of a trip I was making through the region, travelling 
by kayak, bike and on foot. Bed each night would be in some of the 50 recently 
built architect-designed shelters of various sizes at 19 locations throughout 
the area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6897114890dd9ec0a14c4bee80fe2686f690d3a%2F0_147_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6897114890dd9ec0a14c4bee80fe2686f690d3a%2F0_147_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Richard Nelsson in a shelter on the island of Tasinge. Photograph: Richard 
Nelsson 
My journey began at the gatehouse to Tåsinge’s Valdemars Slot 
<http://valdemarsslot.dk/castle/?lang=en>, a 17th-century castle by the sea, 
where Jacob and Pernille Nilsson run their kayak business,KajakInn 
<http://www.kajakinn.dk/>.

Pulling out a map, Jacob explained that we were going to kayak for a few 
kilometres across Lunkebugten – “a tricky-bay” – before rounding a headland and 
following the coast to a remote spot on the eastern edge of the island where 
there weretwo shelters <http://bookenshelter.dk/shelterplads/hegnet-taasinge/>.

After struggling into a dry suit, I grabbed a handful of waterproof gear bags 
and headed down to the beach. As he stuffed food and camping gear into the 
kayaks, Jacob said that South Fyn was perfect for nautical exploration as the 
water around the coasts was very shallow with lots of bays and inlets. This 
makes it popular with families and serious kayakers alike. Kayaks can be hired 
in the nearby town of Svendborg, while KajakInn also offers short training 
courses as well as guiding services.

The shelters were built as part of a tourism project to encourage more outdoor 
enthusiasts travelling under their own steam to visit the Fyn area. Basic 
constructions with one side open to the elements can be found throughout the 
archipelago, but in 2015, new, all-enclosed designs were commissioned, ensuring 
year-round use (at a basic cost of £3 a night).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fe847dd4b4128f9f3a0e071ba0acc8fde3ece29%2F0_98_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fe847dd4b4128f9f3a0e071ba0acc8fde3ece29%2F0_98_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 The architect-designed shelters come in various sizes. Photograph: Jesper 
Balleby 
Five models were created by the Danish firm Lumo Arkitekter 
<http://www.lumo.dk/index.php?id=7>, ranging from the basic two-person 
Flounder, to the Monkfish that sleeps seven, has three floors and comes with a 
bird-watching platform at the top. The shapes are based on the huts used by 
local fishermen to store their catch although my Flounder reminded me most of a 
campervan pop-up roof bed.

All shelter locations include a fire-pit, with a toilet and water supply 
nearby. However, you must bring bedding and cooking equipment, as well as food.

Thankfully Jacob had filled the filled the kayak with more than enough 
provisions. That night, as we sat around the fire, feasting on chicken and dill 
casserole washed down with Bryg brown ale, and with the sea only metres away, I 
felt the Danish concept ofhygge – roughly meaning cosy or content. Retiring to 
my shelter I realised it was more than just a timber tent; there was a feeling 
of solidity, a comforting tar smell, and I lay transfixed as the late evening 
light coming through the small portholes at different angles illuminated the 
cool minimalist design.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd740e0ceb32c79ffb0c9a069bdd2633eceb58adc%2F0_346_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd740e0ceb32c79ffb0c9a069bdd2633eceb58adc%2F0_346_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
 Richard Nelsson kayaking in the Lunkebugten, South Fyn. Photograph: Jacob 
Nilsson 
I slept well, with the shelter warm but well ventilated, although some have 
grumbled about feeling claustrophobic and the bare wood amplifying every 
movement and sound. This was soon forgotten as we made a near-perfect kayak 
journey back to the castle. As the sun burned off the mist to reveal the 
surrounding islands, our slim wooden Greenland paddles slipped silently into 
the near-still waters.

After leaving Tåsinge, I caught a ferry to Drejø, a small island 5km long and 
with permanent population of around 75. From the harbour, a track atop a dyke 
followed the island’s southern coast. Land here has been drained for centuries 
creating lush, flat fields, although in places pumping has ceased so as to 
create lakes and nature reserves.

My dyke walk was short, but a perfect taster for hikers who want to take on the
South Fyn archipelago trail 
<http://www.visitdenmark.co.uk/en-gb/denmark/archipelago-trail-gdk993753>, a 
200km network of signposted paths that circumnavigates the area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc551c88fe05a6f38599416766170eaf74adaac7e%2F0_589_1944_1644%2F1944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc551c88fe05a6f38599416766170eaf74adaac7e%2F0_589_1944_1644%2F1944.jpg>
 A firepit gives a cosy ‘hygge’ feeling. Photograph: Richard Nelsson for the 
Guardian 
Drejø’s three shelters <http://bookenshelter.dk/shelterplads/drejoe-syd/> were 
right next to the island’s best swimming spot – clear seas with a bathing jetty 
leading from the beach into deeper water. After a cooling dip, I met Jonas 
Jespersen, who manages the site, preparing wood for a new communal area. As he 
painted, using the shelters’ trademark black-pigmented wood tar oil, he told 
me: “We get walkers, kayakers, anglers. Last year was a terrible summer and we 
still had over 300 people staying. If we’re full, they just camp.”

Jonas pointed me in the direction of Gammel Havn, the old harbour. On the way 
I passed through the island’s village with its timber-framed houses andmuseum 
<http://www.xn--sfartshistorie-qqb.dk/museer/mus353.html>, not to mention a 
cafe selling the localskarø 
<http://www.isfraskaroe.dk/EN/Retailers/DairyIce-cream/> “birch juice” ice 
cream before heading back to my shelter.

An early start the next day saw me catching a ferry to Ærø, the third largest 
island in the archipelago. With the sky a deep blue, it felt more like Greek 
island-hopping than a Baltic boat trip and by the time we docked in the 
17th-century market town of Ærøskøbing, I felt I had adjusted to South Fyn’s 
slower pace of life.


Here I met local cycle guide and writer, Allan Harsbo, who owns hire firm Bike 
Erria <http://www.bike-erria.dk/eng/eng_om_os.html>. While having a coffee in 
the beautifully preserved, almost Disney-like, cobbled market square, he 
noticed me staring at a bright pink Trabant car parked up next to us. “Ah yes,” 
he said, “Ærø is the Las Vegas of Denmark”. The island’s bureaucracy-free 
marriage laws mean that many non-Danes flock to the island to get hitched.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F658ca4534935b5ea987e98d60c5a8c3a2ff02cb3%2F0_365_5420_3252%2F5420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Designer%20dens%3A%20Danish%20island%20shelters%20perfect%20for%20outdoor%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fdenmark-islands-baltic-shelters-kayak-bike-walk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F658ca4534935b5ea987e98d60c5a8c3a2ff02cb3%2F0_365_5420_3252%2F5420.jpg>
 And old lime kiln near AEro. Photograph: Alamy 
I was keen to start exploring so we picked up a couple of bikes and began 
meandering our way on dedicated cycle tracks and empty roads across the eastern 
part of the island. As we pedalled past quiet bays and fields full of solar 
panels and grazing sheep, Allan would light his pipe and exclaim: “Just listen 
to the silence.”

Eventually we arrived at the seafaring town of Marstal, its long maritime 
history displayed in fascinating detail at the local museum. More strenuous 
cycle routes head up to the tiny hills in the centre of the island, while 
others include themoated manor of Søbygaard 
<http://www.visitdenmark.co.uk/en-gb/denmark/sobygaard-aeroe-gdk612140>, and 
breweries.

The final shelter I visited in this unique area was located beneath a small 
cliff on a beach. As I looked out of a porthole for the porpoises that are said 
to come in close to the shore, I marvelled at this perfect marriage of Danish 
nature and smart design.

• The trip was provided by VisitDenmark 
<http://www.visitdenmark.co.uk/en-gb/denmark/discover-denmark-exciting-city-breaks-and-stunning-nature>
 andDestination Fyn <http://www.visitfyn.com/ln-int/funen/visitfyn>. Shelters 
from about £3pp, individually sleeping from 2-9 on first-come, first-served 
basis if unreserved. Reservations and locations map atbookenshelter.dk 
<http://bookenshelter.dk/shelterplads/hegnet-taasinge/?lang=en>. Kayaks from 
£36 a day (kajakinn.dk <http://www.kajakinn.dk>). Bike hire from £8 a day (
bike-erria.dk <http://www.bike-erria.dk/eng/>). To reach the area, visitors can 
take thetrain from Copenhagen to Nyborg <http://www.dsb.dk/en/> (from £28 one 
way) andbus from Nyborg to Svendborg <https://fynbus.dk/> (£8). The ferry 
<http://www.aeroe-ferry.dk/> from Svenborg to Ærø costs £10 one way
 