
Emerging from customs at St Pancras International station last night, I found 
myself looking up attwo colossal sculptures 
<http://stpancras.com/art/art-and-artefacts>. Paul Day’s nine-metre bronze 
statue of a kissing couple loomed up in all its detailed smoochiness. Higher 
still, suspended from the roof, soared Ron Arad’s wave-likeThought of Train of 
Thought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/07/ron-arad-twisting-aluminium-sculpture-unveiled-st-pancras-station-london>
.

To their supporters and critics these may seem to be very different works of 
art – Arad’s cutting edge abstraction versus Day’s figurative statue – but 
seeing them with the eyes of a traveller who’d just cleared the UK border, they 
both spoke of national self-confidence: bold and brassy, a bit vulgar, and very 
loud.

If our art says anything about us, the vogue for public art in Britain since 
the 1990s may be interpreted by historians as a symptom of the patriotic mood 
that led to Brexit. I know, the standard explanation for this year’s vote to 
leave the EU is that it’s all about the frustrations of voters who feel “left 
behind”. But actually, leaving a larger economic entity suggests a lot of 
national self-regard or pride, a belief that we can easily go it alone. The 
very “elite” that most resists this referendum result has done a lot to build 
up the national self-image through sheer cultural exuberance. Brexit 
consummates the bigging-up of Britain that has been the dominant cultural tone 
of the last quarter century, from Cool Britannia to the London Olympics. Didn’t 
the masses realise we were being ironic about all those union jacks in art and 
pop?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpublic-art-sculpture-uk-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26472a97cf3af29d377836f937addf93cdcde472%2F0_0_1890_2773%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Did%20the%20boldness%20of%20Britain's%20public%20art%20pave%20the%20way%20to%20Brexit%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpublic-art-sculpture-uk-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Did%20the%20boldness%20of%20Britain%27s%20public%20art%20pave%20the%20way%20to%20Brexit%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpublic-art-sculpture-uk-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26472a97cf3af29d377836f937addf93cdcde472%2F0_0_1890_2773%2F1890.jpg>
 Nicholas Monro’s King Kong, a 1972 work for Manzoni Gardens, Birmingham. 
Photograph: Arnolfini Archive at Bristol Record Office 
Public art is very much part of the cocksure cultural revival that has 
transformed modern Britain. From Antony Gormley’s Angel of the North to the 
Tower of London poppies, art on an often epic scale has captured imaginations 
and expressed local, civic and ultimately patriotic pride – and has 
accidentally, unknowingly done its bit to make Britain a Brexit nation.

An exhibition 
<https://www.henry-moore.org/whats-on/2016/11/24/city-sculpture-projects-1972> 
currently on at the Henry Moore Institute in Leeds reveals just how different 
today’s enthusiasm for public art is from the attitudes that prevailed in 1970s 
and 80s Britain. In 1972 a venture called City Sculpture Projects put 
large-scale sculptures by contemporary artists including William Turnbull and 
Liliane Lijn into city centres across Britain. The most striking, and perhaps 
most likely to be popular today, was Nicholas Monro’s five-metre-high statue in 
Birmingham of King Kong with huge outspread arms.

When after six months the cities had an option to buy the works and make them 
permanent, not a single one took up the offer. So while it generated plenty of 
debate, much of it negative, CitySculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sculpture> Projects totally failed to 
seed a revival of public art.

That was because Britain in the 1970s hated itself. Economically decaying and 
politically crippled, the Britain of that time found its true cultural 
expression in the nihilism of punk or the black comedy of Fawlty Towers. Not in 
the pride of public art. Public art, which is expensive, monumental and usually 
affirmative, is the natural self-expression of a cohesive and expansive 
community. Look at the public art that dominates the British landscape and you 
will find that most of it comes from intensely patriotic periods – times very 
unlike the self-loathing 70s. Monuments such as Nelson’s column in London, the
Marquess of Anglesey’s column 
<http://www.northwalesattractions.co.uk/images/virtual/mofa/mofahome.html> near 
Llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantysiliogogogoch, and theWellington 
monument 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wellington_Monument,_Somerset#/media/File%3AWellington_Monument%2C_Somerset.jpg>
 in Somerset were all erected in the early 19th century to remember Britain’s 
victories in the Napoleonic wars. The statues of Queen Victoria found inmany 
city centres 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/conservation/departments/sculpture/case-studies/queenvictoria/>
 embody the confidence of the British Empire at its zenith. In a much bleaker 
way, thewar memorials 
<http://www.ww1hull.org.uk/index.php/our-loses/war-memorials-in-hull> erected 
everywhere in Britain after 1918 reflect a nation united in sorrow and loss.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpublic-art-sculpture-uk-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29db9b18b168c32b0862961a1cb3858311348821%2F0_0_1890_1284%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Did%20the%20boldness%20of%20Britain's%20public%20art%20pave%20the%20way%20to%20Brexit%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpublic-art-sculpture-uk-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Did%20the%20boldness%20of%20Britain%27s%20public%20art%20pave%20the%20way%20to%20Brexit%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpublic-art-sculpture-uk-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29db9b18b168c32b0862961a1cb3858311348821%2F0_0_1890_1284%2F1890.jpg>
 Kenneth Martin’s work for Arundel Gate, Sheffield. Photograph: Arnolfini 
Archive at Bristol Record Office 
The divided and depressed Britain of the 1970s conformed to this rule 
negatively, by turning down the offer of contemporary art to enliven its 
unloved cities. So what does it mean that public art is so much part of our 
culture today? The sculpture we put up tends to be celebrated as subversive. 
Contemporary art on thefourth plinth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/fourth-plinth> in Trafalgar Square is 
supposedly a modern riposte to the traditional pomp of Nelson’s Column, 
reflecting new attitudes and a new Britain. But look at it in a wider 
perspective and we actually have more in common with the creators of Trafalgar 
Square than we think. They had pride and so do we.

Today’s investment in public art reflects and shapes a sense of community and 
Britishness. The grandeur of our public statuary is a visible symbol of 
national confidence. After a day in Paris, the two colossal sculptures at St 
Pancras seemed very British, very Brexit and strangely awful.
 