
Madrid: La Charca Verde and Manzanares

Just over an hour from Madrid, the granite outcrops of La Pedriza, in the 
Cuenca Alta del Manzanares regional park, provide the backdrop to a wonderful 
wild swimming spot. These mountains are the backdrop for Ernest Hemingway’s For 
Whom the Bell Tolls, set during the Spanish Civil War. Today, the area is 
popular with hikers, climbers and wild swimmers.We expected to pay an entrance 
fee but the men in the hut at the gates smile and wave us through. We drive 5km 
up through pine forests beneath the imposing mountains to a small bar and car 
park by the Manzanares river.

We follow the river upstream. From its source near the Navacerrada pass, the 
water has smoothed and sculpted the rocks into surreal shapes. Families are 
having fun in the pools, but the sheer length of the river, the abundant 
vegetation, and the wide choice of swimming spots means it never feels crowded. 
When the path divides, we take the right fork, cross a bridge and continue up 
the valley to our left, finally scrambling over enormous boulders to reach La 
Charca Verde (Green Pond). Enormous bleached rocks on one side have been worn 
smooth, and youngsters slide down them, laughing with joy as they slip into the 
water. On the other side, promontories above the deep pool are a perfect place 
to show off your diving.

This river often served as the backdrop for romantic artist Francisco Goya. 
Those who arrive early – just as the sun (also) rises – could have this 
atmospheric spot all to themselves.
• On the M30/M607, it takes just over an hour to drive from Madrid to the car 
park 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/40%C2%B045'48.2%22N+3%C2%B054'13.7%22W/@40.7633881,-3.9125603,15z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
. From here, it’s a 20-minute walk.Camping El Ortigal 
<http://allaboutmadrid.com/where-to-sleep/camping-el-ortigal> (tent pitch 
€6.60) provides all the necessities with no frills

Barcelona: Riera de Merlès
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fffa15041788c7ce36c40181d8afbd83b59a412%2F0_136_3404_2043%2F3404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fffa15041788c7ce36c40181d8afbd83b59a412%2F0_136_3404_2043%2F3404.jpg>
Abundant pools and waterfalls along sandstone gorges make the Riera de Merlès, 
117km north of Barcelona, a perfect place for wild swimming. To protect its 
otter population, long stretches of the river are designated areas of natural 
interest. The waters are also home to trout, catfish, Pyrenean newts, 
salamanders and a variety of frogs and toads. If you’re lucky you might glimpse 
a kingfisher or a wild cat. Numerous deep pools along the river, often have 
high rocks to jump and dive from. The nearby ancient town of Santa Maria de 
Merlès boasts a ruined castle, the Romanesque bell tower of the church of Sant 
Marti and a Gothic bridge.

Probably the best place to start is the natural pool next to Càmping Riera de 
Merlès <http://www.campingrieramerles.net/index-es.html> (GPS 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/42%C2%B005'28.7%22N+2%C2%B000'29.9%22E/@42.0912982,1.9907904,14z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
), which is great for jumping, wallowing and fun. We walk 400 metres south 
along the road to a secluded and enchanting waterfall at an elbow of the river. 
Look out for a small path through the undergrowth on the left-hand side of the 
road. Follow the path until you reach rocks overlooking the main pool, with the 
waterfall on your left. You can enter the pool from the banks of the far side 
of the waterfall. Get there early to enjoy this pool in peace and privacy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4313719d98e0ca5e5689517a260395bffcafa41f%2F0_2395_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4313719d98e0ca5e5689517a260395bffcafa41f%2F0_2395_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 La Quar: Zona de les Heures 
About 2km further south is La Quar: Zona de les Heures 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/42%C2%B004'26.8%22N+2%C2%B000'31.7%22E/@42.0741,2.006606,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
, an alluring area with pools and huge rock formations making a natural sun 
trap. There’s a shallow pool for kids and a small ravine with a deepish pool 
beneath for older people who like jumping in. There are at least four other 
pools in the vicinity of Zona de les Heures, and exploring them makes a great 
adventure for children and the young at heart.

To find this family-friendly wild swim, turn left down the slip road 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/42%C2%B004'23.9%22N+2%C2%B000'28.4%22E/@42.0732981,2.0035225,16z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
 marked with two signs, one saying Vilartimo and the other Goles de les Heures. 
Follow the road to the right and you soon see the river. Climb down the rocks 
and the first access to the water is on your right. Walk another 100m to reach 
the ravine, where you can jump in, though do check the water level first.

Another 5km south, near Santa Maria de Merlès 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/42%C2%B001'53.4%22N+1%C2%B059'56.8%22E/@42.0314982,1.9969112,17z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
, we find another great spot to jump and dive from rocks into a deep river 
pool. This secluded spot is 5km (10 minutes’ drive) from Santa Maria de Merlès 
on the BV-4406. There’s asmall spot to park 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/42%C2%B001'54.8%22N+1%C2%B059'56.0%22E/@42.0318981,1.9978055,18z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
 by the left-hand side of the road. Cross to the other side of the road and 
follow the gravel path clockwise round the field until you reach the river. 
It’s an easy,three-minute walk from the car park 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/42%C2%B001'53.4%22N+1%C2%B059'56.8%22E/@42.0314982,1.9969112,17z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
.
• From Barcelona, take the B-10/C-58/C-16 for 100km towards Santa Coloma de 
Gramenet until exit 90. Then follow the C-62 towards (and past) Olvan for 12km 
until you see a brown sign for the Riera Merlès. Turn left towards Gironella 
and Berga and drive north on the BV-4406. Stay atCàmping Riera de Merlès 
<http://www.campingrieramerles.net/> (from €13.90 per tent plus €5.40pp)

Santiago de Compostela: A Firveda
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa061964e54beb03215f6d76f39485e305acf78eb%2F0_15_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa061964e54beb03215f6d76f39485e305acf78eb%2F0_15_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Galicia is a land of lush rolling hills threaded with crystalline rivers: it’s 
known asel país de los mil ríos (country of a thou sand rivers). Cascading 
waterfalls and river beaches join 1,000 miles of coast to make the region a 
wild swimmers’ paradise. Galicia’s gorse- and heather-covered hills and mossy 
drystone walls are reminiscent of Derbyshire or Cornwall, but the palm trees 
remind us we are in Spain.

Since the middle ages, pilgrims have flocked to Galicia, and their modern 
counterparts, laden with rucksacks, still walk the Camino de Santiago. On our 
wild swimming pilgrimage, we head south from Santiago for the tiny hamlet of A 
Fírveda in the foothills of the Serra do Cando mountain. Ninety minutes later, 
we find ourselves picking our way down a steep rocky path with the roar of the 
waterfall growing ever stronger. In the jungle-like, mossy valley, we bathe in 
the two natural pools and dare each other to swim under the fierce, cascading 
waters of this dramatic waterfall near the source of the Verdugo river.

• Park on the CP-0306 outside A Fírveda by a wooden sign for Río Verdugo no 
Firenza 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/42%C2%B026'22.2%22N+8%C2%B022'37.6%22W/@42.4394981,-8.3858549,15z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
. Walk into the village, turn left at the fountain, walk for 10 minutes down a 
narrow mossy track andcontinue down the hill, past another fountain 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/42%C2%B026'21.5%22N+8%C2%B022'32.9%22W/@42.4392981,-8.3801775,16z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x0>
. The track is rocky and slippery. Stay atCamping Maceira 
<http://www.campingmaceira.com/?Zone=Prices> (from €4.50 per tent plus 
€4.50pp), an hour’s drive from A Fírveda

Málaga: Río Verde
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e4e36e6f8968ee3f64da3825d6aa470a0ee9249%2F0_2135_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e4e36e6f8968ee3f64da3825d6aa470a0ee9249%2F0_2135_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Just 90 minutes north-east of Málaga, high in the Sierra Nevada, awaits a 
fantastic adventure for adults and children in a stunning natural environment. 
We start our day at the narrowest part of the oleander-garlanded gorge, where 
thrill-seekers are leaping from a mountain ledge, clearing the treetops by 
inches before plummeting into a cool river pool.

We’ve heard there’s a secret waterfall at the top of the Barranco de las 
Chorreras gorge. We climb up steep, narrow paths, passing astounding rock 
formations draped in mosses; the air is heavy with the scent of pine and wild 
herbs. There’s a lot of ascending and descending and quite a bit of zig-zagging 
across the river. We reach a small waterfall, which cascades down yellow rocks 
into a round turquoise pool, La Poza Central. This is a wild swimmer’s 
paradise, and we can’t resist a dip. Revived, we march on, and after an arduous 
trek involving rope bridges, we hear our destination before we see it: the 
powerful and majestic torrent at the head of the gorge. We feel humbled and 
exhausted and a long way from civilisation. Nevertheless, we try and swim under 
the pounding waters, getting pushed back again and again by its forceful 
cascade.

A few words of warning: you have to be physically fit to reach the top 
waterfall. There is little or no phone coverage here. Follow the signs, keep to 
the river and take a map. Flash floods may wash away hanging bridges: if the 
bridges haven’t been rebuilt after the previous year’s floods, the river is 
usually shallow enough in summer to wade or walk across.
• From Málaga take the A7 east towards Almuñécar, then head north on the 
A-4050. After Otívar go north for 6km, stop at gateway on left by the yellow 
hut (there’s a small entrance fee for cars; in winter, the key is available at 
El Capricho Bar in Otívar). Drive 5km down the rough, steep track and park at 
the abandoned pump house or drive up steep hill for 200m and park. Head 
north-west, keeping the river to your right, and pass the dam. Clamber down 
rocks to the river, cross and follow north-east to the first pool. Stay at
Camping Tropical Almuñécar <http://campingtropical.es/en/> (from €5 per tent 
plus €5pp)

Granada: Lake Negratín
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a23b5ed8b22b0ded8beff9143bfa7312fe88bb0%2F0_11_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Different%20strokes%3A%20wild%20swimming%20in%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fwild-swimming-spain-madrid-barcelona-andalucia-galicia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a23b5ed8b22b0ded8beff9143bfa7312fe88bb0%2F0_11_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Negratín, a dazzling aquamarine lake beneath Mount Jabalcón, is one of our 
favourite Spanish wild swims. Set within a vast plateau, El Altiplano de 
Granada, this beautiful unspoilt area is part of the natural parks of Sierra de 
Baza and Sierra de Castril. After an hour’s drive from Granada, we arrive in 
time for a sunset dip. Refreshed, we eat delicious fish at the Cortijo del Cura 
restaurant overlooking the water.

At sunrise we enjoy another magical swim across the lake from the inland beach 
in the warm, silvery waters. In high summer, the beach is popular with locals; 
take a drive or stroll around the huge lake to find more secluded spots. 
Meanwhile, the small town of Cuevas del Campo, just north of the reservoir, 
boasts several cave houses for which the area is famous. There are also thermal 
springs – Baños de Zújar, set slightly above the lakeside next to Los Baños 
restaurant – where you can enjoy the therapeutic waters and a great view.
• From Granada take the A-92/N-342 east, turn left at the GR-7100, follow the 
road until it meets the A-315, and turn left just before Freila. Heading north, 
you’ll passCamping la Cabañuela  
<http://www.campings.net/en/camping-la-cabanuela-freila-en-freila.htm>(from 
€3.50 per tent plus €3.80pp) and then reach the lake. You can park outside the 
restaurant and the beach is in front of you. Arrive early and you may have the 
place to yourself

This is an edited extract from Wild Swimming Spain by John Weller and Lola 
Culsán (£15.99, Wild Things Publishing). Guardian readers can enjoy a 30% 
discount (plus free p+p) by entering “Guardian” as the coupon code at
wildthingspublishing.com 
<http://www.wildthingspublishing.com/product/wild-swimming-spain/>
 