
There’s no hiding from digital change. For business, this era is one of 
constant turbulence and disruption, as technological innovators pick up the 
snow dome and shake it again and again.

Australia is not alone in having to come to terms with the challenges and 
opportunities that digital change is presenting.

“It’s borderless,” says Stefan Hajkowicz, senior principal scientist, strategy 
and foresight, for the CSIRO. “The big thing is connectivity. The international 
global-level network of devices and connected data sets is having an impact in 
Australia as well as everywhere else.

“We’ve been through the early phases of it… minor changes to the way we did 
customer service and stored information, for example. It was business as usual 
with better tools.

“We’ve gone beyond that. Platform-based businesses – the Airbnbs, the Ubers – 
can challenge the existing ones and disrupt really easily. Peer-to-peer models 
are being unleashed in banking and finance… In the next five to 10 years 
banking and finance will see a lot of change.

“Now we’re really getting deeply into business models, governance systems and 
policies. It’s having a deeper level effect on the how the economy works.”

How are other countries coping?

Some countries are managing digital change better than others. 

“The emerging economies of Asia are moving really fast and are at the top of 
the pile,” Hajkowicz says. “Singapore usually comes to the top of the list on 
the World Economic Forum rankings. They are very quick to adopt and capitalise 
on new technologies. There are government policies in place, the private sector 
is moving quickly, there’s evidence of a lot of technology uptake and the 
education systems are responding.”

Singapore is training a workforce ready to tackle technological innovation. 
Its students are among the world’s top performers in science and maths, 
according to the 2012 OECD Programme for International Student Assessment 
(PISA) rankings, which tested 15-year-olds in more than 60 countries. Other 
high performers were Taiwan, Korea, Finland, Switzerland, and Shanghai and Hong 
Kong in China.

Countries that are lagging behind, or could do better – such as Australia – 
are desperate to improve their performance in STEM (science, technology, 
engineering and maths) subjects to fill what has become known as the STEM 
skills shortage.

Those countries that perform well in STEM have several attributes in common, 
according to the Australian Council of Learned Academies, which reported to the 
Prime Minister’s Science Engineering and Innovation Council on STEM country 
comparisons in 2013.

These include:

 * Highly esteemed, well-paid teachers

 * Compulsory disciplinary content

 * Reform to encourage more engaging, problem/inquiry-based learning, and 
critical and creative thinking

 * Prestige attached to careers in science

 * Strategic bipartisan national STEM policy frameworks

 * Targets to motivate collaborative action

The US came up with just such a target in 2012, when it announced its aim to 
have one million additional college graduates with STEM degrees in 10 years in 
a bid to fill labour shortages.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fdigital-change-can-australia-keep-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a32fe0c2f06e4b0a6148316648177e18b9ab327%2F0_496_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Digital%20change%3A%20can%20Australia%20keep%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fdigital-change-can-australia-keep-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Digital%20change%3A%20can%20Australia%20keep%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fdigital-change-can-australia-keep-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a32fe0c2f06e4b0a6148316648177e18b9ab327%2F0_496_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
 Singapore, a consistent leader on the World Economic Forum rankings. 
Photograph: Chinnaphong Mungsiri/Getty Images 
A cultural push

Professor David Wilkinson, Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Corporate Engagement and 
Advancement) at Macquarie University, points to Israel as an example of a 
country that is leading the way in terms of digital transformation.

Israel is known “the Start-up Nation”. With astonishing rates of R&D 
expenditure, venture capital and start-ups per capita, and an extremely high 
proportion of scientists and engineers, Israel has become the nearest thing to 
Silicon Valley outside California. So much so that the Israeli tech scene is 
sometimes called Silicon Wadi (Hebrew for valley).

In 2010 Israel raised 20 times more venture capital, per head of population, 
than Australia, according to PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Multinationals including Intel, IBM and Microsoft are among almost 300 foreign 
companies to have R&D centres in Israel, according to the City of Tel Aviv. And 
a country with a population of just 8.5 million has an estimated 3000 to 5000 
start-ups and 300,000 people employed in high-tech industries.

Long-standing strong government support for commercial R&D has played a big 
role in Israel’s ongoing tech innovation success. But there’s also something 
about the Israeli character – chutpaz, perhaps – that helps people make the 
leap into start-ups, says Ben Lang, co-founder of the start-up community, 
Innovation Israel.

“The culture plays a big part,” Lang says. “It has a lot to do with the 
personality of the entrepreneurs. It’s something very unique to the ecosystem 
here.”

The fact that everyone does national service also helps, Lang says.

“So much of the start-up community is influenced by their service in the IDF 
[Israeli Defence Forces]. What unit they served in, people they know. Since 
everyone is required to serve in the army, that’s where the networking and lots 
of learning occurs.”

But while some countries are obviously managing digital change better than 
others, Professor Wilkinson says innovation can be found all over the globe, 
sometimes in surprising areas.

“I have a deep personal interest in Africa, for example, and know of many hubs 
of innovation, incubation and digital disruption there,” Professor Wilkinson 
says. “Of course many such settings don’t have much depth and breadth, but once 
the change takes hold, it will spread.”

The age of collaboration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/optus-business-smart-future/2016/oct/05/the-age-of-collaboration>
From the States to Spain

Inspiration can be found everywhere. In the US, the Brookings Insitution, a 
non-profit public policy organisation, describes innovation districts as the 
“ultimate mash-up of entrepreneurs and educational institutions, start-ups and 
schools, mixed-use development and medical innovations, bike-sharing and 
bankable investments – all connected by transit, powered by clean energy, wired 
for digital technology, and fuelled by caffeine.”


Economic, physical, and networking assets combine with a supportive, 
risk-taking culture to create what Brookings calls aninnovation ecosystem: “a 
synergistic relationship between people, firms and place (the physical 
geography of the district) that facilitates idea generation and accelerates 
commercialisation.”

Brookings’ work has helped inform Macquarie University’s ongoing development of
its own innovation district 
<https://www.theguardian.com/optus-business-smart-future/2016/oct/05/the-age-of-collaboration>
 in Sydney’s Macquarie Park.

“Brookings has characterised and codified the model beautifully,” Professor 
Wilkinson says. He says the Brookings model or “playbook” is clear, and can be 
adjusted for each setting.

“There is also a very useful audit and evaluation framework,” he says. “I have 
visited many innovation districts and the key principles play out in each – but 
being sensitive to local needs is essential.”

Meanwhile, as the Spanish economy recovers from its years in the doldrums, the 
Barcelona start-up scene is an exciting place to be, says Scott Mackin, the 
American founder of Barcinno, a community-driven English-language platform that 
shares news of the local start-up scene as well as hosting events and workshops 
and helping inbound companies settle in the city.

“Barcelona is poised for exponential growth in the next five to 10 years.” 
Mackin says. “On the whole, we’re still a very young and immature start-up 
ecosystem, but that is rapidly changing… investors are coming in from all sides 
to get a piece of the action.”

As an English-language platform, Barcinno helps Spanish start-ups reach an 
international audience. Mackin describes it as “a two-way bridge of talent, 
capital and information between Barcelona and the global business community”.

The Spanish Government has done a good job in supporting entrepreneurship, 
City Hall has been active in branding Barcelona an “innovation capital”, and 
the city has world-class business, polytechnic and research facilities, which 
together makes a potent combination, Mackin says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fdigital-change-can-australia-keep-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c421e6d61fc861c5d470ad19152981fdfae3bc4%2F0_13_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Digital%20change%3A%20can%20Australia%20keep%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fdigital-change-can-australia-keep-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Digital%20change%3A%20can%20Australia%20keep%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fdigital-change-can-australia-keep-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c421e6d61fc861c5d470ad19152981fdfae3bc4%2F0_13_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 The City Hall in Barcelona, a city in which the start-up scene is an exciting 
place to be Photograph: Oscar Valencoso 
Where does Australia fit in?

“Could do better” sums up Australia’s report card at this stage of our digital 
transformation.

(In Australia) all happening and will happen more and more, whatever 
government does or does not do
Professor Wilkinson 
Hajkowicz says Australia is lagging behind the rising economies of Asia, 
particularly in areas such as high-speed broadband connectivity and having a 
workforce qualified to take on the digital age.

The Government acknowledged the need for action last December, when it 
launched the National Innovation and Science Agenda (NISA), a $1.1 billion, 
four-year program to incentivise innovation and entrepreneurship, reward risk 
taking, and promote science, maths and computing in schools.

Launching the agenda, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull noted that Australia has 
some good things going for it: strong economic fundamentals; direct access to 
Asia; a global reputation for goods and services; and quality scientific 
research organisations.

But it also has obstacles: a low appetite for risk, which can make it hard for 
start-ups to attract capital; declining participation in science, maths and 
computing at high school; and a consistent ranking of last or second last among 
OECD countries for business research collaboration.

“Increasing collaboration between businesses, universities and the research 
sector is absolutely critical for our businesses to remain competitive,” the 
Prime Minister said.

Hajkowicz welcomed the initiative. 

‘It’s a really important agenda,” he says. “Essentially Australia has to make 
a transition in its economy from where we are now to a much more advanced 
hi-tech economy that is much better plugged in to the Asian economies around us.

“The NISA package is a key policy tool instrument to help us make this leap. 
But there is still a how-to factor to building an innovative economy that we 
haven’t resolved. We don’t really know how to do it.

“Do we just build infrastructure and hope they will all come? Or do we pick 
winners and choose industries? Should we be trying to invest big time in the 
fintech sector because we think it is going to be a huge industry? Or do we 
just let the marketplace sort itself out? There are some unanswered questions 
there.”

Professor Wilkinson was also glad to see the NISA package launched, though he 
has reservations.

“NISA has encouraged and enabled the conversation,” Professor Wilkinson says. 
“It is important for that alone. There are some useful new investments being 
proposed, but others, such as funding for incubators and incubation 
programming, are completely inadequate.

“My own view of the sector in Australia is that it is all happening and will 
happen more and more, whatever government does or does not do. Nobody is 
waiting for government, and we don’t need to.”

Ready to be a smart disruptor? Learn more about innovation for Australian 
organisations here <https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/312538488;139309893;w>.
 