
Even by rural Ugandan standards, Besweri Bukenya and Eseli Nambi’s house looks 
basic. The small, tin-roofed, mud-and-wattle structure only stands out because 
of the freshness of the red earth.


But for this couple in Baakijjulula village, in the Kiboga district of central 
Uganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>, the modest house is a 
blessing. It was built with savings from the senior citizens’ grants that the 
government gives to vulnerable Ugandans with assistance from Irish Aid and the 
UK Department for International Development.

The IMF has not lived up to its own hype on social protection | Alexander 
Kentikelenis, Thomas Stubbs and Lawrence King
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/25/the-imf-international-monetary-fund-has-not-lived-up-to-hype-on-social-protection>
“The other house was very weak,” Bukenya, 82, said of his old hut. “It was 
leaking and about to collapse but I had no energy to cut trees to repair it.”


His wife, Eseli, said that before the couple started receiving the monthly 
grant of 25,000 Ugandan shillings (£5.60) each, life had been difficult. “We 
had no money to spend,” she said. “The house was very weak. It leaked when it 
rained. This one is very good. We are now OK.”

The Bukenyas, who have no children, are among more than 150,000 Ugandans aged 
over 65 receiving cash grants from the government’sexpanding social protection 
programme (ESP) <http://socialprotection.go.ug/stephen-kasaija/>. After a pilot 
deployment in 15 districts, the programme is being extended to include 40 
districts over five years.

When the project launched in 2010, many people were sceptical; the £5.60 
monthly grant per household was seen as too little. However, evidence suggests 
the small amounts are having a big impact. If stands up on a larger scale, the 
ESP could go a long way to answering questions about how to address extreme 
poverty and vulnerability, especially in rural Uganda.

The challenge is enormous. According to official figures, barely one in 10 
Ugandans is covered by a formal pension 
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Feature%20Story/Africa/Uganda/ug-economic-update-fact-sheet.pdf>
. The rest rely on their extended family in old age, but deaths from diseases 
are threatening this support system and leaving many older people with 
grandchildren to fend for.

For decades, the case for cash handouts to mitigate vulnerability among older 
people was a difficult one to make as governments moved to cut spending by 
rolling back the remnants of the welfare state inherited at independence.

But as extreme household poverty became a blemish on the record of a 
government that boasted of 7% annual growth rates 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/uganda/overview>, the opposition took it 
up as a campaign issue, prompting President Yoweri Museveni to act.

According to Stephen Kasaija, director of the ESP, the money is intended to 
help older people who are too vulnerable to benefit from existing programmes. 
Even if education is free, for example, a child will be unable to attend school 
if his family cannot provide clothing or the books he needs, he said.

Kasaija said the pilot phase had demonstrated that social protection grants 
can reduce vulnerability. “People who used to have one meal a day say they can 
have three meals a day … the quality of the food has improved, as they buy more 
nutritious foods.”

Bukenya’s experience bears this out. He said that when the money started 
arriving, he bought food so he could eat at least two meals a day. Then he 
bought a shirt and trousers “because I had hardly anything to wear”.

Some recipients have used the small amounts to invest, either by starting 
micro-businesses or by forming saving groups that enable members to access 
money for building, buying chickens, goats or cows, and opening up farm land.


Healthcare innovations won’t cure global health inequality – political action 
will | Ben Ramalingam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/09/healthcare-innovations-wont-cure-global-health-inequality-political-action-will-world-health-summit-berlin>
 “The experience on the ground is that, for those who have more income, 25,000 
shillings means nothing. But for these people who have very little, 25,000 
means a lot,” Kasaija said.

However, Fred Muhumuza, a Ugandan economist, said this positive appraisal 
tells us more about the extent of poverty than the value of the cash transfers.


“If you are giving it to very poor people, anything is welcome … and they will 
talk positively about it,” he said. “If you compare [this] to where you would 
want them to be, they are still not there; you want that if that person falls 
sick, they should be able to go to a clinic and get treatment, be able to buy a 
shirt or other clothes, and live with dignity in old age.”

Uganda’s experience is consistent with findings in other African countries 
that have rolled out pensions and other cash transfers. According to a 2013 
World Bank report,Reducing Poverty and Investing in People: The New Role of 
Safety Nets in Africa 
<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/395991468007775257/Reducing-poverty-and-investing-in-people-the-new-role-of-safety-nets-in-Africa-experiences-from-22-countries>
, in countries such as Swaziland, Ethiopia, Tanzania, Ghana, vulnerability 
grants targeting specific groups led to improved nutrition and use of social 
services such as education and health, as well as greater household 
productivity.

“In Kenya and Malawi, cash transfers led to increased investment in 
agricultural assets, including crop implements and livestock,” said the report. 
“Moreover, both programmes fostered increased food consumption and improved 
dietary diversity, with greater share of household consumption acquired from 
own-farm production.”


As more evidence emerges that cash grants can make an impact, it is still not 
known how sustainable they are. SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, where everyone over 60 and below a 
certain income/asset threshold gets an old-age pension under a system inherited 
from the apartheid era is an exception. In most sub-Saharan African countries – 
such as Uganda – cash transfers have been entirely or in part funded by donors, 
prompting the question: what happens if the donors pull out?

The World Bank estimates that social protection grants could cost as little as 
2% or 3% of GDP of countries like Uganda. But some ask whether African 
governments are committed to social protection. Muhumuza points out the Ugandan 
government is already struggling to pay teachers and medical workers.

“Once the donors pull out, [ESP] will be a shaky thing and will probably have 
to wind up, or it will begin to default. I don’t see the government of Uganda 
[consistently] finding that much money,” Muhumuza said.

Pius Bigirimana, the permanent secretary in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and 
Social Development, said in a recent interview that the government was 
committed to social protection as a broad empowerment strategy. He said senior 
citizens’ grants had been budgeted for in the current financial year and would 
remain in the budget for years to come.
 