
If Brexit is top of the agenda in politics, in fashion, it’s Anglophilia that 
is so hot right now. This week two European powerhouse brands landed in the UK 
to showcase their Cruise catwalk collections whilst simultaneously professing 
their love of all things British. On Tuesday, Parisian brandChristian Dior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/christian-dior> showed its newest 
collection within the baroque grandeur of the library rooms at Blenheim Palace, 
and on Thursday Italian brand Gucci will show its haute eccentric collection 
against the stained glass backdrop of Westminster Abbey. For billion-euro 
fashion houses, it seems that a love letter to English chic is best expressed 
with an excess of tweed, beading, glamour and English heritage buildings.

 Ahead of Tuesday’s show Dior was keen to push a natural symbiosis between 
English and French style. The label’s chief executive Sidney Toledano is a 
declared anti-Brexiter who has just unveiled a refurbished retail temple filled 
with original works of modern art on Bond Street. But shop openings don’t make 
for a compelling narrative in fashion and so the emphasis from the brand was 
very much on history above commerce, and the strong romantic links between 
Christian Dior, royalty and British style.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85b13539f81ade2fc734964f9a36d8dc9026015c%2F0_36_4256_2774%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dior%20at%20Blenheim%20Palace%3A%20English%20countryside%20meets%20Parisian%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dior%20at%20Blenheim%20Palace%3A%20English%20countryside%20meets%20Parisian%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85b13539f81ade2fc734964f9a36d8dc9026015c%2F0_36_4256_2774%2F4256.jpg>
 Christian Dior S/S17 Cruise collection show. Photograph: Stuart Wilson/Getty 
Images 
This show, for the label’s Cruise 2017 collection (once literally holiday 
clothes for the wealthy, now integral to a brand’s bottom line) was the third 
time Blenheim has played host to Dior. In 1958 a young Yves Saint Laurent 
showed his Dior collection at the palace and before him in 1954 Christian Dior 
himself brought his rarified salon chic to Blenheim. Christian Dior was a 
self-proclaimed Anglophile who, after a period spent in the UK, was besotted 
enough with the country that he is on record, unexpectedly, declaring: “I love 
English traditions. English politeness, English architecture. I even love 
English cooking. I dote on yorkshire pudding.”

At the 1954 Dior show at Blenheim, Red Cross nurses, aristocrats and Princess 
Margaret were among the 1,000 guests. This time around Alexa Chung, Bianca 
Jagger and the like passed for royalty and if there were any nurses, they were 
skilfully disguised in extravagantly beaded Dior finery. At the show 60 years 
ago the mannequins were expected to curtsy to royalty and work the catwalk 
without turning their backs on Princess Margaret. On the 2017 catwalk models 
were not expected to do the same for Lady Kitty Spencer, the lone royal front 
row representative. Guests were transported to the Oxfordshire palace on a 
specially chartered Orient Express, but alas yorkshire pudding was not on the 
menu.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d8048a7edb12ff2017e940340d6a0d56bb375ce%2F0_0_3280_4907%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dior%20at%20Blenheim%20Palace%3A%20English%20countryside%20meets%20Parisian%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dior%20at%20Blenheim%20Palace%3A%20English%20countryside%20meets%20Parisian%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d8048a7edb12ff2017e940340d6a0d56bb375ce%2F0_0_3280_4907%2F3280.jpg>
 Bella Hadid walks at the Dior Cruise Collection. Photograph: 
WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
On the catwalk, which was hand-painted and depicted a hunt, the theme was 
English countryside meets Parisian couture style. Nineteenth century equestrian 
scenes were knitted into jackets and fused with English country florals. Crown 
jewel level embellishment was mixed in with the brand’s iconic Bar jacket, 
while equestrian silk scarves were contrasted against leather smock dresses. 
Fashion’s current fascination with mixing cropped trousers with clumpier ankle 
boots and floral dresses was also in evidence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3c15bbfb0c335e5f55adf2150989d1467ed0f4a%2F0_89_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dior%20at%20Blenheim%20Palace%3A%20English%20countryside%20meets%20Parisian%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dior%20at%20Blenheim%20Palace%3A%20English%20countryside%20meets%20Parisian%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdior-at-blenheim-palace-english-countryside-meets-parisian-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3c15bbfb0c335e5f55adf2150989d1467ed0f4a%2F0_89_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Designers Serge Ruffieux and Lucie Meier after the Dior Cruise 2017 show. 
Photograph: Dylan Martinez/Reuters 
Not for the first time the brand found itself without a starry designer to 
take a bow at the end of the show. This season Lucie Meier and Serge Ruffieux, 
joint heads of the studio, performed the honours together. Since the exit of 
Raf Simons seven months ago, Dior has relied on the design studio team to keep 
the sartorial show in the road. Rumours that either Hedi Slimane (was has 
recently departed Saint Laurent) or Mancunian born Sarah Burton the designer at 
Alexander McQueen might take over are persistent, but unconfirmed. Toledano 
himself has brushed off the significance of the lack of designer claiming that 
customers don’t care who designs the Dior clothes. The financial evidence 
suggests he is right. The brand has weathered the storm of the Galliano scandal 
when the label was left without a designer for a year and even managed to grow 
its sales in the same period.

Whil it may be true that ultimately customers do not care, the lack of 
designer does affect the momentum of the brand and like a football team without 
a starry overpaid manager, a little bit of the glamour and the game felt 
missing from this Dior at Blenheim chapter. In truth it may not matter for the 
Cruise collections – which are effectively powerful branding exercises indulged 
in a by only handful of superbrands – but once the focus returns to the clothes 
themselves that may change. At ready to wear, when the spectacle of the event 
becomes secondary to pushing the fashion conversation forward, Dior may find 
itself in more of a hurry to appoint a new designer.
 