
It is a symptom of the current state of flux in the fashion industry that 
Dior’s autumn/winter womenswear show – the traditional biannual showpiece of 
the house, staged in a lavish mirrored venue in the Louvre according to the 
long-established calendar ofParis fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/paris-fashion-week> – was upstaged by the 
announcement of another Dior show.

The house will exhibit its cruise collection in Blenheim Palace on 31 May, two 
days beforeGucci stages an equally blockbusting show in London’s Westminster 
Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/03/westminster-abbey-gets-a-gucci-makeover-stylewatch>
. The news puts the historic buildings of England centre stage in the cruise 
catwalk schedule, which is rapidly becoming the most glamorous and high-profile 
season of the fashion year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c98b43878af456df50c43b5409fa2ad7bc4a99b%2F0_157_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dior's%20Paris%20catwalk%20upstaged%20by%20Blenheim%20Palace%20coup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dior%27s%20Paris%20catwalk%20upstaged%20by%20Blenheim%20Palace%20coup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c98b43878af456df50c43b5409fa2ad7bc4a99b%2F0_157_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
 The collection at times seemed intent on covering all bases. Photograph: Swan 
Gallet/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
Last spring, Gucci’s show was held in New York and Dior’s in Cannes, while 
Louis Vuitton visited Palm Springs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/07/louis-vuitton-turns-catwalk-into-a-spaceship-as-fashion-goes-intergalactic>
 in California and Chanel went to Seoul. This year, while Louis Vuitton 
prepares a pre-Olympic extravaganza in Rio de Janeiro and Chanel a visit to 
Cuba, two of the major shows will take place in the UK.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86fee26e51b2c4d10390428f2bc46bda2d138552%2F11_193_5154_3091%2F5154.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dior's%20Paris%20catwalk%20upstaged%20by%20Blenheim%20Palace%20coup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dior%27s%20Paris%20catwalk%20upstaged%20by%20Blenheim%20Palace%20coup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86fee26e51b2c4d10390428f2bc46bda2d138552%2F11_193_5154_3091%2F5154.jpg>
 Blenheim Palace has a historic connection with Dior. Photograph: John 
Melhuish/Rex 
The Blenheim announcement, and the mighty scale of Dior’s Paris show – for 
which no expense was spared, from the space age tunnelled catwalk housed inside 
the Louvre, to Kendall Jenner on the catwalk – seemed intended to stress that 
Dior’s status in the fashion world is undiminished despite the label’s 
continued lack of a creative director followingthe unexpected departure of Raf 
Simons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/22/raf-simons-to-leave-as-creative-director-at-dior>
 last October. This collection,like January’s haute couture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/25/designerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris>
, was designed by Serge Ruffieux and Lucie Meier, longstanding key members of 
the Dior design studio.

The pair are doing a good job. The classic “bar” shape, a whittled waist 
swelling to a high, exaggerated hip curve, was beautifully executed here on 
coats in ivory and sky blue. Meanwhile, the modern edge that Simons introduced 
to the house continues to thrive: the colourful, high-necked knit shirts 
layered under coats, and the spare, shoulder-baring lines of the cocktail 
dresses were in synergy with the silhouettes being worn by the audience, which 
is a good thing.

Dior & the rise of the in-house design team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/10/dior-the-rise-of-the-in-house-design-team>
But it was a Dior collection that at times seemed intent on covering all bases 
– fromChristian Dior <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/christian-dior> 
himself, in the peplums and ultra-feminine embroidery, to the Raf Simons 
futuristic aesthetic in the knife-sharpness of sliced-off necklines and 
Rey-from-Star-Wars hairstyles – at the expense of the distinct point of view 
that is vital for a fashion house hoping to set the agenda.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd3ee3ec0412295ad875a3a30ba60c01b35b501%2F0_390_5304_3183%2F5304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dior's%20Paris%20catwalk%20upstaged%20by%20Blenheim%20Palace%20coup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dior%27s%20Paris%20catwalk%20upstaged%20by%20Blenheim%20Palace%20coup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdiors-paris-catwalk-upstaged-blenheim-palace-coup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd3ee3ec0412295ad875a3a30ba60c01b35b501%2F0_390_5304_3183%2F5304.jpg>
 Models pose backstage at the Dior show. Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
The news of May’s Blenheim Palace show might suggest a British name will soon 
be announced at the helm of Dior (Sarah Burton of Alexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/21/sarah-burton-brings-alexander-mcqueen-show-london>
 andErdem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2010/sep/18/erdem-fashion-designer-guardian-interview>
 have both been rumoured to be in talks). However, Dior declined to confirm an 
announcement was imminent, or indeed that a decision had been made, pointing 
instead to the house’s historic connection with Blenheim Palace.

In 1954, at the invitation of the Duchess of Marlborough, Christian Dior 
reprised his Paris autumn/winter haute couture show to an audience including 
Princess Margaret, a confirmed Dior fan who had worn the label for her 21st 
birthday party. Each of the 1,600 guests paid five guineas to attend, with the 
proceeds going to the British Red Cross. Four years later, after Dior’s death 
and under the direction of Yves Saint Laurent, the house returned for a second 
show at the Oxfordshire country house. This year’s show will put Blenheim on 
the catwalk circuit for the third time after a gap of 58 years.
 