
The house of Christian Dior is in turmoil. The unexpected departure of Raf 
Simons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/22/raf-simons-to-leave-as-creative-director-at-dior>
 three months ago has left it without a designer, the design studio plunged 
against its will into an interregnum period, stirring up unhappy memories of 
the anxious year that followedJohn Galliano’s scandalous exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/08/john-galliano-margiela-show-silk-men-rustic-haute-couture>
 in 2011.

Responsibility for this haute couture collection, and for the ready-to-wear 
collection that will be presented in a month’s time, rest for now on the 
shoulders of the design team – a thankless task, as the audience out front 
gossip endlessly about which star designer is about to sign a contract.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F772262cd38126538acced41f9b9ffaf4ba98c8ea%2F0_187_3920_2353%2F3920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Directorless%20Dior%20proves%20it%20does%20not%20do%20turmoil%20in%20classic%20haute%20couture%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Directorless%20Dior%20proves%20it%20does%20not%20do%20turmoil%20in%20classic%20haute%20couture%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F772262cd38126538acced41f9b9ffaf4ba98c8ea%2F0_187_3920_2353%2F3920.jpg>
 A model at the Christian Dior show in Paris on Monday. Photograph: Swan 
Gallet/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
Not that you would know any of this from Monday afternoon’s show in Paris. The 
haute couture shows are about brand image as much as made-to-measure dresses, 
andthe Christian Dior brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/10/dior-the-rise-of-the-in-house-design-team>
 simply does not do turmoil.

Dior & the rise of the in-house design team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/10/dior-the-rise-of-the-in-house-design-team>
Dior stands, on the contrary, for serenity. From the wedding-cake white 
packaging, to the Alice in Wonderland oversized D in Dior and the heritage of 
exaggerated, dreamlike hourglass shapes of the New Look, the house represents a 
fantasy of swan-like, unruffled femininity.

As in most recent seasons, the show was held in a giant mirrored box in the 
gardens ofthe Musée Rodin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/05/musee-rodin-reopens-in-paris-with-chocolate-surprise>
. The mirrored box is a visual conceit that borrows something from the concept 
of a country house ha-ha. Where a ha-ha would trick those looking out of the 
drawing room windows into thinking that the lawn ran unbroken to the horizon, 
the mirrored box gives the illusion of another Musée Rodin – this time, 
Picasso-fractured – at the end of the gardens.

Inside there was, as ever, a maze of seating, hundreds of startlingly 
overdressed women, and a full-throttle army of paparazzi. Only the frenzied 
gossiping of the audience as they discussed the latest Dior-related rumour 
doing the rounds – thatSarah Burton of Alexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jun/16/alexander-mcqueen-way-forward-london-collections-men>
 will take over at Dior later this year – disturbed the air of business as 
usual.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ed5df6009516054990b7d95794b8f1f6b379e89%2F0_298_5081_3049%2F5081.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Directorless%20Dior%20proves%20it%20does%20not%20do%20turmoil%20in%20classic%20haute%20couture%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Directorless%20Dior%20proves%20it%20does%20not%20do%20turmoil%20in%20classic%20haute%20couture%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ed5df6009516054990b7d95794b8f1f6b379e89%2F0_298_5081_3049%2F5081.jpg>
 People arrive to attend the Christian Dior fashion show. Photograph: Francois 
Guillot/AFP/Getty Images 
The show began, and it became clear that while Simons may no longer be at the 
fashion house, the modern Dior ideal that he sketched out during his four years 
is very much still present. This makes sense, since the collection was designed 
by a duo of senior designers while Simons was in the job. The sheer number of 
collections and creative campaigns produced by a house on the scale of Dior 
means that an artistic director will delegate a good deal of the designing, or 
oversee with a light touch.

The Swiss designers currently in charge of Dior, Serge Ruffieux, 41, and Lucie 
Meier, 32, took a bow together at the end of the show, before welcoming the 
other members of the design team on to the catwalk to share the applause. 
Ruffieux has worked at Dior since 2008, and was promoted to head designer when 
Simons became artistic director in 2012. Meier worked at Louis Vuitton and
Balenciaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/07/balenciaga-demna-gvasalia-new-creative-director>
 before joining Dior.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2e08c3d932de4930556ca0365ec494057547995%2F0_123_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Directorless%20Dior%20proves%20it%20does%20not%20do%20turmoil%20in%20classic%20haute%20couture%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Directorless%20Dior%20proves%20it%20does%20not%20do%20turmoil%20in%20classic%20haute%20couture%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fdesignerless-christian-dior-raf-simons-turmoil-haute-couture-paris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2e08c3d932de4930556ca0365ec494057547995%2F0_123_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Swiss designers Serge Ruffieux and Lucie Meier appear at the end of their 
show. Photograph: Benoit Tessier/Reuters 
The collection showed that Simons’ vision for Dior is their vision too. The 
colours – navy, black, shots of mustard and electric brights – remained 
recognisable, as did the structured necklines that left shoulders bare, and the 
long, lean lines of the skirts. The oversized bar blazers, worn open over 
cocktail dresses, were an idea glimpsed in the previous couture collection. The 
boxy, perversely sexy bodices with their origami-folds of stiff, tailored 
fabric were reminiscent of Simons’ very first haute couture collection for the 
house.

The show notes made no mention of the absence of an artistic director. Where 
Simons liked to download his own thought processes into his shownotes, 
explaining his influences and messages for the season, this season’s 
pronouncement focussed instead on the heritage of Monsieur Dior himself and his 
eternal muse, “the spontaneous, relaxed Parisienne”.
 