
10 activists changing lives for disabled people around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/22/10-activists-changing-lives-disabled-people-around-world>
Priti Patel <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel> has made a 
strong commitment to disability rights in her role as secretary of state for 
international development, firmly stating that UK aid will improve lives for 
disabled people in developing countries.

Disability <https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> should be entwined 
in “every single aspect of what we do in the development space as the United 
Kingdom”, she said in an announcement yesterday.

When she first looked at the disability figures, after taking up the 
ministerial role five months ago, Patel said she found them “staggering”. There 
areone billion disabled people in the world 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/disability/overview>, 80% of them in 
developing countries 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/80-of-people-with-disabilities-live-in-developing-countries-and-the-barriers-that-people-face-arent-just-physical>
. In a speech marking the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, Patel 
stated that the department’s currentdisability framework 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/dfid-disability-framework-2015> 
“does not go far enough”.

Children around the world with disabilities are four times more prone to 
violence. That is just appalling
Priti Patel 
“Children with disabilities around the world are totally excluded from going 
to school.Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> around the 
world with disabilities are four times more prone to violence. That is just 
appalling. And we can do something about that.”

Patel wants the UK Department for International Development (DfID) to lead the 
world on this issue. “Where we go, others will follow,” she said, adding that 
the DfID will “do the heavy lifting”. She wants the department to collect more 
data, gather evidence for effective programmes and involve disabled people more 
to achieve this.

NGO staff in the UK working in disability and development were surprised and 
impressed by her comments. Tim Wainwright, chief executive ofADD International 
<http://www.add.org.uk/>, an NGO supporting disabled people living in poverty 
in Africa and Asia, said he was “absolutely delighted”. He said disability is a 
neglected area of development that is 20 years behind other areas, and thinks 
it’s the first time there has been such senior commitment to disability in 
development, not only in the UK, but worldwide. “Because DfID is a global 
leader, many others will be influenced by what they say.”

Patel said she wanted to make sure “that disabilities are addressed both 
systematically and consistency through all our development objectives”. 
Wainwright was impressed by the commitment not only to designated disability 
programmes but the integration of disability inclusion into all of the DfID’s 
work.

Hannah Loryman, senior policy officer at disability charity CBM UK 
<http://www.cbmuk.org.uk/>, said that Patel’s speech, along with support for 
disability in the recently publishedaid reviews 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/reviews-set-out-uk-vision-for-an-open-modern-development-system>
, could have “a huge impact”. “At the moment there’s so little funding for 
disability that there’s so many areas where it would be really helpful,” said 
Loryman. “It was good to hear her commit to education, because education is key 
for getting people into work and for combatting stigma.”

Dominic Haslam, director of policy and programme strategy at Sightsavers 
<http://www.sightsavers.org/>, an international disability charity, said the 
secretary of state’s commitment represents “a monumental leap”. He added: “As 
well as challenging itself, DfID will be challenging others to step up and 
change the lives of 800 million people living with disabilities in developing 
countries.”

Unicef estimate that for every child who dies in conflict, three acquire a 
permanent disability
Priti Patel 
Patel’s commitment reinforces the sustainable development goal (SDG) promise 
to “leave no one behind”. Anthony Ford-Shubrook, UN young leader and youth 
ambassador forAbleChildAfrica <http://www.ablechildafrica.org/>, welcomed this: 
“For the first time ever, disabled people were included in the goals which is a 
momentous step forward. I hope we can all work towards making the SDGs happen. 
But the clock is already ticking, so let’s get to work and ensure that no one 
is left behind.”

As well as more inclusive education, Patel voiced a commitment to giving more 
support to people in the refugee crisis affected by disability. “Unicef 
estimate that for every child who dies in conflict, three acquire a permanent 
disability,” she said. “So that is the scale of the challenge. This is 
incredibly hard and it’s difficult. But you know what? It means we have the 
opportunity to step up to really start to address it.”

Disability rights around the world: from 1944 to the present day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/ng-interactive/2016/jun/22/disability-rights-around-the-world-from-1944-to-the-present-day>
Earlier this year, when she was employment minister, Patel pushed through a 
bill in the House of Lords 
<http://www.eadt.co.uk/news/disability_campaigners_in_suffolk_hit_out_over_mps_vote_to_reduce_benefit_payments_1_4452026>
 that will affect disabled people in the UK by cutting employment and support 
allowance.

Despite concern in the development sector at Patel’s appointment after she 
said she plans to overhaul aid based on “core Tory values” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
, Wainwright is encouraged by her commitment to disability. “I judge people by 
their actions,” he said. “There’s a lot of things being said about Priti Patel 
but I think what matters is what she does in the role. And in terms of the area 
that I know, she’s saying all the right things.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.
 