
Disney has become the first film studio to take $7bn (£5.7bn) in global ticket 
sales in a year, with Star Wars spin-off Rogue One joining the hit factory 
production line alongside Marvel superheroes and animated children’s movies.

With Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story>, the spin-off 
tale of the mission to steal the plans for the Death Star,taking almost $300m 
(£323m) globally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/20/walt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one>
 on its opening weekend, Disney has easily shot past the previous$6.9bn annual 
ticket sales record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/12/disney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory>
 set by rival Universal last year with hits including Jurassic World and 
Furious 7.


With almost two weeks of the year left, the momentum generated by the most 
famous sci-fi franchise in the world and the popularity of the studio’s 
animated film Moana ($282m and counting) is likely to push Disney’s overall 
takings closer to $8bn.


Disney has already released the four top-grossing films of the year so far  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/12/disney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory>
with Captain America: Civil War, Finding Dory and Zootopia taking more than 
$1bn at the global box office, while a live-action version of The Jungle Book 
fell just short. Doctor Strange, starring Benedict Cumberbatch, released in 
November, has made more than $650m to date.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dc617fde42a67cdcc85e1fed99675a5cd638367%2F267_0_3821_2294%2F3821.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disney%20breaks%20%247bn%20global%20box%20office%20record%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disney%20breaks%20%247bn%20global%20box%20office%20record%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dc617fde42a67cdcc85e1fed99675a5cd638367%2F267_0_3821_2294%2F3821.jpg>
 Finding Dory grossed more than $1bn at the box office in 2016. Photograph: 
Disney/Rex/Shutterstock 
The record haul is the crowning achievement of a decade long strategy to 
reinvigorate Disney’s film division by buying up blockbuster franchises, 
characters and talent.


In 2006, Disney spent $7.4bn buying Apple founder Steve Jobs’ Pixar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/jan/25/citynews.filmnews>, the hit 
factory behind Finding Nemo, its sequel Finding Dory, Toy Story and The 
Incredibles, to help revive its once proud tradition of producing hit animated 
films.


This was followed in 2009 by the surprise $4bn purchase of Marvel Comics’ 
superhero universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/aug/31/disney-marvel-buy-out>, 
bringing in characters including X-Men, Iron Man and Captain America, which 
took Disney into new live action territory.


The third transformational deal was snapping up George Lucas’ Lucasfilm, maker 
of Star Wars and the Indiana Jones franchises, in a$4bn deal in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/30/disney-lucasfilm-star-wars-deal>, 
with a plan to vastly expand the sci-fi franchise starting with 2015’s The 
Force Awakens.


The $15bn of deals, which were in each case criticised by City investors as 
overpriced, were the brainchild of Bob Iger, Walt Disney chief executive.


“It was almost standard practice to say five and 10 years ago that Disney 
overpaid, but you see from the performance of the films from those divisions 
that they were essential to the company’s success,” says Guy Bisson, research 
director at Ampere Analysis.


When Iger took the helm in 2005 Disney was still licking its wounds, having 
fought off a hostile takeover attempt by cable TV company Comcast, which went 
on to take a stake in studio MGM and buy NBC Universal and DreamWorks. Its 
animation-led film operation was struggling.


That year the company managed to get just one film in the global top 10, The 
Chronicles of Narnia: the Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. And its studio was 
ranked fourth among the top five in the world’s biggest market, the US.


Fastforward to 2016 and Disney accounts for five of the top 10 grossing films 
this year.Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> has been Disney’s 
single biggest hit, raking in $2.07bn, spread across two calendar years of box 
office takings as it launched in December 2015. Rogue One looks set to also 
break $1bn but will also see its box office take split across two calendar 
years.

“Management had a vision that proved to be correct,” says Bisson. “They 
focused on strong characters that work across all their business lines – toys, 
merchandising and theme parks; and it has been very advantageous that the 
franchises breathe sequels and spin-offs very naturally, and they are also very 
popular among the key audiences of millennials and the younger generation.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb729ebb9a26f05f49d75524e3590efc2435f1f18%2F0_125_2600_1561%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disney%20breaks%20%247bn%20global%20box%20office%20record%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disney%20breaks%20%247bn%20global%20box%20office%20record%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb729ebb9a26f05f49d75524e3590efc2435f1f18%2F0_125_2600_1561%2F2600.jpg>
 Artist’s impression of the new Disney theme park Star Wars Land. Photograph: 
Disney/Lucasfilm 
Disney is currently constructing a Star Wars Land at its flagship US theme 
parks, which will include a ride where visitors take control of the Millennium 
Falcon, and the Pirates of the Caribbean ride, which spawned the Johnny Depp 
mega-franchise, has recently been expanded to its Shanghai Disneyland.


Another Disney blockbuster, Frozen, is reportedly the biggest merchandise 
moneyspinner of all time, with sales of more than $107bn.


Hollywood’s movie secret, which Disney happens to have mastered the best, at 
least for now, is that bigger is better and less is more.

In 2005, the top five studios released 173 films, with Disney launching 31, 
according to Box Office Mojo. In 2016 that number has dropped to 118, with 
Disney down 60% with just 13.


“Since the financial crash studios had to rework the way they did things and 
cut their slates back,” says David Hancock, director, head of film and cinema, 
at IHS Markit. “Very few, very big films drive the box office upwards.”


The question is whether, or how long, Disney can keep its box office crown.


The studio will get a running start with about two-thirds of Rogue One’s 
global ticket sales counting toward’s next year’s tally.


And with a big titles including the second Guardians of the Galaxy movie, 
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales and Thor: Ragnarok, Disney is 
banking on another sequel-tastic year of blockbusters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50e469a2346a987a69a34512027d13c66da17ffb%2F0_40_1651_991%2F1651.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disney%20breaks%20%247bn%20global%20box%20office%20record%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disney%20breaks%20%247bn%20global%20box%20office%20record%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwalt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50e469a2346a987a69a34512027d13c66da17ffb%2F0_40_1651_991%2F1651.jpg>
 Disney will release a sequel to Guardians of the Galaxy in 2017. Photograph: AP
The 65-year old Iger, whose contract at Disney runs until 2018, will also be 
looking to the force for box office gold next year. Disney will be banking on 
once again trouncing rivals with the hope thatStar Wars: Episode VIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars--episode-viii> will join just 
Avatar, Titanic and The Force Awakens in the exclusive $2bn-plus box office 
club.

“The next film in the Star Wars saga has the potential to claim the title as 
the biggest movie of all time,” said Paul Dergarabedian, a film analyst with 
comScore.

Top 10 grossing films at the global box office 2016 (to date)

1. Captain America: Civil War - $1.15bn (Disney)

2. Finding Dory <https://www.theguardian.com/film/finding-dory> - $1.03bn 
(Disney)

3. Zootopia - $1.02bn (Disney)

4. The Jungle Book - $966m (Disney)

5. The Secret Life of Pets - $875m (Universal)

6. Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice - $873m (Warner Bros)

7. Deadpool - $782m (Fox)

8. Suicide Squad- $745m (Warner Bros)

9. Fantastic Beasts and Where To Find Them - $718m (Warner Bros)

10. Doctor Strange - $653m (Disney)

Disney’s transformative deals

Pixar


When bought: 2006


Price: $7.4bn


Hits: Up (box office: $735m), Toy Story 3 ($1.1bn), Inside Out ($858m)


Upcoming films: Cars 3 next year, The Incredibles 2 in 2018 and Toy Story 4 in 
2019


Marvel


When bought: 2009


Price: $4bn


Hits: The Avengers ($1.5bn), Iron Man 3 ($1.2bn), Guardians of the Galaxy 
($773m)


Upcoming films: Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 and Thor: Ragnarok next year, 
and Avengers: Infinity War in 2018


Lucasfilm


When bought: 2012


Price: $4bn


Hits: Star Wars: The Force Awakens ($2.07bn), Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story> ($290m opening 
weekend)


Upcoming films: Star Wars: Episode VIII next Christmas, Han Solo spin-off in 
2018 and new Indiana Jones movie in 2019


























 