
Dixons Carphone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dixons-carphone> had a 
record trading day onBlack Friday <http:// formed from a merger of Dixons and 
Carphone Warehouse in 2014,> as the electrical retailer said it had seen no 
impact from the Brexit vote and shrugged off concerns that 2017 will be a tough 
year for UK consumers.

Google Chromecast, televisions and tablets were among the best sellers on the 
discount shopping day in November that began in the US but has been adopted in 
the UK in recent years.

Sales of smart fitness gadgets were up 241% year on year, while dashcam sales 
rose 250%, drone sales were up 60%, and virtual reality sets rose tenfold.

Black Friday takings soar 16% in online bonanza
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/black-friday-takings-soar-16-in-online-bonanza>
Reporting results for the first half of the financial year, the retailer said 
the EU referendum result had not put consumers off from spending, but added it 
was prepared for potential volatility ahead.

Seb James, the Dixons Carphone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dixons-carphone> chief executive, said: 
“We remain optimistic about our ability to continue to gain market share in all 
our key markets, and, while we have still not seen any effect on consumer 
demand as a consequence of Brexit, we have been planning for the possibility of 
more uncertain times ahead.

“We have been focusing on reducing our fixed cost base ... and generally 
preparing for all eventualities – just in case.”

The company reported an 11% rise in revenue to £4.9bn in the first half of the 
year ending on 29 October. Pre-tax profit increased by a third to £104m. 
Like-for-like sales – stripping out the impact of stores open for less than a 
year – rose by 5% in the UK, 7% in southern Europe and 2% in the Nordic 
countries.

However, shares fell nearly 4% despite the upbeat message, making Dixons 
Carphone the biggest faller on the FTSE 100.

Humphrey Singer, the finance director, said he expected a “great” Christmas 
trading period and was not worried about prospects for the business in 2017. 
Economists have predicted that next year will be a difficult one for consumers 
amid rising inflation, weak wage growth, higher unemployment and low growth.

“We’ll make our luck and will be successful regardless of the economic 
background. It’s sensible to have a set of contingencies to make sure you’re 
flexible and ready for any scenario. But we’re not doing anything differently,” 
Singer said.

The retailer said it had not been hit by the sharp drop in the value of the 
pound since the Brexit vote in June, because more than 90% of its purchases are 
made in sterling.

The retailer was formed from a merger of Dixons and Carphone Warehouse in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/15/carphone-warehouse-dixons-agree-merger>
 and currently trades as Carphone Warehouse, Currys and PC World.
 