
Do I want to dress like Kate Middleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/duchess-of-cambridge>? A fashion website that I 
like recently suggested I should, but I’m not convinced.

Paula, north-east London

Thank you, Paula, for sending me the link to the aforementioned fashion website
 <http://milled.com/theOutnet/UnU_6Wh9caoMjM7w>, because reading its little 
promo has now given me insight into what a lobotomy would feel like without the 
benefit of pain relief.

“Kate the Great!” begins our missive (you’re already feeling the drill enter 
your skull, aren’t you?). “We’ve been following Kate Middleton’s recent social 
engagements with keen interest – and we’re seriously impressed.” (Are you? 
Really? Because not even the royals look half-interested in their social 
engagements, so well done you for mustering this enthusiasm.) “Endless events, 
public appearances and parties, and she never puts a nude-pumped foot wrong in 
the style stakes.” (See if you can find the contradiction in that sentence.) 
“Jealous?” (No.) “Us too!” (Great.) “Give your wardrobe the royal treatment 
with tailored dresses, pencil skirts and accessories fit for a princess.” The 
“royal treatment” here being that I pay thousands of pounds for clothes that 
Kate gets for free because of who she married. Thanks for the tip.

Yes, taking apart what is essentially a fashion advert does have the distinct 
tang of getting a barrel and taking an AK-47 to the fish inside. But sometimes 
this can reveal something more than fish guts. I’d really like to call time on 
this idea that Kate Middleton should be a fashion icon because her late 
mother-in-law was. She shouldn’t. Whatever guff people say about theQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen>, fashion is not what the royals are here 
for. To be honest, I’m not sure what they are here for, but that’s because I’m 
a heretic from the colonies who has only lived here for 25 years, so what do I 
know?

What I do know, however, is that trying to pretend the British royals are 
fashionable is like going to the cinema and expecting to be able to buy a roast 
chicken. Who knows, maybe some cinemasdo sell roast chicken (in France, 
probably; possibly Sweden or Italy). But it’s definitely not a given and 
especially not here. So let’s stop demanding our cinemas sell roast chicken, 
OK? Give those cinemas a break and give me one, too. I can’t stand the constant 
hope and disappointment.

Here’s my next issue (I’m in a terrible mood today, folks, so brace 
yourselves, this is going to be a bumpy ride. Consider this myPeter Finch in 
Network <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dib2-HBsF08> moment.) I’m just too old 
and too bored to have any truck any more with the idea that a celebrity should 
be applauded for their fashion sense when we all know the only sense they have 
is hiring a stylist who finds clothes for them and literally puts them on for 
them. That is how difficult these people find the act of getting dressed. Well 
done,Nicole Kidman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolekidman>, for hiring 
a stylist who called upAlexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen>’s PR and borrowed a 
dress for you! We all know this, right? No one thinksJulianne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliannemoore> goes to Harvey Nichols before 
the Oscars and somehow has some magical eye that enables her to find the 
perfect dress that none of us bought because we’re too stupid and busy liking 
photos of salad on Instagram, right?

So, in short, no, I don’t want to dress the way Kate Middleton’s stylist 
dresses her and nor should you, Paula. I don’t mean this disrespectfully to Ms 
Middleton – who I’m sure is a charming woman – but, really, you’re better than 
this. We all are. Even Kate is, probably. There is no helping certain fashion 
websites, but the rest of us can aspire to more than lobotomy by advert.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fdress-kate-middleton-celebrities-clothes-duchess-of-cambridge-fashion-stylist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d4f10bf536fb644ef1eb07cbe1e084e2b6bc35%2F0_0_4781_3413%2F4781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20I%20want%20to%20dress%20like%20Kate%20Middleton%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fdress-kate-middleton-celebrities-clothes-duchess-of-cambridge-fashion-stylist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20I%20want%20to%20dress%20like%20Kate%20Middleton%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fdress-kate-middleton-celebrities-clothes-duchess-of-cambridge-fashion-stylist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d4f10bf536fb644ef1eb07cbe1e084e2b6bc35%2F0_0_4781_3413%2F4781.jpg>
 When a person has submitted themselves to an extraordinary amount of pain and 
cost, surely the polite thing would be to acknowledge it? Photograph: Getty 
Images/Robert Daly 
If someone has very obviously had cosmetic surgery, should you acknowledge it 
or not?

Geoffrey, by email 

It’s a tough one, I grant you, Geoffrey. After all, the person has submitted 
themselves to an extraordinary amount of pain and cost. Surely, you might 
think, the polite thing would be to acknowledge it? You might think that, but 
you would be wrong. The polite thing is to pretend the person has always looked 
like this.Vogue has a corker of an example 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2016/06/06/renee-zellweger-july-british-vogue-cover-interview>
 of that this month in its interview withRenée Zellweger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/renee-zellweger>. Now, Zellweger looks a 
little different these days. How to deal with this silicone elephant in the 
room? Easy: “Let’s get it out of the way: Renée Zellweger looks perfectly 
normal to me,” the interview begins. Um, OK! “And if she has done something to 
her face (and does it really matter?), then hats off to her, she looks 
terrific.” How’s that for some fancy footwork? She doesn’t look like she’s had 
anything done, but if she has, GOOD FOR HER.

Here’s my tuppence on the matter: no one should be judged, negatively or 
positively, for doing whatever they want to their body. It is this judgment 
that makes people who have had the work feel like they have to deny the 
obvious. The best thing for everyone is if the person who has had the work 
laughs at the critics and gossips and makes likeDolly Parton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/aug/21/dolly-parton-country-music> who 
famously said: “If I have one more facelift, I’ll have a beard.” Now I’m not 
saying Zellweger has had work or not, but I do think all of our lives would be 
marvellously improved if she started cracking jokes about pubic facial hair in 
Vogue.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com <mailto:Post your 
questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York 
Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.>.
 