
It’s Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> time, and 
there’s plenty of reasons to be afraid if you’re a retail worker, according to 
a musical protest by Labour MPs.

MPs including Dan Jarvis, Angela Rayner and Mary Creagh have recorded a 
Christmas single to the tune of the 1980s Band Aid hit Do They Know It’s 
Christmas, accusing companies of cutting workers’ perks after the introduction 
of the“national living wage” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
.

Mitcham and Morden MP Siobhain McDonagh, who directed the chorus, said she 
wanted find a catchy way of drawing attention to the issue, which she said had 
seenfirms cut overtime pay rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/16/employers-claw-back-national-living-wage-cuts-pay-perks>
, free lunches and bonuses after the introduction of the national living wage 
which requires employers to pay staff over 25 at least £7.20 an hour.

“We know that they have plenty/ But still they give us less and less/ Stand up 
against the greed this Christmas time,” the MPs sing. The chorus of “Feed the 
World” is now “Keep the perks, don’t be Scrooge this Christmas time.”

The song is a trademark of the Band Aid Trust, which will receive all the 
profits from the single.

Several political songs are aiming to reach the charts this Christmas, with 
the chancellor Philip Hammond agreeing to waive VAT on sales of a Christmas 
single in memory of lateLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP 
Jo Cox.

The special recording of the Rolling Stones’ hit You Can’t Always Get What You 
Want 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/13/jo-cox-charity-single-politicians-pop-stars-rolling-stones-kt-tunstall-david-gray>
 features cross-party MPs and musicians including Kaiser Chiefs frontman Ricky 
Wilson, Cockney Rebel’s Steve Harley, KT Tunstall and David Gray. Money raised 
from the single will go to theJo Cox Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/19/jo-cox-memorial-go-fund-me-charities-donations-flood-in>
 which supports a range of charities, including the Royal Voluntary Service and 
the White Helmets.

A Jeremy Corbyn-themed Christmas song called JC4PM has also been recorded by 
Robb Johnson and the Corbynistas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/nov/15/hallelujah-its-time-to-talk-about-the-battle-for-the-christmas-no-1>
, with has a video featuring actor Maxine Peake.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRJmo2_a4RJ8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRJmo2_a4RJ8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRJmo2_a4RJ8&media=>
 JC4PM For Me by Robb Johnson and the Corbynistas.  