
As any fool knows, you are what you wear. And there’s no fool like a feminist 
fool, which is why as I write this I’m wearing a full-on feminist outfit. By 
which I mean that everything from my pants to my necklace is emblazoned with 
the word “feminist”; that’s just how right on I am. After all, clothes 
emblazoned with the word “feminist” have never been more on-trend, available 
everywhere from Amazon to Etsy. In reality, it takes more than a Sans Serif 
proclamation for your T-shirt to pass the feminist test. Here’s what really 
counts:

Do you know who made it?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdo-your-clothes-pass-the-feminist-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc39b526b3bc9858332cfe9530cad971a63bc3a83%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20your%20clothes%20pass%20the%20feminist%20test%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdo-your-clothes-pass-the-feminist-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20your%20clothes%20pass%20the%20feminist%20test%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdo-your-clothes-pass-the-feminist-test%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc39b526b3bc9858332cfe9530cad971a63bc3a83%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 ‘Feminist’ T-shirts Photograph: Screengrab 
It’s not exactly news that the fashion industry doesn’t boast the best labour 
standards. Long hours, poor pay, bad conditions andeven death are all too common
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rana-plaza>. But what makes this a feminist 
issue is thatthe vast majority of garment workers are women 
<http://www.pri.org/stories/2015-09-16/most-bangladeshi-garment-workers-are-women-their-union-leaders-werent-until-now>
. But don’t panic! There are alternatives – and they don’t require you to break 
the bank or your fashion sensibilities. Have a look atthe Good Shopping Guide 
<http://thegoodshoppingguide.com/> for a quick overview of how high-street 
brands are doing on their supply chains. And if you’re desperate to wear your 
feminism on your sleeve, you could do worse than spelling it out with aTatty 
Devine <http://www.tattydevine.com/> name necklace (pictured above), direct 
from its workshops in Kent and east London.

Is it environmentally friendly? 

Climate change affects us all. But, as the majority of the world’s poor, and 
carers – andalmost half the world’s farmers 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/11/women-farmers-land-rights_n_6833224.html>
 –women bear the biggest brunt 
<http://www.prb.org/Publications/Articles/2012/women-vulnerable-climate-change.aspx>
. They are most affected by declining crop yields, and aremost likely to die in 
climate change-induced natural disasters 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/news/archives/2006/WomenAndNaturalDisasters.aspx>
 becausethey tend to try to save children, the frail and elderly rather than 
escaping 
<http://www.un.org/womenwatch/feature/climate_change/downloads/Women_and_Climate_Change_Factsheet.pdf>
. So, yes, it does matter what your clothes are made of – and, luckily for you, 
it’s not that hard to find eco-friendly clothes. TryNancy Dee 
<http://www.nancydee.co.uk/webshop/> for outfits that are made in small 
factories in the UK from sustainable products.

Is it affordable? 

Of course, affordable means different things to different people, but it’s no 
use presenting yourself as a feminist brand if the majority of women (who still 
earn only 80p to a man’s £1 
<https://fullfact.org/factcheck/economy/pay_gap_women_earn_80p-46476>) can’t 
afford to buy from you.Birdsong <http://birdsong.london/>, a new label that 
ploughs up to 80% of proceeds back to the women’s groups from which it sources, 
is particularly impressive in this regard;its Bradbury hand-knitted jumpers, 
for example, cost £69 
<http://birdsong.london/shop/clothing/heather-hand-knitted-jumper-made-to-order/>
. Founder Sophie Slater tells me it has deliberately positioned its offering at 
high-street prices to make it as accessible as possible to everyone. The brand 
is also opposed to fast fashion, only producing two collections a year, and 
uses models of varying shapes and sizes, from diverse backgrounds, and without 
Photoshop. Which brings me to...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdo-your-clothes-pass-the-feminist-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29768a8421e01096c5716747a51a3d52fd6e8da1%2F0_0_1024_1544%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20your%20clothes%20pass%20the%20feminist%20test%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdo-your-clothes-pass-the-feminist-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20your%20clothes%20pass%20the%20feminist%20test%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdo-your-clothes-pass-the-feminist-test%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29768a8421e01096c5716747a51a3d52fd6e8da1%2F0_0_1024_1544%2F1024.jpg>
 Birdsong does not photoshop models. Photograph: Sophie Davison/Birdsong London 
How is it marketed? 

Undeniably, fashion advertising deals overwhelmingly in white, super-thin 
bodies, photoshopped to within an inch of their lives. It goes without saying 
that most of it doesn’t pass the feminist test. But it doesn’t have to be this 
way. Designer Rick Owens is among those that have eschewed traditional models 
in designer fashion, last year choosing toshow his tunics on a group of mainly 
black women who used their strong bodies to perform an avowedly active stomping 
dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/sep/27/rick-owens-models-dancers-paris-fashion-week>
. On the high street, too, brands fromH&M 
<http://www.instyle.co.uk/fashion/news/hm-close-the-loop-video-plus-size-muslim-and-sikh-models>
 toDebenhams 
<http://thedailydebrief.debenhams.com/news/debenhams-shows-diversity-in-fashion/>
 have flirted with diversity, which is such a hot topic in fashion right now 
that the glossy, unattainable perfection presented by brands that refuse to 
follow suit is looking increasingly old-fashioned.

This list is not exhaustive. Feminist fashion needs to tackle the strict 
gender demarcations we enforce on clothes (change.org <http://change.org/> 
petitions for men in skirts?); it needs to address the impracticality of so 
much that is designed for women (pockets are a feminist issue!); it needs to be 
designed to include all body shapes (in 2015, I still can’t wear button-down 
shirts because of my boob-waist ratio). But without these four points, that 
“feminist” tag on your T-shirt is little more than a bad-taste joke.

 