
As Brazil prepares to host the Olympic Games next year, people in Rio de 
Janeiro are witnessing change at a rapid pace. But in the city’s sprawling 
favelas, promises of rapid urbanisation and economic injections areyet to be 
realised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/05/olympics-rio-pollution-favelas-brazil>
.

In the lead-up to the Games, we’re hearing from Rio locals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/rio-voices-our-olympic-odyssey>
 about the issues that affect them, in our Rio Voices series.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'Hopes of pacification are shattered' | 
Daiene Mendes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-hopes-of-pacification-are-shattered>
In the latest instalment, three bloggers share their diary entries of life in 
their communities. In Alemão, Daiene Mendes writes aboutpervasive gun violence 
and an unrelenting police presence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-many-deaths-go-unexplained-here>
 around her home.

In Maré, Thaís Cavalcante describes the strong community bond in the favela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-we-need-the-freedom-to-be-ourselves>
, with food festivals, campaigning and photography exhibitions bringing people 
together. And in Brazil’s largest favela, Rocinha, Michel Silva describes how 
theOlympic hype is overshadowing ongoing violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-it-is-not-police-role-to-do-social-work>
, and questions the role of policing in the favelas.

If you live in Rio’s favelas, or have ties with them, we’d like to hear what 
daily life is like for you 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f9b308e4b046f0986eb441>. Is your 
community changing because of preparations for the Olympic Games? Share your 
photos of what you love most about where you live, and also what you’d like to 
see improve.


Your contributions will help us to present a well-rounded view of life in Rio 
to add to photos and stories we’ve already collected from readers via 
GuardianWitness. Below are some of the responses we’ve received so far.
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f9b308e4b046f0986eb441/1696699> 
a protester in Rio de Janeiro 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f9b308e4b046f0986eb441/1696699>

Rio de Janeiro, 2014

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Ali Sargent <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Ali Sargent> 

5 September 2015, 10:32 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f9b308e4b046f0986eb441/1552960> 
Welcome to Brazil 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f9b308e4b046f0986eb441/1552960>

Police patrol the streets of Rio

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By nye_jones <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/nye_jones> 

3 June 2015, 4:34 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f9b308e4b046f0986eb441/1552949> 
Football in the Favela 6 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/54f9b308e4b046f0986eb441/1552949>

Kids play in the favela streets about the sugar loaf mountain.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By nye_jones <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/nye_jones> 

3 June 2015, 4:29 

If you would like to contribute your photos, videos or stories, click the 
“Contribute with GuardianWitness” button at the top or bottom of this story. 
You can also submit your comment from theGuardianWitness smartphone app 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> or the Guardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 by searching for “GuardianWitness assignments”.

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of content 
created by Guardian readers. Share your video, pictures and stories, and browse 
contributions submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed prior to publication 
on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on the Guardian site.
 