
Nearly one year ago, as Oscar voters were weathering a second straight year of 
criticism for the lack of diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscars-so-white-straight-academy-fails-diversity-idris-elba-straight-outta-compton-creed-carol-todd-haynes>
 among their nominees, the notion of a film likeMoonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
 emerging as an Oscar frontrunner might have seemed fanciful. The Academy may 
not be unremittingly allergic to stories of contemporary black lives –Precious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/31/precious-review-philip-french> and
 Boyz N the Hood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/27/boyz-n-the-hood-review-blistering-humanitarian-classic-john-singleton>
 cracked their radar – just as they haven’t always been entirely blind to LGBT 
narratives. But neither is among their, shall we say, areas of expertise, and 
in a year where even the reserved, elegantly upholstered white lesbianism of
Todd Haynes’s Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/26/carol-film-review-cate-blanchett-todd-haynes-rooney-mara>
 proved toodiscomfiting for a best-picture nomination 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/01/carol-shut-out-best-picture-best-director>
, you wouldn’t have bet the house on a coming-out story centred on a 
disenfranchised African-American man in contemporary Miami.

Yet, as we head into the climax of awards season, Barry Jenkins’s film is 
shaping up to be a sure Oscar nominee in the top-tier categories, and the chief 
opposition to Damien Chazelle’spresumed field-leader La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
. Not since Ang Lee’sBrokeback Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brokeback-mountain> was famously and 
infuriatinglybeaten to the gong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/academy-members-reassess-past-oscar-decisions-crash-brokeback-mountain>
 by thateveryone’s-a-little-bit-racist sermon Crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/12/paul-haggis-crash-best-picture-oscar>
 has gay cinema had quite such an optimistic shot at the industry’s top honour. 
And while $12.8m (£10.4m) is a modest number in the grand scheme of things, 
it’s an extraordinary gross for a film of its particular demographic focus – an 
encapsulation of multiple interests not accounted for in Donald Trump’s America.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmoonlight-trailer-barry-jenkinss-oscar-tipped-drama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moonlight%20trailer%3A%20Barry%20Jenkins's%20Oscar-tipped%20drama%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmoonlight-trailer-barry-jenkinss-oscar-tipped-drama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moonlight%20trailer%3A%20Barry%20Jenkins%27s%20Oscar-tipped%20drama%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmoonlight-trailer-barry-jenkinss-oscar-tipped-drama-video&media=>
Moonlight trailer: Barry Jenkins’s Oscar-tipped drama – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/20/moonlight-trailer-barry-jenkinss-oscar-tipped-drama-video>
However, as Moonlight gains in momentum and cultural currency, there’s a 
danger in piling too much symbolic weight on its unapologetically slender 
shoulders: it’s an intimate character study, not an all-encompassing social 
dissertation. Nor should it be heralded as some kind of flag-bearer for new 
queer cinema, heartening as its mainstream success is for the movement. Because 
although the film’s depiction of emerging alternative sexuality may be 
beautifully articulated and modulated, there’s a level of cautiousness that has 
enabled its broader acceptance thus far: it’s a gay romance with no on-screen 
sexual activity beyond an unseen handjob. That may be an apt level of extremity 
for a story hinged on repression, but it’s hard to imagine an equally 
accomplished, more explicit study of down-low sexuality among African-American 
men garnering quite as much popular acclaim. Meanwhile,Dee Rees’s marvellous 
2011 film Pariah <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pNRdxsTmV1U>, a story of a 
teenage African-American lesbian’s self-acceptance that bears thematic and 
stylistic comparison to Moonlight in many respects, could only have dreamed of 
this red-carpet rollout.

Jenkins, who is straight, has spoken of his trepidation over steering an LGBT 
narrative: “I think there are some stories that can only be told from a 
first-person perspective,”he told Vulture 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/10/moonlight-director-barry-jenkins-cuts-deep.html>
. “[But] if there’s ever going to be a space where I can truly empathise with a 
character who has a core aspect of his identity that I don’t share, it’s going 
to be this case.” That empathy, the potential to recognise of one’s own 
needling social non-conformities in those of others, is what Moonlight’s makers 
and publicists have, wisely, talked up from the beginning. The Paris Review 
typified the approach of many critics in labelling it“everybody’s protest film” 
<https://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2016/11/07/how-to-swim/>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fits-all-about-perception-director-barry-jenkins-and-cast-on-the-oscar-contender-moonlight-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20all%20about%20perception'%3A%20director%20and%20cast%20on%20Oscar%20contender%20Moonlight%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fits-all-about-perception-director-barry-jenkins-and-cast-on-the-oscar-contender-moonlight-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20all%20about%20perception%27%3A%20director%20and%20cast%20on%20Oscar%20contender%20Moonlight%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fits-all-about-perception-director-barry-jenkins-and-cast-on-the-oscar-contender-moonlight-video&media=>
‘It’s all about perception’: director and cast on Oscar contender Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/19/its-all-about-perception-director-barry-jenkins-and-cast-on-the-oscar-contender-moonlight-video>
Of course, there is both room and need in queer cinema for films that 
universalise the experience of homosexuality as well as ones that explicitly 
localise it. As more LGBT-themed works reach cinemas than ever before, the most 
exciting possibility is that queer film may develop its own increasingly wide 
mainstream-to-niche spectrum, rather than occupying a single specialised corner 
of the arthouse. If Matthew Warchus’srousing, upbeat Pride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/08/no-gays-no-blacks-no-fat-people-film-advertising-betrayals>
 – shown on British TV over the Christmas break – is currently a go-to option 
as a progressive gay film you can safely watch with your gran, perhaps future 
years will appoint an Oscar-gilded Moonlight as gateway viewing for curious 
viewers into more esoteric and/or erotic portraits of homosexuality.

At present, while claims of a golden age of queer cinema may seem too 
idealistic, the menu is a healthily broad one, with non-English-speaking 
filmmakers leading the charge most adventurously. The French, unsurprisingly, 
treat frank queer sexuality on screen with a casual shrug. Alain Guiraudie’s
unique quasi-Hitchcockian thriller Stranger By the Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/20/stranger-by-the-lake-review>, 
which sets a serial killer on the loose in a bucolic cruising ground of freely 
rutting men’s bodies and calmly gazes upon the hot, nasty fallout, was not just 
a substantial hit, but was amply recognised in the country’s Oscar-equivalent
César awards <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/39th_C%C3%A9sar_Awards>; no film of 
remotely comparable gay content has ever passed the Academy barrier. 
(Guiraudie’s eccentric follow-up,Staying Vertical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/rester-vertical-review-cannes-2016-alain-giraudie>
 hits UK cinemas this year and is equally fearless: without straying too far 
into spoiler territory, it has perhaps the most lethal scene ofgay anal 
intercourse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/cannes-2016-rester-vertical-director-alain-guiraudie-sex-suffering>
 ever put on screen.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fdoes-moonlight-prove-that-gay-cinema-has-to-be-sexless-to-succeed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1754d704af1613003a740841cf86efed51f543d9%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Moonlight%20show%20gay%20cinema%20has%20to%20be%20sexless%20to%20succeed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fdoes-moonlight-prove-that-gay-cinema-has-to-be-sexless-to-succeed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Moonlight%20show%20gay%20cinema%20has%20to%20be%20sexless%20to%20succeed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fdoes-moonlight-prove-that-gay-cinema-has-to-be-sexless-to-succeed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1754d704af1613003a740841cf86efed51f543d9%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Theo et Hugo. 
Last year’s most eye-opening queer release was Olivier Ducastel and Jacques 
Martineau’s Theo and Hugo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/theo-and-hugo-review-lovers-on-a-soul-searching-odyssey>
, which opens with an 18-minute gay orgy in a Paris sex club, before its title 
characters introduce themselves and woo each other, Before Sunrise-style, 
across a night of walking, talking and one panicked HIV clinic drop-in. 
Achieving a tender romanticism in a manner that seems thoroughly infeasible 
during its hardcore opening salvo, it’s a film with little interest in making 
the gay experience accessible or palatable to audiences of all stripes; at the 
screening I attended, the walkouts during the first few minutes, by viewers who 
may well have warmed to the film’s ensuing, fully clothed love story, were 
numerous. It’s rare for a film to portray the urban realities of gay sex, 
dating and Grindr culture this candidly and cheerfully; it’s tempting to view 
the film as a litmus test for the extent of straight viewers’ empathy.

Across the globe, Park Chan-wook, not a gay or even expressly queer filmmaker, 
but an all-purpose connoisseur of kink, has been lavished with US critics’ 
awards (and robust arthouse box office) forThe Handmaiden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-handmaiden-review-park-chan-wooks-lurid-lesbian-potboiler-simmers-with-sexual-tension>
, a sly, sinuous and unabashedly sexy reinvention of Sarah Waters’ bestseller 
Fingersmith, relocating that yarn of Victorian lesbian skulduggery to 
Japanese-occupied Korea and adding a number of its own fetishistic fixations 
with bondage and antique erotica. It’s grandly entertaining, artfully lurid 
stuff, and not remotely shy of its own horniest impulses: Park’s fascination 
with bodies, and how we pleasure and abuse them, gets an acrobatic workout here.

Unsurprisingly, he has taken flak in certain critical quarters for offering a 
straight male gaze on intimate lesbian activity; empathy, in the sense that 
Jenkins describes in the aforementioned interview, is not heavily on The 
Handmaiden’s mind, although such jabs glide over Park’s recurring 
identification with otherness and perversion in his cinema.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fdoes-moonlight-prove-that-gay-cinema-has-to-be-sexless-to-succeed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16c280e21caae4fb0d1597ed625ffb3c292e8662%2F0_0_5098_2684%2F5098.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Moonlight%20show%20gay%20cinema%20has%20to%20be%20sexless%20to%20succeed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fdoes-moonlight-prove-that-gay-cinema-has-to-be-sexless-to-succeed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Moonlight%20show%20gay%20cinema%20has%20to%20be%20sexless%20to%20succeed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fdoes-moonlight-prove-that-gay-cinema-has-to-be-sexless-to-succeed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16c280e21caae4fb0d1597ed625ffb3c292e8662%2F0_0_5098_2684%2F5098.jpg>
 The Handmaiden. 
Straight French filmmaker Abdellatif Kechiche faced similar pushback – from 
Steven Spielberg no less – over the extended, undeniably arousing lesbian sex 
sequences in 2013’s closeup coming-out epicBlue Is the Warmest Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/21/blue-is-the-warmest-colour-review>
, which broke out of the queer market to become an across-the-board arthouse 
conversation piece after landing the Palme d’Or at Cannes.

The line between praising non-LGBT filmmakers for placing a sympathetic lens 
on queer lives and accusing them of exploitation can be a fine one, played out 
in a series of backlashes and counter-backlashes. Meanwhile, a respectfully 
restrained approach can find itself in hot water, too. Straight filmmaker Ang 
Lee was taken to task by many queer critics for playing Brokeback Mountain’s 
key scene of campsite sodomy too gingerly; Todd Haynes, while among the most 
forthrightly queer American filmmakers of his generation, was thought by some 
to have emphasised more caution than lust in Carol’s heavy-breathing but 
tastefully blocked sex scenes. Both films saw their tact (and, of course, their 
ample artistic merits) rewarded with major releases and prominent publicity, 
just asMoonlight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/moonlight> has done; with a 
£145m worldwide box office, Lee’s film stands as the highest-grossing gay drama 
of all time.

Of course, you could argue that mainstream cinema has become more averse to 
sex of all persuasions; even the much-ballyhooed straight erotica ofFifty 
Shades of Grey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey> had a 
few more buttons done up than it would have done in the days when Basic 
Instinct was a blockbuster. Uninhibited visions of queer sexuality in the 
multiplex may be many decades off, if even a prospect. But interest, awareness 
and, yes, empathy among general audiences is growing and should continue to do 
so as predominantly liberal Hollywood finds ways to assert itself under Trump 
rule. (The prospect of a boyfriend for glibly blokey but supposedly pansexual 
superhero Deadpool in the upcoming sequel, as repeatedly teased by star Ryan 
Reynolds, may not be treated as the most sincere of gestures by gay audiences.) 
Still, if the Academy and the major studios keep meeting queer cinema in the 
middle, we may be pleasantly surprised by what a little Moonlight can do.

• Moonlight opens in the UK on 17 February and The Handmaiden on 14 April
 