
The Italian fashion designers Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana appear to be 
trying to make amends for derogatory remarks they made last year about same-sex 
couples who have children with the release of a line of handbags and T-shirts 
celebrating gay and diverse families.

Gabbana’s Instagram account 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BBFkpLslWq7/?taken-by=stefanogabbana> carried 
photographs of the new line, including a black handbag depicting two fathers 
and three children. Another photograph showed models wearing T-shirts with 
similar images, including of families with two mothers. The label used the 
hashtag #dgfamily.

The Dolce & Gabbana website is selling a T-shirt for €395 (£300) featuring an 
image of the two designers and their menagerie of pets with the #dgfamily 
hashtag.
 An image from Stefano Gabbana’s Instagram account 
It was a starkly different message than one that landed the pair – who used to 
be a couple – in hot water last year. In an interview in March with the Italian 
magazine Panorama, Dolcemade inflammatory remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/17/domenico-dolce-apologises-for-remarks-about-ivf-and-gay-families>
 about gay families, saying he was not convinced by what he called “synthetic 
children” and “wombs for hire”.

“We oppose gay adoptions,” Dolce said in the interview. “The only family is 
the traditional one.” He went on to describe children born through IVF as 
“children of chemistry, synthetic children. Rented uterus, semen chosen from a 
catalogue.”

The comments infuriated Elton John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/15/elton-john-leading-lgbt-groups-dolce-gabbana-boycott>
, who has two children born with the help of IVF and a surrogate. After 
initially calling for a boycott of the designers, John later said he forgave 
them after Dolce apologised.

“I’ve done some soul searching. I’ve talked to Stefano a lot about this … They 
are just kids,” Dolcetold Vogue in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/17/domenico-dolce-apologises-for-remarks-about-ivf-and-gay-families>
.

Photos of the new line were released days before Italian politicians are 
expected to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/banning-same-sex-unions-hurt-italy-economy-justin-nelson-lgbt-advocate>
 on a proposal that would recognise same-sex civil unions and – in some cases – 
extend parental rights to couples in a same-sex union.

It is far from clear whether the measure will pass and opponents of the 
legislation are expected to stage a large “family day” protest against the 
measure in Rome on Saturday.

A spokesman for Dolce & Gabbana said the designers would not comment on the 
new line or whether it was connected to the upcoming vote. The bags and shirts 
are expected to be in stores soon, he said.

Online reaction to the designs was mixed, with some Instagram users suggesting 
the label was trying to make up for lost sales from gay customers.
 