
Here’s an announcement no scruffy fashion journalist wants to see at the 
beginning of a catwalk show: “The models in this show will be taking selfies 
with you. Be part of this special fashion moment.”

So read signs displayed at the presentation of Dolce & Gabbana’s spring/summer 
2016 presentation in Milan on Sunday. Thankfully, what transpired was not 
members of the crowd being forcibly snapped with the world’s most photogenic 
women, but the models taking photographs of themselves as they walked down the 
runway, a conceit that proved to be just one jolly part of a very jolly show.

Entitled “Italia is love”, the collection presented a 1950s picture-postcard 
view ofItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> over an exhaustive 90 
looks. Decorations on bags and dresses celebrated the country’s greatest 
tourist hits: Capri! Amalfi! Taormina! Rome! Portofino! There were Virgin Mary 
medallions dangling from shoes and appliquéd on burgundy velvet dresses.

Bags were fashioned after tourist’s cameras or traditional wicker baskets. 
Michelangelo’s David, Rome’s Colosseum, Venice’s gondolas, the tower of Pisa 
and Florence’s Duomo all became sequinned patches on frocks. And there were 
lemons everywhere – embroidered into dresses, on headdresses, used as chunky 
plastic earrings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdolce-gabbana-shares-the-amore-in-milan-with-jolly-50s-italy-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a83246cb97f01b64c59cfdf26690b787a8e320%2F0_127_4928_2955%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%20shares%20the%20amore%20in%20Milan%20with%20jolly%2050s%20Italy%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdolce-gabbana-shares-the-amore-in-milan-with-jolly-50s-italy-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%20shares%20the%20amore%20in%20Milan%20with%20jolly%2050s%20Italy%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdolce-gabbana-shares-the-amore-in-milan-with-jolly-50s-italy-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a83246cb97f01b64c59cfdf26690b787a8e320%2F0_127_4928_2955%2F4928.jpg>
 Model taking a selfie of her D&G wicker basket. Photograph: Giuseppe 
Cacace/AFP/Getty Images 
Usually, the Italian designers cite Domenico Dolce’s motherland of Sicily as 
the starting point for their shows, a theme that has taken them to pinstriped 
tailoring, tight black-lace dresses – a slinky take on widow’s weeds – and 
intricate embellishment inspired by the island’s ancient ruins and Norman 
churches over the years.

This time, the whole of Italy was their oyster, and there was nothing subtle 
about the results – the set was a 1950s Italian high street, complete with red 
and white stripy awnings and afruttivendolo (greengrocer), with That’s Amore on 
the soundtrack. This was a foreigner’s view of Italy – a more translatable 
reference than Sicily, perhaps, on a truly global scale – and that was the 
point.


“We have shops in St Petersburg and Rio de Janeiro,” said Gabbana backstage. 
“Everyone is crazy for Italy.”

Trends, he pointed out, are not so translatable, hence the variety of styles: 
“There is not one shape of dress, or one height of heel – we are doing kaftans 
and short dresses, we are doing flats, high heels, sandals.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdolce-gabbana-shares-the-amore-in-milan-with-jolly-50s-italy-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5977c10ac7f655733450f5736473a9d4c6edb3ac%2F0_76_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%20shares%20the%20amore%20in%20Milan%20with%20jolly%2050s%20Italy%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdolce-gabbana-shares-the-amore-in-milan-with-jolly-50s-italy-collection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%20shares%20the%20amore%20in%20Milan%20with%20jolly%2050s%20Italy%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdolce-gabbana-shares-the-amore-in-milan-with-jolly-50s-italy-collection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5977c10ac7f655733450f5736473a9d4c6edb3ac%2F0_76_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 A camera bag from Dolce & Gabbana’s spring/summer 2016 collection. Photograph: 
Daniel Dal Zennaro/EPA 
Internationally, he said, “stores want completely different things. Some of 
them will tell us, ‘our customers hate black’ or ‘no fashion please’. Or, some 
shops will be for the cruise boats, who buy bags and sunglasses.”

And so clothes came in every shape, shade and incarnation, with the brand’s 
signature sleek silhouettes shown alongside those designed with an 
international customer in mind – loose, striped tunics worn over trousers; a 
flowing, long-sleeved, floor-length floral dress that came with a matching 
headscarf, as well as more old-fashioned international references: a kimono, a 
cheongsam and embellished slippers that Gabbana said were inspired by India.

Gabbana added that his starting point had been reading a book about Italian 
fashion after the second world war, when tailors would decorate simple cloth 
with paint or embroidery. That was the beginning of the Italian fashion 
industry, which was then less expensive than its French counterpart.

Now, Dolce & Gabbana’s four-figure catwalk creations are only affordable to a 
select few, although those who can buy them certainly do. The company reported 
sales of more than €1bn (£737m) for the financial year ending 31 March 2015, 
from more than 334 shops around the world.

Though rumours of flotations and approaches from the big conglomerates have 
swirled for years, Dolce & Gabbana is still proudly privately owned. “The 
problem with fashion,” Gabbana mused “is that all the labels are owned by a 
group – they lose their soul. They are not any more fashion designers – this is 
the truth.” Dolce & Gabbana, he said, took a different approach. “We tell a 
story.”
 