
At the closing of Milan fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week>, Dolce and Gabbana 
looked to the future with a collection that boldly goes for the pocket of 
Generation Z. To set the mood the pre-show music was Justin Bieber, which must 
have been a bit awkward for his ex Sofia Richie who was sat on the frow 
alongside Vine celebrity Cameron Dallas, model Lucky Blue Smith and Lily Rose 
Depp.

Fashion world balance of power shifts to social media superstars in Milan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/23/fashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan>
When the show began it was just that, a show, featuring a stage set straight 
out of a 1980s Top Of The Pops (palm trees and a sign reading “Tropico 
Italiano”) plus street dancers who came out of the crowd and startedkrumping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/nov/06/features.review1> on the catwalk, 
flash mob style.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fdolce-gabbana-makes-tilt-generation-z-money-anyway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe369aa9fb3a533bbb26f3ddb72479adcadc345ab%2F7_622_2702_1622%2F2702.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%20makes%20a%20tilt%20at%20Generation%20Z&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fdolce-gabbana-makes-tilt-generation-z-money-anyway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%20makes%20a%20tilt%20at%20Generation%20Z&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fdolce-gabbana-makes-tilt-generation-z-money-anyway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe369aa9fb3a533bbb26f3ddb72479adcadc345ab%2F7_622_2702_1622%2F2702.jpg>
 Handbag in D&G show, Milan fashion week. Photograph: Alessandro 
Garofalo/Reuters 
The collection itself centred on southern Italy and was an itemised list of 
Italianisms made into clothes, including a hessian-bag dress with a can of 
tinned tomatoes painted on it and a maxi dress with images of dried pasta. This 
listicle approach was in keeping with the influence of Buzzfeed and Wikipedia 
in the lives of its intended audience, even if some items felt more 
end-of-the-pier than end of Milan fashion week. Happily some of the collection 
was not just fun-fun but smart-fun: silk pyjamas featuring ice-cream patterns, 
distressed jeans with trinkets sewn on them, slipper loafers and a Dolce & 
Gabbana T-shirt that referenced the bootleg-shirt industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fdolce-gabbana-makes-tilt-generation-z-money-anyway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53f69a087f821059e3c321f6c958308554821a79%2F465_173_2815_4755%2F2815.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%20makes%20a%20tilt%20at%20Generation%20Z&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fdolce-gabbana-makes-tilt-generation-z-money-anyway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%20makes%20a%20tilt%20at%20Generation%20Z&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fdolce-gabbana-makes-tilt-generation-z-money-anyway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53f69a087f821059e3c321f6c958308554821a79%2F465_173_2815_4755%2F2815.jpg>
 Marni’s “Post-it note” dress Photograph: Giuseppe Cacace/AFP/Getty Images 
In the context of a recent shift towards Instamodels like Gigi Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/23/fashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan>
, courtingGeneration Z <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generation_Z> is a canny 
move. “Everybody wants to be young,” Stefano Gabbana said backstage.

Another label that went in an unexpected direction was Marni. Formerly the 
last word in “richster” – rich hipster –Marni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marni> has wandered off-script. Sunday’s 
show felt as if its creative director, Consuelo Castiglioni, had drifted into 
Stranger Things’ Upside Down; a creepy parallel universe.

The first section focused on the idea of surgical utility – white all-in-ones, 
trench coats and boiler suits featuring high sleeves, rigorous folds and 
precisely positioned buttons – suggesting Nurse Ratched from One Flew Over The 
Cuckoo’s Nest. Meanwhile Marni’s trademark orthopaedic shoe was imposingly 
reptilian this season, the familiar winklepicker moulded into something dense 
and beetle-like. Other details that added to a sense of dissonance included 
massive nose-bag-like outer-pockets on dresses, trenches and boiler suits, rope 
belts and a boho dress worn with one arm missing.

The key piece of the show, a black “Post-it note” dress made of squares of 
fabric towered together, could have been a Curtis Jere sculpture come to life. 
This says it all: Marni is in a wonderfully creative dimension all of its own.
 