
When deciding on a fairytale princess theme for their autumn/winter 
collection, it can’t have escaped Dolce & Gabbana’s notice that Frozen, the 
Disney film telling the story of princesses Anna and Elsa, became the most 
popular children’s film of all time in 2015.

Princesses, it seems, are big business. The brand went all-out on the set for 
Sunday afternoon’s show in Milan. It was apt for the day of the Oscars 
ceremony, complete with chandeliers, a gold carriage and princess bed, props 
borrowed from La Scala.

The audience walked into an atrium that had a mirror with “who is the fairest 
of them all?” written on it, and a huge pumpkin practically asking for a cameo 
on Snapchat. There was all the glitter, shine and silliness of the dressing up 
box in the collection – sequinned dresses with Snow White collars, metallic 
cloaks perfect for slipping out to a ball, coats made of flowers to sleep in 
for 100 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fdolce-gabbana-dresses-fit-for-disney-approved-princesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F662453d0758053de1d45a65df636e11991ad45bc%2F0_175_3280_4098%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%3A%20dresses%20fit%20for%20Disney-approved%20princesses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fdolce-gabbana-dresses-fit-for-disney-approved-princesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%3A%20dresses%20fit%20for%20Disney-approved%20princesses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fdolce-gabbana-dresses-fit-for-disney-approved-princesses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F662453d0758053de1d45a65df636e11991ad45bc%2F0_175_3280_4098%2F3280.jpg>
 Dolce and Gabbana’s autumn/winter show. Photograph: Giuseppe Cacace/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Dresses were fit for a roll call of Disney-approved princesses: Sleeping 
Beauty’s Aurora, Cinderella, Snow White and Belle included. One dress had the 
slogan “dreaming of my prince” written across it in punk-style letters. It has 
to be hoped that most women’s tastes go beyond the costume department of the 
Disney store, and that their ambitions in life go beyond snagging a handsome 
prince.

Accordingly, the better designs here played with the idea a bit more. The 
opening outfit wasn’t very princessy at all. Instead, it was the frocked coat 
and britches borrowed from the prince. Another model wore a man’s jacket over 
her bias-cut floral dress, and chunky boots. There were also outfits in case 
the princess needed to get an office job: a white blouse with embroidery, worn 
with a pencil skirt, and a simple black dress with a cat in sequins on the 
skirt. “It’s the princess of today, the new generation,” said Stefano Gabbana 
backstage before the show.

“Every woman wants love, a prince, but the new generation is more independent. 
Look at Frozen. The biggest love, in the end, is for the sister.” Gabbana said 
this thinking led to pairing chunky boots with princess dresses, the mannish 
suiting and oversized jackets with floral dresses.

The Cinderella glass slippers and bags with gold Disney-style ornamentation 
were less easy to justify in a grownup woman’s wardrobe but, perhaps, proved 
irresistible. “For us, fashion is fantasy,” said Gabbana. Whatever fantasy is 
happening on the catwalk, Dolce & Gabbana’s performance in the real world is 
convincing.

Whatever fantasy is happening on the catwalk, Dolce & Gabbana’s performance in 
the real world is convincing. Figures for the financial year ending 2016 will 
show that the brand had revenues of £937m, up 13% on the previous year. Since 
2012, they have staged Alta Moda, collections of highly detailed bespoke 
couture designs presented at lavish invite-only events for couture clients in 
January and July. The increase in revenue is, according to the brand, from this 
higher end of the market. These customers – some of whom quite possibly could 
be real life princesses – would no doubt appreciate Sunday’s collection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fdolce-gabbana-dresses-fit-for-disney-approved-princesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6baf94092c146d2ccf25690a16d02cecf495ee45%2F0_0_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%3A%20dresses%20fit%20for%20Disney-approved%20princesses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fdolce-gabbana-dresses-fit-for-disney-approved-princesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dolce%20%26%20Gabbana%3A%20dresses%20fit%20for%20Disney-approved%20princesses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fdolce-gabbana-dresses-fit-for-disney-approved-princesses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6baf94092c146d2ccf25690a16d02cecf495ee45%2F0_0_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 The Dolce & Gabbana catwalk show in Milan. Photograph: Matteo Bazzi/EPA 
These customers – some of whom quite possibly could be real-life princesses – 
would no doubt appreciate Sunday’s collection. Earlier in the day, the Marni 
show was a different view ofMilan fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week>. Designer Consuelo 
Castiglioni has built up a loyal following for her combination of luxury 
paraphernalia – fur, embellishment, statement accessories – with a wilfully odd 
and arty point of view.

This collection had all the trademarks – odd hems, fur shrugs, oversized 
sleeves and a colour palette of greens and browns mixed with vibrant print. A 
printed shift dress with a band of bright blue oversized sequin paillettes was 
particularly desirable. With fashion insiders among the Marni devotees, it is 
sure to be spotted in the front row next season. The shows conclude in Milan on 
Monday, with Giorgio Armani. Paris fashion week starts on Wednesday, with shows 
from Martin Margiela and Dries van Noten.
 