
“I think I’m a feminist,” Donatella Versace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/versace> said in 2013. “I show women, you 
can do it.”

Fashion world balance of power shifts to social media superstars in Milan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/23/fashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan>
Although some may have raised a quizzical eyebrow at this statement, the idea 
of the self-made woman has been a theme of her most recent collections.

Last week at London fashion week, she debuted her furiously futuristic show 
for her spin-off label, explaining that the Versus Versace woman was a “bad 
girl” who “had her own rules and … personality”.

Was she really just talking about herself? Possibly. Still, the clothes on the 
catwalk at Friday’s show in Milan were filled with riffs on feminine modernity.

To the soundtrack of a specially written trance song by Violet + Photonz 
(sample lyric: “This show is for the women taking the lead”), we saw the 
superheroine look – a jumpsuit worn with a billowy parachute cape attached, in 
psychedelic greens and purples – and the millennial businesswoman, in a deep-V 
dinner jacket clasped with a chunky belt and worn with skintight leggings.

Plus, the Donatella-isation of Self Portrait’s Azaelea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/27/the-azaelea-the-dress-for-the-selfie-generation>
 (her version of the “dress for the selfie generation”) substituted lace for 
crystal chainmail and an OTT neckline.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fdonatella-versace-unveils-fantasy-closet-for-an-athleisure-princess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e2c6f059575fd78e19ac97964102f958acb9fc%2F290_0_2782_2235%2F2782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donatella%20Versace%20unveils%20fantasy%20closet%20for%20an%20athleisure%20princess&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fdonatella-versace-unveils-fantasy-closet-for-an-athleisure-princess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donatella%20Versace%20unveils%20fantasy%20closet%20for%20an%20athleisure%20princess&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fdonatella-versace-unveils-fantasy-closet-for-an-athleisure-princess%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e2c6f059575fd78e19ac97964102f958acb9fc%2F290_0_2782_2235%2F2782.jpg>
 Donatella Versace presenting her spring/summer 2017 collection. Photograph: 
Matteo Bazzi/EPA 
Other elements, such as the bag modelled on an electric guitar and a rain mac 
with a peephole of plastic, spoke to a millennial born of equal parts autonomy 
and sexuality.

That the looks were modelled by Gigi Hadid, Jourdan Dunn and Naomi Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/naomi-campbell> (not to mention Serena 
Williams in the frow) added to the overarching alpha woman theme of the show.

J.W. Anderson and Versace's Versus play with femininity at LFW
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/17/jw-anderson-and-versaces-versus-play-with-femininity-at-lfw>
In a statement, Versace spoke of “a woman’s freedom: freedom of movement, 
freedom of activity, freedom to fight for their ideas, freedom to be whomever 
you want to be”.

Her words about the show underlined a narrative well-known to fashion folk: 
Versace is theMadonna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> of fashion.

Like the singer, she has an uncanny ability to sniff out the latest trends and 
make them her own. This time it was sportswear, which she called “the future” 
before the show.

Mixing materials like neoprene with nylon and leather suggested a place where 
sportswear mixed seamlessly with the high end, a fantasy closet for an 
athleisure princess.

But what she also shares with La Ciccone is an ability to stretch our ideas 
about what it means to be a feminist.
 