
More than 42,000 people flocked to Ireland to one of the biggest tech 
conferences in the world, Dublin’s Web Summit. Once described as “the best 
technology conference on the planet”, the gathering is a seething mass of 
startups pitching ideas, investors looking for the next Google or Facebook, 
tech thinkers talking about the latest trends, and the odd celebrity giving 
their visions for the future. Here is what we learned at this year’s meeting of 
techie minds.

Tinder says it’s about long-term love, not short-lived thrills

Dating app Tinder <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder> is often 
seen as being purely about the “hook-ups” – people meeting for casual sex. The 
company’s CEO, Sean Rad,claimed otherwise at the summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/tinder-app-users-casual-sex-long-term-relationships>
, saying that a survey of 300,000 Tinder users found that “over 80% of people 
on Tinder are there to find a long-term relationship”. The other 20% are there 
for “things more short-term: either friendships or … dare I say, hook-ups. Very 
brief friendships!”

Rad also offered stats to illustrate Tinder’s growth: its users collectively 
go on 1.5 million dates every week, while every day they swipe through 1.8 
billion potential mates, with the app making 30 million daily matches.

He also made the case for Tinder being more meaningful than other social apps: 
“You’re not going to remember the photo you saw on Snapchat two hours ago. You 
are going to remember the person you met onTinder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder> even weeks ago.”

Could virtual reality’s killer app be education?

Oculus VR is the virtual-reality company bought by Facebook for $2bn, which is 
planning to launch its Oculus Rift headset in 2016. While games were its 
initial focus, founder Palmer Luckeysuggested that education might be a key area
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/oculus-vr-founder-classrooms-are-broken>
 for virtual reality technology.

“I think there’s a lot of potential for virtual reality in the education 
industry … Classrooms are broken. Kids don’t learn the best by reading books,” 
he said. “There’s clearly value in real-world experiences: going to do things. 
That’s why we have field trips. The problem is that the majority of people will 
never be able to do the majority of those experiences.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdublin-web-summit-things-learned-tinder-drones-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77651280eb4107df1695b224a07709fa8d3736f6%2F0_93_2784_1672%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drones%2C%20hackers%20and%20online%20satire%3A%20eight%20lessons%20from%20a%20global%20tech%20fest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdublin-web-summit-things-learned-tinder-drones-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drones%2C%20hackers%20and%20online%20satire%3A%20eight%20lessons%20from%20a%20global%20tech%20fest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdublin-web-summit-things-learned-tinder-drones-apps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77651280eb4107df1695b224a07709fa8d3736f6%2F0_93_2784_1672%2F2784.jpg>
 Cyberpsychologist Mary Aiken, who studies online behaviour, speaking to the 
conference. Photograph: Clodagh Kilcoyne/Getty 
Cybercriminal motives? Ask them about their mother…

One of the summit talks that made waves beyond Dublin came from 
cyberpsychologist Mary Aiken, who studies online behaviour.She suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/hackers-gonna-hack-but-why-maybe-freud-has-the-answer>
 that criminal hackers may have motivations beyond revenge, profit or 
maliciousness.

“My favourite explanation in academic literature is a Freudian psychoanalytic 
approach to hacking, which actually conceptualises hacking in Freudian terms as 
a cybersexual urge to penetrate,” she said. “And there are castration complex 
overtones in terms of being cut off from the network as well.”

But Aiken also said that society needs to stop thinking about hacking as a 
negative, menacing thing, pointing out that, in cases where teenagers have been 
caught hacking companies, hitting them with the full force of the law may be 
the wrong approach. “As a society, do we really want to criminalise 13-, 14- 
and 15-year-olds? Or do we want to understand their behaviour, engage with 
their incredible skillsets, mentor them and try to point them in the right 
direction?”

Drones can be used for good, not evil

DJI is one of the companies making consumer drones – “flying robots with 
high-quality cameras attached”, in the words of executive Randy Braun. He said 
that while much media attention focused on nefarious uses for drones, better 
examples are coming: “Based on what I read in my local newspaper, we’re sort of 
the bad guys. We’re the ones spying on our next-door neighbours in their 
backyard. We’re the ones flying up the high-rise buildings and peeking in the 
windows, right? We’re kind of deviant too, we’re the ones dropping bags of 
marijuana into the prisons these days!” he said. “We really don’t read a lot of 
good news about small drones in the media. But it’s coming.”

DJI is trying to help that by working with humanitarian organisations: Braun 
showed off a project involving its drones being used in Nepal to map and scan 
areas damaged by April’s earthquake, to help people plan for any future 
disasters. Elsewhere at the summit, footage shot by drones flying over active 
volcanoes showed the potential for aerial robotics to help us understand the 
natural world.

Kickstarter picks social impact over Silicon Valley riches

Crowdfunding service Kickstarter recently passed $2bn of pledges since its 
launch in 2009. And the company also recently turned its back on the prospect 
of being bought or going public in a lucrative “exit”, instead transforming 
itself into a “public benefit corporation”, obliged to think more about its 
impact on society than its potential riches from selling up. Its CEO, Yancey 
Strickler,delivered a polite but clear message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/kickstarter-chooses-public-good-over-private-riches>
 to the technology world.

“Every giant corporation started as a small company, but at some point they 
lost their soul. I think there are other entrepreneurs and people like us that 
want to do something more than just survive or get rich,” he said. “They 
shouldn’t be forced to put aside their strong beliefs just to get that cheque.” 
He also criticised Silicon Valley culture. “So much of the zeitgeist in the 
world of business and technology and startups is about ‘be more aggressive than 
the next guy, be harder, be faster, be paranoid’. All these things. It’s all 
wrong. Being patient, thoughtful, creative, trying to make the right decisions. 
That’s what matters.”

Ford’s future is more than cars and trucks

“We have to make great cars and trucks today, but we also have to imagine a 
future of transportation as a service,” said Bill Ford, great-grandson of Henry 
Ford, and executive chairman of the motor firm that he founded. “What if a car 
could stop just being a method of transportation, and what if a car could start 
solving problems for people?” he asked.

Ford said current technological trends represent the biggest disruption in the 
history of the car industry. “If you think of this industry, we’ve been 
revolution-resistant for 100 years. If you look at the business model of our 
industry from when my great-grandfather started Ford, it didn’t really change a 
lot,” he said. Self-driving cars are one of those challenges. “We used to talk 
about autonomous driving as 25 to 30 years away. Well no, it’s not,” he said. 
“The pace of change is always going to come at us much faster than we thought.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdublin-web-summit-things-learned-tinder-drones-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F10%2F1447164225497%2F5202947e-009f-4a18-b334-21c1aec23282-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drones%2C%20hackers%20and%20online%20satire%3A%20eight%20lessons%20from%20a%20global%20tech%20fest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdublin-web-summit-things-learned-tinder-drones-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drones%2C%20hackers%20and%20online%20satire%3A%20eight%20lessons%20from%20a%20global%20tech%20fest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdublin-web-summit-things-learned-tinder-drones-apps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F10%2F1447164225497%2F5202947e-009f-4a18-b334-21c1aec23282-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dance-music star Steve Angello told the summit about his unconventional plans 
to release his next album. Photograph: Naoise Culhan / SPORTSFILE / Web 
Summit/Naoise Culhan / SPORTSFILE / Web Summit/SPORTSFILE/Corbis 
In the streaming age, the album is evolving

As Spotify nears 100 million users, and services like Apple Music and Google 
Play Music continue to grow, the way music is released may be changing. 
Dance-music star Steve Angello explained how his forthcomingWild Youth album 
will be released unconventionally: “I’ve decided to split my album and do 
chapters, where we have a pre-order that releases a couple of tracks. Then we 
go into a chapter of the album, which is going to be half the album. Then we 
present six videos, then we go into the second half, then we go with six other 
videos,” he said.

“Kids today are different from what they used to be. We have kids that are 
spending eight, nine hours a day on their phones on social media … So for me to 
split it up, it’s going to make it more interesting for me and the fans, 
because they can be part of it. And if you’re trying to tell a story today with 
an album, you need their attention.”

Twitter is changing online satire

On Twitter, anyone can fire off one-liners in response to topical events. 
That’s upping the pressure on satirical websites like The Onion to be funnier. 
“There is more pressure to be quick,” said its president, Michael McAvoy. “The 
bigger point is: are you commenting on something in a unique enough way that, 
even if you don’t have the first joke, you have the best joke?”

He also said that sites like The Onion are finding partnerships with big 
brands, which want to associate themselves with comedy sites even if they’re 
spiky. “For us, it has always been through advertising, yet The Onion also has 
this anti-establishment ethos. It’s a delicate balance,” he said. “The right 
brands understand that to reach people under 35, you need to do something 
different, and the best way to do something authentic is through comedy. Be in 
on the joke, and don’t take yourself too seriously.”
 