
Rachel Amida*, a 52-year-old farmer in Adamawa state, north-eastern Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, points to a small heap of maize 
laid on the ground just outside her home. “If it wasn’t for the herdsmen we 
would have had much more,” she says. “It is making it harder to survive when we 
are harvesting only a portion of what we sowed.”

On both sides of the Yola-Gombe road that runs through Adamawa’s vast 
countryside, small groups of herdsmen lead scores of cattle through the fields 
to feed.

The herders, mostly northern Fulani <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fula_people>
, are sometimes young children. Tiny figures beneath their large, wide-brimmed 
hats, they carry bows and arrows as they shuttle their cattle south in the 
heat. Yet their novel appearance belies a deadly crisis that, in the past few 
years, has spiralled out of control.

Nigeria’s farmers return home to rebuild lives shattered by Boko Haram
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/21/nigeria-farmers-return-home-rebuild-lives-shattered-boko-haram>
On 3 November, near Amida’s home in a village in Demsa district, two people 
were killed by Fulani herdsmen. “I now have to send my son to my plot to till 
the land,” she says. “Before we thrashed the crops outside, but now we do them 
in here. It’s more dangerous there now.”

Farmers have accused the herdsmen of trespassing on their farmland to graze 
their cattle, destroying their crops.

The Fulani herdsmen have always ventured in search of land on which to feed 
their cattle; some are semi-nomadic, rooted in communities across Nigeria, 
while others travel along courses leading from Niger and Chad to Nigeria. But 
the combined effect of competition for land and droughts has made their search 
increasingly desperate.

Reprisal attacks and provocations exist on both sides. Cattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cattles> are sometimes stolen from 
herdsmen by criminal groups and communities often attack the herdsmen, assuming 
them to be a threat. But the conflict has been deadly for farming communities.

In August, more than 30 people were killed when herdsmen attacked villages in 
Demsa <http://guardian.ng/news/herdsmen-kill-dozens-in-adamawa-village/>. In 
the three months prior to this, another 50 people were killed in escalating 
attacks that led to crisis meetings involving the governor of the state and 
local rulers.

The perennial conflict, for years confined mainly to “middle-belt” states, has 
now spread around the country, withmass killings increasingly reported 
<https://www.worldwatchmonitor.org/2016/10/4672538/> in southern states over 
the past year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdrought-worsens-deadly-conflict-between-fulani-herdsmen-nigeria-farmers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8535964ca21a7003ee0e6b1e3fb1545ac26854c7%2F278_513_5312_3187%2F5312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drought%20worsens%20deadly%20battle%20between%20Fulani%20herdsmen%20and%20farmers%20in%20Nigeria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdrought-worsens-deadly-conflict-between-fulani-herdsmen-nigeria-farmers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drought%20worsens%20deadly%20battle%20between%20Fulani%20herdsmen%20and%20farmers%20in%20Nigeria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdrought-worsens-deadly-conflict-between-fulani-herdsmen-nigeria-farmers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8535964ca21a7003ee0e6b1e3fb1545ac26854c7%2F278_513_5312_3187%2F5312.jpg>
 A Fulani herdsman waters his cattle on a dusty plain in Adawama state. 
Photograph: Emmanuel Arewa/AFP/Getty Images 
In Plateau state, where such conflict has a long history, some locals feel the 
attacks are part of an effort to get farming communities to leave their land, 
allowing the herdsmen to settle without competition for resources.

“That’s why they attack villages – they don’t just attack because of quarrels 
with villagers,” said a farmer who did not want to be named. “They burn homes 
and farms so that we will have to start again somewhere else. But we can’t, and 
will not leave because this is our land.”

According to John Reginald, a worker from Nigeria-based NGO Crudan 
<http://crudan.org/who-we-are/>, the attacks have met little resistance from 
police or the military. “This crisis has been able to go on partly because 
there is very little security present in village communities, and attacks in 
rural fields are hard to police,” he said. “So most times when the herdsmen 
attack, or when these issues take place, by the time people hear about it, it’s 
too late to stop.” According to the World Bank,52% of Nigerians still live in 
rural areas <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL?locations=NG>, 
where people are most vulnerable to sporadic, sustained attacks.

The federal government’s response to the crisis has been widely criticised by 
the Nigerian press as inadequate. Increasingly, the killings have been viewed 
as motivated along religious and ethnic lines. President Muhammadu Buhari’s 
ethnicity – he is a Fulani Muslim – has fed accusations that the government is 
reluctant to confront a group it has sympathies with.

But according to Sola Tayo, a Nigeria specialist at the Royal Institute of 
International Affairs in London, the crisis is more complicated. “I think this 
series of conflicts is multifaceted,” she explains. “The mistake is to reduce 
it to a simple clash of ethnicities or religions.

“There seems to be little appetite to address some of these historic 
grievances concerning grazing at a national level in government. Most of the 
discussion seems to be taking place at state level with some governors more 
keen to engage with farmers and herders to try and seek some sort of workable 
solution, while others are adopting a more hostile approach through tightening 
restrictions on nomadic herding practices.”

A plan by the federal government to allocate grazing reserves was rejected by 
Nigeria’s parliament 
<http://punchng.com/bayelsa-assembly-rejects-grazing-reserves-bill/>. In 
opposition to the government’s position, some states such asEkiti and Abia 
<http://www.vanguardngr.com/2016/11/ekiti-footsteps-anti-grazing-bill-passes-first-reading-in-abia-legislature/>
 are passing legislation to allow them to limit the herdsmen’s activities, and 
prosecute those who graze on private land. In Kaduna,the state government has 
admitted to having paid compensation to aggrieved herdsmen 
<http://dailypost.ng/2016/12/03/paid-violent-herdsmen-stop-southern-kaduna-killings-el-rufai/>
 to stop further killings.

In some cases, farmers have taken to burning their land after they’ve 
collected the harvest – to deny passing herdsmen farmland to graze on – despite 
the fact that it damages the soil.

The effects of the conflict on communities, particularly across the 
north-east, has been severe. Adrought across the Lake Chad basin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/30/violence-around-lake-chad-is-leading-nowhere-just-deepening-divides>
 that has affected north-eastern Nigeria and other areas of west Africa has 
sharply decreased crop yields.

Adamawa, like much of north-eastern Nigeria, is hugely reliant on agriculture, 
and the population is now vulnerable. For many families, the crops are their 
sole source of income and food.

The crisis is even more acute for the 166,000 people living in Adamawa who 
were displaced by Boko Haram from their homes in neighbouring states.

Tearfund 
<http://www.tearfund.org/en/about_us/what_we_do_and_where/countries/west_africa/nigeria/>
, an NGO working in Nigeria, has been helping internally displaced people in 
Adamawa, supplying farming tools and providing training on dry season farming 
techniques. “Most of the IDPs who are here were farmers or wives of farmers in 
states like Borno,” explains Munene Kibera, a disaster response manager at 
Tearfund. “It’s the main thing that they know how to do so it’s the best way 
for them to survive.”

The crisis has had a significant impact in Adamawa, a state with already 
stretched resources due to the huge influx of IDPs. The number of people 
reliant on land to farm for food is increasing just when climate change has 
made farming more difficult. As a result, the land disputes with the herdsmen 
are likely to increase. Despite the many deaths and federal government 
statements, there is little sign of the crisis coming to an end.

“All we can do is manage with what we can farm,” Amida says. “It is a bad 
situation, but we are powerless to stop it because they are armed and we are 
not.”

* Name changed to protect identity
 