
In parts of southern Africa, prolonged drought is the new normal. Failed 
harvests, made worse by an unusually strong El Niño, have created a hunger 
crisis affecting millions of families.In our latest podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/mar/30/drought-new-normal-el-nino-worsens-food-shortages-malawi-zimbabwe-africa-podcast>
, Global development editor Lucy Lamble reports from Malawi and Zimbabwe where 
the crisis is having a devastating effect.

In our Rio voices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/rio-voices-our-olympic-odyssey>
 series, which features diary entries from Rio residents as we lead up to the 
Olympic Games: Michel Silva from Rocinha writes about the“safari trips” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/30/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-tour-operators-treat-favelas-like-zoos>
 that tour guides lead through his favela, Maré resident Thaís Cavalcante tells 
ofher battle with the Zika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/30/rio-olympics-view-favelas-six-people-with-zika-virus>
 and Alemão resident Daiene Mendes reflects oncontinued violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/30/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-closer-the-gunshots-the-stronger-my-heart-beats>
 in her neighbourhood.

Elsewhere on the site

Mozambique’s enduring discrimination leaves gay men untreated for HIV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/29/mozambiques-enduring-discrimation-leaves-gay-men-untreated-for-hiv>

World Bank lending arm sees off lawsuit by Indian fishermen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/30/world-bank-lending-arm-ifc-sees-off-lawsuit-by-indian-fishermen-power-plant>

Egyptian feminist leader Mozn Hassan resolute in face of official investigation
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/egyptian-feminist-leader-mozn-hassan-resolute-investigation>

Bolivia’s cholitas: female wrestlers put discrimination in a stranglehold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/24/bolivia-cholitas-female-wrestlers-cholitas-discrimination-stranglehold>

UK aid budget swelling coffers of private firms, claims campaign group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/01/uk-aid-budget-consultancy-firms-campaign-group-global-justice-now>

Opinion

By 2030 sub-Saharan Africa could be adding more working-age people to the 
global labour force than the rest of the world combined. How can enough jobs 
can be created,asks Joshua Meltzer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/29/new-trade-deals-challenge-africa-step-on-to-global-stage>
 of the Brookings Institution.

Multimedia

In parts of rural western Nepal, women are forced to live in cowsheds during 
their periods and immediately after childbirth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/apr/01/menstruating-nepalese-women-confined-to-a-cowshed-video>
. The practice, known aschhaupadi, is banned but still occurs widely.

Photographer James Morgan captured Bhutan’s fight to safeguard its 
environmental achievements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/mar/26/bhutan-where-happiness-is-at-the-heart-of-the-political-agenda-in-pictures>
 in the face of accelerated development and urban growth. The country absorbs 
three times more CO2 emissions than its population produces.

What you said

On Project opens lucrative export market for 70,000 Ugandan and Tanzanian 
farmers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/04/project-opens-lucrative-export-market-for-70000-ugandan-and-tanzanian-farmers>
,Peter Topping wrote:

Finding the means to bypass government bureaucracy in east and central Africa 
and going directly to co-op groups is currently a better option for development 
in many parts of Africa because of a lack of governance, transparency and 
anti-corruption measures in government.

Co-ops are locally run, have local ownership and interest at heart, and many 
(but not all) NGO groups have a more open and accountable structure than 
western government-based overseas aid projects that report to various 
ministers, civil servants and quasi-government bodies with poor transparency. 
The smaller the amount of money on offer the less effective the government 
structures are – all the evidence points to local solutions.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Are we underestimating urban poverty 
<http://www.odi.org/publications/10358-are-we-underestimating-urban-poverty>, 
asks a report from the Overseas Development Institute.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>,@LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 