
The Duchess of Cambridge <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/duchess-of-cambridge> 
is to appear on the front cover of the British edition of Vogue to mark the 
magazine’s centenary.

Several more pictures of the duchess will appear inside the magazine, and two 
of the photographs will go on public display in London on Sunday 1 May.

The photographs, taken by British photographer Josh Olins, will hang in the 
National Portrait Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-portrait-gallery>, where the 
duchess has been a patron since 2012.

A Kensington Palace spokesman said: “The duchess was delighted to play a part 
in celebrating the centenary of an institution that has given a platform to 
some of the most renowned photographers in this country’s history.

“She is incredibly grateful to the team at Vogue and at the National Portrait 
Gallery for asking her to take part.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fduchess-of-cambridge-appears-as-vogue-cover-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a63e23b97c0592eb082f966a7ab419a76e6bd40%2F89_94_2760_1656%2F2760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Duchess%20of%20Cambridge%20to%20be%20Vogue%20cover%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fduchess-of-cambridge-appears-as-vogue-cover-star%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Duchess%20of%20Cambridge%20to%20be%20Vogue%20cover%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fduchess-of-cambridge-appears-as-vogue-cover-star%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a63e23b97c0592eb082f966a7ab419a76e6bd40%2F89_94_2760_1656%2F2760.jpg>
 Two of the portraits of the duchess on display in the National Portrait 
Gallery. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
“She would like to thank Josh Olins for being such a pleasure to work with. 
The duchess had never taken part in a photography shoot like this before. She 
hopes that people appreciate the portraits with the sense of relaxed fun with 
which they were taken.”

Olins, who has worked on advertising campaigns for a host of high street and 
designer fashion brands, said the duchess was “a joy to work with, a natural”.

The royal family are no strangers to being photographed by the world’s best 
fashion photographers –the Queen was recently pictured in separate images 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/21/queen-family-portrait-grandchildren-90th-birthday>
 with her beloved corgis and the royal children by Annie Leibovitz for her 90th 
birthday.

The latest photos of the duchess were styled by British Vogue fashion director 
Lucinda Chambers and a colour image of the duchess in a brown Burberry coat and 
fedora will adorn the cover of the magazine’s June centenary issue.

 * Vogue 100: a Century of Style 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/whatson/vogue/exhibition.php> runs at the National 
Portrait Gallery in central London until 22 May this year.
 