
The first day of the E3 games conference in Los Angeles also brought us the 
last two major briefings of the year:Nintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> (in the form of its usual 
live online broadcast) and Square Enix.

After the thrills and spills of the Microsoft and Sony events, it was all a 
little underwhelming. Nintendo immediately charmed viewers with its depiction 
of its key executives as Muppets, but the actual games content of its 
presentation left someWii U <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii-u> 
owners frustrated by the seeming lack of support.

Meanwhile, Square Enix, was still basking in the afterglow of the Sony 
briefing on Monday, where the Final Fantasy VII remake was a major highlight.

Its event was dominated by titles we already knew about, including Rise of the 
Tomb Raider, Deus Ex: Mankind Divided and Just Cause 3. However , the veteran 
publisher still had a couple of other treats for its dedicated fanbase.

Here’s what we liked best from the games that were officially unveiled for the 
first time during these events.

Star Fox Zero
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds6PEecNY0Sc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds6PEecNY0Sc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds6PEecNY0Sc&media=>
The classic flight shooter is returning courtesy of a joint development 
between Nintendo and the extraordinarily busy PlatinumGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>. Featuring all the old 
characters, vehicles and enemies, it’s a sort of re-envisioning of the series 
so far, with particular debt to Star Fox 64.

The most intriguing aspect is the new control system, which uses the GamePad 
display as a first-person cockpit view, while the TV shows a more cinematic 
viewpoint of the craft.

It’s tricky to get used to, and worked better on some of the showfloor demo 
levels than others, but it should allow players to target in one direction 
while flying in another. It’s due out this winter.

Hyrule Warriors Legends
 Hyrule Warriors: Legends – the Wii U title is battling its way onto the small 
screen 
Nintendo’s million-selling tactical battle game, which features a cast of 
characters from the Zelda series in objective-based skirmishes, is coming to3DS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3ds> early next year.

The fresh version includes all the DLC from the Wii U original and adds two 
characters (and some scenery) lifted from Wind Waker: Tetra and the King of 
Hyrule. Not a ground-shattering announcement but the 
Dynasty-Warriors-meets-Zelda format should shine on the handheld console.

Metroid Prime Federation Force
 Metroid Prime: Federation Force – not exactly the Metroid Prime announcement 
fans were hoping for, but still... 
The classic sci-fi series is always a welcome presence at Nintendo events, but 
this incarnation left viewers scratching their heads rather than whooping 
approval. It’s billed as a mission-based four-player co-op adventure, but 
there’s also going to be a three-vs-three competitive mode called Blast Ball, a 
sort of future sport side... thing.

It’s being developed by Canadian studio Next Level Games, previously 
responsible for a whole bunch of Wii conversions, and is due out in 2016.

Animal Crossing Amiibo Festival
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3d4kB5UMeNo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3d4kB5UMeNo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3d4kB5UMeNo&media=>
It was a double offering from the popular life sim series this year. The news 
that Animal Crossing: Happy Home Designer will be coming West, was accompanied 
by the announcement of Amiibo Festival.

It’s essentially a take on Nintendo’s board game-like Mario Party titles, but 
with popular characters from the Animal Crossing universe. The general 
consensus on the trailer was: this looks weird.

Mario and Luigi Paper Jam
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzI9Ic3tz2lc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzI9Ic3tz2lc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzI9Ic3tz2lc&media=>
As the owner of a typically unreliable printer, the words “paper jam” usually 
fill be with horror and frustration – but not this time! It is of course an 
origami mash-up of the Mario and Luigi series with the Paper Mario titles, 
which means papery two-dimensional models of our beloved heroes – but in 3D. If 
that doesn’t break all the laws of Euclidean geometry. Anyway, it’s due out on 
3DS next spring.

Mario Tennis Ultra Smash
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434553671372%2Fe3f47c7d-5487-4b6a-8f9f-a70d584676a2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=E3%202015%3A%20the%20eight%20biggest%20announcements%20from%20Nintendo%20and%20Square%20Enix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=E3%202015%3A%20the%20eight%20biggest%20announcements%20from%20Nintendo%20and%20Square%20Enix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434553671372%2Fe3f47c7d-5487-4b6a-8f9f-a70d584676a2-1020x612.jpeg>
 Mario Tennis Ultra Smash – Bowser’s really been bulking up for this tournamwent
Mario’s tennis games have always been super fun, intuitive takes on the sport, 
and the latest incarnation is no exception. A simple two-button control set up 
gives you access to top spin, slice and lob shots, and players are able to hold 
the buttons, or use them in combination, to pull off shots of differing power 
and technique.

At points in a game, mushrooms appear on the court, allowing the players (all 
familiar Super Mario heroes of course) to grow larger – turning the ensuing 
rally into a sort of It’s a Knockout tribute. It’s coming to Wii U this winter.

Nier new project (working title, obviously)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434553828490%2Fa105f871-c041-400a-a19d-72879c95909b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=E3%202015%3A%20the%20eight%20biggest%20announcements%20from%20Nintendo%20and%20Square%20Enix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=E3%202015%3A%20the%20eight%20biggest%20announcements%20from%20Nintendo%20and%20Square%20Enix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434553828490%2Fa105f871-c041-400a-a19d-72879c95909b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The game currently known as Nier New Project. Not only is there no name, 
there’s no screenshots either, so we’ll have to make do with concept art 
Photograph: Square Enix 
Director Yoko Taro is returning to his cult role-playing adventure, working 
with Platinum Games on a PS4 exclusive follow-up. The original title was famed 
for its eccentric implementation of various gameplay styles and genres and it 
looks like the refreshed take on the universe will be similar.

Viewtiful Joe luminary Atsushi Inaba, Metal Gear Revengeance designer Takahisa 
Taura and Dragon Quest X producer Yosuke Saito are also on the project. No 
release date yet.

Project Setsuna
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434554661126%2Fed427545-dbe0-4a40-9bd1-443440aecc74-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=E3%202015%3A%20the%20eight%20biggest%20announcements%20from%20Nintendo%20and%20Square%20Enix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=E3%202015%3A%20the%20eight%20biggest%20announcements%20from%20Nintendo%20and%20Square%20Enix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fe3-2015-the-eight-biggest-announcements-from-nintendo-and-square-enix%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434554661126%2Fed427545-dbe0-4a40-9bd1-443440aecc74-1020x612.jpeg>
 Project Setsuna is the first game from Square Enix’s new dedicated RPG 
developer, the apparently aptly named Tokyo RPG Factor Photograph: Square Enix 
Square Enix has established a new studio Tokyo RPG Factory, which is set to 
specialise in Japanese role-playing games (JRPG) – and this will be its debut 
project. The publisher famed for the Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest titles 
seems keen to maintain a stake in the JRPG business. And that’s pretty much all 
we know about it, apart from that its coming to consoles in 2016.
 