
All you really need to know, to get your head around Paris fashion week, is 
this: the most lusted-after, Instagram-liked piece on the catwalk this week was 
an anorak. At Balenciaga, new designer Demna Gvasalia’s vision for the most 
ultra-chic, super-refined Paris label was distilled in anoversized anorak in a 
garish green-and-blue colour combination 
<http://www.businessoffashion.com/fashion-week/2016aw/balenciaga/collection/look/9>
 which was a long, long way from the pale greys of Avenue Montaigne or the matt 
black of the Boulevard Saint Germain. And the audience loved it.

Eight key trends from Paris: silk scarves, studenty velvets and flashy pleats
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/08/eight-trends-paris-silk-scarves-studenty-velvets-flashy-pleats-fashion-week-trench-coats>
It is not often that you come away from the Paris shows resolving to look less 
chic. But that is, most definitely, the vibe. Aside from the Balenciaga anorak, 
other key pieces from this week’s catwalks included a donkey jacket (in leopard 
print, at Givenchy 
<http://www.businessoffashion.com/fashion-week/2016aw/givenchy/collection/look/37>
), and quilted coats at Stella McCartney and Rick Owens. Off the catwalk, 
patchworked jeans with asymmetric seams and frayed hems have replaced Céline 
blazers as the front-row status symbol. In fact, the blazer – for so long the 
bedrock of the chic Frenchwoman look – was conspicuous this week by its absence 
from both catwalk collections and what was being worn in the audience.

That whole French-girls-are-so-chic, trench-coat-and-black-coffee shtick is 
still shifting books at the tills at WHSmith, but Paris fashion week has – 
finally – moved on. For decades, Paris designers have essentially flip-flopped 
between celebrating an ultra-feminine, Tuileries-promenading, couture-shopping 
Parisienne and a heavy-lidded, Gitanes-smoking, Café de Flore girl. But the new 
Paris muse is neither of these. The new look is closer to the aesthetic of 
French-cropped boys who spin the waltzers at the fairground. The models at this
Paris fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/paris-fashion-week> 
walked with neither the old-school high-stepping pony gait, or the slouchy 
hands-in-pockets stride. Instead, they stomped so fast that clocking what they 
were wearing was difficult. They seemed to less parade for the audience, as 
barge past us. The half-zipped tracksuit top is the new blazer, and, in the 
front row, Kanye West is the new Catherine Deneuve.

Chicness is essentially about being easy on the eye: a fluid line, neutral 
colours and a sense of cultured ease. The new Paris look is more hard-edged. 
There are Easy Rider motorcycle leathers at Anthony Vaccarello and Chloé. 
Trousers either drag on the floor like pyjama bottoms you haven’t pulled up 
properly, or end deliberately awkwardly above the ankle bone without pandering 
to old-fashioned concepts such as making your legs look longer. However, Paris 
is still, at the end of the day, Paris. The anoraks at Balenciaga and the 
quilted coats at Stella McCartney were worn loosely on the shoulders, with the 
grand attitude of a fur stole. Chic is dead, and the anorak is the new blazer – 
but the look is still, unmistakably,Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>.
 