
Dear Istanbul Eats
In September I will be going to Europe for the first time and have decided to 
throw in a visit to Istanbul at the end of the trip. I'm a student and so my 
budget for travelling is limited, but, as I love food, I'm not exactly crazy 
about partaking of the classic backpacker "soup of the day" thing (one bowl of 
soup for the whole day). I was hoping you guys would know of a few places that 
strike the happy middle ground of being delicious cheap eats, but in places 
where the local flair can be soaked up at the same time. Thanks!
Young & Hungry, Boston, MA

Dear Y&H
Although our own student days are, sadly, long behind us, we still approach 
every day as if we still had a pack firmly attached to our back. Now, as then, 
our daily culinary mission remains the same: how to maximise our eating 
pleasure while minimising what we spend. So, in that sense, you will find that 
most of the spots reviewed on Istanbul Eats are backpacker friendly, with 
memorable food served along with friendly prices. That said, here are a few 
specific tips that will help you avoid having to get more cash wired from home.

While Istanbul has long been a major stop on the backpacker route, the city is 
no longer the budget destination it once was, with prices often surpassing 
those found in many other European cities – especially when it comes to coffee 
and booze. But it's still possible to eat your way through Istanbul without 
being left completely broke.

As a backpacker on a budget, the Turkish word you should immediately commit to 
memory isbüfe. A type of corner store found throughout Istanbul, the büfe is 
the spot for your daily fix of cheap food, from doner (meat roasted on a 
vertical spit) to, yes, soup (usuallymercimek corbasi, a hearty and tasty red 
lentil soup that serves as many a Turkish workingman's breakfast). Another büfe 
staple is a panini-like grilled cheese sandwich known astost. Most spots turn 
out a serviceable version of this pressed sandwich, but the folks over atGüngör 
Büfe <http://istanbuleats.com/2009/09/gungor-bufe-lord-of-the-sandwich/>, in 
the harbourside Karaköy neighbourhood, have turned tost-making into an art. (In 
fact, we recently received a note from Italian visitors to Istanbul who said 
the pressed sandwiches they had at Güngör were the best ones they've had this 
side of Naples.)

Many büfes will have on offer another ubiquitous Turkish dish, kuru fasulye 
(white beans in a tomato sauce). In this case, spend a few extra liras and 
treat yourself to the stellar and infinitely tastier Black Sea version of this 
dish. For our money, the buttery beans atHayvore 
<http://istanbuleats.com/2011/01/hayvore-lost-and-found/>, a wonderful and 
affordable Black Sea restaurant in the Beyoglu area, are among the best in the 
city. The Black Sea area is also famous for another delicious yet 
budget-friendly item,pide (sometimes referred to as Turkish pizza, although the 
two are not quite the same).Fatih Karadeniz Pidecisi 
<http://istanbuleats.com/2010/11/fatih-karadeniz-pidecisi-crunch-time/> is not 
only one of the best and most authentic pide spots in Istanbul, but is also 
located in an atmospheric neighbourhood rarely visited by tourists.

Of course, this being Istanbul, you will probably expect to eat some kebab. 
Sitting down for a proper meal at an Istanbul grill house is likely to leave 
you staring dejectedly at a budget-busting bill at the end of the night. A 
better bet is to follow the lead of hungry late-night revellers and head to
Durumzade <http://istanbuleats.com/2009/04/durumzade-wrap-artists/>, a small 
and affordable joint near the bustling Beyoglu fish market that makes 
superlativedurum (kebab wrapped up in a flatbread).

As your days in Istanbul pass by and you find yourself staring at the 
beautiful waters surrounding the city, you will likely start craving some fish. 
As with kebab, going out to eat fish at most waterside Istanbul restaurants 
will leave you with serious sticker shock. In this case, we suggest you find 
your way to the central square of Samatya, a sleepy neighbourhood by the shores 
of the Marmara Sea, where the owners of tinyKuçuk Ev 
<http://istanbuleats.com/2010/04/kucuk-ev-fantastic-voyage/> will serve you up 
a fresh fish dinner for a fraction of what you would pay in restaurants up the 
Bosphorus.

Finally, no discussion of Istanbul cheap eats is complete without talking 
about the "wet burger 
<http://istanbuleats.com/2009/12/istanbuls-top-5-street-foods-3-kizilkayalars-wet-burger/>
" ("islak burger" in Turkish, pictured above). A garlicky beef patty that 
resides inside a fluffy white bun that's been soaked in an oily, tomato-based 
sauce, the wet burger is a budget eater's dream: cheap, sloppy, delicious and 
utterly addictive, a taste memory that will stay with you long after your cash 
has run out and you are back on campus hitting the books, your thoughts slowly 
turning towards planning next summer's vacation.
 