
Talk to Thessalonians and you could be forgiven for thinking the word “crisis” 
means “opportunity”. “BC” stands for “before crisis”, but it’s referenced when 
describing an innovation or entrepreneurial venture that arose in response to 
it. Of course, the collapse of the economy has brought hardship and deprivation 
here in Thessaloniki, as in the rest of Greece, but locals – from the 
150,000-strong student population to the73-year-old mayor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/dec/30/tattooed-mayor-thessaloniki-greece-yiannis-boutaris>
 – have refused to let it stop the city moving forward. And nowhere is this 
more evident than in its thriving gastronomic scene: Thessaloniki might be the 
country’s second city, but it is the gourmet capital.

Located in the far north of the country, it has for over 2,000 years been a 
melting pot of cultures – reflected in the blend of spicy eastern, French, 
Balkan and Mediterranean flavours of its cuisine, and in its cosmopolitan vibe. 
are part of the culture, and while everyone has been forced to tighten their 
metaphorical belts, no one wants to tighten their real ones. So, gone are the 
days of meals in tavernas setting you back around €30 per head; in their place 
are good-value bars and cafes.

Thessalonians were never going to let a financial crisis get in the way of a 
good time. Instead, they’ve seized the chance to breathe new life into the 
city. Here are the highlights.

The Roman forum
 Piece of Cake. 
The agora is undergoing excavations. The area is a typical Thessalonian mix of 
ancient and modern. Look down and you’ll see ancient columns and arches running 
the length of the agora; look up and you’re surrounded by tall office blocks 
and apartments leading to the Arch of Galeris and the Rotunda, which has the 
city’s only minaret. Once a Roman mausoleum, then a Christian church, and later 
a mosque, the Rotunda is the oldest monument in the city.

Barely a week goes by without a new cafe, bar or restaurant popping up here. 
One of the newer arrivals is six-month-oldBasta 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Kafeneio-Basta-Thessaloniki/287147344829369> 
(Mitropolitou Gennadiou 16). With its tiled floors, deep-red walls hung with 
black-and-white photos, and bistro-style chairs, it’s a modernised version of a 
traditionalkafeneio, where retired men once eked out their days over backgammon 
and cigarettes. Linger over a coffee ortsipouro (the local grappa) for €3. More 
funky and colourful is the recently openedKoubi 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/%CE%9A%CE%BF%CF%85%CE%BC%CF%80%CE%AF-coffee-crafts/338814699633019>
 (Peloponnisou 2), a coffee-crafting cafe, which teaches crocheting, jewellery 
making and other crafts (€10 a session). Alternatively, €4 buys a drink and a 
panini.

Before the crisis, Dimitris Ekosidios restored classic cars; now he runs 
Derlicatessan Souvlaki <https://www.facebook.com/NterlikatesenOlaSoublaki> 
(Ioanni Kouskoura 7) – a play on the wordderli, meaning to scoff – where he 
serves pork and chicken souvlaki,dikavalo (mushrooms and halloumi cheese) with 
chips, and feta pitta pockets from as little as €2.50. Diners here spill out 
onto the wooden tables on the pavement.

Thessaloniki’s bakeries are famous for their trigona panoramatos (triangular 
pastries filled with cream) andkoulouria (a regional, Sephardic, bagel-type 
bread), but new cafe on the blockPiece of Cake 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Piece-of-Cake/340197129339385> (Xrysostomou 
Smyrnis 19) serves “Greek spoon sweets” with its coffee – chunks of oranges 
stewed in syrup, made to the recipe of the young owner’s grandmother (€2). It’s 
a narrow cafe, with just enough room to pass between the marble counter and the 
circular tables opposite, but it’s welcoming, with bright cups used as vases 
for fresh flowers. Another new restaurant, and a first for Thessaloniki, is the 
vegetarianRoots 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/rOOTS/1512775345602506?_rdr=p&fref=ts> (Balanou 
4-6, +30 231 026 8063) – veggie restaurants are few and far between in Greece – 
which serves dishes such as risotto, beetroot balls andfava (pureed chickpeas), 
inspired by Greek, Asian and Balkan cuisine.

Ano Poli
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Feating-drinking-thessaloniki-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436542269272%2Fdee4cc6c-cdaa-4cc6-95bf-48adb29d0f23-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eating%20out%20in%20Thessaloniki%3A%20how%20Greece%E2%80%99s%20culinary%20capital%20is%20reinventing%20itself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Feating-drinking-thessaloniki-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eating%20out%20in%20Thessaloniki%3A%20how%20Greece%E2%80%99s%20culinary%20capital%20is%20reinventing%20itself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Feating-drinking-thessaloniki-greece%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436542269272%2Fdee4cc6c-cdaa-4cc6-95bf-48adb29d0f23-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Toixo Toixo. Photograph: Picasa/PR 
This district (its name means “upper town”) is a maze of wooden houses and 
restaurants that have adapted their menus and dropped their prices to suit the 
times.Propyleon Piano Bar <https://el-gr.facebook.com/propyleon> (Eptapyrgiou 
130, +30 231 020 2495) has outstanding views over the Byzantine domes ofSt 
Paul’s church 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=st+paul+church+thessaloniki&espv=2&biw=1920&bih=1041&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=7qibVe6oIcnU7AaB4IGQDg&ved=0CDkQsAQ>
 to the city and gulf beyond. Suck on a “submarine”, a hard vanilla sweet, 
served with a spoon in a glass of water, with Greek coffee. Or, in the evening, 
order a selection of meze – mackerel, sardines, slices of sausage and grilled 
cheeses (€8, including a drink) – and listen to live traditional and 
contemporary music.Toixo Toixo  
<https://www.facebook.com/toixosalonica/info?_rdr=p&tab=overview>(Polydorou 
Stergiou 1, +30 231 024 5351) is airy and bright, with sage woodwork, wooden 
tables and Greek rush seats, but it’s the view of the ancient city walls that 
makes it worth a visit, along with the food: try thehilopites metsovou (pasta 
made in the mountain village of Metsovo) orsikotia sharas (thick slices of 
chargrilled liver) with Macedonian red wine (from €15).

Heading downhill, narrow streets open out into small squares and the 
courtyards of Byzantine chapels. Tsinari Square, named after the Turkish 
(cinar) for the plane tree which provides welcome shade here, is home toOuzeri 
Tsinari 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Ouzeri-Tsinari/161289803922336?sk=info&tab=overview>
 (Alexandras Papadopoulou 72, +30 231 028 4028) where, for around €20, you can 
wash down grilled sardines, flash-fried shrimps with tomato and thyme, and
soutzoukakia (meatballs with cumin) with enough ouzo to send you staggering 
back to the lower town.

Valaoritou
 Pizza Poselli. 
In the former Jewish quarter, this is one of the few areas that was not 
destroyed by the greatfire of Thessaloniki in 1917 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Thessaloniki_Fire_of_1917>. Back then, the 
banks in the area held so much money in their vaults the fire crews rushed to 
their aid. Today, above the empty vaults standsPizza Poselli 
<https://www.facebook.com/poselli?_rdr=p> (Vilara 2, +30 231 401 9687). Named 
after the building’s Italian architect, who reflected the aspirations of the 
merchant class of the early 20th century in the building’s columns and 
balustrades, it is topped by a facade with a built-in clock that shows the 
exact time the city was struck by an earthquake in June 1978 – 11.05pm.

Pizza Poselli dishes up generous slices of Greek-style pizza – wafer-thin 
crusts topped with fresh vegetables and local cheeses – with salad and beer, 
for around €3.

This area bursts into life after 10pm, when Thessaloniki’s younger crowd 
begins to party. Neoclassical merchant dwellings now house trendy cocktail 
bars, likePiccadilly <https://www.facebook.com/PICCADILLYS3V?fref=ts> (Syggrou 
3) andUrania <https://www.facebook.com/urania.bar.thessaloniki/timeline> 
(Kapodistriou 7 & Paiko), where DJs spin to crowds over three floors – on the 
rooftop bar, the €3 drinks include a view over the lit-up city.

The atmosphere in Valaoritou is hedonistic, but a resurgence of 
fortune-tellers is indicative of the uncertainty that lies beneath. Will the 
teller atCafé Sosa <https://el-gr.facebook.com/SosaEspressoCafeWineBar> 
(Komninon 24, +30 231 023 8900) see a Grexit in the coffee grinds, If the queue 
is too long, opt for a coffee andbougatsa (custard-filled pastry) in the 
present, rather than wait to find out.

Squeeze through a narrow space between the front of Pentes Portes 
<https://www.facebook.com/penteportes?_rdr=p&pnref=story> (five doors) 
restaurant (Fragkon 2, +30 231 053 2503) and the ancient city walls, and you 
enter a large, olive tree-filled garden strung with lanterns. The newly 
revamped menu offers slices of smoked chicken, grilled veal steak and squid 
stuffed with fresh herbs and feta, washed down with wine from the surrounding 
Macedonian vineyards (from around €15).

The Waterfront
 The White Tower of Thessaloniki. Photograph: Alamy 
This is a pricier dining area, but no visit to Thessaloniki would be complete 
without at least one drink in one of the bars strung along the newly completed 
two-mile boardwalk.Ouzeri Agioli 
<https://www.facebook.com/AgioliOfficial?_rdr=p> (Leoforos Nikis 15, +30 231 
026 2888) has magnificent views over the gulf and, on a clear day, you can see 
Mount Olympus, home of the gods. In an ouzo-induced haze, I dined like a god, 
on pan-fried red mullet,midopilafo (mussel risotto) and zucchini fritters with 
aubergine salad for €15, to the accompanying strains of a bouzouki player 
strummingMisirlou <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1hLIXrlpRe8> (aka the 
opening theme to Pulp Fiction).

• Trip provided by Visit Greece (visitgreece.gr <http://visitgreece.gr/>). 
British Airways (britishairways.com 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb>), easyJet (easyjet.com 
<http://www.easyjet.com/en/>), Ryanair (ryanair.com <https://www.ryanair.com/>) 
and Thomson Airways (flights.thomson.co.uk 
<http://flights.thomson.co.uk/en/index.html>) fly direct to Thessaloniki, 
returns start at £60 in low season. In the heart of the city, close to the 
waterfront, is the oasis-like City Hotel (rooms from €70,cityhotel.gr 
<http://www.cityhotel.gr/>). Colors (Valaoritou 21, colors.com.gr) 
<http://colors.com.gr/> offers apartments and rooms from €45

 