
The strongest El Niño in 35 years which has seen long droughts, scorching 
temperatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/16/april-third-month-in-row-to-break-global-temperature-records>
, water shortages and flooding around the world isofficially over 
<http://media.bom.gov.au/releases/267/el-nino-ends-as-tropical-pacific-ocean-returns-to-neutral/>
. But the consequences of a second year of extreme weather will be seen for 
many more months infood shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/africans-face-famine-after-crops-fail>
 fornearly 100 million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/el-nino-leaves-100-million-people-hungry-short-of-water-droughts-floods-worldwide>
, the loss of income for millions of poor farmers and higher prices in cities, 
say the UN and leading meteorologists.

According to Australian and US government scientists, sea surface temperatures 
in the Pacific, which warm significantly every few years, have cooled to normal 
levels and are unlikely to rise again this year. This marks the end of an
18-month global weather hiatus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/16/april-third-month-in-row-to-break-global-temperature-records>
 which has created social and ecological turmoil inAsia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/animals-die-cambodia-worst-drought-decades>
,Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/southern-africa-worst-global-food-crisis-25-years>
 andLatin America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/30/hunger-threatens-millions-el-nino-drought-floods-humanitarian-disaster>
.

Drought and rising temperatures 'leaves 36m people across Africa facing hunger'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/drought-high-temperatures-el-nino-36m-people-africa-hunger>
 “There is little chance of [sea surface temperatures] returning to El Niño 
levels, in which case mid-May will mark the end of the 2015–16 El Niño,” said 
an Australian government spokesman.

However, scientists say a reverse effect “La Niña” phenomenon is possible. 
This would see temperatures fall below normal in the Pacific equatorial waters, 
bringing heavier rains, floods and much cooler temperatures to many countries.

Overstretched humanitarian groups have warned that the extreme conditions will 
last for many more months. Concern is mounting in southern Africa, where50 
million people are expected by the UN’s World Food programme to need help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/africa-worst-famine-since-1985-looms-for-50-million>
 with food supplies in the coming nine months.

Some of the most extreme weather has been felt across southern Asia in the 
last nine months, where countries including India, the Philippines, Myanmar, 
Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and Indonesia have all experienced their worst 
droughts and most intenseheatwaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/india-records-its-hottest-day-ever-as-temperature-hits-51c-thats-1238f>
 in decades.

According to US meteorologists at Accuweather, highest ever temperatures 
<http://www.accuweather.com/en/weather-news/2016-asia-summer-forecast-drought-eases-india-malaysia-la-nina-suppresses-typhoons-west-pacific-below-normal/56991053>
 have been recorded in Thailand at 44.6C (112.3F), Cambodia at 42.6C (108.7F), 
Laos at 42.3C (108.1F) and the Maldives at 34.9C (94.8F). Last week India broke 
the world record, with a temperature of51C (123.8F) recorded in Rajasthan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/india-records-its-hottest-day-ever-as-temperature-hits-51c-thats-1238f>
.

 “Millions of families are living in El Niño’s devastating path of extreme 
conditions. Children, especially, face hunger, disease and futures shorn of the 
opportunities provided by education. Countries most affected by El Niño are 
also bearing the brunt of climate change, and it’s the most vulnerable and 
impoverished communities that will continue to be the hardest hit,” said Tanya 
Steele, interim CEO of Save the Children.


 India

Two consecutive failed monsoons, the lowest rainfall in seven years 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nashik/Rainfall-lowest-in-11-years/articleshow/48832169.cms>
, and some of the hottest days and nights ever recorded in India saw vast 
tracts of farmland scorched and rice, maize, sugar cane and oilseed crops badly 
damaged in 2015/16.

Hundreds of millions of Indians who depend on farming for livelihoods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/india-drought-affecting-330-million-people-weak-monsoons>
 were badly affected, with reports suggesting thousands of poor farmers have
abandoned their withered crops and gone to live in towns 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/india-heatwave-farmers-suicide-killing-themselves-51-record-temperature-climate-change-global-a7039841.html>
.

 May and June are usually India’s hottest months and temperatures regularly 
exceed 40C in the run-up to the monsoon rains. But theseverity of this year’s 
heat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/india-records-its-hottest-day-ever-as-temperature-hits-51c-thats-1238f>
 has been been unprecedented. Rivers, lakes and dams have dried up in many 
parts of Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Gujarat states.

The heatwaves have also made life intolerable in many cities. Indian weather 
officials warned last week of more frequent heatwaves 
<http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/india-braces-for-more-heat-after-temperatures-break-records/article8636833.ece>
 as the scorching temperatures triggered power cuts, after demand for air 
conditioning and fans greatly exceeded supply.

Vietnam

Vietnam has suffered its worst drought in nearly 100 years 
<http://www.efe.com/efe/english/world/vietnam-works-to-cope-with-worst-drought-in-almost-100-years/50000262-2858306>
 with record low river flows and salinisation of fresh water supplies. Because 
of low water in the Mekong river and its tributaries,saltwater intrusion 
started two months earlier than usual 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/viet-nam/vietnam-consolidated-report-drought-and-saltwater-intrusion-reporting-period-oct>
 and reached 20km to 30km further inland than normal.

As a result, more than 429,500 hectares of crops were damaged 
<http://www.unocha.org/el-nino-asia>, severely hitting rice production. 
According to the UN,500,000 hectares (1.2m  
<http://www.un.org/sg/spokesperson/highlights/?HighD=3/14/2016&d_month=3&d_year=2016>
acres) of rice paddy 
<http://www.un.org/sg/spokesperson/highlights/?HighD=3/14/2016&d_month=3&d_year=2016>
 are still under threat and 300,000 households have had no income for many 
months.

More than 10,000 households in 11 provinces 
<http://english.vietnamnet.vn/fms/society/152317/eight-provinces-in-vietnam-declared-as-natural-disaster-areas.html]>
 have had to be supplied with bottled water, and water purification tablets. 
Rain has reportedly returned to Vietnam’s parched coffee belt but around20% of 
all coffee trees have either been killed or damaged 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-vietnam-coffee-drought-idUSKCN0YG0KB>.

El Niño is causing global food crisis, UN warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/el-nino-leaves-100-million-people-hungry-short-of-water-droughts-floods-worldwide>
Mongolia

This winter, Mongolia suffered a particularly severe dzud, or winter of snow, 
blizzards and temperatures as low as minus 50°C. It has been a disaster for 
tens of thousand of herder families who have lost around 40% of their herds and 
seen more than1 million livestock die 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-35983912>, primarily due to starvation or 
from the cold itself. More than 2.5 million cattle are expected to die by the 
end of the year. The knock-on effects are seen in children’s education, 
unemployment and financial losses.

Cambodia

Nearly 250,000 hectares (617,763 acres) of unique flooded forest 
<http://www.phnompenhpost.com/national/tonle-sap-forests-razed-fire> around the 
ecologically vitalTonle Sap lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/01/cambodia-tonle-sap-lake-fish-stocks-dwindle-conservation>
 have been devastated by fire since January. The lake is the most important 
breeding ground for many species of fish which migrate into the Mekong river 
and provide thousands of Laotian, Cambodian and Vietnamese communities with 
food.

According to Chhéng Phén, the director of the Ministry of Agriculture’s Inland 
Fisheries Institute (IFReDI <http://ifredi-cambodia.org/about-us/>), the fires 
will reduce fish production next year. Fish forms80% of the protein in 
Cambodians’ diet 
<https://www.globalgiving.org/projects/regenerating-fish-harvests-in-cambodian-villages/>
.

The exceptionally severe drought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/animals-die-cambodia-worst-drought-decades>
 has also left tens of thousands of farmers unable to plant rice crops. Annual 
rains have come late, exacerbating the drought, and exports of Asia’s staple 
food are expected to be the lowest in many years. Although water has been 
brought in to help farmers plant, the rice industry now fears that the arrival 
of La Niña will bring devastating floods.

Some 2.5 million farmers people were affected by the dry spell 
<http://www.phnompenhpost.com/national/digging-deeper-wells-costs-more>, which 
also led to the deaths of cattle, monkeys and tonnes of fish, said the National 
Center for Disaster Management (NCDM).

Myanmar

Monsoon rains are expected to start within days but it may take months before 
the full effects of the deepest drought and highest temperatures in living 
memory are over. Water shortages are common in April and May but this year more 
than 2,000 villages have been left desperate for drinking water, with dried up 
wells, ponds and rivers.Inle, the country’s second largest lake, suffered from 
unprecedented low water levels 
<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/national-news/mandalay-upper-myanmar/19125-fears-mount-for-inle-lake-as-myanmar-faces-drought.html>
 and farmers have been unable to plant crops. The Magway, Mandalay and lower 
Sagaing regions, known as the “dry zone”,have been especially hard hit 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/99919/hunger-myanmar%E2%80%99s-%E2%80%9Cdry-zone%E2%80%9D>
.

The Philippines

The Philippines depends on rice imports from Vietnam and Thailand, but prices 
are expected to rise dramatically as both these countries have beenhit hard by 
droughts and crop losses <http://www.unocha.org/el-nino-asia>. In a country 
where rice accounts for about nearly a quarter of all poor people’s spending, 
any price increases or shortages can translate into political dissent. Farmers 
have warned of more crop damage later in the year when La Niña, the counterpart 
of El Niño, could develop and bring intense rains.

More than 5 million people, many on the island of Mindanao, have been severely 
affected by drought and heatwaves. Nearly 200,000 farmers are said by 
government to have lost crops.

Indonesia

Indonesia has seen failed harvests, increased hunger, and severe floods and 
landslides <http://www.unocha.org/el-nino-asia>. The El Niño conditions peaked 
in January and coincided with the main growing season for maize and the 
planting season for rain-fed paddy rice. Heavy rains have now started, 
resulting in widespread flooding and landslides that have caused many deaths.

Latest estimates suggest nearly 25% of the main rice crop was not planted 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/indonesia/el-ni-ola-ni-impact-indonesia-scenarios-possible-developments-indonesia-over-next>
 by the end of December 2015 in eastern Indonesia, Java and Sulawesi. The 
drought is said by the World Food Programme to have affectedabout 22 million 
people who rely on agriculture <http://un.or.id/elnino/>. More than 1 million 
are expected to need food aid. Income losses have been reported for 80% of 
households. The worst effects areexpected to be felt after July 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/indonesia/el-ni-ola-ni-impact-indonesia-scenarios-possible-developments-indonesia-over-next>
.

Nearly 500,000 people – half of that figure living in the poor eastern 
province of Nusa Tenggara Timur (NTT) – are said by the UN to be in need of 
food, with a further 700,000 at risk of food insecurity. If the late, heavy 
rains cause flooding, food access could become problematic for the people in 
the most affected provinces, say humanitarian groups, and crops could be hit by 
landslides and flooding.

Timor-Leste

Severe drought delayed crop planting and has significantly reduced yields, and 
left many communities seriously short of water. According to the Ministry of 
Agriculture, nearly half the households across the country are likely to 
experience hunger,with around 120,000 people severely affected 
<http://www.unocha.org/el-nino-asia>. 
 