
El Salvador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/el-salvador> already has some 
of the most draconian anti-abortion laws in the world, but they could become 
even stricter if Congress adopts an opposition proposal to imprison women for 
up to 50 years if they terminate a pregnancy.

The Nationalist Republican Alliance (Arena) has submitted a motion to reform 
article 133 of the penal code, which stipulates the penalty for women who cause 
or consent to an abortion.

Making El Salvador's abortion law more punitive would compound injustice | 
Kelly Castagnaro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/14/el-salvador-abortion-law-increase-jail-sentences-more-punitive-compound-injustice-kelly-castagnaro>
Existing sentences range from two to eight years 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/07/el-salvador-scandalous-proposal-to-increase-jail-terms-for-women-accused-of-abortion/>
 – far higher than most countries, even in conservative Catholic Latin America 
– but the rightwing opposition wants to increase this from a minimum of 30 
years to a maximum of 50 years. This is equivalent to the sentence in El 
Salvador for aggravated murder with “extreme cruelty”.

A copy of the document seen by the Guardian claims the reform is necessary to 
keep penalties in line with a constitution that guarantees the right to life, 
which is defined as beginning from the moment of conception.

It also calls for maximum penalties for causing “negligent injury to the 
unborn” to be raised from 100 days to two years, and for “sale of products that 
induce abortion” to increase from 30 days to three years.

Amnesty International called the proposals scandalous and irresponsible. 
“Parliamentarians in El Salvador are playing a very dangerous game with the 
lives of millions of women,” said Erika Guevara-Rosas,Americas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas> director for the human rights 
group.

“Banning life-saving abortions in all circumstances is atrocious but seeking 
to raise jail terms for women who seek an abortion or those who provide support 
is simply despicable.”

The International Planned Parenthood Federation has also opposed the proposed 
increase in penalties, calling the move “shameful and irresponsible”.

Abortion rights around the world – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2014/oct/01/-sp-abortion-rights-around-world-interactive>
“The proposal to increase the existing sentences for women who have had 
abortions is not only an egregious human rights violation; it flies in the face 
of evidence showing that restricting access to abortion does not reduce the 
number of abortions,” said Kelly Castagnaro, a spokeswoman for IPPF’s western 
hemisphere region.

Since 1998, abortion in El Salvador has been banned in all circumstances. 
Injustices are rife. Civil Rights groups say17 women have been imprisoned for 
miscarriages or attempted terminations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/17/el-salvador-anti-abortion-law-premature-birth-miscarriage-attempted-murder>
. In some cases, abortions are already treated as murder. Pregnant women who 
turn up at hospitals bleeding are sometimes handcuffed to the bed. Others are 
forced to go through births even when their lives are at risk, such as Beatriz, 
a 22-year-old womanwho almost died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/30/el-salvador-deny-abortion-seriously-ill-woman>
 because she was not permitted to terminate her pregnancy with a foetus that 
was missing large parts of its brain and skull.

In most countries, abortion is legal. In Europe, even murder is not treated as 
harshly. In the UK, 14 years is the average length of sentence served by people 
jailed for murder.
 