
The Long String Instrument is exactly that – and then some. Stainless steel 
and phosphor bronze strings, 100-feet-long, are stretched taut across a room. 
Ellen Fullman, the instrument’s creator, places her fingers on the strings, 
pressing down as she moves the length of the instrument. A droning sound sweeps 
out like a prairie wind. “I feel like I’ve been miniaturised when I’m playing 
it,” Fullman says. “My whole body is a finger moving along a fretboard.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1NSl1U_3fII&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1NSl1U_3fII>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1NSl1U_3fII&media=>
The LSI <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uq9AFRMWLTU> has been Fullman’s 
obsession for more than 30 years, but is only now beginning to make waves. 
Having secured a major US arts grant last year, Fullman has “a very busy 
schedule” taking it to festivals in Paris and Bologna in the coming months. Its 
sound recalls Indian raga, with harmonies sliding over one another. Fullman 
says playing it “can be an ecstatic feeling, a floating sensation. Music is 
bigger than me: there are pitch relationships, shapes of notes beautiful beyond 
the level of human expression. I like that feeling of being a conduit. I don’t 
like egotistical thrashing. I like trying to give a gift.”

In effect, she turns herself into a human bow

The strings are connected to wooden resonators that act like the body of a 
guitar to amplify the sound. To bring it out further, Fullman rubs her fingers 
with rosin, the same substance used on bows. In effect, she turns herself into 
a human bow. The strings are 2cm apart and she can have up to 28 on each of the 
two sides of the instrument: “The number is only limited by the length of my 
arms: 60cm.”

The LSI began life in New York in 1983, after Fullman heard about composer 
Alvin Lucier’sMusic on a Long Thin Wire 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dwE4Jwk_zeI>. An early version, which featured 
a single wire with a mixing bowl full of water as a resonator, made “a chaotic, 
noisy sound”. She worked by day as a bookkeeper and chef to an art materials 
supplier “who only ate goat meat – these legs of goat boiled in the department 
where they mixed all the paint”, says Fullman. “He ate very loudly, with lots 
of slurping, on a desk covered in rat droppings. It was so New York.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F100-foot-instrument-long-string-ellen-fullman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6225d89b3815023811d9a388ec1e8a95b4f25b09%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ellen%20Fullman%3A%20how%20to%20play%20a%20100ft%20stringed%20instrument&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F100-foot-instrument-long-string-ellen-fullman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ellen%20Fullman%3A%20how%20to%20play%20a%20100ft%20stringed%20instrument&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F100-foot-instrument-long-string-ellen-fullman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6225d89b3815023811d9a388ec1e8a95b4f25b09%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 ‘I don’t like egotistical thrashing’ … Fullman plays the LSI 
Born in Memphis and kissed by Elvis as a baby, Fullman went to art school in 
Kansas and moved to Minneapolis before New York; she’s since lived in Austin, 
Seattle, Tokyo and Berlin, working as a graphic designer, an electrician and in 
building maintenance. “It’s only in the last few years that I’ve started to 
feel a kind of financial viability in music,” she says, having now settled in 
Berkeley, California. “Graphic design gave me skills I’ve used in my notation, 
and being an electrician demystified some of the equipment I work with. It’s 
great to feel self-sufficient as an artist, having an idea of plumbing, how to 
construct walls, how the world works.”

She was also initially a sculptor, making such one-off pieces as the 1980 work 
Streetwalker: a metal skirt with strings that connect to the wearer’s shoes. 
“This triangular skirt made me look like a female stick figure, and the strings 
were puppet-like, so I looked likePinocchio 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iAykOz1gWi4>.” She turned heads walking 
through Minneapolis. “One man leaned out of a phone booth and said, ‘D’ya need 
some oil?’ Another asked what planet I was from. I like something funny to be 
in my work, funny and serious. The Long String Instrument has a ridiculous 
aspect to it too – it’s absurd!”

And the serious side of Streetwalker? “As a young female wearing a skirt, 
you’re very vulnerable,” she says. “So the skirt was like armour. I’ve been 
sexually assaulted in public wearing a skirt. Women always have to deal with 
being victims – you have to protect yourself. Skirts are also stereotypically 
female, and the female stereotype is that you are less capable than a male, so 
I rejected that. It was the last time I wore a skirt.”

I've designed it to fit into my luggage

In fact, she rejected everything that society expected her to be as a woman, 
including heterosexuality. “When I saw women serving the food and clearing the 
dishes the way they do, especially in Europe – taking on that stereotypical 
gender role – it was enough to make me want to go gay. It’s kind of a crass way 
to put it. But I couldn’t stand that feeling of being subjected, of being less 
equal.”

Fullman continues to finesse the LSI. “Sometimes when I’m playing, it seems 
like something special is happening,” she says. “Other times, it seems more of 
a failure.” What about transportation costs? Does an instrument this large not 
need roadies? “I’ve designed it to fit into my luggage,” she says proudly, “and 
to weigh just under the baggage limit. But I’m not a huge person – and dragging 
this sack, it’s is not very freeing.”

She laughs. “I sometimes think, ‘Could I have found more mainstream success if 
I were a man?’ But on the other hand, I am dragging around this 100-foot-long 
instrument wherever I go. And it requires five days of installation. I’ve got 
this monkey on my back.”

 * Ellen Fullman <http://ellenfullman.com> plays the Sonic Protest festival 
<http://www.sonicprotest.com>, Paris, 6 April, and the Angelica festival 
<http://www.aaa-angelica.com/splash.html>, Bologna, 5-6 May. She is coming to 
Australia forSydney festival 2017 <http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/>.



 <http://aaa-angelica.com/>
 