
As the globalised workforce evolves and the technology used within it changes, 
so too will our roles as workers. For employees of tomorrow, many of the things 
that define ‘work’ for us today may simply no longer apply. From fixed working 
hours and career paths to defined workspaces and physical tools, today’s static 
views are rapidly giving way to more fluid models built on adaptability and 
reinvention, all underpinned by technology, networks and the information 
sharing economy.

In the future, more than ever, career longevity and success will require the 
continual adaptation and upgrading of skills. The traditional career ladder 
will be a thing of the past, replaced by a lattice model – where employees can 
move in different directions, rather than just up, allowing them to tap into 
new networks.

Speaking at the Future of Work conference held in Melbourne earlier this year, 
Jan Owen, Foundation for Young Australians CEO, said the “old paradigms of the 
corporate ladder or the idea of becoming just a job seeker are now over”.

“Work is being seriously disrupted,” she said. “For the next generation of 
young people, they are likely to have 17 jobs in five different industries. The 
other thing that’s going to happen is that people are going to be in work for a 
much longer time. The future workforce wants to know: why are we doing what 
we’re doing; where are we going; how are we going to get there; what’s my 
unique contribution and how am I going to know that I’ve contributed to 
something bigger than myself?” For the employers of tomorrow, demonstrating 
they stand for something bigger than just profit, and making sure their 
workforce feels like they’re part of that, is going to be key to attracting and 
retaining top talent.

As well as this desire for a more fulfilling and rewarding working life, 
employees of tomorrow will be competing increasingly on a global level. 
According to ‘Future Inc’, a report by Deloitte Australia, the combination of 
greater global economic integration and technological advancements has led to 
the rise of the “virtual global worker”. The report found that many of these 
global-scale jobs would not have been around 10 or 15 years ago, and that as 
new technologies develop we will continue to see significant growth in roles 
that may not currently exist.

Networks and the ever-expanding means we have to interact with data, people 
and intelligent systems, will be the driving force behind these new global 
roles. Being able to identify and leverage new opportunities at the 
intersections of people and systems will be a key skill for success in the 
future workplace: Bot Lobbyist anyone?

A global workforce brings more than just jobs. According to Fiona Monfrooy, 
Executive Director of Human Resources at ING DIRECT Australia, the benefits of 
global synergy are substantial.

“By also taking into account local influences and ways of doing things, you 
end up with a real diversity of thought which, I believe, is key to innovation 
and progression,” she says. “The pace of change globally is immense yet varied, 
so colleagues in some countries will likely be more progressive in certain 
areas, while colleagues in other countries will have different experiences to 
contribute.

Old paradigms of the corporate ladder or the idea of becoming just a job 
seeker are now over.
Jan Owen, Foundation for Young Australians CEO 
“We can all learn from each other, share successes and frequently adapt 
innovations to take into account regional distinctions. I’ve seen numerous 
examples within ING Group whereby ideas have been initiated and implemented in 
one country successfully, then rolled out to others as best practice.”

Along with globalisation, for the first time in decades, employees of the 
future will find themselves in a workplace that’s home to at least five 
generations – each bringing its own benefits and attributes. Owen describes it 
as “the most significant change since the industrial revolution” and says that 
while young people will bring the critical digital literacy skills to the 
workforce, skills connected to confidence, presentation and communication are 
just as crucial to success – many of which are held by older and more 
experienced employees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Femployees-of-tomorrow-how-to-thrive-in-a-disrupted-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c93c46827f55ad507b726a974e16d0592b953a2%2F1028_0_4731_7710%2F4731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Employees%20of%20tomorrow%20-%20how%20to%20thrive%20in%20a%20disrupted%20workplace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Femployees-of-tomorrow-how-to-thrive-in-a-disrupted-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Employees%20of%20tomorrow%20-%20how%20to%20thrive%20in%20a%20disrupted%20workplace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Femployees-of-tomorrow-how-to-thrive-in-a-disrupted-workplace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c93c46827f55ad507b726a974e16d0592b953a2%2F1028_0_4731_7710%2F4731.jpg>
 Photograph: Klaus Vedfelt/Getty Images 
“For the first time ever, we are really clear that technical skill must be 
balanced with what we describe as enterprising skills. Things like 
collaboration, innovation, and entrepreneurial spirit and mindset.”

Technology will also help to shape the face – and careers – of future workers. 
In the 2015 report ‘Australia’s Future Workforce?’, Sue Beitz, former Head of 
Secretariat at the Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency wrote that 
while the impacts of technological change will take time to appear, and will 
vary across industries, we can safely assume that some workers will find their 
skills are complementary to new technologies while others will find themselves 
out of work.

“Data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics point to the growing importance 
of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) skills in the labour 
market,” Betiz says. “Between 2006 and 2011, the total number of people (both 
with and without higher level STEM qualifications) employed in the 10 most 
common STEM occupations grew 14 per cent. This was greater than the nine 
percent growth across all other occupation groups. This trend looks set to 
continue with the Australian Government Chief Scientists 2014 report ‘Science, 
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics: Australia’s Future’, finding 
indications that “… 75 per cent of the fastest growing occupations now require 
STEM skills and knowledge”

“The number of people employed as design, engineering, science and transport 
professionals increased 23 per cent between 2006 and 2011. There was also 
strong growth among information and communications technology (ICT) 
professionals (19 per cent), and engineering, ICT and science technicians (19 
percent).”

However, Beitz says that in its report into the future demand for ICT skills, 
the Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency noted that ICT skills and 
capabilities are important for all workers, not just those engaged in 
specialist ICT roles.

But future success for employees of tomorrow depends on more than just ICT 
skills.

“As the pace of change increases, the need to not only keep up but to be ahead 
of the game is even more important,” Monfrooy says. “It’s as much about mindset 
as it is skill set. You need to be curious and also resilient to thrive in an 
environment of change. Irrespective of what the future holds, it’s about being 
adaptable and even thriving in change and consistently seeking ways to stay a 
step ahead.

“Skills such as great leadership and communication don’t fundamentally change, 
it’s how we apply them that does: how we will engage and lead future 
generations, how we lead our people through change. People will need to be more 
accountable for their own careers, be the ones to push themselves beyond what 
they thought was possible, to think like an owner, be adaptable, and even drive 
change.”

While it’s impossible to predict exactly what is in store for the employee of 
tomorrow, one thing is clear: it will not be just one career path, but many 
that will require the constant development of both technical skills and 
adaptable mindsets to navigate successfully.

US futurist and author Jacob Morgan has named seven “principles” of the future 
employee, as detailed in his bookThe Future of Work. They are:


1. Has a flexible work environment


Employees are no longer bound to the office but location independent as long 
as they have WiFi.


A future without cash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/ing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world/2016/sep/29/a-future-without-cash>
2. Can customize own work


The concept of being hired in one role for a long-term career is dead. 
Employees will be able to shape their career paths and choose projects to work 
on.


3. Shares information


Employees who share their ideas and information and use collaborative 
technologies and internal social networks will be the ones who succeed.


4. Uses new ways to communicate and collaborate


Many emergent technologies such as internal collaboration platforms are going 
to start to replace email in many situations. Employees will need to embrace 
this.


5. Can become a leader


Employees have the unique opportunity to become leaders within their 
organisations by sharing their ideas and feedback in a public and transparent 
way for their peers, managers and executives to see.


6. Shifts from knowledge worker to learning worker


Employees start “learning to learn” by embracing the ability to learn new 
things and apply those learnings to new scenarios and environments.


7. Learns and teaches at will


Technology has connected employees and information together anywhere, anytime, 
so learning and teaching can happen between employees without official 
corporate training programs or manuals.

 