
Stricter rules are needed to stop private businesses exploiting unemployed 
people doing unpaid work experience now the scheme is linked to the Abbott 
government’s mandatory work-for-the-dole requirements, the union movement 
argues.


The new draft tender for the outsourced jobs placement system – worth $5.1bn 
over the next three years and released last week – states that “jobseekers will 
be able to participate in up to four weeks of unpaid work experience at any 
point while they are unemployed, including as part of their work-for-the-dole 
activity”.

It says the “unpaid work experience placements have been limited to a maximum 
of four weeks duration to ensure that there is no displacement of existing or 
potential paid employees”, that unpaid work experience would count towards the 
required 25-hours-a-week work for the dole (15 hours for over-30s) and would be 
allowed in not for profit agencies, local councils and the private sector.

A spokesman for the assistant employment minister, Luke Hartsuyker, said 
current guidelines would continue to apply for unpaid work experience, 
including that employment providers should “monitor” employers seeking 
“back-to-back” work experience placements and a ban on employers taking on 
unpaid work experience workers if they had downsized their paid workforce in 
the previous 12 months.

The guidelines say unpaid work experience “must not involve the jobseeker 
doing work that results in the reduction or replacement of any existing paid 
workers and/or any paid worker’s hours of employment.”

But under the previous scheme unpaid work experience was a voluntary option 
for jobseekers. Now, with the government estimating 150,000 unemployed are 
likely to be required to work for the dole within 12 months, jobseekers may 
have little choice but to take on unpaid work experience to make up their 
required hours in regions where work-for-the-dole placements are in short 
supply.

The president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Ged Kearney, said she 
had grave concerns that once unpaid work experience was linked to the mandatory 
work-for-the-dole requirements “the safeguards may no longer be enough to 
protect people from exploitation”.

“Who is going to decide whether someone is missing out on a paid position, who 
is going to monitor whether a business has downsized in the past 12 months … we 
are concerned that there are too many loopholes and once all these people are 
forced into work for the dole and into unpaid work experience, they will end up 
doing work for free that could have provided a fully paying job,” she said.

David Thompson, chief executive of Jobs Australia, the peak body for 
not-for-profit job service providers, said the government would need to “keep a 
close eye on things” to make sure the safeguards continued to work.

“Unpaid work experience has been possible before, but not as an alternative 
for mandatory work for the dole,” he said. “If it is well managed, unpaid work 
experience can be a very good thing. The question is how the government intends 
to implement and monitor it … and how it will make sure it isn’t exploited by 
employers.

“Given the massive expansion of the program, many more job service providers 
will choose unpaid work experience options, so the government is going to have 
to keep a close eye on things.”

The tender is for the job placement rules that will operate from July 2015, 
and includes the controversial proposal that job seekers apply for 40 positions 
a month. The government is undertaking one month’s public consultation on the 
plan.
 