
At a dispensary in Nyaluoyo village in western Kenya, there is just one 
midwife on duty. There are three women in labour, about 40 children waiting to 
be vaccinated, and another 15 people with other ailments.

 It is 3pm and the lone midwife has yet to take lunch. She does not earn 
enough to buy school books for her own child, and she cannot meet other basic 
monthly needs. She has participated in health worker strikes in the past to 
push for higher salaries, but to no avail.

'My mother did everything but she was left to bleed to death after giving 
birth' | Alon Mwesigwa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/14/maternal-child-mortality-uganda-citizens-hearings-white-ribbon-alliance>
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> has taken great strides in 
developing a favourable policy environment for reproductive and maternal 
health. But this positive environment has not translated into better health for 
African women, because it has not been supported by the funding required for 
implementation.

In 2001, 189 African heads of states and governments met in Abuja, Nigeria 
<http://www.who.int/healthsystems/publications/Abuja10.pdf>, where they 
committed to spending at least 15% of their annual budgets on improving the 
health sector (although it is important to note that even this level of 
commitment is not adequate to meet needs across the continent).

Ten years on, 
<http://www.who.int/healthsystems/publications/abuja_report_aug_2011.pdf?ua=1> 
only six countries had kept this promise. Fourteen years later and the vision 
seems to have been lost altogether, with 11 countries actually reducing their 
relative contributions during the period.

The consequences are tragic, with maternal health epitomising the impact that 
underfunding can have on a health system. Too many Africans, including mothers, 
are dying of preventable diseases. The main causes include weak health systems 
characterised by poor infrastructure, inadequate supplies of drugs and 
equipment, a critical shortage of health workers, and weak management capacity.

A woman living in sub-Saharan Africa has a one in 16 chance of dying in 
pregnancy <http://www.unicef.org/mdg/maternal.html>or childbirth, compared with 
a one in 4,000 risk in a developing country. The major causes of maternal 
deaths are preventable ones, including haemorrhage, infection, hypertensive 
diseases and unsafe abortion.

Your stories on childbirth and maternal healthcare around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/your-stories-childbirth-maternal-healthcare-around-the-world>
For reasons beyond their control, more than half of African women deliver at 
home without the services of a skilled birth attendant. It is estimated that 
sub-Saharan Africaneeds 551,000 additional midwives 
<http://amref.org/standup/standup/news/latest-news/international-day-of-the-midwife-5-may-2014/>
 by the end of 2015 to bridge its deficit, a tall order that cannot be met with 
the meagre resources currently committed to health systems.

In fact, at the current rate of increase in midwife numbers, it will take an 
estimated 29 years to reach theWorld Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/91/11/13-021113/en/>’s recommended numbers 
in Africa.


As 2015 progresses, it is becoming increasingly obvious that countries in 
Africa will not meet millennium development goal five, which aimed toreduce 
maternal mortality by 75% between 1990 and 2015. 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/maternal.shtml> In sub-Saharan Africa, for 
example,the figure has been reduced by 41% 
<http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Resources/Static/Products/Progress2013/English2013.pdf>
; in northern Africa, by 66%.


Amref Health Africa <http://amref.org/> works to bridge this gap by training 
cadres of community health workers, nurses and midwives – strengthening the 
provision of care at facility level, linking communities to formal health 
services and supporting the realignment of these services to community needs. 
We’re successful in our field, but in itself this – and the work of numerous 
NGOs – simply isn’t enough. It is imperative that governments devote more 
resources to their health systems.

Almost all African governments, for example, are yet to meet the target of 
committing 15% of their national budgets to health. Donor funding isestimated  
<http://www.equinetafrica.org/bibl/docs/McIfin092005.pdf>to account for more 
than a quarter of total healthcare funding in about 35% of African countries, 
while in 5% of countries more than half of all healthcare funding comes from 
external sources.


While this support is important, it is not sustainable. The lack of domestic 
resources devoted to healthcare is undermining the positive policy environment 
for maternal and reproductive health.


Millennium development goals 4 and 5: 15 achievements on reducing child 
mortality and better maternal health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/28/millennium-development-goals-4-and-5-15-achievements-child-mortality-maternal-health>
The Continental Policy Framework on Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights  
<http://pages.au.int/carmma/documents/continental-policy-framework-sexual-and-reproductive-health-and-rights>
and theMaputo Plan of Action <http://pages.au.int/pages/carmma/maputo> are key 
instruments guiding Africa’s efforts to achieve maternal health goals. The
Campaign on Accelerated Reduction of Maternal, Newborn, and Child Mortality in 
Africa <http://www.carmma.org/>, an initiative of the African Union 
<http://www.au.int/>, serves as a critical advocacy platform for improvement of 
maternal, newborn and child health, and has been launched in more than 40 of 
the 54 AU member states. The campaign has motivated national ownership of 
significant maternal, newborn, and child health initiatives.

Without adequate funding, however, these laudable initiatives lack teeth. 

Saving a mother is the most definite pathway to giving children the future 
they deserve. To eradicate poverty and underdevelopment, we must all commit to 
breaking the vicious cycle by making pregnancy and childbirth safer.

 * Dr Joachim Osur is head of reproductive and child health at Amref Health 
Africa <http://amref.org/>, based in Kenya
 