
The British property market’s post-crash boom will come to a halt in 2017 when 
house prices flatline after five years of increases, according to an industry 
forecast.

Uncertainty caused by the EU referendum and weaker consumer sentiment will 
result in two quiet years in the housing market, according to property firm
Savills <https://www.theguardian.com/business/savills>, with zero growth next 
year followed by a 2% rise in 2018.

In London and the east Midlands price growth will grind to a halt, while in 
the north of England, Wales and Scotland prices are expected to fall over the 
year, Savills said. Only the south of England outside the capital is expected 
to buck the trend, with growth of up to 2.5% predicted in some regions.


Releasing the annual forecasts, Savill’s UK head of residential research, 
Lucian Cook, saidthe referendum decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> had made predicting the 
market more challenging than ever.


Our society has lost control of housing – here's how to get it back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/26/social-housing-crisis-local-control-economics>
“The effect of Brexit is complicating a natural shift towards the later stages 
of the housing market cycle, when the strongest growth is seen beyond London 
and the south-east,” he said.

“What is clear is that the housing market does not like political and economic 
uncertainty and this points to a lower growth, lower transaction market across 
the board.”

Since June’s vote, estate agents have reported a fall in the number of sellers 
coming to the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/08/confidence-housing-market-house-prices-rising-brexit-vote-rics-surveyors>
. On Thursday, data from the website Housesimple showed that in four out of 
five towns there was a fall in the number of new listings last month.

Cook said he expected the number of homes changing hands to fall by 16% in 
2017 to just over 1.1m and that it would drop further the following year. This 
fall will be driven by a decline inbuy-to-let landlords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/06/landlords-lose-legal-challenge-buy-to-let-tax-changes-cherie-booth>
 following recent and impending tax changes. In April, the upfront cost of 
buying a rental property was increased with a new stamp duty surcharge, and 
from next spring the tax relief that landlords can claim on mortgage payments 
will start to fall.

On Wednesday, the UK’s largest building society, Nationwide, reported that 
prices had stalled in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/02/house-price-growth-nationwide>, 
and said that in some parts of the country affordability was being squeezed.

Cook said he expected first-time buyers to face “significant ongoing 
challenges in raising a deposit without financial assistance”, and that schemes 
such as the help-to-buy equity loan “look like they will need to become 
long-term features of government efforts to sustain housebuilding and home 
ownership”.
Property graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-03T15:54:51/embed.html>
Data compiled by Savills using its own research and figures from the Office 
for National Statistics shows the average cost of a UK home increased by 
£47,900 between August 2011 and the same month in 2016, to £214,000. Over the 
same period, prices in London went up by £192,100, to an average of £481,000, 
while at the other end of the scale the north-east saw prices rise by £10,100, 
to £122,000.

Growth is expected to be lower over the next five years, with Savills 
anticipating that UK prices will increase by £27,900 by December 2021, to 
£241,900.


 