
It’s been reported that the Hiddleswift meme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/15/taylor-swift-tom-hiddleston-dating-rumors-photos-beach>
, also known as Taylor Swift and Tom Hiddleston, is over after three months of 
inspiring reports on the internet just like this one.

Besides my devastation at not being able to make the alternate portmanteau 
“Swiddleston” happen, I am further saddened to think that these two celebrities 
might no longer be interested in dating for our amusement.

“Tom wanted the relationship to be more public than she was comfortable with,” 
a source close to the couple supposedlytold Us Weekly 
<http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-news/news/taylor-swift-tom-hiddleston-split-after-three-months-of-dating-w434036>
. “Taylor knew the backlash that comes with public displays of affection but 
Tom didn’t listen to her concerns.”

Surely I’m not the only one confused by the above statement. Tom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston> was the one who wanted the 
relationship to be public? Just him? I suppose all those beach photos were 
staged without her consent – that she just wanted to frolic on a pile of rocks 
without cameras present, because that’s a common pastime for regular folks like 
Taylor Swift.

More importantly, isn’t Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> famous for outing details of 
her relationships in her songs? Fans parse her lyrics for any clues as to the 
particulars of whatever high-profile coupling she’s most recently ended. Maybe 
the songs will be about Hiddleston, maybe they’ll be about Harris. The only 
thing you can count on is that her next album is on the way, and it will be 
about a breakup.

That’s why I’ve compiled a short list of song titles that Taylor Swift is 
welcome to use, in case she’s totally bereft of ideas when she gets into the 
studio to lay down the inevitable collection of raw diss tracks that cut Tom 
Hiddleston up like a Christmas ham and serve him out to an insatiable audience.

 * The Spy Who Dumped Me

 * Why Do You Call Them Knickers? 
 * Less Than Jake (Gyllenhaal) 
 * Somewhere in Brighton 
 * Devious 
 * Smash That ‘Like’ Button

 * You Changed the Netflix Password...to My Heart 
 * Three Yellow Bow Ties 
 * Soup Is Not a Meal (So Don’t Order It) 
 * This is a Song About Tom Hiddleston (The Dude Who Plays Loki) Trap Remix, 
feat. Fetty Wap



 