
Eric Dier departed England’s friendly with Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
 angrily accusing Ander Herrera of elbowing him in the face and claiming he 
would “see him soon” after a flashpoint that could linger into next month’s 
meeting between the players in the Premier League.

Adam Lallana’s cameo lights up Wembley until Spain punish England | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/15/adam-lallana-england-draw-with-spain-at-wembley>
Herrera made contact with Dier five minutes from time, at which stage Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> were still trailing their hosts 
2-0, in an occasionally bad-tempered match during which there were six 
bookings, with the Tottenham Hotspur midfielder so incensed he pursued the 
Manchester United player down the pitch to remonstrate. Upon being confronted, 
Herrera apparently denied any wrongdoing. “I think it’s pretty clear what he 
did and I can feel it on my cheek now,” the Spurs midfielder said as he left 
Wembley.

“I’ve made a pass and it was a long time afterwards [that] he’s elbowed me in 
the face, and I just can’t see why. For me, it’s just ridiculous. So I know 
what he did, and I don’t like that kind of stuff. I don’t mind people kicking 
each other at times and stuff, but that’s just dirty and not needed.”

Asked whether he had sought an apology, Dier said: “I don’t need him to 
apologise. I’ll see him soon … These things happen. But I don’t know why he did 
it, to be honest. That’s why I was angry. It was just strange and it’s not 
nice.” Spurs travel to Old Trafford on 11 December.

The Liverpool midfielder Adam Lallana left the stadium with an optimistic 
thumbs up having been withdrawn from the fray midway through the first half 
having sustained an ankle injury in a challenge from Thiago Alcãntara. He will 
be assessed by Liverpool’s medical staff before the weekend Premier League 
match against his former club, Southampton.
 