
They are among the hardest working men and women in football. Even before 
Spain arrive at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/wayne-rooney-injury-doubt-england-spain-friendly>
 on Tuesday night to provide the latest obstacle to the tottering baby steps of
Gareth Southgate’s tenure as England manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/12/fa-gareth-southgate-england-manager-candidates>
, those whose job it is to continue to fill Wembley began trumpeting their 
wares for March’s home qualifier against Lithuania.

No matter how big the humiliation or how small the pool of English talent, the 
masses keep trudging up Olympic Way for the friendlies and qualifying ties that 
keep the FA’s tills ringing and have helped contribute to a changed financial 
picture which, the FA chief executive Martin Glenn told an industry event last 
week, will boost its revenues by £100m a year. “The Wembley Stadium proposition 
is profitable, it is not a stone in our shoe any more,” he said.

FA plucks Gareth Southgate for England job from a bare cupboard | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/12/fa-gareth-southgate-england-manager-candidates>
Remarkably, more than 80,000 fans are expected at Wembley for the Spain match. 
A similar number turned up to watch theworkmanlike 2-0 victory over Malta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/england-malta-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
, Southgate’s first in charge following Sam Allardyce’s shambolic exit, and on 
Friday night the official attendance was 87,258 – bolstered by a big contingent 
of well refreshed but ultimately despondent Scots.

Question the value of some of those at the FA all you like, but there can be 
little doubt that those who fill Wembley through a combination of ticket 
offers, family deals and canny stretch pricing are earning their corn. And all 
this at a time when England’s stock has arguably never been lower.

Given the apathy and general feeling of tumbleweed blowing through the Sky 
Sports News studios when international week rolls around – particularly the 
breaks in October and November that interrupt the league season just as it is 
getting going – that is a remarkable achievement.

Likewise, the fact that an average of 7 million viewers watched England beat 
Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
 on ITV and this summer’shumiliating capitulation to Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 in Nice remained the most watched TV event of the year until the final of the 
Great British Bake Off proves that the half life of the national side’s once 
pre-eminent position in the national psyche remains long.

And yet. For all that, international football has never felt less loved or 
lower down the agenda. Most of those traversing the Jubilee line or the 
Metropolitan line to Wembley Park are after a fairly cheap, decent night out at 
a modern stadium with their family or friends. The result, it seems, matters 
rather less than it used to.

The atmosphere for a football match at Wembley increasingly feels 
interchangeable with that at any of the other mega-events it hosts, from pop 
concerts to NFL matches. The reasons are many and varied. The expanded size of 
the European Championship and the World Cup arguably makes these early 
qualification skirmishes even less exciting.

Some of it is generational and recent underperformance must be a factor. If 
you are 60, you can just about recall 1966. If you are 40, Italia 90 and Euro 
96 still loom large. If you are 15, then the best you can probably manage is a 
dim recollection ofmeek surrender in Bloemfontein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jun/27/germany-england-world-cup-2010>
.

Is the unthinkable happening – are people finally switching the football off? 
| Owen Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/sky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off>
Paradoxically, given the number of kids at Wembley on good value family 
tickets, many younger fans feel more engaged with their chosen club side – be 
it Arsenal or Barcelona – or even individual players, than their country.

But there is something wider at work too. An overload of televised football, 
the feeling that international football no longer represents the pinnacle of 
the sport and the sheer lack of quality on show must all contribute.

Friendlies <https://www.theguardian.com/football/friendlies> were the first to 
suffer from this creeping sense of ennui and it has now extended to the bloated 
qualifying process for major finals too. If Fifa follows through on plans to 
expand the World Cup to 48 nations, expect it to accelerate still further.

Still, at a time when there is a similarly complex and knotty debate raging 
about whetherthe public appetite for football generally is falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/sky-sports-bt-sport-people-switching-football-off>
 amid a feeling of oversaturation, perhaps the international break is doing the 
Premier League and its broadcasting paymasters the ultimate favour by prompting 
a yearning for its return.
 