
Aid workers are under attack. We are bleeding out from a thousand small cuts. 
We are being robbed, raped and murdered inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, South Sudan, Yemen, Syria and 
countless other places. The reaction from politicians, however, has been only 
words; promises to do better, pledges to investigate, condolences for our 
losses. Press releases and political assurances are not enough.

Stories of bombed hospitals and lost civilian lives have become all too 
common. Whether the death and violence comes from above – as in the devastating 
attackon the aid convoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/the-bombardment-was-continuous-the-rescue-teams-werent-even-able-to-work>
 near Aleppo – or from nearby, as in the brutalisation, rape and murder of aid 
workers in theTerrain Compound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/south-sudan-aid-worker-rape-attack-united-nations-un>
 in Juba, one fact remains the same: those in power with responsibilities to 
protect humanitarian aid workers have chosen instead to blatantly disregard 
their obligations under international humanitarian law.


Behind the headlines: daily life for Red Crescent workers in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/20/red-crescent-red-cross-syria-aleppo-aid>
Working to help populations in protracted crises and active conflict zones has 
always been, and will continue to be, a dangerous endeavour. Humanitarians know 
that. The families and friends that we leave behind know that. And all
humanitarians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/humanitarianshumanitarians>
, myself included, accept the risks that come with our chosen profession, 
trusting that our principles, our purpose, our organisation and our presence 
among the community will provide us with the security we need.
And in some places it does. I have witnessed amazing bravery and selflessness, 
both from colleagues but also from people who have already lost everything yet 
are willing to risk even more to protect those who came to help.

But there is no safety if governments and other parties to conflicts are 
allowed to act as if they have no responsibilities towards us, or see us as 
acceptable collateral damage. There is no safety when attacks are met with 
silence. When a colleague and I were in South Sudan last November, we heard of 
several recent violent attacks against aid workers. Despite clear confirmation 
of the incidents, none were reported or condemned publicly by the political 
leadership. The incidents became security anecdotes – devoid of humanity, 
dismissed as rumour. Impunity for prior attacks, the weakness of the United 
Nations Mission inSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> 
as a protection force, the negative local public campaign against NGOs, and the 
relentless intimidation of humanitarians were not the only factors, but all 
contributed in their own way to the Terrain incident.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fenough-is-enough-its-time-to-protect-aid-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70f503852730d0fc45a2802e67651bb6e6510608%2F0_308_5068_3040%2F5068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Enough%20is%20enough.%20It's%20time%20to%20protect%20aid%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fenough-is-enough-its-time-to-protect-aid-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Enough%20is%20enough.%20It%27s%20time%20to%20protect%20aid%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fenough-is-enough-its-time-to-protect-aid-workers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70f503852730d0fc45a2802e67651bb6e6510608%2F0_308_5068_3040%2F5068.jpg>
 Aid is seen strewn across the floor the morning after a convoy delivering aid 
to Aleppo was hit by a deadly air strike. Photograph: Omar Haj Kadour/AFP/Getty 
Images 
During my last trip to the border of Syria in May this year, my colleagues and 
I met with NGOs carrying out cross-border programmes. We spoke with aid workers 
who regularly travel back intoSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. 
They spoke of living under the constant threat of attack. We learned of the 
tenuousness of their lifeline to help, with access and security situations 
changing often daily.


The indiscriminate attacks from above on civilians, hospitals and rescue 
efforts in Syria have all been called out before, and yet they continue to 
happen. As with the Terrain incident, the recent savage and sickening attack on 
the aid convoy nearAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> is 
indicative of the increasing boldness by warring parties in wilfully ignoring 
their responsibilities to civilians.


During a maelstrom of insecurity, we are trapped between choosing ourselves or 
those we are working to serve

Humanitarian organisations cannot make appropriate safety and security 
decisions, from how to keep people safe to whether they even wish to work in 
Afghanistan, Syria,Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> or 
elsewhere, without accurate information on what risks exist. And we cannot 
assist and assure others when it is unclear who, if anyone, can be called upon 
to help aid workers when all else fails.


As a community uncomfortable with even having a day of commemoration to mark 
our sacrifices, humanitarians strive to ensure the conversation is not about 
ourselves, even when it may be costing us our lives. And so despite, or rather 
because of, the existence of intimidation, fear and mistrust, aid workers have 
grown ever more silent. During a maelstrom of insecurity, we are trapped 
between choosing ourselves or those we are working to serve.


Stories of attacks, robberies, rapes and murders keep arriving. Some are 
hidden, but some so widely reported by the press it is impossible for the world 
to ignore. The flurry of public statements about the Terrain incident, almost a 
month after it occurred but days after the story broke, further prove that some 
truths are only known when they are on the front page.

Tired of war: South Sudan street artists calling for peace - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/sep/21/tired-war-south-sudan-street-artists-calling-peace>
There comes a time when enough is enough, when even the most altruistic among 
us become angry. That time is now. World leaders must recognise and respect 
those who rush in to help when all others turn away, and provide humanitarians 
the protection they need and deserve.

Stop the attacks, and hold accountable those who seek to harm us. The time for 
talk is over.


Patricia McIlreavy is the vice president of Humanitarian Policy and Practice 
at InterAction, the largest US alliance of international relief and development 
organisations.
 