
The barbecue stoppers this summer will be freedom of speech, section 18C and 
political correctness gone mad, according to the conservative backbencherEric 
Abetz <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/eric-abetz>.


The conservative backbencher said those topics were talked about much more 
than the republic or the definition of marriage at the community events he 
attended.

The former Abbott minister urged his conservative colleagues to work within 
the system and reflect the values of the conservative base after reports that
Cory Bernardi and George Christensen were considering a split 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/a-conservatives-split-from-the-liberals-would-free-the-party-to-be-truly-liberal>
.

He made a thinly veiled swipe at the Turnbull leadership team, saying when he 
was Senate leader underTony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> he made an effort to 
reach out to all colleagues “irrespective of what their particular disposition 
might be”.

A conservatives split from the Liberals would free the party to be truly 
liberal | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/a-conservatives-split-from-the-liberals-would-free-the-party-to-be-truly-liberal>
“To ensure everybody had their voice heard, that nobody felt alienated, that 
there was genuine reward for effort within the Senate team as opposed to people 
being rewarded for the way they lined up or the way they voted,” Abetz said. “I 
think that is what we in theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> need to do again and get 
back to that.”

He urged the party to remain true to conservative values rather than indulge 
topics such as the republic and same-sex marriage, which were talked about only 
within the “Canberra bubble”.


“[Conservative voter] aspirations are to be able to balance their household 
budget, to have job security, to protect our borders, to have national 
security,” Abetz told Radio National.

“They’re the sort of things that excite them and concern them and, if I might 
say, it is not marriage, it is not republic, it is not those sort of things 
that often get spoken about in the Canberra bubble within the cities at coffee 
shops but can I tell you they are not spoken about at community barbecues or at 
the workplace lunch rooms.”

Abetz, who has been a politician for more than 20 years, said he knew what 
people were concerned about outside the Canberra bubble because he was “out and 
about, listening to people, not watching ABC24 or Sky News 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week”.

“Actually being out there in the community being at school assemblies, at the 
local men’s shed barbecue the other day ... it is interesting what topics are 
raised and I can I tell you republic is not raised, marriage is not raised,” 
Abetz said.

Abetz said freedom of speech and political correctness were the big issues 
being discussed and he quoted polls to justify support for changing section 18C 
of the Racial Discrimination Act. However, he rejected thestrong support in 
polls for marriage equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/20/marriage-equality-poll-finds-majority-support-for-a-free-vote-if-plebiscite-blocked>
.

“People talk about the right to freedom of speech, political correctness gone 
mad, they seeBill Leak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/28/malcolm-turnbull-declares-bill-leak-is-not-a-racist>
 and theQUT students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/qut-computer-lab-racial-discrimination-lawsuit-thrown-out>
, which got a lot of mainstream media people, so yes, people were talking about 
that,” Abetz said.

Most MPs and senators want to ditch monarchy, says Australian Republican 
Movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/most-mps-and-senators-want-to-ditch-monarchy-says-australian-republican-movement>
Abetz rejected the suggestion that the push to remove “insult” and “offend” 
from the Racial Discrimination Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/gillian-triggs-says-replacing-insult-and-offend-could-strengthen-18c>
 was only of concern inside Canberra and might be considered in the same 
category as the republic and marriage equality.

He said 18C had developed into a mainstream issue because polls showed 
overwhelmingly people wanted change. He chastised interviewer Hamish Macdonald 
for using the term “marriage equality”.

“Once again, the ABC betrays itself when you talk about marriage equality as 
opposed to changing the definition of marriage,” he said. “And when you talk to 
people in the streets, can I tell you the issue of changing the foundational 
institution of our society does not rate.”

Abetz called on the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> to take stock and 
consider why it had lost some of its support base, haemorrhaging 1.7m votes at 
the last election.

“I think the reason is we have not necessarily appealed as we should to our 
natural core constituency with some of the conservative values that myself and 
others share.”

He quoted the rule in politics that “disunity is death” and said it was best 
to work within the system because the Liberal party voter base was 
overwhelmingly of a conservative disposition and expected a centre-right 
government.
 