
The hulking waste-to-energy power plant taking shape on the edge of Addis 
Ababa, Ethiopia’s capital, symbolises ambitions to convert the agrarian Horn of
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> country into an eco-friendly 
industrial powerhouse.

The government’s $120m (£76.8m) Reppie project 
<http://www.eepco.gov.et/abouttheproject.php?pid=27&pcatid=9>, being built to 
EU emissions standards, will incinerate the city’s rubbish to generate 50MW of 
electricity. A computer-generated image on display at the site shows the future 
factory shrouded by a tree-filled park.


In about a year, green, cutting-edge Reppie will replace a vast rubbish dump 
picked over by hundreds of scavengers. Currently, toxic effluent from the 
landfill seeps into nearby rivers when it rains and methane perpetually drifts 
into the atmosphere.

The power plant is just one facet of Ethiopia’s four-year-old climate 
resilient green economy 
<http://www.undp.org/content/dam/ethiopia/docs/Ethiopia%20CRGE.pdf> (CRGE) 
strategy, which aims for the nation to become middle-income by 2025 while 
limiting its carbon footprint to less than 2010 levels by 2030.

“In doing this we ensure our development is sustainable, and another thing is 
we ensure we contribute positively to the global interest,” said the minister 
of environment and forest,Belete Tafere 
<http://www.landscapes.org/glf-2014/speaker/h-e-belete-tafere/>.

Regreening program to restore one-sixth of Ethiopia's land
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/30/regreening-program-to-restore-land-across-one-sixth-of-ethiopia>
Successful implementation of the plan, formally presented 
<http://www.ccchina.gov.cn/archiver/ccchinacn/UpFile/Files/Default/20150611133252368919.pdf>
 to the UN last month, would mean a reversal of existing trends in a nation 
that regularly suffers droughts and floods. Ethiopia’s deforested, intensively 
cultivated highlands are degraded and eroded. The capital has ageing vehicles 
spewing fumes and a dearth of green public spaces, while its rivers are choked 
with garbage.

The CRGE initiative has four pillars: renewable energy, modernising 
agriculture, reforestation and adopting energy-efficient technology. Ethiopia’s 
hydropower possibilities, in the government’s eyes, resolve the inherent 
tension in industrialising while trying to curb emissions.

Although Ethiopia produces only 2,300MW of power for 96 million people – 
compared with the UK’s 110,000MW for a population of 64 million – mountainous 
terrain and nine river basins give it the potential for45,000MW from hydropower 
<http://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/19482_0611bp_verhoeven.pdf>
. Developing dams, while also investing in wind, solar and geothermal energy, 
should create the ability to power a manufacturing boom without burning fossil 
fuels.

“We are absolutely going to depend on the renewable resources for our energy 
development,” Belete said. “Industries are going to use only energy from the 
grid that is renewable.”

An initial plank of the CRGE is slotting into place with the imminent 
completion 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-03-18/ethiopia-s-largest-hydro-plant-to-produce-electricity-this-year>
 of the 1,870MWGibe III hydropower station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/13/ethiopia-gibe-iii-dam-kenya>
. Despite Ethiopia’s dire need for power, western pressure groups such as 
International Rivers are up in arms over the $1.8bn project. They claim it will 
facilitate large-scale irrigation that will have a devastating impact on up to 
500,000 people by drying out Lake Turkana.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fethiopia-powers-up-ambitions-for-green-industry-economy-climate-resilient%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc456d43daee0798db748824a0b1ed0f2862031cb%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ethiopia%20powers%20up%20ambitions%20for%20green%20industry%20%7C%20William%20Davison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fethiopia-powers-up-ambitions-for-green-industry-economy-climate-resilient%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ethiopia%20powers%20up%20ambitions%20for%20green%20industry%20%7C%20William%20Davison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fethiopia-powers-up-ambitions-for-green-industry-economy-climate-resilient%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc456d43daee0798db748824a0b1ed0f2862031cb%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 The Grand Renaissance Dam under construction near the Sudanese-Ethiopia border 
in March this year. The 6,000MW capacity will make it Africa’s largest power 
plant. Photograph: Zacharias Abubeker/AFP/Getty Images 
The government ramped up its hydropower programme in 2011 by beginning the 
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam on the Blue Nile. The 6,000MW capacity will 
make it Africa’s largest power plant.

 Tapping into this clean energy, along with factories, will be public 
transport – including a 5,000km electrified rail network. The government has 
already used Chinese loans and contractors to build a track to Djibouti’s port 
from Addis Ababa, as well as a light rail system in the city.

One obvious barrier to achieving all the CRGE goals in a growing but still 
poor economy is finding the required $150bn investment, Belete admits. Astudy 
<http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/8995.pdf>
 by the UK’s Overseas Development Institute (ODI) estimated the government’s 
annual resources to be $440m when $7.5bn a year is needed.

New development goals need to be ambitious, actionable and accountable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/08/new-development-goals-ambitious-actionable-accountable-sustainable-development>
The 2014 ODI study also noted that “considerable investments” are required to 
ensure the local governments responsible implement the CRGE. The upside is that 
Ethiopia’s semi-authoritarian system is ideally set up for mobilising 
communities to engage in activities such as tree planting, as well as 
water-harvesting projects and constructing terracing to prevent soil erosion.

The finance ministry has set up a CRGE facility to pool donor climate-finance 
funds, but the level of contributions will depend on how much victims of 
climate change such asEthiopia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> are 
compensated by the industrialised nations that have caused it.

Full implementation of the plan is “contingent upon an ambitious multilateral 
agreement being reached among parties that enables Ethiopia to get 
international support and that stimulates investments”, the government said of
forthcoming climate change talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/global-climate-talks> in its UN 
submission. High-level negotiations resume in Paris in December.

While that process continues, Ethiopia is exploring all options, including 
private investment. Ken Montler and his US companies Pangea andGlobal Electric 
Transport <http://getevee.com/>(GET) see commercial opportunity in Ethiopia’s 
eco-friendly vision. Following a successful venture in the Philippines, Pangea 
plans to assemble electric buses in the country that will be used in a 
GET-managed public transport system.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fethiopia-powers-up-ambitions-for-green-industry-economy-climate-resilient%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66015fd5868013a0cc16b0c66fdd98498a68dcce%2F0_209_4549_2981%2F4549.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ethiopia%20powers%20up%20ambitions%20for%20green%20industry%20%7C%20William%20Davison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fethiopia-powers-up-ambitions-for-green-industry-economy-climate-resilient%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ethiopia%20powers%20up%20ambitions%20for%20green%20industry%20%7C%20William%20Davison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fethiopia-powers-up-ambitions-for-green-industry-economy-climate-resilient%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66015fd5868013a0cc16b0c66fdd98498a68dcce%2F0_209_4549_2981%2F4549.jpg>
 Camels walk along the road near turbines at Ashegoda wind farm in Ethiopia’s 
northern Tigray region. The farm has a capacity of 120MW. Photograph: AFP/Getty 
Images 
Montler says the Nile megadam and technological leapfrogging to electric 
trains and vehicles gives Ethiopia a chance of being carbon-neutral in the next 
decade. “You really have to be electric to hit those kind of numbers,” he said.

Critical for success is the trajectory of agriculture, with livestock 
emissions of methane and nitrous oxide responsible for42% of the total in 2010 
<http://unfccc.int/files/cooperation_and_support/capacity_building/application/pdf/ethiopia_indc.pdf>
. However, the approach to the sector thatemploys 80% of Ethiopians 
<https://www.farmafrica.org/ethiopia/ethiopia> lacks the coherence of the 
renewable energy plan.

It hinges partly on boosting productivity by methods such as mechanisation, 
higher yielding seeds, irrigation, using organic fertilisers and “efficiency 
improvement to the livestock value chain” – strategies thataren’t a marked 
departure 
<http://www.future-agricultures.org/publications/research-and-analysis/research-papers/97-agriculture-growth-and-poverty-reduction-in-ethiopia-policy-processes-around-the-new-prsp-pasdep/file>
 from decades-old attempts to modernise a sector dominated by subsistence 
farming on dwindling highland plots and pastoralism in semi-arid areas.

The plan also rests on an assumption that agriculture’s importance will reduce 
as Ethiopia follows a well-trodden path to prosperity via industrialisation and 
urbanisation, Belete said. “As the country is moving for transformation, people 
could have an interest in depending on different livelihoods. Now, they don’t 
have any other options.”
 