
In Gondar, a city in Ethiopia’s northern highlands, a lone tourist pauses to 
take a photo of a fortress built more than two centuries ago. Nearby, past a 
row of gift shops, lies the wreck of a coach torched during unrest in August.

Gondar, known as “Africa’s Camelot 
<http://www.ethiopia.travel/attractions/gondar-camelot-africa>”, was once the 
centre of the Ethiopian empire – at a time when that empire was defined mainly 
by Amhara traditions.
Today, the city is facing new tensions that have a complex history. A 
territorial dispute between elites here in the Amhara region and those in 
neighbouring Tigray has been simmering for at least 25 years.

State of emergency likely to ramp up repression in fractured Ethiopia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/20/state-of-emergency-likely-ramp-up-repression-fractured-ethiopia>
Tigrayans have been accused by opponents of wielding undue influence over 
Ethiopia’s government and security agencies since 1991. In recent months, these 
and other grievances have led to protests, strikes, vandalism and killings in 
Gondar, causing a drastic reduction in foreign visitors to the 
tourism-dependent city and an exodus of fearful Tigrayans.

Shops and schools have reopened in Gondar, after the authorities reasserted 
control in urban areas by declaring astate of emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/20/state-of-emergency-likely-ramp-up-repression-fractured-ethiopia>
 on 8 October. But sporadic clashes with the military continue in the 
countryside.
“We don’t feel like it is our country. We feel like it is the time when the 
Italians invaded. We are like second-class citizens,” says a prosperous local 
businessman. Like all interviewees, he requested anonymity due to fear of 
reprisals from the authorities. Europeans never colonised Ethiopia, but 
Mussolini’s army occupied the country from 1936 to 1941.

Gondar’s predicament is a microcosm of Ethiopia’s: a toxic brew of uneven 
development, polarised debate amid a virtual media vacuum, contested history, 
ethnic tensions, a fragmented opposition and an authoritarian government. 
Ethiopia’s rulers show few signs of being able to solve the morass of problems, 
which many believe the government itself caused.

Trouble began in Gondar in July, when word went around that the authorities 
intended to arrest Col Demeke Zewdu, a former rebel and retired military 
officer.When security forces tried to arrest Zewdu, who is a member of a 
committee campaigning over thecontested Wolkait territory 
<http://welkait.com/?page_id=121>, armed Amharas protected him and several 
people, including security officers, were killed.

Wolkait is an administrative district in Tigray that borders Amhara. The 
committee says Wolkait and others areas were taken out of Gondar’s control by 
the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front in 1992, whenEthiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> was divided into a federation 
along ethno-linguistic lines. Allied rebels led by the TPLF, who unseated a 
military regime in 1991, introduced the system and still monopolise power.

Critics of the committee point out 
<http://hornaffairs.com/en/2011/06/05/reality-check-tigray-annexed-amhara-lands/>
 that a 1994 census found more than 96% of the people of Wolkait were Tigrayan 
, and that the complaints of annexation stem from the town of Gondar, not the 
district itself. The activists say the TPLF moved Tigrayans into the area 
during the rebellion.

The issue struck a chord in Gondar. After Demeke’s arrest, rural militiamen 
paraded through the city on 31 July, firing bullets into the air during a 
large, peaceful demonstration. It is thought that the demonstration was 
facilitated by the Amhara wing of the TPLF-founded Ethiopian People’s 
Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) – a four-party coalition that, along 
with allied organisations, controls all the country’s legislative seats.

A Tigrayan lecturer at Gondar University said he abhors Ethiopia’s ethnicised 
politics and believes jostling between the Amhara and Tigrayan EPRDF wings lay 
behind the Gondar violence. The TPLF is the predominant party in the EPRDF, and 
Amhara National Democratic Movement politicians are seeking greater power, he 
said. “I don’t believe in parties which are organised on ethnicity. I prefer it 
to be based on the individual.” An end to ethnic politics would make a 
resolution of the Wolkait issue possible, he believes.

Among activists from Amhara, disavowal of the ethnicity-based system is at the 
crux of disagreements over how to oppose the EPRDF. Because federalism formally 
protects the rights of communities marginalised during previous eras, when 
Ethiopia was a unitary state, promoting national unity at the expense of ethnic 
autonomy is often cast as regressive.

Groups promoting Amhara identity within a democratised federation are 
therefore at odds with those focused on national cohesion, according to 
Wondwesen Tafesse, a commentator on Amhara issues. “Since most diaspora Amharas 
support Ethiopianist political parties, they seem to have this fear in the back 
of their mind that a resurgent Amhara nationalism, and the possible emergence 
of a strong Amhara political organisation, might undermine their political 
designs,” said Wondwesen.

In the weeks after Demeke’s detainment, there was more unrest, amid 
allegations that Tigrayan businesses were being targeted and Tigrayans 
attacked. People in Gondar say the companies were targeted because of their 
connections with the regime, rather than the owners’ ethnicity.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgondar-ethiopia-ethnic-tensions-toxic-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e809fc87c92b0d92dbd4f36e9a522458829f5f3%2F0_0_2854_1897%2F2854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ethnic%20tensions%20in%20Gondar%20reflect%20the%20toxic%20nature%20of%20Ethiopian%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgondar-ethiopia-ethnic-tensions-toxic-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ethnic%20tensions%20in%20Gondar%20reflect%20the%20toxic%20nature%20of%20Ethiopian%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgondar-ethiopia-ethnic-tensions-toxic-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e809fc87c92b0d92dbd4f36e9a522458829f5f3%2F0_0_2854_1897%2F2854.jpg>
 Amba Giorgis town in the North Gondar district of Ethiopia’s Amhara region. A 
territorial dispute has recently caused clashes between farmers and the military
Unrest in Amhara was preceded by protests by the Oromo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/18/ethiopia-oromia-farmland-development-fatal-clashes>
, Ethiopia’s largest ethnic group, who also complain of marginalisation and 
repression. In response, the government has reshuffled officials – and 
intensified repression. During the state of emergency,the government has sent 
at least 24,000 people to camps 
<http://www.waltainfo.com/news/editors_pick/detail?cid=26417> for 
indoctrination under rules that allow the suspension of due process. According 
to the Association for Human Rights in Ethiopia, security forces killed some600 
demonstrators over the past year 
<https://ahrethio.org/2016/09/02/ahre-urges-ethiopia-to-end-use-of-lethal-and-excessive-force-against-civilians/>
.

Since the beginning of November, a new federal cabinet has been announced and 
similar changes made in the Amhara government. But while maladministration and 
corruption were tagged as the pre-eminent problems, there is little evidence of 
officials being punished, or of policy reforms. An Amhara government spokesman 
said systemic changes were not required.


In August, on the outskirts of Gondar near Demeke’s neighbourhood, a crowd 
looted Baher Selam hotel. It was targeted following a rumour that the Tigrayan 
security officers allegedly involved in the operation to arrest the colonel 
were staying there.


Near the wrecked hotel, an elderly lady was roasting coffee beans. On the 
morning of the incident she was coming home from church when she heard 
gunshots.Business has since declined and large numbers of unemployed young 
people have been mobilised against the government, she said.


People here believe Wolkait was part of Gondar throughout history. “If they 
take that place, where else are they going to take?” the woman asked. “The 
situation is not going to go back to normal. If you light a match, it’s small – 
but it can burn a whole area.”
 