
Well, 2016 has been a heck of a year – so we’re going to see it out in the 
best way possible: with a candid discussion about the best, worst and most 
interesting moments from the world of video games.

On 15 December, the Guardian games section is holding its annual review of the 
year event at our London headquarters. Joining games editor Keith Stuart on 
stage will be Tomb Raider writer Rhianna Pratchett, comedian and broadcaster
Ellie Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/13/tomb-raider-lara-croft-20-years>
 (from hit Dave show,Dara O Briain’s Go 8 Bit 
<http://dave.uktv.co.uk/shows/dara-o-briains-go-8-bit/>), and designer and 
academic Phoenix Perry, as well as Alice Bell from games site VideoGamer and 
Guardian games contributors Simon Parkin and Jordan Erica Webber.

We’ll be looking at the lows and highs of the year, from the majestic 
Uncharted 4 to the now available Final Fantasy XV; from the promise of virtual 
reality to the ... unfulfilled promise of virtual reality; from the biggest 
commercial releases to the strangest, most beautiful little indie gems. We’ll 
also be asking: what do the games of 2016 tell us about what we can expect in 
2017 and beyond?

Along with candid games chat, there will be home-cooked mince pies and lots of 
prizes on our now legendary raffle table. Companies such as Team 17, 
Activision, Rovio, Read Only Memory and many more have given us a lot of 
frankly amazing prizes to give away, including games, merchandise and books 
such as the beautifulBitmap Brothers Universe 
<https://readonlymemory.vg/shop/book/the-bitmap-brothers-universe/>. Not only 
that but the developer of the critically acclaimed PC game Fractured Space is 
providing a free digital copy of theFractured Space: Commander Pack 
<http://store.steampowered.com/app/465220/> (worth £45) for every one who 
attends the event. 


So there is really no excuse – join us for lively debate and Christmas fun.

Tickets are £15 and available from the Guardian Members website.  
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/gaming-series-review-of-the-year-29107577548>
 