
It’s that moment when the ship sets sail and all that remains is a tiny, white 
handkerchief fluttering in a hand on the shoreline.

This ritual hasn’t changed since 1840, when one of the first cruise ships 
designed for passengers left Liverpool with a cow on board to supply fresh milk 
on the 14-day transatlantic crossing.

While ocean liners have long been crucial in transporting mail and cargo, 
cruising for pleasure only emerged in the 1840s when shipping companies started 
to treat passengers as the payload and travellers realised the joys of life at 
sea. However, there wasn’t nearly so much luxury if you were an immigrant 
travelling across the Atlantic to America in steerage. Here ‘guests’ were 
responsible for providing their own food and slept in whatever space was 
available in the hold.

Introducing the leisure cruise

As advancements such as electric lights, more deck space and entertainment 
were added in the 1850s and 60s, leisure cruising gained in popularity. Cabins 
were designed for comfort and moved from inside the hull to superstructures 
with private balconies. Passengers were intrigued and delighted by the novelty 
and glamour: dancing and card tables on the deck, excursions and guided tours 
on land and – of course – lavish parties.

We can thank Mark Twain and the British Medical Journal (BMJ) for increasing 
the popularity of cruising for health. It started with Twain’s personal 
bestseller, and one of the bestselling travel books of all time: Innocents 
Abroad or The New Pilgrims’ Progress. Written after a pleasure cruise to Europe 
and the Holy Land in 1867, Twain shared the joys of cruising with a wide 
audience.

When the BMJ endorsed ocean voyages for curative purposes in 1897, passengers 
flocked to recover their vigour with the fresh sea air and enjoy days of peace 
and leisure on board.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fevolution-of-the-cruise-ship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60b86574c779e46410552439e97b4bcc1939c177%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modern%20cruising%3A%20the%20sophistication%20of%20yesteryear%20meets%20new%20age%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fevolution-of-the-cruise-ship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modern%20cruising%3A%20the%20sophistication%20of%20yesteryear%20meets%20new%20age%20technology&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fevolution-of-the-cruise-ship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60b86574c779e46410552439e97b4bcc1939c177%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
 Illustration: Eirian Chapman 
Superliners bring romance to cruising

The first superliners, designed as massive, ornate floating hotels, appeared 
in the early 20th century. For the next 40 years, passenger ships became 
increasingly luxurious and a strong focus of the holiday. It was a time of 
glamour, when people dressed for dinner and strangers found love travelling 
across the Atlantic, like Nickie and Terry in An Affair to Remember.

When the sky started to fill with large jet aircraft in the 1960s, 
intercontinental passengers made a swift switch from ocean liners to planes. 
Travel became more about the destination than the journey, leaving the cruise 
industry floundering. It took ten years and 250 episodes of The Love Boat 
(1977-1987) to remind us of the romance of cruising.

The new era of cruising

Today’s new breed of ships from Royal Caribbean takes cruising to a new level: 
from observation capsules 300 feet above sea level offering 360 degree views, 
to sky-diving simulators and full scale production Broadway shows. These ships 
are holiday heaven.

Your main question will be how much or little do I want to do? Do I want to 
push myself in a state-of-the-art gym, work up a sweat on the running track, or 
is a massage and facial more my style? Is my goal to master theFlowRider 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N04skIgWkW4> or do I just want to watch a 
bionic bartender make me a drink?
 Royal Caribbean’s North Star. Photograph: Supplied/Royal Caribbean 
International 
Concerned about space? The staterooms have plenty of room for all your stuff, 
there are family-connected rooms, or lofts for those in search of serious 
luxury. Or you could save money with an interior room with a virtual balcony. 
That’s right, a floor-to-ceiling screen with exactly the same view as you’d get 
outside.

However you see your holiday, there’s one thing you can be sure of: there’s a 
deckchair somewhere on board with your name on it and an endless view that 
requires some gazing. Schedule that down time now!
 