
Almost 40 years ago, Allah Noor took his family to a safe haven in Pakistan, 
following the Soviet invasion ofAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. Last week he returned, to a 
country at war.

At the crack of dawn, when his family crossed the border to Afghanistan on a 
truck heaving with all their possessions, they were greeted by the roar of 
fighter planes returning from nightly bombing missions. A white surveillance 
blimp hovered above.

Afghan exodus from Pakistan could be 'catastrophic' without urgent aid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/04/afghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid>
Noor’s family is among more than 100,000 Afghans who have been coerced out of 
Pakistan since July 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/pakistan/pakistan-afghan-refugees-and-undocumented-afghans-repatriation-january-august-2016>
. Pakistan’s government has ordered all Afghan migrants and refugees to leave – 
about 3 million people. Roughly 250,000 of their number have left so far this 
year,according to figures from the World Food Programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/04/afghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid>
, in the biggest eviction of Afghans in decades.

Whole neighbourhoods are being uprooted, often second- or third-generation 
refugees with little connection to Afghanistan. Many arrive in their place of 
origin to findno help from international agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/04/afghan-exodus-from-pakistan-could-be-catastrophic-without-urgent-aid>
.

Pakistani authorities have raided homes, and returning families have spoken of 
police harassment and arbitrary arrests.

The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ocha, expects 
600,000 Afghans to have returned by the end of the year. With another 250,000 
people newly displaced by the Afghan conflict,the UN warned last month 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=54868#.V_R6rZN95E4> of a looming 
humanitarian crisis. Yet the response from international aid agencies has been 
slow and insufficient.

Noor’s family of 18 left after months of intimidation by police, who came to 
their house near Peshawar almost every day to order them to leave.

The family’s truck crossed the Afghan-Pakistan border post at Torkham.

Slipping out of the bottleneck of decorated jingle trucks, they passed 
Jalalabad airport, which since 2001 has been occupied by the US military with 
its jets anddrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/deadly-drone-strike-afghanistan-isis-civilians>
.

Noor, 62, is the family’s only adult male. Two sons live in Saudi Arabia and 
the UK.

In the back of the truck sat burqa-clad women, squeezed among a thicket of 
possessions: beds, a rusty floor fan, a child’s bicycle and piles of firewood 
for winter. In the middle of it all, a gaggle of geese bounced with the harsh 
movements of the truck.

It was a punishing, day-long ride. “Where are you going?” children shouted 
from the roadside, as the truck circumvented Jalalabad and steered toward 
Noor’s native Laghman province.

Noor said that his village had been totally destroyed. “There might be peace 
for a month now and then,” he reflected, “but there is still fighting in our 
village.” He had to find a new plot of land, a school for the children, and 
then wait for remittances from his sons abroad.

EU signs deal to deport unlimited numbers of Afghan asylum seekers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/03/eu-european-union-signs-deal-deport-unlimited-numbers-afghan-asylum-seekers-afghanistan>
Still, the Noor family is relatively lucky. Upon arrival, they received $3,600 
(£2,825) from the UN’s refugee agency, the UNHCR, for the nine family members 
who were registered as refugees in Pakistan. The remaining nine were ineligible 
for the$400 cash grant 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0ahUKEwj48pC2_sPPAhXIOxQKHYecD-MQFgg0MAI&url=http%3A%2F%2Freporting.unhcr.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2FUNHCR%2520Repatriation%2520of%2520Afghan%2520Refugees%2520from%2520Pakistan%2520SB%2520-%2520Sept-Dec.%25202016%2520--%252019SEPT16_0.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFGpLPhAKXE0t9GfumZf3di1YHqfA&sig2=naL2OATdRCte0YFmCUXfAw&cad=rja>
 because they were undocumented, as are about two-thirds of returnees.

Due to inadequate funding, the International Organisation for Migration is 
only able to provide the most vulnerable of undocumented returnees, about 30%, 
with tents, kitchen utensils, food and other basic needs.

In September, Ocha launched a flash appeal 
<https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/Afghanistan/afg_2016_flash_appeal.pdf> for 
$152m to assist the returning families.

The influx of returnees has caught international agencies by surprise, and the 
response has been hampered by inertia, according to Will Carter, head of 
programme with the Norwegian Refugee Council, one of the main organisations 
assisting in Nangarhar.

In addition, he said, the response is skewed. The UNHCR receives the vast 
majority of funds but only assists people registered as refugees in Pakistan.

“The difference in survival chances is jarring, and frankly it’s bizarre that 
an agency mandated to protect refugees appears to care for just half of them. 
It’s callous,” said Carter.

The UNHCR argues it is only mandated to help registered refugees. The agency 
is also responsible for distributing personal registration cards to refugees in 
Pakistan, which they have not done since 2007.

Alexander Mundt, assistant representative for the UNHCR in Afghanistan, said 
children of refugees could easily have registered with the agency over the past 
nine years. He added that “people with a credible fear of persecution” were 
also able to apply for individual refugee status.

“I think we did what we could, and were more than generous,” he said. “It is 
not a bottomless pit of money.”

Mundt admitted, however: “There is no way we can keep up with [the number of 
refugees], and we don’t encourage people in the millions to approach the UNHCR.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fexiled-pakistan-destitute-afghanistan-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e8c54119b1f0f0e4732ec2c02af825956012a8b%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exiled%20from%20Pakistan%2C%20destitute%20Afghans%20return%20to%20a%20country%20at%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fexiled-pakistan-destitute-afghanistan-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exiled%20from%20Pakistan%2C%20destitute%20Afghans%20return%20to%20a%20country%20at%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fexiled-pakistan-destitute-afghanistan-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e8c54119b1f0f0e4732ec2c02af825956012a8b%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 Afghan families camp out in temporary housing in Nangarhar province’s Behsud 
district, after crossing the border from Pakistan. Photograph: Andrew Quilty 
He conceded that the recent UN cash grants to returnees had contributed to 
some inequality. “But I wouldn’t assume that every person returning in is dire 
need,” he added.

Among the undocumented returnees is Taj Bibi, a mother of six who was widowed 
four months ago. Her oldest son, Amanullah, is 14. Bibi had lived in Pakistan 
since the jihad in the 1980s but was forced out barely two months after her 
husband died in a motorcycle accident.

“Our life was very good there – my husband could make a salary,” she said from 
behind a curtain in her tent in Nangarhar’s Behsud district, where she relies 
on aid and help from neighbours. “We will live the rest of our life here,” she 
said.

Aid workers say about 75% of returnees crossing the Torkham border settle in 
Nangarhar province. Here, unemployment is endemic, even for those who never 
left, but the area is also beset by insurgent groups,including Islamic State 
<https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/descent-into-chaos-why-did-nangarhar-turn-into-an-is-hub/>
.

“This is creating so much desperation among families who have lost everything. 
It makes them easy recruitment targets for Taliban and even Daesh [Isis],” said 
Timor Sharan, senior Afghanistan analyst with the International Crisis Group.

For decades, Pakistan has been a safe haven for Afghans, with whom they share 
a cultural kinship. Yet the large Afghan refugee communities are difficult to 
monitor, and Pakistani authoritieshave claimed 
<https://timesofislamabad.com/afghan-migrants-used-for-terrorism-and-narcotics-smuggling-nasir-janjua/2016/05/17/>
 they harboured militants and criminals.

The Pakistan government has periodically threatened to send Afghans back, but 
it is unclear what triggered the recent crackdown.

Some have speculated 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/long-settled-afghan-refugees-in-pakistan-face-an-unsettling-future/2016/09/23/ad53b532-7f3c-11e6-ad0e-ab0d12c779b1_story.html>
 that Pakistan is using Afghans as pawns in a dispute with the US. Noor, 
meanwhile, thought the harassment had more to do with the Afghan government’s 
recent diplomatic outreach to Pakistan’s rival.

“Ever since Afghanistan began improving relations with India, they called us 
‘sons of India’”, he said.
 