
Thirty four million views <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iEeMJgV75nQ> on 
YouTube;30 million views <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgCyhVNsRWc>; 23 
million views <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I9SL_lrKmKs>. Not figures for 
music videos, orcats playing the piano 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zeoT66v4EHg>, or even celebrities reading mean 
tweets <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RRBoPveyETc>, but clips of exploding 
cysts, unplugged blackheads and, reader – I’m sorry to have to tell you –botfly 
extractions <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PcuyYhCTDMo>.

Welcome to the world of “popping”. To Generation Xers, popping might be more 
familiar as thefunk dance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G21nWIBFdP8> that 
came out of California in the 70s – as in body-popping – but in the age of 
internet, it speaks to two hours spent down a YouTube clickhole of pus and 
screams.

Popping is seeping across the internet, burying under our collective skin, 
oozing tens of thousands of likes and clicks.

Not only are there dedicated YouTube channels (YouTube’s Greatest Cysts 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC371MccN2nfc6CEpv60_MHQ>; 
Cyst.Blackhead.Acne.Bursting 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCjRWy7sVuYpStWDWl5hRE0A>) and an active and 
enthusiastic subreddit (/r/popping <http://www.reddit.com/r/popping/>), but 
there arewebsites <http://www.pimplepoppingvideos.net/> and forums, the sole 
aim of which are to provide popping aficionados with their hit of zits.

I want to say 'euw gross'. I want to wretch

There are even popping celebrities – including Dr. Pimple Popper 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/DrSandraLee> (“Blackhead Queen”) and Dr. Vikram 
Yadav <https://www.youtube.com/user/shaziajafrey8> (“The King of Comedones”). 
Online awards <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yvKdPXiy8gg> are handed out, 
best-of roundups created.

I want to say euw, gross. I want to wretch in disgust. But, I’m afraid that, 
well … my name is Hannah, and I’m a popaholic. And the above numbers are 
testament to the fact that I am not alone.

Who, among us, can honestly say they have never squeezed a spot? Who has never 
been frustrated by one of those under-the-skin chin lumps, impervious tozinc 
oxide <http://www.livestrong.com/article/147539-zinc-oxide-ointment-uses/>? Who 
doesn’tlook at the pore strip after it has been peeled from the nose?

There could be worse things to be into, right? Crystal meth perhaps, or 
water-boarding.

‘Does everyone have on their safety glasses?’

The appeal of these videos doesn’t just stop at the lancing of cysts (closed 
sacs made up of pus, fat, keratin or fluid – I’mso sorry), or even different 
types of cysts, in which I have become well-versed:ganglion 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/excisionofganglion/pages/introduction.aspx>, 
sebaceous 
<http://www.channel4embarrassingillnesses.com/conditions/sebaceous-cyst/>, 
epidermoid 
<http://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/guide/epidermoid-sebaceous-cysts>
.

A spectrum exists. Some people graduate from, say, whiteheads 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgCyhVNsRWc> to abscesses 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SqIBsU9B8v0>. Before crossing genres to 
watching the removal of botflies, orimpacted earwax 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l1CFgV1EYnQ>, or the tweezing of ingrown hairs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tWojjMso4as>. 

There’s a lot of debate in the popping “community” about what people are into; 
judgment even.Tonsil stones <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UT3IZPKA-FQ>? 
Dude, that’s fucking disgusting. But more often there’s a kind ofwhatever 
you’re intoacceptance. ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ Rare for the internet.

The cyst has a name, which is common

I have no idea what started my own fascination with watching cyst-popping, but 
I remember what tipped the scales:Operation Kill George 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r4zX892XOaw>. 

(“Oh wow, thank you for the reminder! That is a classic that I have not 
watched in a while” says Chris Azzari, founder ofPopThatZit.com 
<http://www.popthatzits.com/>, when I contact him for this piece.)

I’ll try to explain: Operation Kill George is the sole upload of the YouTube 
channelProjectKillGeorge 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC5bTW2AP-3ST24mwV2tNWxw>, as if its owner 
posted it in 2012, saw the response and thought:my work here is done. 

George follows the tropes of a specifically popular kind of cyst video. The 
cyst has a name, which is common. The film, which is almost 10 minutes long, 
starts with an intro to rivalApocalypse Now 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bU0DxJVWhGw>, and is backed with dramatic 
music.

In this case, the song is by Alexandre Desplat 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0006035/>, a composer better known for cinematic 
soundscapes. There’s something about a popping video set to the music of a man 
who recently scoredThe Imitation Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-imitation-game> which I approve of.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr4zX892XOaw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr4zX892XOaw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr4zX892XOaw&media=>
 Operation Kill George, a classic of the genre. Credit: YouTube 
Located on the back – the best location, Azzari tells me – the seemingly 
never-ending guff stream that springs forth, likeKatie Hopkins 
<https://twitter.com/KTHopkins> in full-flow on Twitter, might have something 
to do with the lump having been there for 20 years.

“Does everyone have on their safety glasses?” asks the doctor, before pinching 
at the lump like a crab on acid.

George has been viewed more than 17 million times, has upwards of 20,000 
likes, and has almost 19,000 comments.

‘It’s certainly gross’

I’m interested in why we’re interested in this stuff. Particularly the general 
squeezing of pimples and cysts, more than those who have graduated to getting 
off to a three-inch bug beingpulled from someone’s ear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CsLGhXtwDpI>.

The enduring popularity of TV programmes such as the UK’s Embarrassing Bodies 
<http://www.channel4embarrassingillnesses.com/>, and the fact that certain 
popping videos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O52XO5ZsATE> frequently break 
out to go viral, racking up thousands of page views formainstream media 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3057200/Horrifying-video-shows-man-popping-huge-fluid-filled-cyst-using-needle-pliers-SCREWDRIVER.html>
, proves that it is more than a niche concern.

Popping fans even include celebrities. British writer Caitlin Moran 
<https://twitter.com/caitlinmoran> is one. The tweet she shared of a 
25-year-old blackhead 
<https://twitter.com/caitlinmoran/status/372635155095359488> – imagine a 
Redwood root being prised from the ground – broke the internet way beforeKim 
Kardashian <https://twitter.com/kimkardashian>. 
Caitlin Moran (@caitlinmoran) 
@RealSharHorgan <https://twitter.com/realsharhorgan> There was a blackhead in 
my armpit in 2005 I still remember with all the joy of a birthday
 <https://twitter.com/caitlinmoran/status/128223771755683840> October 23, 2011 
<https://twitter.com/caitlinmoran/status/128223771755683840> 
Numerous MetaFilter threads 
<http://ask.metafilter.com/192082/Why-does-this-bring-me-pleasure>, queries on 
Yahoo Answers 
<https://answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20080806193257AAfKaUt>, YouTube 
comments,WebMD searches  
<http://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/guide/cysts-lumps-bumps>and 
Imgur posts <http://imgur.com/gallery/AOCrV> also point to this being a 
question people are interested in knowing the answer to.

My first port of call is to ask the active enthusiasts of the popular popping 
subreddit. These are the true fans, who know the struggle of an out-of-focus 
camera, gauze blocking the view, a video with distracting squealers, an 
incompetent popper.

A lot of redditors think that it’s somehow cathartic. “Soothing” and 
“cleansing” are words which come up a lot. “It relieves my stress. Seeing it 
explode out gives me relief”, writes one redditor,former_anachronism 
<http://www.reddit.com/user/former_anachronism>.

It’s just so satisfying, especially black heads for me – they’re my favourite. 
I like solid when it comes to popping, those giant cysts constituted almost 
entirely by liquid don’t tickle my fancy –Zelda6finity. 
<http://www.reddit.com/user/Zelda6finity>

58008_35007 <http://www.reddit.com/user/58008_35007> agrees with my 
proposition that it might be an atavistic thing, harking back to a gorilla love 
of grooming. “Could be our monkey brains. I remember picking fleas off my cat 
as a kid and finding that satisfying, but not quite the same.”

Others tell me they think it is an extension of their general love of 
cleanliness and order. But there are other theories, too.

“It’s something illicit and certainly gross. Just that slight sickening 
feeling in your stomach is pleasurable to some. Some people just get the same 
sort of thrill as, say, riding on a roller-coaster”, museszatan130 
<http://www.reddit.com/user/zatan130>.

The doctor will see you now

Dr Sandra Lee <http://www.skinps.com/about-us/> – AKA Dr. Pimple Popper – is 
one of the stars of the popping scene. A dermatologist who took over her 
father’s Californiapractice <http://www.skinps.com/> with her husband, she also 
features on TV show,The Doctors <http://www.thedoctorstv.com/>. Lee echoes the 
viewpoint of a lot of the redditors I asked.

“I agree that there is something hypnotic about pimple popping”, she writes 
via email. “Sometimes when I upload my own videos I find myself watching 
certain parts over and over.

 Dr. Sandra Lee, or Dr. Pimple Popper to her fans. Photograph: Dr. Sandra Lee 
“I have seen people mention ASMR 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autonomous_sensory_meridian_response> (autonomous 
sensory meridian response), or that it is something primitive.”

The redditors revere Lee. (Sample comment: “I wish I could marry you Sandra. 
I’d put a ring under my skin and pretend it’s a cyst.”)

Lee tells me that she first entered the popping world when she uploaded a 
blackhead extraction to herpersonal Instagram account 
<https://instagram.com/drsandralee/> and noticed a significant jump in 
followers and engagement, with individuals tagging friends in comments.

She decided to set up a dedicated YouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/DrSandraLee/about> in late 2014, which now has 
upwards of 70,000 subscribers and 32 million views. She tells me she is driving 
her husband up the wall with the glow of her phone late at night while she 
edits her videos shot with iPhone.

I wish I could marry you. I'd put a ring under my skin and pretend it's a cyst.
Reddit user 
Lee and I go deeper into the popping talk, however, when I ask whether 
repeatedly watching these videos is a healthy form of release or indicates 
something more compulsive.

Dermatillomania 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/dermatillomania/Pages/Introduction.aspx>, or SPD 
(skin picking disorder), is a condition included in theDSM V 
<http://www.dsm5.org/Documents/Obsessive%20Compulsive%20Disorders%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf>
 (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders). But Lee tells me 
watching her videos might be a means of helping individuals with this condition.

“I do know that it helps some of my viewers cope with their dermatillomania. I 
have a few patients with this condition, and when I see one again, I plan to 
suggest that they watch my videos and let me know if it helps them cope.”

A lot of fans feel Lee’s popularity is down to her caring manner with 
patients. An extraordinary story, this: during treatment, one regular patient, 
known as “Pops”, spoke of the recent death of his wife.

Both Pops and his wife had been longtime patients of Lee. After watching 
videos featuring Pops <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dPeS2augwOg>, redditors 
asked Lee to set up agofundme <http://www.gofundme.com/s2h23s> page for him, as 
he was struggling with financing the care home he had just moved into: Lee 
hopes to present him with a cheque for almost $6,000 (£4,000) next week.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAQHsOH_MPqc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAQHsOH_MPqc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAQHsOH_MPqc&media=>
‘A guy filming bathroom tiles? Bad’

It’s not as simple, however, as being either grossed out or fascinated by 
popping. Lee mentions the difference between “soft pops” and “hard pops”: those 
who appreciate the silly-string snaking of a blocked pore versus people who can 
stomach alipoma <http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/lipoma/Pages/Introduction.aspx> 
excision.

There’s also a split between those who enjoy watching videos in a clinical 
setting (as with George), but who baulk at the DIY videos which have also 
spread across the web.

In some cases, there’s a level of horrified behind-the-camera banter to these 
which can have me in stitches, hence a cropping up ofreaction videos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QST9w51mLO8>. I’d also argue, maybe, that a 
familygathering around <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AQHsOH_MPqc> to finally 
rid an uncle of his hard-to-reach back zit is more heartwarming than a viral 
video of adog greeting its owner <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RKBcs9tNWg8>.

It’s equally pleasing to see pop-watchers get their hands on the real thing. 
“Jesus Christ, that is like heaven”,says one popper 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ADLY7tAaO4U> in a broad Dublin accent, hardly 
believing her luck, as her friends debate whether to name the blackhead she’s 
digging out Bob or Wayne.

YouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> commenters in 
particular are quick to point out the pros and cons of a given video. A splat 
on a camera lens? Good. A guy filming bathroom tiles while we know the good 
stuff is squirting out-of-shot? Bad. (“Could have done this so much better”).

Someone filming in portrait mode <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6YFLkRlZzXw> 
or making a too-small hole? Don’t get them started.

The least sanitary <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vCoAiEDkIlg> of homemade 
poppings receive short shrift. “Wear some fucking gloves!”, is a common 
complaint, as an amateur goes at her boyfriend’s shoulder with a carving knife.

An amateur goes at her boyfriend's shoulder with a carving knife

Often, comment threads underneath videos featuring infected tattoos or 
recurring cysts descend into class-based warfare, with people pillaging 
Southern-accented “rednecks” for not washing, allowing their lumps to get so 
large, and asking why they don’t “just go to the fucking doctor”.

As Lee points out, however, healthcare is expensive in America, and given that 
these procedures are often not deemed medically necessary and therefore would 
not be covered by insurance, people might not be able to afford to have them 
professionally removed.

Mostly though, commenters express concern with themselves: how they started 
with a chaste squeezing of a forehead blemish, to four hours later watching an 
operation on a seven-year-old tumour or extractions ofmango worms on puppies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZXnhQyj9gfI>. 


“HOW DID I END UP HERE?” screams the internet. 

The King of Comedones

However, in addition to the savage lack of public healthcare in America, is 
there – like an oxidised blackhead – a darker side to these videos?

Most of the DIY videos filmed at home are anonymised. Occasionally, names are 
mentioned in the background, as a group of frat-boys nursing red paper cups 
discuss proceedings.

Nearly all of the videos filmed in clinical settings avoid identification of 
patients. But some videos are more discomforting than others; and not just the 
age-restricted ones.
 Dr. Yadav performs an extraction. His videos have been viewed more than 217 
million times. Photograph: YouTube screengrab 
By far the biggest popping celebrity on the scene is Vikram Singh Yadav 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/shaziajafrey8>, a New Delhi based doctor. His 
YouTube channel, established in 2009, has 165,000 subscribers and a staggering
217 million <https://www.youtube.com/user/shaziajafrey8/about> views. His 
speciality is the removal of blackheads andcomedones 
<http://www.dermnetnz.org/acne/comedonal-acne.html>.

His most recent hit is a video showing blackheads under UV light 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bcqv5Hoe71U> (“this world is full of all 
things, some that glitter”), but his most viral video was theremoval of maggots 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2833454/The-video-make-skin-crawl-Man-develops-maggot-infestation-EAR-housefly-lays-eggs-asleep.html>
 from a man’s ear. And for the record, even I cannot bring myself to watch that.

Yadav’s fandom stretches far and wide, to the point that he now uploads new 
videos every Wednesday and Sunday to satisfy pus-thirsty viewers.

He is popular because of his quirky turns of phrase and his habit of 
introducing all videos with “hi, friends” – stick that on a T-shirt and a lot 
of people would buy it –but personally I find Yadav’s rough-handled approach to 
his patients off-putting.

He also slags them off. A lot. And I’m like: dude, they are literally right 
there. They can hear you?

To stick to his deadlines, I imagine him spotting someone across the street 
with an inflamed ingrown hair, and dashing in between cars before bundling them 
into a sack.

Yadav didn’t respond to my requests for comment. For her part, Lee tells me 
she always asks permission to film.

“I will offer to extract them for free in exchange for permission to videotape 
the procedure to post on my social media.

“Interestingly, very few people decline. So I feel it’s a win-win-win 
situation. I didn’t realise how very appreciative many of my patients were to 
have me extract their blackheads andmilia 
<http://www.patient.co.uk/health/milia-leaflet>.”


‘There’s a zit manifesto’

One thing is for sure, the explosion in online popping popularity doesn’t show 
any sign of abating.

Chris Azzari, 36, is a veteran. Now, there are a whole roster of popping 
dedicated websites –epiczitpop.com <http://epiczitpop.com/>, 
pimplepoppingvideos.net <http://www.pimplepoppingvideos.net/> – but Azzari set 
upPopThatZit <http://www.popthatzits.com/> back in 2006, when, working in IT, 
he saw a gap in the market.

His website is ordered into categories – butt cysts, belly button lint…

In the years since, he has appeared on the talk shows of Tyra Banks 
<https://twitter.com/tyrabanks> and Rosie O’Donnell 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005280/>. His website is meticulously ordered into 
categories <http://www.popthatzits.com/zits-categories/> – “butt cysts”, “belly 
button lint” and, (rather worryingly), “MRSA”. There is even azit manifesto 
<http://www.popthatzits.com/zit-manifesto/>. 

“The community is great and has changed a lot over the years”, he tells me. 
“People come and go, people complain, people praise, and you have to take it 
with a grain of salt. In the early days I used to try and please everyone, but 
we all know that is impossible.”

At the site’s inception, PopThatZit offered $20 (£13) for original 
submissions. “If there was a site like this when I was in high school I could 
have made my college tuition.”

Azzari says that PopThatZit continues to grow. “Many visitors are regulars 
that come every day and people spend a lot of time on the site. We get about 
350,000 visitors a month and sometimes have big spikes when the site is 
mentioned places”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fcyst-popping-explosion-pimple-popping-extraction-behind-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14bc9180be70bf901773053aaa239c38a7bbd5b7%2F0_0_1470_458%2F1470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Explosive!%20Behind%20the%20internet's%20fascination%20with%20pimple%20popping%2C%20zit%20zapping%20and%20squeezing%20cysts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fcyst-popping-explosion-pimple-popping-extraction-behind-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Explosive%21%20Behind%20the%20internet%27s%20fascination%20with%20pimple%20popping%2C%20zit%20zapping%20and%20squeezing%20cysts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fcyst-popping-explosion-pimple-popping-extraction-behind-community%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14bc9180be70bf901773053aaa239c38a7bbd5b7%2F0_0_1470_458%2F1470.jpg>
 Online interest in cysts has exploded over time. Credit: Google Trends 
Photograph: Google Trends 
A look at Google Trends 
<https://www.google.co.uk/trends/explore#q=cyst%20popping> shows a continuing 
rise in people searching for cyst hits. Most poppers seem to live in New York, 
and interestingly, Dallas (it’s unclear as to why this was never covered in the 
show).

Recent media coverage has also buoyed the community. A video  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O52XO5ZsATE>(completely dull, by the way), of 
a man popping his ganglion cyst with a hammer and nail has done the rounds.

The Mirror ran a poll in which 65% of respondents cited 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/weird-news/meet-dr-pimple-popper---5576812> 
popping videos as “totally satisfying” rather than “totally gross”, andin 
another poll <https://twitter.com/tyrabanks>, 78% said they found them 
“fascinating”.

Over the past couple of years outlets such as Buzzfeed 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/nickw44/32-gifs-of-cysts-popping-that-will-give-you-awesom-gmia#.dvQ6Dbeyky>
 andOddee <http://www.oddee.com/item_99145.aspx> have run collated pieces. Even 
the Daily Mail’stop-rated comment  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/reader-comments/p/comment/link/84172155>on an 
article about cysts was approving.

‘I absolutely cannot’

One of the redditors I contacted asked me by direct message why I was 
interested in popping. I told him, as above, that I wasn’t precisely sure.

 Ganglion cysts, also known as ‘Bible bumps’ due to a popular means of getting 
rid. Photograph: YouTube screengrab 
I was never into the game Operation 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_%28game%29> as a kid, nor did I ever 
suffer from acne. I am very squeamish in a lot of ways – blood tests make me 
cry, and I had to stop eatingDoritos 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/28/Doritos.jpg> after I 
realised they look like they have blackheads. (Someone else must have noticed 
this, surely?)

Low points, however, have included chasing after my brother-in-law’s ganglion 
cyst with a copy of Dante’s Inferno, him running from the room and knocking 
over an anglepoise lamp on his way out.

(Ganglions are known as “Bible bumps”, as whacking them with heavy objects is 
an effective, if unadvised, way of getting rid).

More recently: a colleague swinging by my desk for lunch, seeing an open tab 
of a YouTube cyst video (for this piece!) and her swiftly departing with the 
words: “I absolutely cannot”.


Of course, when not writing 3,000 word essays on the subject, I try to hide my 
interest. I guess, like a hardcore porn habit, it’s the sort of predilection 
that lends itself to the quick snapping shut of a laptop lid.

“Viewer discretion advised” a lot of videos state in their introduction. Yeah, 
no shit.

But even Lee, Dr. Pimple Popper herself, has a confession to make:

“Redditors try to tell me all the time: ‘You are one of us!’. Perhaps I’ve 
been in denial, since until lately, I’ve not really thought that I was “one of 
them” – maybe just that I was just a “provider” for them.

“But I’ve slowly started to admit to myself that I, too, am a popaholic.”

 * The Guardian obviously does not condone – or comedone – trying to extract 
cysts or any type of lump or bump at home. Go and see a doctor – and then 
upload to YouTube.
 