
Britain is to step up efforts to combat abuse of women and girls around the 
world, international development secretaryPriti Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel> said this weekend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpatel-international-aid-fgm-violence-women-girls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c6ebb00e50026fcd5caea2d7bb8029b1dde5ecf%2F0_277_1675_1004%2F1675.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Extra%20%C2%A36m%20in%20development%20funding%20to%20fight%20abuse%20of%20women%20and%20girls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpatel-international-aid-fgm-violence-women-girls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Extra%20%C2%A36m%20in%20development%20funding%20to%20fight%20abuse%20of%20women%20and%20girls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpatel-international-aid-fgm-violence-women-girls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c6ebb00e50026fcd5caea2d7bb8029b1dde5ecf%2F0_277_1675_1004%2F1675.jpg>
 International development secretary Priti Patel. 
Patel says she wants the UK to be a global leader on the issue and is 
announcing a £6m package of aid to go towards supporting innovative grassroots 
programmes in 17 countries, dealing with female genital mutilation, child 
marriage and domestic violence.

This marks a change in tack for the Department for International Development 
(DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
, and has been welcomed by many in the aid sector, focusing as it does on 
smaller projects deemed to be making a difference on the ground. The next 
hurdle for DfID will be scaling up such interventions so that they change more 
lives.

According to the UN, 35% of women worldwide have experienced either physical 
or sexual abuse at some point in their lives.

Patel said breaking the cycle of abuse was a crucial aim: “We cannot and will 
not tolerate any form of violence against women and girls. Britain is leading 
efforts across 30 countries … from ending female genital mutilation and child 
marriage to preventing domestic abuse. UK aid already helps survivors in some 
of the world’s poorest countries – now we are stepping up our global leadership 
and support to protect even more women and girls and address the root causes of 
violence.”

The investment was announced on the International Day to Eliminate Violence 
Against Women, which kickstarts 16 Days of Activism against Gender-based 
Violence, a multi-agency campaign which aims to raise public awareness and 
mobilise people to bring about change.

Patel has set out a new package of support to protect women and girls in some 
of the world’s poorest countries from such practices. The (DFID) will team up 
with a range of innovative grassroots organisations with the local knowledge 
and expertise to drive forward action to protect vulnerable women and girls and 
support victims.

The money includes £3m to AmplifyChange, a fund which supports 40 small 
grassroots groups working to address FGM and child, early and forced marriage, 
taking UK total contribution to the fund to £11million. An extra £2.75m will go 
to the UN Trust Fund to End Violence Against Women, which supports 
organisations across the world to tackle gender-based violence, improve access 
to services such as legal assistance and healthcare and strengthen laws that 
protect women and girls.
 