
While upscale grunge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/13/how-aap-rocky-rihanna-and-kanye-west-reinvented-grunge-style>
 – the trend for current pop stars to wear old band T-shirts – shows no sign of 
stopping, and neither does the use of Gothic fonts that has been the mainstay 
of 2016’smerchandise and fashion confluence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/may/09/why-the-pop-merchandise-store-is-the-most-fashionable-place-to-shop>
 (from Vetements to The Life Of Pablo and beyond), the cyclical nature of 
fashion means things move on quickly to a new craze.


The next one bubbling up is the use of retro computer game references. If old 
techhas become fetishised (think of Adele’sflip phone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/10/from-rihanna-to-london-spy-how-flip-phones-were-called-back-into-fashion>
 in Hello and labels likePear Shaped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/mar/02/signage-chic-streetwear-palace-pear-shaped>
 using old Nokia imagery), it makes sense that old computer games would come 
into play. IfPokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/jul/14/pokemon-go-style-from-guccis-seadra-to-vetements-pikachu-catch-em-all>
 has taught us anything, it’s that style travels quickly from the console to 
the catwalk.

@future killed it #futurenowtour #future #tour #futurehendrix #futurehive #nyc 
#soho #tourmerch #adidas #complex #streetwear #hypebeast #freebandz #popup 
#popupshop #kanye #drake <https://www.instagram.com/p/BInlh3EhTDP/>

A photo posted by Eric P. (@rezyracks) on Aug 2, 2016 at 12:45pm PDT

From vinyl records to toys: the return of analogue products in our digital 
lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/feb/12/return-analogue-digital-products-phygital>
Anya Hindmarch’s AW16 collection used Pac-Man as the block-y influence on her 
collection. The rainbow palette, building block aesthetic and cutesy elements 
(Pac-Man Ghost featured on a backpack later be worn by Karlie Kloss), may have 
been too kitsch for some but was daringly analogue in the 24-7 age of 
information overload. It wasn’t a great leap for the designer who had co-opted 
everyday logos (Boots the chemist, Ship matches, KitKats) but also set the tone 
for the next wave of graphic influences on fashion and had elements in common 
withTetris’s own fashion line 
<https://twitter.com/Tetris_Official?ref_src=twsrc>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fextra-life-retro-video-game-references-fashion-pac-man-tetris-doom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefb58832c876887f723666e46b1b9fec6f45392b%2F0_0_3964_2852%2F3964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Extra%20life%3A%20retro%20video%20game%20references%20are%20all%20over%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fextra-life-retro-video-game-references-fashion-pac-man-tetris-doom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Extra%20life%3A%20retro%20video%20game%20references%20are%20all%20over%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fextra-life-retro-video-game-references-fashion-pac-man-tetris-doom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefb58832c876887f723666e46b1b9fec6f45392b%2F0_0_3964_2852%2F3964.jpg>
 Anya Hindmarch AW16. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA 
Retro computer games have been seeping into the fashion consciousness for a 
while now. Moschino collaborated withSuper Mario Bros 
<http://www.fashiongonerogue.com/moschino-mario-bros-clothing-bags-shop/> for a 
capsule collection, and Sonic The Hedgehog remains a fashion icon for those who 
experiment with grey blue hair. Meanwhile, the casting of the Final Fantasy 
characterLady Lightning <https://www.instagram.com/p/_1j_dEq4eK/> for Louis 
Vuitton’s SS16 virtual team-up with Japanese video game developer Square Enix 
felt uncannily futuristic but also comfortingly backward-looking.

There are hints that musical tastemakers are turning away from the vintage 
rock tee, last weekDrake’s touring mate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/05/drake-pop-up-store-new-york-summer-sixteen>
 Future had his own pop-up shop and was selling Doom-homaged T-shirts, while at 
the Billboard Music Awards rehearsals, Justin Bieber was photographed wearing a 
Mortal Kombat T-shirt.

“Going analogue” has been in the air since normcore and dad-dressing started 
to trend, while shows like Stranger Things, and Instagrams like
Interiorsofmurdershewrote <https://www.instagram.com/interiorsofmurdershewrote/>
 suggest there’s an massive cultural appetite for putting the pause button on 
modernity and basking in the comfort of looking back.
 