
In the runup to the election in Canada, it didn’t take long for the focus to 
fall on the semiotics of the candidates’grooming 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/22/fashion/justin-trudeau-takes-an-image-and-wins-with-it.html>
 habits and, in particular, that of Justin Trudeau, who is now the country’s 
newly appointed prime minister. Yes, he does great hair – and we can expect the 
“Trudeau” to enter the lexicon soon – but he also gives great brows. Which, for 
a man, is often a bit of a taboo topic of grooming conversation. For shame, 
though.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Feyebro-justin-trudeau-canadas-new-prime-minister-gives-good-brow-and-heres-how%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444228267281%2Ff409adf6-968c-4d2c-93d4-3e65eefa02a1-2060x1520.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eyebro%3A%20Justin%20Trudeau%2C%20Canada's%20new%20prime%20minister%2C%20gives%20good%20brow%20(and%20here's%20how)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Feyebro-justin-trudeau-canadas-new-prime-minister-gives-good-brow-and-heres-how%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eyebro%3A%20Justin%20Trudeau%2C%20Canada%27s%20new%20prime%20minister%2C%20gives%20good%20brow%20%28and%20here%27s%20how%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Feyebro-justin-trudeau-canadas-new-prime-minister-gives-good-brow-and-heres-how%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444228267281%2Ff409adf6-968c-4d2c-93d4-3e65eefa02a1-2060x1520.jpeg>
 Dipbrow Brown by Anastasia. 
Colin Farrell’s slugs have their place, but if you’re aiming for Trudeau’s 
sculpted, natural thickness, plucking between the eyebrows is a good place to 
start. Tweezerman’sslant tweezers 
<http://www.tweezerman.co.uk/store/product/slant-tweezer/> are excellent, if 
only for grabbing on to the tiny hairs in between the eyes that other tweezers 
miss. Trudeau’s brows are well-sculpted, with an excellent thickness between 
the start and the tail, so take your time with this bit. Or visit your local 
threading salon and demand an arch.
 Tom Ford Brow Sculptor in Espresso. 
For colour, Eyeko’s Magic Brow Boost  
<http://uk.spacenk.com/en_GB/brow-magic-brow-boost/MUK200015410.html>is a good 
starting point. It’s bold and thick, as it is made from cellulose, so apply 
carefully to avoid an overly thick brow. It also contains caffeine, which gives 
brows a boost. MAC has a good line in grooming products for men, and theBrow Set
 
<http://www.maccosmetics.co.uk/product/shaded/9153/305/Video/Mens-Grooming/Brow-Set/index.tmpl>
tidies and shapes without overshaping them. Stila’sStay All Day Brow Gel 
<http://stila.co.uk/collections/all-products/products/stay-all-day-brow-gel-brush>
 is a bit of a faff, involving a separate brush and a sort of mini-toothbrush 
tube, but it’s thick and long-lasting and does, indeed, last the whole day. Tom 
Ford’sBrow Sculptor <http://www.tomford.com/brow-sculptor/T0W9.html> is angled, 
so you can almost paint on individual hairs, but at £35 is a little pricey for 
a souped-up pencil.

If you want to go the whole hog, Anastasia Beverly Hills DipBrow, a pot of 
chocolatey, powdery gel, works best with a double-ended angled brush/spooley. 
You need to apply with a soft touch and barely need any, so chances are this 
product will last for as long as Trudeau is in office.
 