
Chris Froome’s ambitions to improve on the bronze medal he won in the men’s 
time trial at London 2012 were thwarted when he had to settle for another 
bronze behind Fabian Cancellara and Tom Dumoulin. Despite the contention by 
British Cycling’s Andy Harrison that Froome has been suffering from a tight 
chest that had affected his performances here, the cyclist said there were no 
medical issues and that he was fine.

There will be no more popular winner than the Swiss 35-year-old, who won from 
Dumoulin by 47 seconds. The man they call Spartacus raged against the dying of 
a light he confirmed will be extinguished this season, possibly even on 
Thursday to take his second Olympic time trial gold – the first was in Beijing 
– in 1hr 12min 15sec. His was a sensational ride over a course many thought 
would not suit him in conditions that did not really suit anyone.

An angry sea and crosswinds meant that, as well as coping with the forbidding 
climbs of the Grumari Circuit, those involved were forced to contend with 
Mother Nature’s tetchiness on an uncharacteristically filthy day. They did not 
have it quite as badas the women who preceded them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/kristin-armstrong-beats-wild-weather-olympic-cycling-time-trial-gold>
 but 37 riders took their chance under a canopy of grey skies in a grimy race 
of truth contested in regular rain showers that left puddles on the asphalt and 
made conditions considerably more testing than expected.

With each competitor’s spin round the course topped and tailed by a buffeting 
from strong winds, blowing in from the Atlantic, what had promised to be a 
long, stamina-sapping and technically challenging journey became significantly 
more arduous.

Kristin Armstrong beats wild weather to win Olympic cycling time trial gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/kristin-armstrong-beats-wild-weather-olympic-cycling-time-trial-gold>
“Fabian was clearly the strongest rider on the road, so congrats to him,” said 
Froome, who finished just over a minute behind the winner. “They were tough 
conditions. I tried to hold something back for the second lap and just didn’t 
have the legs to push on.

“It’s been an amazing summer and to come away with a medal is really special. 
Just to be part of the Olympics is really special. I have no regrets. I gave it 
everything. I’m really happy.”

The trip was 54.5km, extremely long by the standards of time trialling and 
nearly 10km further than any of those staged in this year’s Giro or Tour de 
France. It began and ended in Portal, on the outskirts of Rio about 30km west 
along the coast from where the road race peloton went under the gun. Taking in 
two circuits of the Grumari Circuit, that hilly tree-lined 25km loop the field 
tackled twice on Sunday, the riders were allowed to bypass the cobbles that had 
done for so many inner tubes and poorly holstered water bottles at the weekend.

Not to be confused with the Vista Chinesa, whose treacherous descent claimed, 
among several others, the men’s and women’s road race leaders, Vincenzo Nibali 
andAnnemiek van Vleuten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/annemiek-van-vleuten-intensive-care-olympic-road-race>
, in serious crashes, the Grumari Circuit boasts two significant climbs. The 
eponymous ascent snakes to a height of 129m at a gradient of around 12% and 
precedes a tricky, twisting, often narrow descent. The subsequent Grota Funda 
climb is longer but significantly more straightforward. Rising to two 
kilometres at a little under 7%, considerably less concentration is required to 
negotiate the meandering downhill that follows.

Set-up was all important and most riders opted for a rear disc wheel and 
clip-on handlebars and eschewed the option of a deep-rimmed front wheel to 
minimise wind resistance and offer better handling. One of the exceptions, 
drafted in due to late withdrawals of the lame and halt from the road race, was 
the bearded Namibian Dan Craven, who was first down the ramp on a borrowed 
bicycle and finished well behind several of the riders who set off after him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Ffabian-cancellara-rio-2016-olympic-time-trial-cycling-gold-chris-froome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd43aa40c7baedd3705258bb9d26304f26e851419%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fabian%20Cancellara%20wins%20Rio%20time%20trial%20gold%20as%20Chris%20Froome%20takes%20bronze%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Ffabian-cancellara-rio-2016-olympic-time-trial-cycling-gold-chris-froome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fabian%20Cancellara%20wins%20Rio%20time%20trial%20gold%20as%20Chris%20Froome%20takes%20bronze%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Ffabian-cancellara-rio-2016-olympic-time-trial-cycling-gold-chris-froome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd43aa40c7baedd3705258bb9d26304f26e851419%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 Chris Froome in action on his way to bronze. Photograph: Pool/Reuters 
Team GB’s Geraint Thomas <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geraint-thomas>, 
still bearing the raw tattoos of his sickening crash on Vista Chinesa when 
looking good for a medal in the road race, was not forced to slum it. He was 
the quickest of 22 starters at the 10km mark three or four minutes before 
Froome set off but his effort soon faded.

Rio 2016 Olympics: Chris Froome on the road in hunt for time trial gold – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/10/rio-2016-olympics-day-five-phelps-froome-gymnastics-swimming-live>
Despite the bumpy topography this was a depressingly flat affair. At the 
coronation of Bradley Wiggins in London four years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/01/bradley-wiggins-gold-medal-olympian>
, crowds thronged the route from start to finish and created a ferocious din as 
he pedalled his way on to that preposterous but brilliantly conceived golden 
throne from which he would not be ousted. By contrast public interest here was 
negligible with the inclement weather ensuring that not even the few 
inquisitive beach-goers who had looked in on the finish of the weekend’s events 
were on hand to see Spartacus recline on his ceremonial sun lounger.

On a course that was all about pacing Froome was seventh at the first 
time-check, where Cancellara posted the fastest time. Australia’s Rohan Dennis, 
too, had been quick but broke his handlebars and was forced into a bike change 
that slowed his gallop and almost certainly cost him a medal.

Froome said he’d be going a “good training ride” of five or six hours “to keep 
the body ticking over” before heading home on Friday. Asked which parts of Rio 
he’d take in on his jaunt, he thought briefly. “Maybe a few more laps of the 
time trial circuit,” he said. “It seems to be the best route around here.”
 