
My career started when I was barely 14 years old. I was in Milan, at the gym, 
and one of the two biggest photographers in Europe,Oliviero Toscani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/sep/18/gayrights.italy>, came up to me 
and said, ‘You should model.’ I wasn’t in the industry, so I had no idea who he 
was. I remember giving him my father’s phone number. He called my father, hired 
me for a big campaign and things took off from there.

I came to New York City at 19 years old, walked into the Ford modelling agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/10/modelling-agent-eileen-ford-dies-92>
 without an appointment and walked out with a contract. The next day, in the 
gym, I got a call and was asked to meet with Barry McKinley, then the biggest 
photographer in the world. He hired me for the biggest campaign in America – 
the launch of the Gap. At that time, if you were one of the top male models in 
the world, you could earn $120,000 a year. My first job, straight away, was 
close to $150,000. So I set new standards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436896256014%2Fd97d198e-bd73-442f-be63-aaf26aee031b-1353x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fabio%3A%20confessions%20of%20the%20original%20male%20supermodel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fabio%3A%20confessions%20of%20the%20original%20male%20supermodel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436896256014%2Fd97d198e-bd73-442f-be63-aaf26aee031b-1353x2040.jpeg>
 Soaking up some rays in Hawaii in 1993. Photograph: Lynn Goldsmith/Lynn 
Goldsmith/Corbis 
I think I was the first really muscular model. When I started modelling, 
[clothes] were a 40-inch regular; here I am coming in with a 56-inch chest. I 
couldn’t fit my arm into a suit.

Some writers saw me and said, “I want my hero to look like this guy,” and 
approached me for their book covers. Then I’m doing 15 or 16 book covers a day.

When shooting those covers, it’s simple: you’re hugging a beautiful girl and 
you think about making love to her. You look at the camera and you go, “I’m 
serious – if I get hold of you, I’ll do a number on you. I would make you lose 
your sanity!” You play a character, otherwise it would be just another empty 
picture. People would look at your eyes and expression – and they can tell.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436896514145%2Fe6628abd-f096-4b54-a3e0-625bccbe9596-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fabio%3A%20confessions%20of%20the%20original%20male%20supermodel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fabio%3A%20confessions%20of%20the%20original%20male%20supermodel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436896514145%2Fe6628abd-f096-4b54-a3e0-625bccbe9596-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fabio: a man of many book covers 
I’d be the biggest hypocrite if I said I really worked very hard for my 
career, because it was given to me on a silver platter. I can’t take any 
credit. My major focus was sports and going to the gym.

Miracles exist – you just have to believe it. A lot of the time when people 
pray to God they aren’t specific enough. I always tell people God is the god of 
details. You have to ask for the detail. So, you want a car – what kind of car 
do you want? Do you want a Cherokee, a Ford, a Chevy, a Bentley? An off-road 
vehicle? What about the trim and interior and the wheels? Be specific, then 
when you get something like that it will be no coincidence. I always prayed to 
God and that’s why I saw my life as a miracle.

They offered me everything – movies, shows, so many things I could have done. 
I could have been a million times bigger. But the question I asked myself was, 
“If I accept all this work, am I going to be happy or miserable?” The answer 
was loud and clear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436896993878%2Fa65f4659-6d8d-4569-85d9-cf38904fbd29-2028x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fabio%3A%20confessions%20of%20the%20original%20male%20supermodel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fabio%3A%20confessions%20of%20the%20original%20male%20supermodel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436896993878%2Fa65f4659-6d8d-4569-85d9-cf38904fbd29-2028x2040.jpeg>
 Fabio circa 2000. Photograph: Maureen Donaldson/Getty Images 
They wanted me to be Tarzan, but that would have meant living in Mexico for 
three or four years – and there’s not enough money in the world to make me want 
to do that. Some places you just want to visit. No way. I don’t think so. I’m 
out.
 Fabio as the face of I Can’t Believe It’s Not Butter. 
People come to Los Angeles and sell their soul every day. It’s sad. Here, the 
mentality is that everyone has a price. But I say no – no money can buy my 
soul. I’ve had so many offers that I didn’t think were proper and I’d say 
sorry, I don’t need it. I didn’t want to work my butt off and not be happy. 
I’ll always choose happiness and life over all the money in the world.Across my 
entire career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/apr/05/fabio-lanzoni>, I had 
respect in the industry, because I was the one who never sold out.

People ask if I’ve made a pact with the devil to still look like this – but I 
say I’ve made a pact with God. I go to the gym for 60 minutes at least four 
times a week. In my property, I have a very tough trail, and I do hiking and 
running andmotorcross enduro <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enduro>, then in 
the gym I do regular cardio and lift weights.

When you have a bad day, you have to think about how lucky you are. You think 
of people with cancer, people coming back from Afghanistan and Iraq [with] no 
arms or legs. And you say, “how can I be getting upset because I had a bad hair 
day?”

I lost my younger sister to cancer. So I know that you have to live day by day 
– you don’t know what’s happening tomorrow. I have perspective. Life is so 
fragile; you have to treasure it. And you have to have fun – you cannot take 
yourself too seriously. Look at Napoleon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436896697762%2F40f365d4-5917-43e0-bfb2-abe6f483a33a-1573x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fabio%3A%20confessions%20of%20the%20original%20male%20supermodel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fabio%3A%20confessions%20of%20the%20original%20male%20supermodel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Ffabio-confessions-original-male-supermodel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436896697762%2F40f365d4-5917-43e0-bfb2-abe6f483a33a-1573x2040.jpeg>
 ‘The only thing left in my life to do is find a wife and get some kids.’ 
Photograph: ITV/Rex Shutterstock 
To tell you the truth, I really don’t care [about Instagram], because I have a 
life. I don’t want people to know what I’m doing or where I’m at. I understand 
that [models] are using it to make a business and a life for themselves, but 
I’ve already made so many businesses. I have the most amazing line of nutrition 
– the highest quality, pretty much, in the United States – and it’s going 
really well. I can be taking a shower and my distributor is taking orders. I 
don’t need to be on Instagram.

The only thing left in my life to do is find a wife and get some kids. All the 
rest, trust me, it’s done. But you always find one person that might be a 
contender and then afterwards you get disappointed. So I always keep my eye 
open.
 