
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> is aiming to use 
the Oculus Rift virtual reality headset to create a more immersive social 
experience through the company’s communications tools.

In the first explanation of what Facebook intends to do with its $2bn purchase 
that has puzzled some investors and analysts, the company told developers at 
its F8 conference in San Francisco that it will help create a more lifelike and 
useful social network.

“After thousands of demos we know we are just on the cusp, just getting there 
to get that sense of presence where for a moment your conscious brain is 
overruled by the subconscious that says: ‘You are not where you think you 
are,’” Facebook’s chief technology officer Mike Schroepfer said during his 
on-stage talk on the second day of the 2-day conference.

Virtual reality <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/virtual-reality> 
headsets such as the Oculus Rift and Samsung’s Gear VR have launched with a 
focus on video games and entertainment, but Schroepfer and other Facebook 
executives attempted to convince attendees that the gadgets could transform how 
people communicate.

Oculus Rift’s founder and chief executive Palmer Luckey has said in the past 
that Facebook in its current form wasn’t a good fit for virtual reality.

“Looking at a larger than life News Feed or someone’s photos in VR isn’t 
interesting. It needs to be new experience. I don’t think it’s going to be 
Facebook the social network in VR, but people are narcissists and they want 
people to see what they think are their amazing lives,” hesaid at International 
CES 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/07/oculus-vr-virtual-reality-facebook>
 in Las Vegas in January.

One example given of these “new experiences” was an event such as a birthday 
party or a child’s first bike ride that could be shared on Facebook so that 
users in different parts of the world felt as if they were taking part.

“Their mission is to connect the world and VR teleports people into a 
different place,” said Vlada Bortnik, the founder of app-maker Happy Bits, at 
the conference.

Facebook said the Oculus headset will be released “before long,” but did not 
provide a timeframe. Samsung’s Gear VR, which was built in partnership with 
Oculus Rift, was released to consumers through the electronics chain Best Buy 
in the US on Friday, becoming the first VR headset to be available beyond 
developers and early adopters to the mass market.

• Sony Morpheus virtual reality headset to launch in first half of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/04/sony-morpheus-playstation-4-ps4-virtual-reality-headset-to-launch-2016>

• Andreessen Horowitz gets behind London VR startup Improbable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/24/andreessen-horowitz-london-virtual-reality-startup-improbable>
 