
John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> and Next, two of 
the country’s biggest retailers, have reported falling profits as Britons slash 
spending on clothing and the internet sucks sales out of high street stores.

Next chief executive, Simon Wolfson, batted away talk of a July retail sales 
bounce after it was forced to discount heavily in the wake of poor summer sales 
in its stores. The retailer revealed 30% more clothing went into its 
end-of-season sale which contributed to a near-17% fall in first-half profits 
at its high street store division. He said trading remained “challenging and 
volatile” as Britonsopted to spend spare cash on eating out and other leisure 
pursuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/next-retail-profits-slide-as-consumers-shun-full-price-clothes>
.

What Brexit effect? Why British consumers still spend, spend, spend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/sep/15/what-brexit-effect-why-british-consumers-still-spend-spend-spend-retail-sales>
The weak performance worried investors, making Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> the second biggest faller in the 
FTSE 100 with its shares losing almost 5%. The grim picture it painted of high 
street trading conditions also weighed on the fortunes of rival Marks & 
Spencer, whose shares were pulled down 2.6%.

The gloom was compounded by the John Lewis Partnership, which said it was 
scaling back the expansion of its Waitrose supermarket chain and warned of 
further job losses. Pre-tax profits for the group fell 14.7% to £81.9m, 
excluding exceptional property items, for the six months to the end of July. 
Operating profits slumped 31.2% at John Lewis, as its Never Knowingly Undersold 
promise forced it to match rivals promotions, whileWaitrose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> saw a 10.5% fall.

John Lewis Partnership chairman, Sir Charlie Mayfield, said the performance 
reflected the decision to invest in its infrastructure as well as to improve 
staff pay levels. “We have grown gross sales and market share across both 
Waitrose and John Lewis, but our profits are down,” he said. “This reflects 
market conditions and steps we are taking to adapt the partnership for the 
future.”

The company, which is owned by its employees– known as partners, said it was 
taking a £25m writedown relating to sites it had acquired to build seven 
Waitrose supermarkets that it no longer plans to open. It will instead invest 
money in sprucing up existing branches, adding new attractions such as wine and 
sushi bars, which appeal to its upmarket shoppers.

The divergence between the performance of each chain’s physical and internet 
presence showed the challenge bricks and mortar retailers face in a digital 
age. While sales at established Waitrose stores fell 1%, in line with a fall in 
its food prices, they were up 4.3% online. At John Lewis department store sales 
fell 1%, while its website recorded a 18.4% sales surge.

Next’s first half performance was shored up by a recovery at its internet arm 
Directory, where profits rose 10.9% to £204.2m. As a result, Next’s pre-tax 
profit for the six months to the end of July was down just 1.5% at £342.1m.

To adapt to this sea change in shopping habits, John Lewis has been investing 
heavily andlast week unveiled the £150m extension to its Milton Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/john-lewis-hi-tech-warehouse-hard-act-sports-direct-follow-milton-keynes>
 depot that will boost efficiency at its home shopping business before the key 
Christmas period. The retailer banks at least two-thirds of its annual profits 
in the second half.

Marks & Spencer's Laura Wade-Gery to leave at the end of September
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/12/marks-spencer-laura-wade-gery-to-leave-at-the-end-of-the-month>
Mayfield said it had also increased pay for its lowest-paid partners by £33m – 
£30m more than was required by the introduction of the national living wage – 
but warned there would be a steady reduction in staff numbers from now on after 
cutting about 1,500 jobs last year. “We anticipate that this will mean we will 
have fewer partners over time compared with today,” he said.

Mayfield said John Lewis had felt little effect from the vote to leave the EU, 
but that uncertainty created by the referendum result would linger. One 
immediate impact of the Brexit vote was that the group’s pension deficit soared 
by £512m to £1.44bn in the first half, because of falling yields on bonds used 
to fund the scheme.

Wolfson warned in March that the high street would suffer the most difficult 
trading conditions this year since the financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/next-warns-of-toughest-trading-since-financial-crisis-and-cuts-sales-forecast>
. At the time he likened conditions to “walking up the down escalator”. The 
retailer expects its full-price sales to either grow or contract by 2.5% this 
year, and Wolfson said he hoped to present a clearer picture of trading in 
November when it reports its third-quarter sales. “We will hopefully have a bit 
of cold weather then and be able to see the reaction to our winter ranges, 
because at the moment it’s impossible to read because no one is buying winter 
ranges,” Wolfson said.
 