
A woman marries the love of her life, has nine daughters with him, then finds 
herself widowed. More than a decade later, this family of 10 women let a camera 
crew into their lives.

On the face of it, Family Rules seems like yet another reality TV show with a 
twist – in this case, that it focuses on an Aboriginal family, who have been 
labelled“the Aussie Kardashians” 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/entertainment/television/the-tragic-past-of-the-aussie-kardashians-nine-feisty-daughters-a-fearless-mum-one-noisy-tv-show/news-story/097c7eaa636ecae9e0f0dc3b0c7c77ef>
.


But in NITV’s new six-part account of a very modern Indigenous family, still 
waters run deep.

When it comes to Indigenous families in Australia, negative stereotypes abound:
parents being indifferent to their children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/07/indigenousdads-and-their-children-take-to-twitter-over-bill-leak-cartoon>
; chronic welfare dependency. But in Family Rules they’re blown aside to make 
room for something more positive and refreshing: an exploration of what life is 
really like for a large section of the Aboriginal community that, through hard 
work and a focus on education, is moving into a middle-class life.

As intellectual debate continues about what it means to be Aboriginal in 
contemporary Australia, here is a television program that shows it, simply and 
honestly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2lsQUQnhvPQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2lsQUQnhvPQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2lsQUQnhvPQ&media=>
At the heart of the Perth-based clan is Daniella Borg, a Noongar woman. The 
mother of nine young women was widowed in 2004 after her husband, Kevin Rule, 
was killed in a random one-punch attack. Her loving patience, resilience and 
strong values are instilled in her daughters, aged 12 to 19: Angela, Shenika, 
Helen, Kelly, Kiara, Sharna, Aleisha, Jessica and Hannah.

Women of the stolen generations: 'I want my story out'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/28/women-of-the-stolen-generations-i-want-my-story-out>
“I hope people can laugh with us and relate to us, or some of us – because 
we’re all different, and all the girls have different personalities,” Daniella 
says. “And some might relate to me.”

She also hopes the show might put a human face on what she and her daughters 
have been through. “It may stop someone from punching someone, [show them] that 
person has a family, that person has been robbed from their life. Or for 
someone going through grief, we can show there is always a tomorrow, there is 
always something to look forward to.”

Reality TV <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/reality-tv> comes with 
baggage these days, thanks in part to the aforementioned Kardashians and other 
shows set up to shock and mock – but at its best, in shows such as Family 
Rules, observational documentary can reveal intimate moments of life that we 
all relate to, and present us with very real characters who we can admire.

The daughters are introduced to us by their order in the family, and then – in 
the manner of the genre – with identifiers: Kiara is the golden child, Kelly is 
the fun one, Shenika is the enforcer. But none are edited in a way to make them 
one-dimensional – and the archetypes fall away as we get to know them.

All are ambitious. All are family-oriented. Of the seven who are old enough to 
have finished high school, all have done so – and the other two are following 
in their footsteps.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F422c1a7451d21aec20c4412263df75849db33950%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20Rules%3A%20Indigenous%20family%20of%2010%20strong%20women%20star%20in%20refreshing%20new%20reality%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20Rules%3A%20Indigenous%20family%20of%2010%20strong%20women%20star%20in%20refreshing%20new%20reality%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F422c1a7451d21aec20c4412263df75849db33950%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Daniella Rule, a single mother of nine daughters. ‘She’s superwoman,’ Kiara 
says of her mother. Photograph: Sabine Alber 
“We were just being parents and we wanted them to go to school,” Daniella 
explains. She speaks with a quiet determination and focus that has equipped her 
well for the challenges life has thrown. “I really didn’t have a long-term 
goal. Just being happy and getting an education.”

Among the daughters are great role models for young women, who defy the 
negative stereotypes often levelled at Indigenous Australia. All see education 
as a pathway, and are goal-oriented – whether working towards a music career, 
aspiring to be a model, studying at university or finishing high school. They 
are vivacious and independent, and there’s plenty of bickering – but they all 
have generous spirits, supportive natures and a deep value for family. There is 
no excessive alcohol consumption, no drug taking.

In the first episode, Aleisha – 17 and in her final year of high-school – is 
focused on her formal. She is worried about what to wear and how much her 
mother should be paying; at the same time, we see her working hard at her own 
job. Amid the teenage distractions, she is concentrating on her future.

My experience on First Contact challenged everything I knew about Indigenous 
Australia | Tom Ballard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/29/my-experience-on-first-contact-challenged-everything-i-knew-about-indigenous-australia>
Aleisha is philosophical about how she might come across in the show: she 
fears her obsession with her clothes, hair and makeup might show her as 
superficial, but takes it all in her stride. “I always push the boundaries,” 
she says. “Everyone’s boundaries,” Kiara quips. Kiara studies anthropology and 
business; they might seem like different topics, she explains, but they’re both 
about people.

Daniella works as an Aboriginal education liaison officer at the high school 
her youngest daughters attend.

“I think it came from my Mum’s family,” she says of the high value she places 
on education. “She juggled going to Tafe, having a job and looking after her 
kids. And I think that she got that from her side – my great-grandfather once 
wrote a letter to the native welfare asking for his children to be educated. So 
it’s always been passed down through our mob. You just add to it, I suppose. 
Add your own little flavour.”

“She’s superwoman,” Kiara says of her mother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f0ade1b93b9ca4d246b00b324cfbf798a4992dd%2F0_0_5140_3427%2F5140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20Rules%3A%20Indigenous%20family%20of%2010%20strong%20women%20star%20in%20refreshing%20new%20reality%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20Rules%3A%20Indigenous%20family%20of%2010%20strong%20women%20star%20in%20refreshing%20new%20reality%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f0ade1b93b9ca4d246b00b324cfbf798a4992dd%2F0_0_5140_3427%2F5140.jpg>
 Aleisha Rule, 17, gets ready for her formal. Photograph: abine Albers/Screen 
Australia 
This isn’t the first time the family have let a camera crew into their lives. 
The second eldest, Shenika,competed in the first Australian season of the 
modelling reality show The Face <http://theface.wikia.com/wiki/Shenika_Rule>, 
and the 2015 documentary seriesAngela’s Rules 
<http://www.metamorflix.com.au/productions/angelas-rules/> – also produced by 
Metamorflix and Karla Hart Enterprises, for NITV – focused on the eldest of the 
sisters and her musical aspirations.

Still, they hadn’t planned for a follow-up series – and there was some soul 
searching before the family agreed.

“When it was offered to us we asked ourselves, ‘What do we want out of 
this?,’” Daniella says. “We saw it was a platform to be able to tell our story, 
and also to show that this is life. And we wanted to enjoy the process. It was 
a bit daunting with the cameras but you get used to it.”

By this stage, the girls are somewhat used to having an audience – and know 
how to weather the storm. “There’s always going to be negative critiques and 
comments but we’ve chosen to ignore it,” Aleisha says. “As Shenika says, ‘You 
know who you are, you know how it is, so other people’s opinions don’t matter.’”

She continues: “We had lots of negative comments when Shenika was on The Face, 
but we just didn’t look at them. We just didn’t look ourselves up on the 
internet. We are just going to ignore it. As long as we have each other, it 
doesn’t matter.”

Aleisha hopes the show will inspire people, and Kiara adds: “Especially if 
they are going through hardship. All women would find something to relate to.”

For her part, Daniella is thrilled with the final product. “It’s just a normal 
family, doing normal things, and going through normal ups and downs,” she says. 
“The negativity that may come with it is out of our control. We just have to 
stay real to what we want to do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f78b14a8051de986559b25af9e5735b3e469843%2F0_0_5492_3661%2F5492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20Rules%3A%20Indigenous%20family%20of%2010%20strong%20women%20star%20in%20refreshing%20new%20reality%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20Rules%3A%20Indigenous%20family%20of%2010%20strong%20women%20star%20in%20refreshing%20new%20reality%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffamily-rules-indigenous-family-of-10-strong-women-star-in-refreshing-new-reality-series%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f78b14a8051de986559b25af9e5735b3e469843%2F0_0_5492_3661%2F5492.jpg>
 ‘It’s just a normal family, doing normal things, and going through normal ups 
and downs,’ says Daniella Rule. Photograph: Sabine Albers 
The season is strongest when all the women are together. In the finale, they 
travel to Norseman, Western Australia, where Daniella and Kevin met and fell in 
love and where he is now buried.

Some of the daughters remember him and the others barely knew him, but their 
father is ever-present in their lives: the portrayal of their relationship to 
him is not just an exploration of grief and legacy but also of connection to 
country.

The women are proud of their culture and endeavour to learn more about it. 
“Our journey with our culture is still ongoing,” Daniella admits. “It keeps you 
grounded … it helps us be strong with who we are.”

The show is so compelling thanks in part to its cast of remarkable women and 
its fascinating portrayal of modern Aboriginality – but at its heart, Family 
Rules is simply a love story: not just between mother and daughters, or between 
sisters, but also between Daniella and her husband.

What would Kevin think of the show, I ask. “He’s going to be very proud of his 
girls,” Daniella says with a gentle smile. “I think our worst fear is to be 
forgotten when you’re gone – and he knows he’s not forgotten.”

• Family Rules premieres on NITV on Monday 9 January at 7.30pm
 