
A Bay Area family is holding on to its ramshackle farmstead in the heart of 
Google’s sprawling headquarters despite reason to believe it has been offered 
$5m to $7m by the tech giant for the tiny patch of land.

The land – which is home to battered pickups, a crumbling ice house, and a 
handful of renters – is now surrounded on all sides by the tech company’s more 
than 25-acre campus in Mountain View,California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>.

Measuring less than an acre, the property is also home to fig, tangerine, 
avocado and ancient pepper trees, many of which were planted and harvested by 
the late patriarch of the family, Victor Molinari, who died five years ago.

His surviving relatives appear disinclined to sell.

“Right now we’re living,” said Leonard Martinelli, 49. “We don’t need the 
money. Right now it’s not for sale.” His sister, Sandra Martinelli Bilyeu, 43, 
added: “If we keep it, we keep our history.”

But it is not only the family’s history that is being preserved.

Silicon Valley may now be synonymous with tech behemoths such as Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, Apple and Facebook, but not so 
long ago it was miles of lush farm fields where plums, cherries and tomatoes 
grew in abundance.

Although Silicon Valley has been generous to the point of extravagance in 
preserving its own history – the massive Computer History Museum is almost 
exactly one mile away from the farmstead – the industry and its supporters have 
been less enthusiastic about memorializing anything before the advent of high 
tech.

“I don’t think anyone sees any historic significance” in the property, said 
Mountain View city councilman Leonard Siegel. “Eventually all these properties 
are going to go. There’s nothing unique about them.”

“It’s not as if the Golden Era of Mountain View was when it was agricultural,” 
added Siegel, who describes himself as a professional environmental advocate. 
“Silicon Valley’s strength is its permanent sense of evolution.”

That sentiment was called “unfortunate and not surprising” by Brian Grayson of 
the valley’s preservation action council. “The fabric of a community comes from 
what happened here. Newcomers have no connection to why we came here except for 
more jobs. That’s it for them.”

The fabric of community comes from what happened. Newcomers have no connection 
to why we came here except for more jobs
Brian Grayson 
Those newcomers have transformed the agricultural land south of San Francisco 
into one of the most expensive swaths of real estate in the world, and the 
Martinelli family has witnessed the value of its land rocket.

“That land is worth probably $5m-7m,” according to Myron Von Raesfeld, a 
leading real estate expert in the valley and former president of the Santa 
Clara County Association of Realtors. “I have reason to believe they’ve been 
offered that kind of money from Google.”

Google declined to respond to inquiries about the attempted purchase of the 
property.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fgoogle-campus-silicon-valley-farm-martinellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c3dfe11b4587af8af80bd94c82acca020a84141%2F0_185_5189_3113%2F5189.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20resists%20Google's%20campus%20sprawl%20despite%20offer%20to%20buy%20farm%20for%20millions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fgoogle-campus-silicon-valley-farm-martinellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20resists%20Google%27s%20campus%20sprawl%20despite%20offer%20to%20buy%20farm%20for%20millions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fgoogle-campus-silicon-valley-farm-martinellis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c3dfe11b4587af8af80bd94c82acca020a84141%2F0_185_5189_3113%2F5189.jpg>
 A Google employee bikes in front of the Martinellis’ property at 1851 
Charleston Road, in the middle of the Google campus. Photograph: Ramin Talaie 
for the Guardian 
The Martinelli clan no longer reside at the farmstead, which has been 
gradually surrounded by the tech giant’s campus, known as Googleplex, which 
provides offices for about 20,000 employees.

Instead, it is now home to a handful of eclectic renters such as Mihail 
Kivachitsky, a self-described artist who declined to be interviewed but makes a 
living as a carpenter.

Victoria Martinelli, 79, one of the elders of the Martinelli clan and the late 
Victor Molinari’s sister, remembers working the vegetable rows and learning to 
drive on a tractor in the fields during childhood summer vacations. She gave 
the Guardian a recent tour of the property.

She glanced at a weathered shed, recalling how, about 70 years ago, her family 
built it and a now ruined barn. The latter included a place to keep the produce 
cold before trucking it to the San Francisco produce markets.

'Largest-ever' Silicon Valley eviction to displace hundreds of tenants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/07/silicon-valley-largest-eviction-rent-controlled-tenants-income-inequality>
“That was in 1946, maybe 1947,” Victoria Martinelli recalled. “That’s where 
they washed the fruit before it went on the truck. The shelves are where we 
stored the onions.”

While her children appeared reluctant to let go of the family’s farm, Victoria 
Martinelli was more ambivalent. “We don’t know,” she said, noting that there 
were “lots of grandchildren” and endowing them with financial independence 
deserves consideration.

Should the family change its mind and relinquish its farmstead, Google would 
extend its formidable imprint on Mountain View – resigning to history the 
bucolic fields that have since turned to concrete.

“It’s a pretty much amazing-looking place right here in the middle of all 
this,” said Rob Carr, a young Google software engineer walking by the old 
farmhouse. “I can see the value in saving it. But I also believe property 
should be used.”
 