
When an Indian farmer plants his cotton crop, there’s at least a 75% chance 
the seeds have been been bought from a company owned by Monsanto. If a Latin 
American farmer sprays insecticide on her genetically engineered soya beans, 
the chemical is more than likely to have been provided by German chemical and 
drugs company Bayer or by US firm Dupont.

And when African farmers add chemicals to their maize fields or plant it’s 
odds-on that they have come from Swiss company Syngenta.

Until recently, six or seven global agri-food businesses competed with each 
other for a share of the world market for seeds and chemicals. But if EU and US 
regulators allow a series of mega-mergers to take place, within months just 
three companies will be left in control of nearly 60% of the world’s seeds,
nearly 70% of the chemicals and pesticides 
<http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2016/09/whoa-monsanto-about-get-swallowed-german-giant-bayer>
 needed to grow food and nearly all of the world’s GM crop genetic traits.

Obama’s development legacy rings hollow on farmers’ rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/11/barack-obama-legacy-farmers-rights-lesbia-yaneth-urquia-honduras-food-security-agriculture>
The mega-deals now being scrutinised by governments and the EU include the 
$66bn (£51bn) agreed takeover 
<https://www.advancingtogether.com/en/social-disclaimer-b/> of US seed, 
chemical and biotech company Monsanto by drug and German gene firm Bayer;US 
chemical company Dow’s intention to merge with chemical conglomerate rival 
DuPont 
<http://www.delawareonline.com/story/news/2016/09/20/duponts-collins-says-merger-wont-stifle-innovation/90725626/>
; andChemChina’s plan to buy massive Swiss seed and gene group Syngenta 
<https://www.syngenta-growth.com/en/home/?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_term=global&utm_content=General&utm_campaign=syngenta-deal-2016&gclid=CPWK7Ju6oM8CFWUq0wodWq0HiQ>
 for $43bn (£33bn).

Include the mergers of several of the world’s biggest fertiliser companies 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/canadian-fertilizer-giants-agrium-and-potash-agree-to-merge-1473676785>
, and moves by the world’s largest farm equipment companies to invest in big 
data, robotics and farm surveillance technologies, and the consolidations are 
seen as taking global agriculture into a new era.


Alarmed EU, US and Latin American consumer, environment and anti-trust groups 
this week claimed that the three mega deals have the potential to concentrate 
political and financial power dangerously and could force more countries to 
adopt a single model of farming that excludes or impoverishes small farmers.

With seeds, chemicals, research and lobbying power in the hands of a tiny 
group of immensely powerful companies, they say, the small farmer will 
inevitably be blown away, competition could be stifled, and food and farm input 
prices will rise.


In a report to be shortly published on the growing concentration of power in 
the agri-food industry, theInternational Panel of Experts on Sustainable Food 
Systems <http://www.ipes-food.org/> (Ipes) is expected to say that “an 
unprecedented wave of corporate consolidation is under way”.

“New technology and data-driven synergies could lead to three companies 
controlling 60% of seeds and 70% of agrochemicals worldwide with still greater 
oligopoly possible – a historic power shift throughout global agricultural 
inputs and even greater crop and livestock vulnerability through uniformity,” 
says an early draft of the report seen by the Guardian.

The consolidation means that each of the big three corporates will also be 
positioned to access massive banks of genetic data, seen as crucial to 
companies growing in places like sub-Saharan Africa with burgeoning populations 
and food shortages.


Myanmar can flourish by sowing seeds of agricultural prosperity | Deirdre May 
Culley and Martha Baxter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/myanmar-can-flourish-by-sowing-seeds-of-agricultural-prosperity>
 “The mergers will enable pharmaceutical and agriculture companies to become 
big data companies,” says Catherine Wood, CEO of Ark investment management. 
“When you sequence a human genome, or a seed, what you get out of it is data.”

Olivier De Schutter, former UN special rapporteur on the right to food and a 
co-chair of Ipes, says the mergers will make developing countries a more 
attractive target for corporate farming.


“The frontier of industrial agriculture is moving towards sub-Saharan Africa. 
There is a huge market there which the seed companies [say] will grow very 
significant in the next few years.

“They will be in a position to dominate this market. Sub-Saharan Africa is 
becoming the battleground of the giants,” says De Schutter.

Colin Hamilton is Maquarie bank’s global head of commodities research in 
London: “These mergers show companies are looking for technological advance and 
improved yields. China gets half the corn output of the US, so it wants to 
catch up. It wants technology from Syngenta.”

Some of the shift to corporate consolidation and a US system of agriculture 
led by genetic engineering is being driven by demography and technology, he 
says. “Most farmers in countries like China are aged over 50. Young people [no 
longer] want to farm.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffarming-mega-mergers-threaten-food-security-say-campaigners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc003bf9f6aa47378c503fd73a485cb0191f067c%2F0_75_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farming%20mega-mergers%20threaten%20food%20security%2C%20say%20campaigners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffarming-mega-mergers-threaten-food-security-say-campaigners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farming%20mega-mergers%20threaten%20food%20security%2C%20say%20campaigners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffarming-mega-mergers-threaten-food-security-say-campaigners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc003bf9f6aa47378c503fd73a485cb0191f067c%2F0_75_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
 Farmers dry corn in east China’s Shandong province. Photograph: Xinhua / 
Barcroft Images 
Technology and agriculture watchdog group ETC argues that the takeover frenzy 
is no longer just about seeds and pesticides but about global control of 
agricultural inputs and world food security.


“Anti-competition regulators should block these mergers everywhere, and 
particularly in the emerging markets of the global south, as the new mega 
companies will greatly expand their power and outcompete national enterprises 
[there],” said ETC’s director, Pat Mooney, a group which monitors global 
agribusiness and agricultural technologies.


Mooney says the mergers are linked to companies wanting control of big data 
and access to patents, gene traits and intellectual property.

“These deals are not just about seeds and pesticides, but also about who will 
control big data in agriculture. The company that can dominate seed, soil and 
weather data and crunch new genomics information will inevitably gain control 
of global agricultural inputs – seeds, pesticides, fertilisers and farm 
machinery.”

“Dominance may go to the biggest companies best able to manage the data and 
the DNA to their own advantage,” he says.


 The mergers have created alarm throughout Latin America and raised concerns 
about increased prices, more privatisation of research and political pressure, 
says Silvia Ribeiro, director of ETC’s Latin American office in Mexico.

El Niño hits Fairtrade: 'It went from -4C to 25C in a week, ruining our crops' 
| Murithi Mutiga and Sam Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/29/fairtrade-farmers-crisis-temperatures-ruining-crops>
“[There is] huge pressure from these giant companies to make laws and 
regulations in our countries that allow them to dominate markets, crush 
farmers’ rights and make peasant seeds illegal,” he says.

 “Together, these mergers are set to re-shape world farming, potentially 
raising prices for growers and consumers around the world,” says Adrian Bebb, 
senior food, agriculture and biodiversity campaigner for Friends of the Earth 
Europe, who has described the Bayer-Monsanto takeover as a“marriage made in 
hell” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/14/bayer-takeover-monsanto-66-billion-deal>
.

By concentrating market control and access to seeds and land among a handful 
of corporations, Bebb says millions of small farmers in developing countries 
stand to become impoverished. “From Africa and Asia to Latin America and the 
EU, corporate control over markets and supply chains is displacing millions of 
small-scale farmers.

“These dynamics have created some of the world’s highest rates of poverty and 
hunger among small-scale food producers and rural communities worldwide.”

Bebb and others argue that the mergers have little to do with solving world 
hunger. “Research consistently demonstrates that world hunger is not a problem 
of supply, but rather of poverty, lack of democracy and unequal access to land, 
water and other resources, especially for women.

To avoid the absolute control of the global food supply by a few companies, 
money should be invested heavily in grassroots farming, he says.

 “Smallholders are the backbone of world food supply; they represent over 90% 
percent of farmers worldwide and provide more than 80% of the food consumed 
throughout much of the developing world, particularly southern Asia and 
sub-Saharan Africa.

The battle to stop the mergers will not just be decided by regulators. 
Powerful farm movements in many developing countries frightened by the immense 
power that the corporates will wield, plan to take their concerns to the UN and 
international meetings in Indonesia, Mexico and elsewhere over the next few 
months.

One of the most important meetings will be in Rome where the UN’s Food and 
Agriculture Organisation’scommittee on world food security meets next month 
<http://www.fao.org/cfs/en/>.

 “Virtually all of the world’s governments, farmer organisations and many 
agribusinesses companies will be in the same room for a week, with food 
security on the official agenda. There are going to be a lot of angry people 
there wanting to stop these mergers,” says Ribeiro.

 