
The most powerful women of the catwalk circuit are no longer to be found on 
the front row or in the industry boardrooms – but on the catwalks themselves. A 
tiny elite of models who have become social media superstars wield influence 
and commercial clout the like of which the supermodels of the 1990s could only 
have dreamed of.

Milan fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week> 
has long been ruled by luxury brands, but this week a new brand leapfrogged 
Prada and Gucci to dominate coverage: that of 21-year-old Gigi Hadid, whose 
stratospheric rise in modelling is inseparable from the 23 million followers 
she has on Instagram. (To put this figure into perspective, consider that 
Donatella Versace has 858,000 followers.) This week Hadid, the star of 
MaxMara’s advertising campaign, walked in their catwalk show along with her 
19-year-old sister Bella. The pair also starred on the catwalk for Fendi, 
designed by Karl Lagerfeld.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ffashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5139523616cec8c818ee9e88221fdce35f8d156b%2F0_0_3000_1936%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20world%20balance%20of%20power%20shifts%20to%20social%20media%20superstars%20in%20Milan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ffashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20world%20balance%20of%20power%20shifts%20to%20social%20media%20superstars%20in%20Milan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ffashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5139523616cec8c818ee9e88221fdce35f8d156b%2F0_0_3000_1936%2F3000.jpg>
 Hadid was the centre of attention at Milan fashion week. Photograph: Melodie 
Jeng/Getty Images 
More significantly, both of the most talked-about incidents of Milan fashion 
week happened away from the catwalk, and both involved Gigi Hadid. An Instagram 
picture showing herself in a MaxMara coat and inviting followers to a public 
appearance at the label’s flagship store had garnered well over a million likes 
by the night of the event, which proved so popular that it led to a virtual 
roadblock in the centre of Milan. The following morning,a video of Hadid 
fighting off an assailant 
<https://twitter.com/HardysCloset/status/778960846219255808?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 who picked her up from the pavement went viral. For all the best efforts of 
Gucci and Prada, the bandwidth of Milan fashion week was largely taken up by 
Hadid.


Instagram <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>, initially 
conceived as an image-sharing platform for amateur photography enthusiasts, has 
evolved into a powerful system for delivering information in the visual, 
bite-size chunks modern audiences crave. It is a set-up which favours the 
young, being both tech-savvy and photogenic enough for selfies, and has enabled 
individuals such as Hadid to establish a considerable power base. Such is the 
potential publicity brought by a model with a social media following that it 
has become commonplace for casting directors to request only models with over 
10,000 followers when recruiting for a show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ffashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F869034c63b8573de33d6d2a6454a80c3ee3a40a4%2F0_0_2625_3263%2F2625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20world%20balance%20of%20power%20shifts%20to%20social%20media%20superstars%20in%20Milan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ffashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20world%20balance%20of%20power%20shifts%20to%20social%20media%20superstars%20in%20Milan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Ffashion-world-balance-of-power-shifts-to-social-media-superstars-in-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F869034c63b8573de33d6d2a6454a80c3ee3a40a4%2F0_0_2625_3263%2F2625.jpg>
 Kendall Jenner on the cover of Vogue. Photograph: Mert Alas and Marcus 
Piggott/Vog/PA 
At his blockbuster New York fashion week show, Tommy Hilfiger, who has been a 
fashion mogul a decade longer than Hadid has been alive, chose to give Hadid 
equal billing to himself in all aspects of promotion for a joint Tommy x Gigi 
collection. It was a clear sign that Hilfiger, whose fortune was forged on a 
strong instinct for the commercial zeitgeist, recognises Hadid’s influence with 
consumers to be level with his own.

Hadid was able to dominate the first half of Milan fashion week because the 
only two models with an even greater Instagram reach – Kendall Jenner, whose 
65.9 million followers outnumber the population of Great Britain, andCara 
Delevingne <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/cara-delevingne>, who has 33.9 
million – were not yet in town.


During a joint appearance with Hilfiger on American talk show The View, Hadid 
defended her Instagram power base against those who use the term “social media 
model” pejoratively, querying why others are “judging me for a tool that I 
think I would be dumb not to use”.

The platform which Hadid has to speak to fans makes her valuable – and 
expensive – to the brands that employ her. It also gives her an independent 
voice which previous generations of seen-and-not-heard models did not have. .


The industry shift in the balance of power from the traditional editorial 
tastemakers represented by Anna Wintour to the catwalk queens of social media 
is illustrated by this month’s American Vogue. Wintour’s totemic September 
issue starsKendall Jenner <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kendall-jenner>, 
a member of the Kardashian family and model for Chanel, Balmain and Estée 
Lauder, with the coverline “the face that launched a billion likes”. Dazed 
magazine called the issue “a cultural milestone”.

Another significant cultural milestone was reached this week when Kate Moss, 
an icon forged in a pre-internet age who rarely speaks in public, finally 
joined Instagram.
 