
Live by the sword, die by the sword. That’s what Vogue.com’s senior editors 
should be thinking at the moment. Ruefully, if they can do that without 
exacerbating wrinkles. Last week they were simply going about their business 
disparaging and belittling people – just a normal day at the office for those 
who professionally sit in judgment on what others are wearing – when they got a 
nasty shock.

Let me explain. Apparently it’s just been Milan fashion week. I was surprised 
to hear that because it seems to me it’s always London fashion week. Not 
literally always, but very nearly literally always. It genuinely feels like 
it’s absolutely always London fashion week this week, last week or next week. 
Is that the system? That it’s once every three weeks? If so, I suppose that 
leaves two thirds of the time for it to be Paris fashion week, New York fashion 
week, Bristol fashion week (for tidy sailors) orMilan fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week>, which is the one it 
was last week.

At the end of Milan fashion week, the staff of Vogue.com wrote an article on 
the internet 
<http://www.vogue.com/13483417/milan-fashion-week-spring-2017-vogue-editors-chat/>
 – a blog, I suppose you’d call it – discussing what the week had been like, 
what everyone had learned and why it absolutely hadn’t been a vacuous jamboree 
consecrated to the monetisation of narcissism. But the main issues the 
Vogue.com team had wanted to raise – the future of trousers, perhaps; how a 
raspberry sock makes a stylish and practical epaulette warmer; the advent of 
the thigh-gap storage sporran, a great place for the malnourished to keep 
cocaine and diet pills – got rather lost because of the digs they all made at 
bloggers.

Ageing and mortality must hurt all the more if you’ve made a profession of 
praising novelty

Other bloggers, that is, not each other. Not people who get paid to write a 
blog by a magazine that also has a printed-out version for the dentist’s, but a 
group who seem to be known variously as bloggers, influencers and street-style 
stars. The ladies at Vogue.com absolutely hate this group and really let rip at 
them in a tone of weirdly feverish condescension.Vogue’s creative digital 
director, Sally Singer, started it, writing in brackets to emphasise her 
contempt: “Note to bloggers who change head-to-toe, paid-to-wear outfits every 
hour: Please stop. Find another business. You are heralding the death of style.”

Her use of the word “style” is illuminating because it reveals weakness. She 
put “style” rather than “fashion”. It suits her haughty tone, of course. While 
affecting to give those not actually under her control an off-hand instruction 
(which they will defy), she also seems to be alluding to something more 
significant, more permanent than the merely trendy. But she isn’t. The sense of 
something being stylish is subjective and, as such, will never die unless we 
create a world that contains nothing at all to which anyone at all has a 
positive aesthetic response. Talk of “the death of style” is empty rhetoric.

“Fashion”, on the other hand, means something solid. It refers to objects, 
usually clothes, manufactured to new, cutting edge and/or popular designs. I 
never know what’s fashionable but plenty of people always do and, at any given 
time, some things are and some things aren’t. Sometimes flares or ripped jeans 
or kipper ties or powdered wigs are in and sometimes they’re out. It’s a matter 
of fact. The discussion and prediction of such facts is what fashion journalism 
andVogue are for.

But Sally Singer couldn’t refer to “the death of fashion” because that sounds 
wrong: something will always be in fashion. Saying “the death of fashion” is 
like saying “the death of recently”, “the end of the latest thing”. And the 
latest thing at the moment is the phenomenon of bloggers, influencers and 
street-style stars. These people, such asChiara Ferragni 
<http://www.theblondesalad.com/>, Susie Lau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/feb/20/at-home-with-susie-bubble-lau-in-pictures>
 andShea Marie <http://peaceloveshea.com/>, whose names mean nothing to me, 
have huge online followings, can create and redirect trends, and make a lot of 
money doing it. Essentially they have the same business model asVogue.

These bloggers are, by definition, fashionable, even if Sally Singer and her 
colleagues don’t consider them stylish. So, note to Vogue.com: never mind style 
– that’s not what you’re paid to care about. If what you find stylish is not 
fashionable, then neither are you.

Now, I would say that being fashionable doesn’t matter. But the staff of 
Vogue.com can’t say that. Their entire raison d’être has been to elevate and 
celebrate the value of being in touch with, and responding to, the latest 
trends. They can’t suddenly go off all that when it gets a bit youthful and 
digital and scary. That’s the top of a slippery slope that leads down to 
comfortable shoes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ffashions-old-guard-right-fear-bloggers-vogue-editors-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76bc8a6b94a0569054a222d6d37d284c04dc9519%2F0_0_1884_1399%2F1884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%E2%80%99s%20old%20guard%20are%20right%20to%20fear%20the%20blogger%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ffashions-old-guard-right-fear-bloggers-vogue-editors-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%E2%80%99s%20old%20guard%20are%20right%20to%20fear%20the%20blogger%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ffashions-old-guard-right-fear-bloggers-vogue-editors-milan-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76bc8a6b94a0569054a222d6d37d284c04dc9519%2F0_0_1884_1399%2F1884.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Of course they weren’t trying to say that fashion doesn’t matter – they were 
trying to be the arbiters of fashion, which I suppose has historically been the
Vogue journalist’s role. It was an attempt to assert authority. Sarah Mower, 
Vogue.com’s chief critic, called the bloggers “pathetic” and “desperate”; 
Alessandra Codinha, its fashion news editor, said they were 
“pretty embarrassing” and that going to bloggers for style was “like going to a 
strip club looking for romance”; and Nicole Phelps, the director of the Vogue 
Runway app, called them “sad” and said “it’s distressing, as well, to watch so 
many brands participate”.

That last remark is a bit of a giveaway. That does sound pretty distressing. 
If you’re looking to sell advertising spots inVogue, I imagine it has a 
positively tragic quality. Phelps’s implication that these brands had somehow 
let themselves down by associating with bloggers is a hopeless attempt to 
assert her dated view of the dignity of haute couture above the dictates of 
commerce.

Essentially, the Voguesters’ bid to make the new girls feel small didn’t work. 
It didn’t make the bloggers seem gauche, it made the old school journalists 
seem out of touch – not something the fashion world readily forgives. As 
“fashion influencer” Shea Marie put it: “You are exactly the type of people 
that have given the fashion world the cold, unwelcoming and ruthless reputation 
it has had in the past.” And the really hurtful word there is “past”. It falls 
to others, bloggers probably, to give it the cold, unwelcoming and ruthless 
reputation I expect it will continue to have in the future.

Old bullies make way for new. But ageing and mortality must hurt all the more 
if you’ve made a profession of praising novelty. When Sally Singer lashed out 
at the bloggers, talking desperately about “the death of style”, she must have 
been terrified. Because, ultimately, that’s not the death they herald.
 