
Reading certain sections of the media over the past few weeks you might have 
thought that we were living in a golden age of diversity in fashion. Modelling 
– so the narrative goes – is finally opening its doors to people who reflect 
the eclectic beauty of the world’s population, with models with disabilities 
among those being welcomed to the fold.

This month Jillian Mercado 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/model-muscular-dystrophy-img_55d36257e4b07addcb442973>
, who has muscular dystrophy, was signed to IMG Models, the same agency as 
Gisele Bündchen. The American fashion blogger and editor has also featured in a 
Diesel campaign and has been photographed by the high priestess of fashion, 
Carine Roitfeld. Also this month, Madeline Stuart, an 18-year-old Australian 
who has Down’s syndrome, was announced as the face of cosmetics brand 
GlossiGirl and cast to walk at New York fashion week in September.

Mercado and Stuart are not the first models with disabilities to win 
headlines. In February the actress Jamie Brewer, who stars in the TV series
American Horror Story, and who has Down’s syndrome, appeared on the catwalk for 
the US designer Carrie Hammer, 
<http://time.com/3708150/carrie-hammer-jamie-brewer-new-york-fashion-week/> 
while Armani collaborator Antonio Urzi’s designs were modelled by models with 
disabilities. In June theBreaking Bad actor RJ Mitte – who has cerebral palsy 
and hasstarred in a Gap campaign 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/02/18/gap-spring-campaign-2014_n_4810110.html>
 –walked for Vivienne Westwood 
<http://time.com/3930251/breaking-bad-walt-jr-vivienne-westwood-fashion-show/>.

This handful of examples is a drop in the ocean of a multibillion-pound global 
industry, but it does represent “some increase” in the use of models with 
disabilities, says Cat Smith, a doctoral researcher at London College of 
Fashion. “In general there is real cultural invisibility when it comes to 
disabled people – in fashion, on TV, in film, in politics, in writing,” she 
says. “So it’s certainly important to see disabled models, because seeing 
people who look like you is important in fostering empowerment and making you 
feel a little less invisible. Visibility also creates a more realistic 
representation and understanding of the lives of disabled people.

“But what I find frustrating,” she says, “is that you see the same thing over 
and over again. Fashion week comes around, a couple of shows include disabled 
models – and that is a good thing – but the coverage that follows is often 
quite patronising. It often becomes a fuzzy, inspirational human interest 
story, aimed at a non-disabled audience, rather than a step towards real 
inclusivity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Ffashion-industry-diversity-models-disabilities-jillian-mercado-jamie-brewer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440793058600%2Fc1c8162a-e70f-4fc8-8699-7ff183ed9fd0-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20has%20to%20do%20much%20more%20if%20it%20is%20serious%20about%20catwalk%20diversity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Ffashion-industry-diversity-models-disabilities-jillian-mercado-jamie-brewer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20has%20to%20do%20much%20more%20if%20it%20is%20serious%20about%20catwalk%20diversity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Ffashion-industry-diversity-models-disabilities-jillian-mercado-jamie-brewer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440793058600%2Fc1c8162a-e70f-4fc8-8699-7ff183ed9fd0-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Chelsey Jay, from Models of Diversity. Photograph: Emma Shamaya Photography 
The representation of models with disabilities is particularly paltry in the 
UK, according to Chelsey Jay, a campaigner and director of the models with a 
disability division at non-profit organisationModels of Diversity 
<http://www.gofundme.com/vrusu7q>. Jay started using a wheelchair three years 
ago and argues that models should be representative of the population. 
(According to the latest government figures, 19% of the British population,more 
than 11 million people, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/disability-facts-and-figures/disability-facts-and-figures#disability-prevalence-estimates>
 have a disability.) “I’ve gone from seeing myself represented in fashion to 
being totally ignored, essentially because I am now sitting down, which is 
ridiculous.,” says Jay.

“I’ve always loved fashion – it can be so empowering,” she says. “But it also 
feels like that popular friend who is sometimes so nice to you and other times 
makes you feel like the worst person alive. It’s a big fat contradiction. [The 
industry] seems permanently on the cusp of change, but it never quite gets 
there.”

Often fashion’s arguments for not using models with disabilities are the same 
as those it cites for not using anyone over a size 10. Designers claim that 
models are not meant to reflect society but to be walking clothes-hangers – and 
clothes-hangers do not have breasts or wheelchairs.

Jay believes that argument is long out of date: “You can’t say that models are 
just mannequins. Things have moved on – models have an identity and a fan base 
through social media. One modelling agent told me that they are not trying to 
represent everybody, they are only trying to represent an elite group who buy 
that clothing, but disability is the one thing in the world that can affect 
absolutely anyone.”

Jack Eyers, a personal trainer and amputee who also works with Models of 
Diversity, has hadgreat success as a fitness model 
<https://twitter.com/JackEyers?lang=en-gb> (including featuring on the cover of 
Men’s Health) and more mixed experiences in fashion. He walked in the Antonio 
Urzi show at New York fashion week and loved it. “He made my leg part of the 
look, which I think is exactly the best way to go for people to accept 
[disability].” But in general, he says: “I think people look at the health and 
fitness side of things as inspirational, but in fashion it’s more of a one-off 
sob story – ticking a box. I don’t think, in fashion, people are viewing 
[models with disabilities] as attractive.”

Jay agrees that tokenism is rife. “Brands say, ‘we used a girl with Down’s 
syndrome three years ago’. But we are fighting for the same treatment, not 
special treatment.” She cites US catalogue Nordstrom as a rare exception, where 
models with disabilities are used every season, as a matter of course.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Ffashion-industry-diversity-models-disabilities-jillian-mercado-jamie-brewer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440793260567%2F274e1222-b100-4d0a-8294-10188b88ddde-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20has%20to%20do%20much%20more%20if%20it%20is%20serious%20about%20catwalk%20diversity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Ffashion-industry-diversity-models-disabilities-jillian-mercado-jamie-brewer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20has%20to%20do%20much%20more%20if%20it%20is%20serious%20about%20catwalk%20diversity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Ffashion-industry-diversity-models-disabilities-jillian-mercado-jamie-brewer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440793260567%2F274e1222-b100-4d0a-8294-10188b88ddde-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Breaking Bad actor RJ Mitte on the catwalk for Vivienne Westwood. Photograph: 
SIPA/Rex Shutterstock 
In designer fashion, there’s much praise for the 1998 collaboration between 
Alexander McQueen and athlete Aimee Mullins, who starred on the cover ofDazed & 
Confused’s famous “Fashion-able” issue and walked the McQueen catwalk wearing a 
pair of bespoke, intricately carved, wooden prosthetic legs. “I was in my teens 
when I saw that,” says Smith, “and when you are not used to seeing disabled 
people at all it was quite extraordinary. I thought – oh! disabled people can 
look really cool – it doesn’t have to be done in an ‘aren’t we being 
inclusive?’ way. It genuinely felt like McQueen took the artistic and creative 
possibilities around designing for bodies that look different rather than 
trying to fit people into little boxes.”

Nearly 20 years later, though, she says, “nothing has really developed beyond 
that in terms of mainstream or high fashion. You don’t get disabled models on 
the catwalk for McQueen these days – it tends to be smaller, less ‘out there’ 
designers, which I find interesting. There is a unique creative possibility 
there and I wonder why it’s not being addressed by artists who push boundaries 
in other ways.”

“If the high end did it, everyone would follow,” says Jay. “If you saw a Marc 
Jacobs or a Victoria’s Secret model with a disability – that would be so 
groundbreaking.”

Though the media tend to report disabled models’ catwalk appearances in a 
uniform way, there are vast differences in the projects different models have 
recently appeared in. RJ Mitte, for example, has operated at the top of the 
industry, via Gap and Vivienne Westwood; it helps that he had a huge 
pre-modelling following through his acting (“a lot of the time models who have 
disabilities still fall into the industry’s confines of ‘acceptability’ in 
other ways,” says Smith). Jillian Mercado is also working with some of 
fashion’s biggest names – including Diesel creative director Nicola Formichetti 
(who is famously Lady Gaga’s former stylist) and Roitfeld, the former editor of
Vogue Paris.

Many other fashion shows that feature people with disabilities are special 
campaigning or charity shows with names like “RoleModels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/models> not Runway Models” that feel a 
long way from the powerhouses of Chanel and Gucci. “There is a case for working 
outside the mainstream, but when it comes to visibility it’s all too easy to be 
ignored. Frustratingly, unless the mainstream pays attention, I don’t know how 
things are going to change,” says Smith.

Rosanne Stuart, mother of Madeline, has a different perspective. Her daughter 
expressed an interest in modelling after seeing a fashion parade at a fair in 
Brisbane, and caught the attention of a number of fashion brands after 
professional photographs she had taken and posted on Facebook went viral.

Rosanne says she was approached by three New York fashion week brands before 
choosing FTL Moda, because it is being run in collaboration with the 
Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation. “We don’t do anything that isn’t to do 
with charity or that isn’t in line with our values,” she says. So Madeline is 
working with handbag brand EverMaya because it has agreed to donate 5% of sales 
to the Down’s Syndrome Association, with Manifesta because its clothing is 
specifically designed for a diverse range of body shapes, and for GlossiGirl, a 
vegan makeup company with the ethos: “if you ain’t a nice person, makeup won’t 
help”.

“Modelling means nothing to me,” says Rosanne. “What we are doing is not for 
money – we don’t usually get paid anyway – it’s an avenue to get the word out 
about inclusion and disability. I can see that working with big names might 
mean Madeline had broken boundaries, but I wouldn’t want to work with a big 
brand that didn’t have the right morals.”

In any case, perhaps the power that used to be in the hands of few has been 
transferred, a little bit, to the many. “We have had magazine offers that I 
have turned down, because I don’t like that magazine, and they say ‘but we have 
25,000 readers,’ to which I think, ‘well,Madeline has 400,000 followers on 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/madelinesmodelling>.”

Those who do believe that models with disabilities need to break into the 
mainstream industry know that the challenges are huge. “It’s a vicious circle,” 
says Jay. “Modelling agencies say they don’t have disabled models on their 
books because brands won’t hire them; brands blame the modelling agencies, 
saying there are no models with disabilities there for them to hire. It’s 
impossible to point a finger at any one part of the industry.”

It would certainly help if there were more people with disabilities employed 
behind the scenes in creative positions – and more McQueen-like risk-takers. 
“It’s funny that fashion constantly talks about what’s new,” says Jay, “but the 
industry’s principles are painfully out of date.”
 