
Late one September evening 10 years ago, the pavement outside Brick Lane’s 
Truman Brewery filled with people waiting for the last show ofLondon Fashion 
Week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week>. Nothing unusual 
about that, in the city whose fashion weeks have turned passive-aggressive 
queueing into an art form. But this was something different. The crowd was 
waiting for MAN, LFW’s first dedicated menswear event, a show that would 
revolutionise British men’s fashion.

The event – which showcased the work of three emerging designers on one 
catwalk – was the brainchild ofLulu Kennedy, founder of Fashion East 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/jul/08/lulu-kennedy-fashion-east-interview>
, a non-profit support scheme set up in 2000 to nurture design talent. “The 
idea came into my head while watching the Central Saint Martins MA show that 
February,” she says. “I thought: ‘Why is no one supporting this incredible 
menswear talent in London?’ So I approached Topman to be our partner, and by 
September we were doing our first show.” For Topman’s design and development 
director, Gordon Richardson, it was a no-brainer: “We agreed that we couldn’t 
let those designers fade into anonymity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433945462128%2F3437042c-177b-4833-96b8-0ada9d1253c8-1994x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%3A%20the%20ascent%20of%20MAN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%3A%20the%20ascent%20of%20MAN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433945462128%2F3437042c-177b-4833-96b8-0ada9d1253c8-1994x2040.jpeg>
 The SS10 show invitation by JW Anderson. 
Kennedy and Richardson were tapping into a new sense of energy in London’s 
menswear. Attempts had been made to promote menswear before – from the British 
Fashion Guild’s London Line in 1960, to a short-lived London Men’s Fashion Week 
in the 90s – but the time, at last, seemed right. Adventurous stores such as 
Dover Street Market, bStore, Oki-Ni and the Pineal Eye had opened doors for 
young designers; the first generation of menswear bloggers was emerging, eager 
to anoint their own fashion heroes, and new style magazines were appearing;GQ 
Style Magazine and AnOther Man both launched the same September as MAN.

“My PR, Mandi Lennard, told me that the people who organised MAN were 
interested in me doing it,” says Patrik Söderstam, one of the designers who 
took part in that first show, alongside Siv Støldal and Benjamin Kirchhoff. 
“There really was no place to show menswear in London,” remembers Støldal. “I 
was completely blown away by the opportunity.”

The show – unplanned, uneven, unpredictable – set the MAN template. Söderstam 
sent out colourful polka-dot ruffles, supersized jackets and paint-streaked 
jeans; Kirchhoff teamed dishevelled knits and baggy tailoring with jelly 
sandals, while Støldal, the most established of the three, showed luxurious 
sportswear (and inflatable shirts). “I was working with the stylist Thom 
Murphy,” Støldal remembers, “and he went round the East End hiring the models 
from boxing gyms. Two of the best boys were only 16, but were already wearing 
electronic tags. They each had a policeman following them to the studio 
fittings, hanging out backstage. It was quite intense; I remember one of them 
threatening to kill the hairdresser if he fucked up his hair.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433945556619%2F13041be8-4cf6-407e-ae7a-695fd76317dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%3A%20the%20ascent%20of%20MAN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%3A%20the%20ascent%20of%20MAN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433945556619%2F13041be8-4cf6-407e-ae7a-695fd76317dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Martine Rose’s AW11 show at the Royal Opera House. Photograph: Ian Gavan/Getty 
Images 
Backstage, whilst his models smoked weed, Söderstam was stressed: “I remember 
Mandi Lennard saying she didn’t like the trashy old sneakers I had the models 
wearing, and I remember thinking she was wrong.”

As it turned out, the show was a success. The next day Opening Ceremony called 
to buy Støldal’s inflatable pieces, and Söderstam had interest from Barneys New 
York. But neither he nor Kirchhoff took their menswear further – Kirchhoff made 
a successful switch to womenswear, under the Meadham Kirchhoff label, whilst 
Söderstam returned to Sweden and became a lecturer. Only Støldal carried on, 
becoming the first of 12 designers to show for the scheme’s maximum permitted 
allocation of three seasons. “We were so hungry for it,” she says, “and we used 
every show to make each a bit better than the last.”

MAN also grew each season, forging a reputation for exciting, 
thought-provoking design. Today its alumni are in some of the most powerful 
positions in menswear – from Loewe’s JW Anderson to Kim Jones at Louis Vuitton. 
Since 2012, London has had its own dedicated Men’s Fashion Week –London 
Collections: Men <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-collections-men>. 
Of the 32 designers showing at LC:M this season, nine started out at the MAN 
show – and a further five have featured in Fashion East’s menswear 
presentations. The British Fashion Awards’ menswear trophies have been on 
almost permanent rotation among MAN stars such as Jones, Anderson,Agi & Sam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/may/14/agi-and-sam-menswear-topman> 
and Craig Green. “Obviously their talent was always there,” Richardson says, 
“but it’s humbling to know that, through MAN’s support, we’ve helped them on 
their way to success.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433945630855%2Fb597ab3f-9d8e-4c94-b693-53a754f741f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%3A%20the%20ascent%20of%20MAN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%3A%20the%20ascent%20of%20MAN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433945630855%2Fb597ab3f-9d8e-4c94-b693-53a754f741f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Primary colours: models take to the runway for Topman Design’s SS09 show. 
Photograph: Chris Jackson/Getty Images 
This season MAN will celebrate its own success story. For the first time only 
two designers – Liam Hodges and Rory Parnell-Mooney – will feature, with the 
third slot devoted to a specially commissioned film about MAN’s first decade. 
Flicking through the archive images at Fashion East’s office, it’s clear 
there’s no shortage of stand-out memories. “So many!” Kennedy laughs. “I loved 
it when Chris Shannon sent his boys out with lip gloss and tan lines and Craig 
Green used Roxette’s ‘Listen to Your Heart’ as his show soundtrack.”

Topman’s Richardson, meanwhile, singles out Aitor Throup’s haunting 2007 
installation in Holborn’s derelict sorting office for special mention. “But 
emotionally it will always be the first show,” he adds, “when it felt like we 
were on the cusp of something monumental.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433945821268%2Fbfc96fc8-29f1-4871-b040-e25e27a3c27c-1507x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%3A%20the%20ascent%20of%20MAN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%3A%20the%20ascent%20of%20MAN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ffashion-the-ascent-of-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433945821268%2Fbfc96fc8-29f1-4871-b040-e25e27a3c27c-1507x2040.jpeg>
 Blanket coverage: a model shows off pieces from the Shaun Samson SS12 
collection backstage at MAN. 
They were. MAN has played a vital role in British menswear’s decade-long boom. 
The resurgence of the once-staid Savile Row and the powerful international 
clout of megabrands such as Burberry have played key parts also, but without 
the stream of new names who’ve left their mark on the MAN runway, menswear 
today would be a very different proposition.

The collections MAN has presented over the years – tough, tender, angry, 
silly, sexy, cheeky, moving, baffling – have made the language of modern 
British menswear immeasurably richer. Along the way, there’s been bondage gear 
(Jaiden rVa James), joss-stick crowns and dildo hats (New Power Studio), 
beach-bum blankets (Shaun Samson), ab-flashing sportswear (Astrid Andersen), 
exploded tailoring (Alan Taylor) and flowing monastic robes (Craig Green). Out 
in the harsh world beyond the runway’s end, though, those designers have met 
with as much disappointment as success. But they all agree MAN has become far 
more than a career stepping-stone: as Carri Munden, one of its most memorable 
alumni, says: “It’s a family for life.”
 