
The Women’s Equality party is to launch an unprecedented campaign aimed at 
radically changing the way the fashion industry treats body size and shape.

Coinciding with London fashion week <http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/>, 
which will run from 16-20 September, the initiative will call for an end to 
unrealistically small “sample sizes” – the sizes in which designers show their 
new creations – and demand a minimum body mass index (BMI) for models.

Two models, one goal: to free women from fashion’s weight tyranny
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/04/models-women-weight-london-fashion-week>
Sophie Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/04/womens-equality-party-leader-sophie-walker-its-complex-but-not-complicated>
, the WEP leader, plans to ask the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, to withdraw 
funding for next year’s fashion week if the campaign’s key demands are not in 
place by then. She will also ask Maria Miller, chair of the Women and 
Equalities Commission, to hold a public hearing in which fashion designers will 
be asked why their clothes are based on “an unattainable level of thinness in 
women”, which Walker believes is contributing to a crisis in public health with 
an economic impact of £1.3bn a year.

The campaign calls for models whose BMI is below 18.5 to be seen by a medical 
professional from an accredited list, who will judge whether they are well 
enough to be employed by a modelling agency. Similar legislation exists in 
France, Spain, Italy and Israel. Campaigners are also asking that fashion 
designers showing at LFW commit to including at least two sample sizes in every 
range, one of which must be a UK size 12 or above.

Additional proposals include fashion magazines committing to at least one 
piece in each issue featuring plus-size models. WEP is also demanding that body 
image awareness become a compulsory part of personal, social and health 
education, with a focus on media depictions of beauty and extra training for 
teachers.

Those backing the campaign include Caryn Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/mar/05/caryn-franklin-carer-partner-multiple-sclerosis>
, the former presenter ofThe Clothes Show, who is now a professor of diversity 
in fashion at Kingston University, plus-size model Jada Sezer and model Rosie 
Nixon, who has spoken out against an industry that asked her to lose an 
unreasonable and unhealthy amount of weight in order that she get “down to the 
bone”.

WEP will also launch an interactive social media campaign, #NoSizeFitsAll, 
based on the statistic that one in five women cut the labels out of their 
clothes to conceal their size. A photoshoot will feature new designers Isatu 
Harrison and her line, Izelia, and Katie Pope of Pope London, both of whose 
work will be modelled by a diverse group of women.

Walker describes the initiative as a chance to “raise awareness of the body 
image issues experienced by women and girls, and to have a discussion about the 
significant and far-reaching impact of the fashion industry’s idolisation of a 
unique and very small size”.
 