
My lunch date walks into the lobby of the Tribeca Grand 
<http://www.tribecagrand.com/> hotel in New York, shrugging off his heavy black 
coat as iced air off the Hudson river gives way to the sleepy fug of lobby 
warmth. In black jeans and charcoal grey crewneck, tucking his phone and white 
earbuds into a pocket, bouncing boyishly on his sneakers, you might at first 
peg him as, say, aSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> whiz-kid rather than a 
top-flight fashion designer. But then he gets nearer, and the grey crewneck 
reveals itself to be the finest double-ply cashmere, and his hair is in a 
perfectly-imperfect man-bun, and the twentysomethings at the next table 
recognise him and swivel in their seats to get a better look, and there is no 
mistaking who it is: Alexander Wang, the 21st century’s fashion superhero.

Alexander Wang is a name that means everything to the younger generation, and 
almost nothing to their parents – which, of course, is exactly why the kids 
love it. A few days after my lunch with Wang, the New York Times ran a feature 
onthe Wang sample sale 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/11/fashion/at-the-alexander-wang-sample-sale-a-predawn-wait-in-the-rain-and-cold.html?_r=0>
, profiling the shoppers who arrived at 5am for a below-zero four-hour wait to 
buy discounted handbags and clothes. Mostly, they were 25 and under. It is no 
coincidence that Wang’s jeans-and-monochrome look is closer toMark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> than to Karl Lagerfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/karl-lagerfeld>, because he comes from the 
generation for whom technology is at the heart of everything they do. When he 
revealed he was working on last year’s out-of-the-box-hit high street 
collaboration,Wang x H&M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/apr/14/alexander-wang-collaboration-h-m-affordable-style-social-media-generation>
, the news did not come in office hours via a press release: instead, it was 
launched on Instagram, at midnight on a Saturday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563516927%2Fc543e876-d37e-472b-b594-5e30642b6c20-950x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563516927%2Fc543e876-d37e-472b-b594-5e30642b6c20-950x2040.jpeg>
 From the spring/summer 2015 collection: the ultimate party dress for the 
Sneakerhead generation inspired by trainer design Photograph: Victor 
VIRGILE/Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images 
Wang orders hot water with lemon, and a small cheese plate. I suspect he 
orders the cheese because we’re in a restaurant at lunchtime – he looks faintly 
surprised when it is put in front of him, and barely touches it. I appreciate 
the gesture, which seems intended to make the encounter feel more relaxed. But 
then that’s how Wang and his brand roll: inclusive, informal. The word he uses 
most often is conversation: “Fashion is so much more about conversations now 
than trends.” “There’s not one message that matters, it’s about all the 
one-on-one conversations a brand has with its audience.” “As a brand we talk to 
our audience about all kinds of things – music, what we’re doing on the 
weekend, the people who interest us. And sometimes those conversations lead 
towards fashion and product, and sometimes they are just conversations.”

Wang is adept at multi-channel conversations. Last year, he presided over 
successful fashion collections at not one, not two, but three entirely 
different price points, with entirely separate customers. In 2012, just five 
years after launching his own label and at the tender age of 28, he wasmade 
creative director of Balenciaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/dec/03/alexander-wang-balenciaga-creative-director>
, whose founder,Cristobal Balenciaga 
<http://cristobalbalenciagamuseoa.com/Biography-and-milestones.html>, was 
revered by no less thanChristian Dior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/christian-dior> as “the master of us all”. 
The most recent Balenciaga financial results showed double-digit growth. Last 
year, the Wang x H&M range created renewed buzz around the slightly tired 
designer-high street collaboration concept; 70% of stock was sold within one 
hour of going on sale. Meanwhile his own brand, Alexander Wang, continued to 
grow at a rate of 20% every year; it now has 20 stores globally.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563589481%2F484ea95b-5c2a-4a47-8303-8aa86be915e9-898x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563589481%2F484ea95b-5c2a-4a47-8303-8aa86be915e9-898x2040.jpeg>
 From the autumn/winter 2013-2014 collection: a new sophistication is evident, 
in the first collection after Wang’s appointment at Balenciaga Photograph: 
Victor VIRGILE/Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images 
When I ask Wang how it felt to be designing for the H&M customer and the 
Balenciaga client at the same time, he beams. “I know, right? You couldn’t get 
two more opposites. But I love that. I’ve always been interested in doing 
things in different ways, I’ve always been interested in doing things on a big 
scale – whether that’s an elevated price point or a huge reach. Balenciaga is a 
challenge because it has to be exclusive and precise, and H&M was a challenge 
because it had to be democratic and accessible, but still exciting.”

The last time it was the-done-thing for young designers to helm historic 
labels while also designing their own labels was the era ofJohn Galliano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/john-galliano> at Dior and Alexander 
McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen> at Givenchy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/givenchy>. The mental stress of this dual 
identity was blamed, by some, for the breakdowns that followed. If Wang, who 
turned 31 on Boxing Day, seems to take the double life in his stride, perhaps 
coming of age in the era of the internet and superbrands has given him – and 
contemporaries such as 30-year-old JW Anderson, similarly now designing the 
LVMH-ownedLoewe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/sep/26/jonathan-jw-anderson-debut-loewe-paris-fashion-week>
 as well as his own label – a more supple idea of identity. They see brands and 
personalities and personal brands coexist in a fluid kind of Venn diagram that 
would baffle an older generation. Wang has a sophisticated understanding about 
how his vision is only one element of what happens on a catwalk, and how 
audience interpretation plays a part. Of his very first collection for 
Balenciaga, for instance, where the remodelling of classic shapes in the latest 
technical fabrics was read by critics as Wang’s promise to modernise the house, 
he says, “People think they know what you’re about, and they kind of make their 
minds up in advance. My guess is that collection would have been interpreted 
very differently if someone from the in-house design team had been taking the 
bow. The audience had pre-existing expectations, and they read me into what 
they saw.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563652072%2Ffa22e8c6-e053-4fe0-8bc1-3ea43335882c-873x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563652072%2Ffa22e8c6-e053-4fe0-8bc1-3ea43335882c-873x2040.jpeg>
 From the autumn/winter 2007 collection: T-shirt, baseball cap, 
too-cool-for-school leathers: Wang makes his mark as the prince of downtown 
cool Photograph: JP Yim/WireImage 
Six months after his first Balenciaga show, this notion of how a collection 
can have diverse interpretations was clearly still on his mind: his own-name 
New York fashion week show in September 2013 split the audience into two, 
apparently at random, with different soundtracks for each of the opposite ends 
of the vast show space at Pier 94. On one side the music had the explicit words 
filtered out. “I’m really interested in how audience perception of a show will 
vary depending on so many things – their mood, the traffic, whether they ate or 
are hungry. So I wanted to play with one of those elements, which was the 
music, and see what came out,” Wang says.

“A lot of who I am as a person is funnelled into what the brand stands for, 
and I am who I am 110% of the time. But there are elements of any personalitiy 
that can be reflected in different ways.” The Alexander Wang brand is 
inextricably linked to sportswear – mesh T-shirts, tracksuit bottoms, 
sweatshirts – but Wang himself doesn’t do any sport, or even go to the gym. “A 
lot of people find that surprising, but to me the point is that sportswear has 
a functionality to it. It’s what you see people wearing in the street, carrying 
in their bags. It has a very direct connection to our lives and that’s what I 
love about it – it’s not so much about being sporty as about being active and 
functional and easy.”

He laughs when I ask him where his interest in fashion began. “There’s no, 
like, my mum was a seamstress, or my dad was a tailor, or anything like that.” 
(That kind of backstory wouldn’t fit, anyway. Way too analogue.) Wang was born 
in California, to Taiwanese immigrants who had built a successful plastics 
business since arriving in San Francisco a decade earlier. By the time he was a 
teenager, his mother was travelling frequently to China, and Wang was 
dispatched to an expensive boarding school in America. His first encounters 
with haute couture came through his classmateVanessa Traina Snow 
<http://www.vogue.com/tag/celebrity/vanessa-traina-snow/>, daughter of novelist 
Danielle Steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/08/library-readers-love-danielle-steel>
, who would come to school in castoffs from her mother’s fairytale couture 
wardrobe. “I never really played sports after school like the other kids did. 
So instead I discovered fashion and magazines, and I kind of filtered 
everything through that. Even then, I knew fashion wasn’t just about designers. 
I loved Japanese street style magazines, and I was a big fanatic over models. I 
can still remember how excited I was when MTV did a show, A Day In The Life Of
Gisele <http://www.vogue.co.uk/person/gisele-bundchen>, or something.” Traina 
Snow is still a key part of Wang’s fashion life, a stylist/consultant who 
travels with him to Paris when he is on Balenciaga duty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563693811%2Fc78fd2de-ad6d-43b8-9494-2b12946ff588-843x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563693811%2Fc78fd2de-ad6d-43b8-9494-2b12946ff588-843x2040.jpeg>
 From the spring/summer 2012 collection: Zips, go-faster stripes and technical 
mesh fabrics star as the sports influence shines through Photograph: Victor 
VIRGILE/Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images 
Wang produced his first collection of sweaters while studying design at Parsons
 <http://www.newschool.edu/parsons/> in New York; soon, he quit Parsons to work 
on his business full-time. His sister-in-law, then between jobs, helped with 
the business side. In the early days of this venture,Diane von Furstenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/nov/23/diane-von-furstenberg-woman-i-wanted-to-be-interview>
 spotted one of his knits on a Vogue staffer, tracked Wang down and called up 
to offer him a job on her design team. Wang politely declined, much to the 
surprise of von Furstenberg, a formidable woman who tends to get her own way. 
“I was really flattered when she called, but I’d dropped out of school to start 
this line, I’d made a commitment to my family who had supported me in it, and I 
wasn’t ready to give up.”

His stubbornness paid off: within three years he was showing at New York 
fashion week. He attributes this success to the fact that “even back then, when 
I was young and still figuring out who I was, I got that this had to be a 
lifestyle brand. There was a real clarity and an honesty about that. The first 
lookbook we shot was this girl in this raw Soho loft, just hanging out, 
everything was like, wardrobe items reconfigured, everyday items 
reappropriated, because that was how I lived, how my friends lived. We were 
going out a lot, and sleeping wherever, and wearing clothes for days and then 
throwing them in the wash and things were a bit destroyed. So the way those 
clothes looked was very authentic to what I was doing at the time. I had always 
looked up toMarc Jacobs <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/marc-jacobs> 
andTom Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford>, because I loved how 
they created a whole world around them which was authentic to who they were. So 
that’s what I wanted to do.”

These days, his life is more complicated. For a start, he splits his time 
between New York and Paris, where he lives “polar opposite” lives. “Here I have 
a close group of friends I went to college with, I’m up late, I’m out a lot. 
Whereas in Paris it’s literally the office, a quiet dinner, home. On the 
weekend I maybe take a walk, and that’s it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563781309%2F7615c2b0-a8fd-4b4d-a973-5d0d35c6ac5f-981x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20superhero%20Alexander%20Wang%20on%20style%2C%20sportswear%20and%20never%20going%20to%20the%20gym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Falexander-wang-interview-the-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425563781309%2F7615c2b0-a8fd-4b4d-a973-5d0d35c6ac5f-981x2040.jpeg>
 From the autumn/winter 2009 collection: The inclusion of an LBD shows a new 
maturity, as the label grows in polish Photograph: JP Yim/WireImage 
The Alexander Wang label, too, is becoming more international: they have 
opened 15 stores in Asia in the last two years, and this year will open a 
London flagship in an old post office in Mayfair, around the corner fromDover 
Street Market <http://www.doverstreetmarket.com/> and Victoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/sep/24/10-things-about-victoria-beckham-dover-street-store>
.

The challenge for a name like Alexander Wang is how to make a down-to-earth, 
informal brand feel “elevated”. (This is marketing speak for: how to make 
shoppers feel the name is worth a high price tag.) “Design integrity, quality, 
that’s number one. But the visual environment is also very important, so we pay 
a lot of attention to display and store design. There is still a grit to the 
brand but it’s been refined, in a natural kind of a way, because now I’m 31, 
not 21, so there are things I didn’t like before that I like now; things I 
liked before and now want a better version of. A lot of it is quite subtle. 
It’s about using the best photographers, stylists and models, to elevate the 
image you are creating.”

The company is still privately owned – “My sister-in-law is CEO, my mum has a 
backroom role as a board member” – which means, Wang says, he can stay true to 
himself. “I’m really lucky to have this liberty, to do what I think is right 
for the brand in the long term.” He demurs from naming a business model he’d 
like to follow – “Because if it’s been done before, what’s the point of doing 
it again?” – but namesRalph Lauren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/oct/13/ralph-lauren-at-80-eight-facts-about-the-designer>
 as “a brand I really respect and admire, that touches different audiences, 
from mass to elite, yet has an integrity to it that never feels compromised.” 
Wang throws this out quite casually, as a benchmark. Note that in January, 
Forbes magazine estimatedRalph Lauren’s wealth 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/ralph-lauren/> at close to $8bn, making him the 
155th richest person in the world.

But then, Wang is a natural entrepreneur: a risk-taker and a strategic 
thinker. The part of the job that makes him happiest, he says, is “being able 
to execute something that I feel passionate about, turning something that comes 
from an abstract part of my brain, into reality.” Fashion, he says, is a way to 
communicate, to have conversations about who we are, how we want to live. 
“Sometimes people ask me what I think I’ll be doing in 10 years’ time. Like, am 
I going to switch careers, sort of thing. And I feel like that’s an impossible 
question now, because my job is so many different things. It’s like, the 
possibilities within what I’m doing now are already endless.”
 