
The British Fashion Council has announced plans to revamp its annual fashion 
awards, with an emphasis on global fashion. In the words of the BFC chair, 
Natalie Massenet, it will be “bigger and better”, with an emphasis on glitz.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Ffashion-awards-2016-uk-answer-to-met-ball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49c8f3a6b260aa64be8a3556d2169afcdd539bcf%2F0_0_970_1888%2F970.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20awards%202016%3A%20the%20UK's%20answer%20to%20the%20Met%20Ball%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Ffashion-awards-2016-uk-answer-to-met-ball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20awards%202016%3A%20the%20UK%27s%20answer%20to%20the%20Met%20Ball%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Ffashion-awards-2016-uk-answer-to-met-ball%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49c8f3a6b260aa64be8a3556d2169afcdd539bcf%2F0_0_970_1888%2F970.jpg>
 Kate Moss and Naomi Campbell at the British fashion awards in 1993. 
Photograph: Richard Young/Rex/Shutterstock 
Previously called the British fashion awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/british-fashion-awards>, the ceremony has 
been renamed the Fashion awards and will take place on 5 December at the Royal 
Albert Hall, London. In its new, souped-up surroundings, the awards arebeing 
described as <http://www.businessoffashion.com/> to the UK’s answer to the Met 
Ball. Proceeds from the awards will go to the BFC’s education foundation, which 
helps fashion students who are struggling financially.

Sarah Mower and Meribeth Parker, the presidents of the BFC education pillar 
and trustees of the foundation, said: “The money raised will underpin work in 
schools, support apprenticeships and enable BA and MA students to continue 
their studies.”

Massenet said: “As a global industry, we should make a commitment to support 
talented people from all backgrounds to fulfil their dreams and access the best 
universities in the world. Over the next 10 years, our ambition is to raise and 
invest £10m to support young people.”

The awards began in 1989 and have always been considered the industry’s most 
prestigious event. Last year’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/23/british-fashion-awards-2015-jw-anderson-wins-designer-of-the-year-mens-womenswear>
ceremony was typically star-studded, featuring Victoria Beckham, Naomi 
Campbell, Stella McCartney, Lady Gaga and Lily Allen. J.W.Anderson was named 
the menswear and womenswear designer of the year, the first time any designer 
had won both categories. Previous years have been eventful: in 2014, Anna 
Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/nov/30/british-fashion-awards-2014-a-z-list-style>
 received an outstanding achievement award from John Galliano in one of his 
first appearances after being sacked fromChristian Dior  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/01/john-galliano-sacked-by-christian-dior>
in 2011.
 