
Aside from the odd punchline (see: the “yogging” scene in Anchorman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6nFhcI4tgI>) you don’t hear much about 
jogging these days. “To jog” sounds like something Madge Bishop might do on a 
sunny day in Ramsay Street. Instead, in recent years, a far sleeker verb – “to 
run” – has taken over, conjuring up images of picturesque forest pathways and 
blurs of black lycra.

It is this athletic vision that the fashion industry is currently obsessed 
with. Magazines includingElle <http://www.elleuk.com/more/running-club>, the 
Gentlewoman <http://thegentlewoman.co.uk/#/socialities> and Grazia have all 
featured reader runners’ clubs; talk of specialist trainer brands has become an 
integral part of front row chatter (as it happens, Victoria Beckham thinks 
Asics are the best). A fair few fashion people are taking part in the London 
Marathon this weekend, including Hugo Boss PR manager Tamara Klien, whose 
workout buddies include fellow fashion PRElle Hankinson 
<https://instagram.com/runlikeelle/>, an ultra marathon runner.

If you believe the Devil Wears Prada stereotypes about the industry’s 
obsession with thinness and its competitive nature, fashion’s love affair with 
running may seem like a no-brainer. But the industry’s runners talk of more 
wholesome motivations. “Running is the easiest way to lose weight,” says Klien, 
“but that’s not my aim. I can clear my head with running. It’s spontaneous. And 
I have always preferred to be out in nature rather than in the gym.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffashion-obsession-running-sports-shoes-editors-marathon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429625533326%2Febb16851-592d-4a98-8423-c94681907fa5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%E2%80%99s%20obsession%20with%20running&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffashion-obsession-running-sports-shoes-editors-marathon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%E2%80%99s%20obsession%20with%20running&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffashion-obsession-running-sports-shoes-editors-marathon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429625533326%2Febb16851-592d-4a98-8423-c94681907fa5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Stellasport for Adidas: knee-high running socks 
Editor-in-chief of Elle UK, Lorraine Candy often commutes to work with a run, 
and her staff join her in a weekly jaunt “from fashion cupboard to Regent’s 
Park” every Wednesday lunchtime. She sees the boom in running as partly a 
feminist issue: “It’s about women being strong and feeling energised,” she 
says. “There are so many inspiring female athletes – including Paula Radcliffe, 
who isrunning her last marathon on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/20/paula-radcliffe-london-marathon-interview>
. It’s also a real everywoman sport. Women of all shapes and sizes and 
backgrounds can run. The fashion industry likes a trend, and it is a trend, but 
it’s also something you can do, entirely, by yourself – you can put your 
trainers on and go, any time.”

Penny Martin, editor in chief of the Gentlewoman, is part of a Saturday 
morning club at her local coffee shop, Paperback in South Ealing: “Running 
side-by-side is such an ice-breaker,” she says. “It’s so much less 
confrontational than talking face to face. Within a couple of runs I knew all 
about my fellow runners’ divorces, their career implosions, even one woman’s 
birth control preferences! You’re all red in the face – it’s a great leveller 
and creates such a nice bond.” It sounds a long way from thehardcore world of 
Barry’s Bootcamp 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2275411/Barrys-Bootcamp-opens-London.html>
 classes. “You look at the industrial atmosphere that’s supposedly cool in most 
urban gyms and you almost want to experience the opposite,” she says. “Women’s 
running clubs often have something of the Fun Run, mums’-keep-fit-class 
atmosphere about them, and that’s actually really chic in its way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffashion-obsession-running-sports-shoes-editors-marathon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429626060268%2F368fd175-c3f8-4b5d-b731-e1a7eef489e1-1379x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%E2%80%99s%20obsession%20with%20running&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffashion-obsession-running-sports-shoes-editors-marathon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%E2%80%99s%20obsession%20with%20running&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffashion-obsession-running-sports-shoes-editors-marathon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429626060268%2F368fd175-c3f8-4b5d-b731-e1a7eef489e1-1379x2040.jpeg>
 Compression socks in Alexander Wang’s H&M Collection. Photograph: JP 
Yim/FilmMagic 
Martin believes fashion’s love of running is clearly linked to the efforts of 
Nike, which has increasingly targeted female customers in recent years and is 
wooing the fashion press hard. Tactics include a “concierge service”, which 
provides a select bunch of fashion editors with a personal trainer who will run 
them around Milan, Paris, New York or London, ensuring they arrive at the next 
show with a glow. “You’re aware you’re participating in marketing,” says 
Martin, “but it’s hard to be snarky when you know how much good it’s doing 
you.” Afterwards, she says, “that editor who feels so energised is sitting on 
the front row telling the other editors ‘you’ll never guess what I did this 
morning ...’” This fashion season, the biggest bragging rights went to models 
Karlie Kloss and Natalia Vodianova, and fashion editor Derek Blasberg, who
casually did a half-marathon mid-way through Paris fashion week 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2015/03/paris-marathon-karlie-kloss-natalia-vodianova-derek-blasberg>
.

Just as sports companies are wooing women, fashion companies are increasingly 
experimenting with sportswear, with the annoyingly named “athleisure” trend 
credited withboosting all US footwear and accessory sales by 1%, or $2bn 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/mattpowell/2015/03/06/sneakernomics-whats-next-for-athleisure/>
 in 2014. But thoughAdidas’ Stan Smiths currently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/aug/15/how-to-dress-the-minimal-trainer>
 outnumber high heels at industry parties, fashion people tend to stick with 
genuine sportswear on the track. For one thing, a slightly wonky seam can cause 
incredibly unglamorous weeping sores after a long run, so technical features 
must be prioritised. And looking as though you have tried too hard is just not 
cool. “I think pro runners would be really suspicious of anyone who was dressed 
up like a Christmas tree in all the latest gear,” says Martin, who eschews 
pink, patterned “lady” sports gear for the clean boxy lines of men’s Nike.

Trainers can be a complex issue – though there is some snobbery towards Nike, 
with brands including Asics and Mizuno bestowing more ‘serious runner’ points, 
they do have a sound technical record, and Pegasus Zoom and Lunar Glides are 
popular with the fashion pack. One unlikely source of pizzazz and even status 
is socks. Stella McCartney’sStellasport collection for Adidas centred around a 
bright pink knee high pair 
<http://blogs.ft.com/material-world/files/2015/01/adidas_StellaSport_SS15_13_72dpi.jpg>
. Alexander Wang’s collection for H&M, too, wasfull of grey-on-grey knee high 
compression socks 
<http://www.hanger.my/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Alexander-Wang-X-HM-knee-high-compression-socks.jpg>
. One very chic colleague will wear socks byAshmei <http://www.ashmei.com/> for 
her London Marathon. The high-end, niche running brand suggests serious nous on 
the starting line; it helps that the socks are the cheapest product in its 
range. For her marathon, Klien plans to wear neon yellow H&M menswear 
compression socks with black Nike running shorts. So if you suspect you might 
be running alongside a fashion editor this weekend, but you’re not quite sure, 
look down at their socks – the devil is in the detail.
 