
Problems with Centrelink’s online service portal have prevented some welfare 
recipients from challenging debt notices, prompting fears they will be 
automatically referred to debt collectors just before Christmas.


The government has intensified its efforts to retrieve debts from low-income 
Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
 since mid-2015, when it began using a new automated data-matching system to 
detect overpayments. Since the system was introduced the number of compliance 
letters being sent by Centrelink has jumped from 20,000 a year to 20,000 a week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffears-centrelink-online-glitch-may-send-welfare-recipients-to-debt-collectors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F894f07d29c6ec0dad17c078bc3107544f8f5b629%2F0_64_1510_906%2F1510.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fears%20Centrelink%20online%20glitch%20may%20send%20welfare%20recipients%20to%20debt%20collectors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffears-centrelink-online-glitch-may-send-welfare-recipients-to-debt-collectors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fears%20Centrelink%20online%20glitch%20may%20send%20welfare%20recipients%20to%20debt%20collectors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffears-centrelink-online-glitch-may-send-welfare-recipients-to-debt-collectors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F894f07d29c6ec0dad17c078bc3107544f8f5b629%2F0_64_1510_906%2F1510.jpg>
 Two screenshots showing errors with Centrelink’s online service that have 
prevented welfare recipients from disputing debts. Photograph: Centrelink 
Recipients are given 21 days to dispute the debt online, forcing them to track 
down payslips and employment history from up to six years ago to prove they did 
not wrongly claim benefits.


Marginal Coalition electorates among the hardest hit by pension changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/marginal-coalition-electorates-among-the-hardest-hit-by-pension-changes>
“If you do not respond, it will be assumed no reasonable excuse applies and 
the 10% recovery fee may be added to the debt amount,” the letter warns. But 
problems with Centrelink’s online service have left some users unable to lodge 
a dispute.

One user, Timothy Heywood, was told in late November he owed Centrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> thousands of dollars, a 
debt he disputes. Heywood told Guardian Australia he had attempted to log in to 
the online service every day for the past month, but had received a “service 
unavailable” error every time.

Heywood said he tried to deal with the debt at a Centrelink office and over 
the phone, but was told all compliance issues had to be dealt with online. The 
errors left him unable to lodge a dispute within the 21-day period, which ended 
on Friday, and he now fears he has been referred to a debt collector.

Asked whether the process had caused him anxiety, Heywood said: “A lot. It’s 
an uphill battle because you are guilty until proven innocent, and when you 
aren’t given a voice or an appeals method that doesn’t cost money or a lawyer 
to organise ... you’re screwed,” he said.

The Department of Human Services confirmed it had experienced problems with 
its online system, but said they had been fixed.

General manager Hank Jongen said it had affected only a “small group” of 
customers.


“A certain specific set of circumstances was impacting a small group of 
customers, resulting in them receiving an error message,” Jongen said. “We 
apologise for any inconvenience caused.”

 The data-matching system Centrelink is using to detect overpayments has also 
been experiencing problems, according to some welfare recipients. The new 
system compares data held by Centrelink with data from other government 
agencies, including the tax office, to determine whether a person has wrongly 
claimed welfare.

Last week, independent Andrew Wilkie called on the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/centrelink-urged-to-stop-collecting-welfare-debts-after-compliance-system-errors>
 to suspend the automated compliance system while reports of errors were 
investigated. Other welfare recipients have since spoken to Guardian Australia 
about claims for debts they say have been incorrectly issued.

One man, who asked not to be named, was told he owed $2,200 because the ATO’s 
information did not match the income he had reported to Centrelink. He said he 
claimed benefits for only part of the year, and believed the ATO’s information 
on his annual income had been mistakenly used to suggest he worked the entire 
year.

“I believe no government department could be so incompetent to not recognise 
the glaring problems with matching data that is on completely different scales 
(yearly vs fortnightly),” he said. “To me this means it has been purposely 
done.”

The department said last week it believed the automated system was working 
without error. It said there had been no increase in the rate of appeals 
received.
 