
Critics of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s president, Joseph Kabila, 
fear his attempts to cling to power could lead to widespread violence after a 
key opposition leader was charged with plotting acoup d’état this week. 

Political tensions in the country escalated when Moïse Katumbi, a provincial 
powerbroker and former close ally of the president, was charged hours after 
announcing he would run for president in elections scheduled for later in the 
year.

Critics accuse Kabila, in power since 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/02/joseph-kabila-reluctance-cede-power-democratic-republic-congo-brink>
, of manoeuvring to delay the vote and remain in office beyond his 
constitutionally permitted two terms.


Kabila had “deliberately sabotaged the electoral process” and instituted a 
“policy of chaos and fear”, said Olivier Kamitatu Etsu, a member of Congo’s 
national assembly and a former minister of planning.

Joseph Kabila's presidential ambitions could push Congo to the brink | Richard 
Moncrieff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/02/joseph-kabila-reluctance-cede-power-democratic-republic-congo-brink>
The Obama administration has threatened to impose sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/06/obama-drc-washington-summit-africa>
 on anyone who undermines security and democracy in the DRC and the latest 
charges are likely to concern Washington.

The country is Africa’s largest copper producer and western mining companies 
have invested heavily there since a2003 peace agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2007/may/02/society.conservationandendangeredspecies1>
 ended years of conflict that drew in more than six neighbouring countries and 
may have killed millions.

A delegation of Kabila’s political opponents traveled to Washington earlier 
this week to urge the US to act quickly against him and his top aides.

Sanctions could include the freezing of assets and a travel ban. But the 
warning has so far failed to sway Kabila and members of his government. The 
DRC’s ambassador to the US, François Balumuene, denied the charge and said 
Kabila was committed to holding fair and peaceful elections.

Balumuene said it was impossible for the president to change the constitution 
to stay in power. He insisted that logistical and financial problems had to be 
resolved before any polls.

The threat of sanctions has provoked an angry response from Kabila loyalists. 
Henri Mova Sakani, the secretary general of the president’s party, accused 
western powers of trying to divide the DRC to tryto restore colonialism.

“You can come up with anything you like – sanctions or whatever. You won’t 
scare us,” he told crowds gathered on Tuesday to mark the 1997 overthrow of the 
autocrat Mobutu Sese Seko by Kabila’s father.

Some analysts fear a violent showdown, pitting Kabila against Katumbi, a 
former governor of Katanga province in the south-east and the owner ofAfrica’s 
top football team, TP Mazembe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/dec/15/tp-mazembe-club-world-cup-final>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdemocratic-republic-congo-president-joseph-kabila-power-violence-katumbi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc62a983994266488b988ff0367ae4c30b9791edb%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fears%20DRC%20president's%20push%20to%20keep%20power%20will%20spark%20major%20violence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdemocratic-republic-congo-president-joseph-kabila-power-violence-katumbi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fears%20DRC%20president%27s%20push%20to%20keep%20power%20will%20spark%20major%20violence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fdemocratic-republic-congo-president-joseph-kabila-power-violence-katumbi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc62a983994266488b988ff0367ae4c30b9791edb%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Moïse Katumbi, who has been accused of plotting a coup. Photograph: Federico 
Scoppa/AFP/Getty Images 
Last week, police fired tear gas at Katumbi and thousands of his supporters in 
Lubumbashi, the DRC’s second city and a bastion of the opposition.

The country’s highest court ruled a week ago that Kabila would stay in power 
until elections could be held. Leading opposition parties say the ruling is 
part of a “constitutionalcoup d’état” and have called for nationwide marches on 
26 May to demand Kabila steps down this year.

But Kabila allies won more than two-thirds of the elections for governors of 
newly created provinces in March, shoring up local control of security forces 
and patronage networks.

Hans Hoebeke, International Crisis Group’s senior Congo analyst, said: 
“Cohesion in the Kabila camp has been maintained these last months. At this 
stage there is little to no pressure on him.”

Whereas the neighbouring strongmen Denis Sassou Nguesso in Congo-Brazzaville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/congo-brazzaville-president-burns-elephant-ivory-poachers>
 andPaul Kagame in Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/03/rwanda-president-paul-kagame-crushed-free-press>
 have easily pushed through constitutional changes to allow them to stand for 
third terms, Kabila has been unable to take such a blunt approach.

Ben Shepherd, an analyst at Chatham House, said the moves against Katumbi were 
part of a struggle by the rival politicians to win the confidence of members of 
Congo’s “interlocking, self-interested elite”.

“There is a sense that the presidency is weak. Kabila hasn’t managed to get a 
third term rubber-stamped and a new deal is possible. Currently no one wants to 
commit to either side so momentum is extremely important. If one candidate 
could attract support it could snowball,” Shepherd said.

He also downplayed the possibility of widespread violence. “I don’t think 
there will be anything remotely resembling peace and order in the DRC but I 
don’t think anyone is ready to light the blue touch paper either,” he said.

Robin Wright targets Congo's 'conflict minerals' violence with new campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/robin-wright-stand-with-congo-campaign-mining-house-of-cards>
Millions have died from conflict, hunger and disease since Kabila’s father, 
Laurent Kabila <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/feb/11/theobserver>, 
overthrew Mobutu. Despite the presence of nearly 20,000 UN peacekeepers, the 
country’s east remains ravaged by armed groups. In January 2015,dozens died in 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/26/democratic-republic-congo-protests-joseph-kabila>
 against proposed changes to the election law that could have delayed the poll 
by years.

Opposition parties have struggled to mobilise supporters for street rallies, 
but that may change with the multimillionaire Katumbi, who resigned from 
running the mineral-rich Katanga in September, accusing Kabila’s allies of 
plotting to keep the president in power.

“Our future president is Moïse Katumbi whether Kabila likes it or not,” said 
Pierre Nyembo Muyeye outside the prosecutor’s office in Lubumbashi. Some 
Katumbi partisans threatened to burn down the entire city if he was arrested.

Known during his governorship for distributing $100 bills to the public, 
Katumbi has been keen to present himself as the face of the people against a 
predatory state. “The greatest army in the world is the people,” he often says.

“The government fears him because he has the potential to mobilise an 
electorate in different parts of the country,” said Kris Berwouts, an 
independent Congo analyst. “There is an aura of success around him.”

The government denies Katumbi’s allegation that the coup plot charges against 
him are politically motivated.

Katumbi, though nominated by seven opposition parties to be their presidential 
candidate, faces an uphill battle to unify a historically fractured opposition.

The result has been a stalemate, said Jason Stearns, the director of the Congo 
Research Group at New York University. “Delaying tactics will work for a 
certain amount of time and buy him months, maybe several more years in power,” 
he said. “But it’s not a long-term strategy.”

The DRC is nearly two-thirds the size of western Europe and has a population 
of more than 79 million. Since it won independence from Belgium in 1960, there 
has never been a peaceful, democratic transition of power in the country.

Observers differ over the potential for widespread conflict. Its sprawling 
borders reach nine other African countries, and an implosion in the vast nation 
could spark instability in its neighbours, some maintain.

Others say that regional powers have little interest in sparking a violent 
battle to exploit the country’s resources. “The kind of proxy wars which were a 
feature before are possible, but not likely. It’s hard to see who would do it 
or why,” said Shepherd, of Chatham House.

Kabila took office less than two weeks after his father was shot by a 
bodyguard in the presidential palace in 2001.He was elected president in 
disputed polls in 2006 and again in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/18/despotism-democracy-congo-africa-elections>
.


“It’s a really dicey situation,” said Senator John McCain, one of several US 
lawmakers who have sought to draw greater attention to problems in the country. 
McCain last month wrote to the DRC’s ambassador in Washington, telling him that 
the advocacy group Human Rights Watch has documented dozens of cases of 
arbitrary arrest and unlawful detention.
 