
It can be hard to pinpoint exactly when an actor has made it to the upper 
echelons of the profession, but an Oscar nomination and an appearance in Vanity 
Fair’s Hollywood issue are fairly good markers. To those,Felicity Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/felicity-jones> can add a nomination for 
leading actress at this year’s Baftas. In previous interviews with Jones, each 
one, going back to at least 2008, has predicted her to be on the brink of 
superstardom. Now, finally, it seems to have happened.

Everybody seems to want her. Her forthcoming projects are a mix of the 
blockbuster – she has an action film, Autobahn, out soon, co-starring Anthony 
Hopkins and Nicholas Hoult, and she has just been cast in a new Star Wars 
spin-off film – and intelligent drama (True Story, directed by theatre director 
Rupert Goold and based on the memoir by journalist Michael Finkel).

But it has been her most recent film that has made her a star and brought the 
awards nominations. The 31-year-old plays Jane Wilde Hawking in The Theory of 
Everything, the film adaptation of Hawking’s memoir of her marriage to Stephen 
Hawking. Eddie Redmayne, who plays the scientist, is also up for an Oscar and 
appears next to Jones on the Vanity Fair cover.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423249270696%2F6487c6ce-34f5-4380-b221-70f9d2567093-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Felicity%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98My%20job%20is%20a%20calling%20%E2%80%A6%20like%20becoming%20a%20nun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Felicity%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98My%20job%20is%20a%20calling%20%E2%80%A6%20like%20becoming%20a%20nun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423249270696%2F6487c6ce-34f5-4380-b221-70f9d2567093-2060x1236.jpeg>
 With Eddie Redmayne in The Theory of Everything. Photograph: Allstar/Working 
Title Films/Sportsphoto 
“When they were filming, she came to dinner several times and we talked and we 
talked,”Jane Hawking said recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/12/jane-hawking-stephen-hawking-first-wife-theory-of-everything-interview>
. “I thought: ‘What is she going to make of me?’ But she is a method actress 
and when I saw her on screen in those first shots when she arrives at the party 
I was just astounded. I thought ‘she’s stolen my personality!’ because she had 
my mannerisms, she had my speech patterns. It was a very weird experience.”

Jones is an immersive actor. In an interview with Vogue last year, she said 
she researches each role intensely, “because that’s how I can take on a new 
headspace”. Her profession, she said, was something she’d always wanted to do. 
“Without sounding too pretentious, I feel my job is almost like becoming a monk 
or a nun – it’s a calling.”

Jones grew up in Bournville, a suburb of Birmingham. Her parents met when they 
worked on a local paper – her mother was in the advertising department, her 
father was a journalist – though they divorced when Jones was three and she and 
her brother were brought up by their mother. Later, she chose to go to 
university (Oxford, where she read English) over drama school, but her career 
was building nicely in the background. When she was 10, Jones auditioned for 
the Central Junior Television Workshop, an influential and well-connected youth 
drama group. Its then director, Colin Edwards, would become a friend and 
mentor. “She was the sweetest, polite, brightest little girl you can imagine,” 
he says.

He recently found pictures of Jones from the chorus line of a production they 
put on of Oh! What a Lovely War. Jones didn’t get the lead roles back then – 
not because she wasn’t good enough, but because she was rarely available for 
rehearsals as she had work commitments: there was her part in the children’s TV 
series The Worst Witch, and in the film Treasure Seekers (also featuring a 
young Keira Knightley).

“The nice thing was,” says Edwards, “even with her early success, she wasn’t 
at all affected by it. It would have been very easy, particularly at that age, 
to act the star, but that was never the case. She was very popular.” Not a 
natural show-off, she has said “I think there’s also a shyness sometimes” to 
many actors, “and there’s a sensation you get when you’re performing of release 
from a self-consciousness that you might have in everyday life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423249580684%2F3f06e149-76f3-41d8-8027-a4bd71e7c71e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Felicity%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98My%20job%20is%20a%20calling%20%E2%80%A6%20like%20becoming%20a%20nun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Felicity%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98My%20job%20is%20a%20calling%20%E2%80%A6%20like%20becoming%20a%20nun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423249580684%2F3f06e149-76f3-41d8-8027-a4bd71e7c71e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In Cemetery Junction with Christian Cooke, Tom Hughes and Jack Doolan. 
Photograph: © Giles Keyte 
Jones appears never to have been out of work since she was a child. For many 
years, she played Emma Grundy in the Radio 4 series The Archers. “That’s where 
I learned my craft,” Jones has said. “When I come home I am literally the most 
popular person with my friends’ parents for doing The Archers.” Later, she 
appeared in period dramas – Northanger Abbey and Brideshead Revisited – but 
before she could get typecast, she took roles in more contemporary projects 
such as Ricky Gervais’s filmCemetery Junction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/15/cemetery-junction-ricky-gervais-review>
 and the romantic comedy Chalet Girl, for which she spent months learning how 
to snowboard. A couple of other British films she appeared in went largely 
unnoticed.

It was not until Like Crazy, a 2011 film she made with the American director 
Drake Doremus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/28/drake-doremus-like-crazy-sundance>
, about a British girl in a long-distance relationship, that Jones’s career 
really started to take off. At the Sundance film festival, she won a special 
jury prize (the film also won the best film prize) for her role, which was 
largely improvised. Directors and producers, including Woody Allen and Harvey 
Weinstein, wanted to meet her, and fashion companies wanted her to star in 
their ad campaigns. That year, she appeared in Michael Grandage’s production of 
theFriedrich Schiller play Luise Miller at the Donmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/13/luise-miller-review> in London 
(she turned down the lead alongside Julia Roberts in the film Mirror, Mirror to 
do it). Grandage had previously directed her in The Chalk Garden in 2008; this 
time, her fame had grown but he says she hadn’t changed. “She has a very level 
head on her shoulders. She has an amazing sense of humour and a good sense of 
humour about herself, which is always helpful in our profession. She has a good 
self-knowledge.”

Jones accepts a part, he says, “because she has an innate understanding of the 
role – she never comes to the process not knowing what she’s got to do”. What 
follows, during the rehearsals, is a layering process, he says. “With each day 
that goes by, she finds more of the character and takes away what she doesn’t 
like. She is somebody who excavates a role very deeply and builds from inside 
out. It’s a fantastic thing to watch because you see, in front of your eyes, a 
character grow and grow.” Jones is ready, he says, for opening night with 
precision timing.

Although her film career is established – she won much praise for her role 
playing Charles Dickens’s mistress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/09/invisible-woman-mark-kermode-review>
 in the 2013 film The Invisible Woman – Grandage would love to see her take on 
more theatre: “I believe on stage she’s got a massive body of work that she can 
explore and it will be exciting. Not just new plays, where she started [in 
Polly Stenham’s That Face], but the classical repertoire and she will be able 
to go to all sorts of places over a long career.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423249875769%2F6272a0ec-98e4-4244-8abf-2467b5fa8070-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Felicity%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98My%20job%20is%20a%20calling%20%E2%80%A6%20like%20becoming%20a%20nun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Felicity%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98My%20job%20is%20a%20calling%20%E2%80%A6%20like%20becoming%20a%20nun%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffelicity-jones-profile-my-job-is-a-calling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423249875769%2F6272a0ec-98e4-4244-8abf-2467b5fa8070-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In The Invisible Woman with Ralph Fiennes as Charles Dickens. Photograph: 
David Appleby/AP/Sony Pictures Classics 
Celebrity doesn’t appear to sit too easily with Jones. Colin Edwards remembers 
going to see Luise Miller and arranging to meet her afterwards, waiting with a 
crush of people outside the theatre. “They were all waiting for her to appear. 
She was signing autographs and then she came across to me and the first thing 
she did was apologise, saying: ‘I don’t understand why they’re bothering.’ 
Self-effacing is a good word to describe her.”

This was the impression I got too – I interviewed her in 2012 and she seemed 
quiet and reserved, a little bemused at the fuss that had been surrounding her. 
Jones has said she’s aware she “can’t run away from the public element of my 
job”.

Caroline Harvey, who wrote and directed the 2013 short film, Emily, with Jones 
has been friends with the actor for a number of years. “She’s very private,” 
she says, but adds that she’s also “really fun, and I’m looking forward to her 
picking films that are perhaps less heavy drama”.

She wrote her short with her friend in mind, and Jones also wanted to produce 
it. “[That] says a lot about her in terms of how committed she can be to 
material. She was so curious about the process of producing. She was at every 
meeting, even at ones about lenses.” As an actor, she says, Jones is “really 
instinctive. She asks the right questions – even though I wrote it, she opened 
it up even more for me. Everyone you talk to will say how intelligent she is. 
And she’s curious about everything.”
 