

 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OItKvc13gws&feature=youtu.be>The first 
full-length Fifty Shades Darker trailer has just been released. Fifty Shades 
Darker, you’ll remember, is a film you won’t watch based on a book you haven’t 
read, that acts as a sequel to a film you haven’t watched based on a book your 
mum read once.

But fear not. Even though you know nothing of the film’s source material, I’ve 
compiled a scene-by-scene rundown of theFifty Shades Darker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-darker> trailer to get you up to 
speed. This is the rough story of the film, told in microcosm.

1. The trailer opens with a shot of Christian Grey. He’s worried about the 
direction this film is taking, because fireworks are such a painfully obvious 
metaphor for male ejaculation. But, still, he has bigger things on his mind. He 
may have won Anastasia over with all of his kinky fetishes, but he has a darker 
secret to divulge. For he has a hidden identity. By day, he is Christian Grey. 
But by night, he is …

2. Fey Batman, inadequate crimefighter.

3. “Did you hear that, Anastasia?” he asks. “I like to dress up like a rubbish 
Zorro. That’s sexy, isn’t it?” But Anastasia cannot answer, for she is too busy 
working on a particularly stubborn bar of Highland toffee.

4. Eventually Anastasia replies. As luck would have it, she also has a secret 
identity – Even Feyer Batman. She cut the mask out of her nan’s net curtain and 
everything. Truly, they are a match made in heaven.

5. To commemorate their newfound compatibility, Christian and Anastasia attend 
a fancy party. “Isn’t this too direct a rip-off of Eyes Wide Shut?” Anastasia 
whispers. “Yes. We never should have got rid of Sam Taylor-Johnson,” Christian 
replies. “She was the only good thing about this franchise,” chirps the 
irritating bowler-hatted fire-breather, but nobody hears him. Nobody ever hears 
him.

6. The next day, Anastasia opens a new exhibition based purely on photographs 
of herself. One second after opening the doors, she realises what a terrible 
mistake she’s made, which is why she looks so sad here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffifty-shades-darker-first-trailer-deconstructed-stuart-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52955007390d50c38fba91237b9b4f4c93fdb181%2F44_0_632_379%2F632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fifty%20Shades%20Darker%20%E2%80%93%20the%20first%20trailer%20deconstructed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffifty-shades-darker-first-trailer-deconstructed-stuart-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fifty%20Shades%20Darker%20%E2%80%93%20the%20first%20trailer%20deconstructed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ffifty-shades-darker-first-trailer-deconstructed-stuart-heritage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52955007390d50c38fba91237b9b4f4c93fdb181%2F44_0_632_379%2F632.jpg>
7. Still, Christian finds it all too sexy for words. So, in a moment of 
spontaneous ardour, he takes off all his clothes, gets into the shower, turns 
the shower on, gets back out of the shower, towels himself off, puts all his 
clothes back on, drags Anastasia into the shower and dry-humps her. It seems a 
bit convoluted, especially when there’s presumably a bed only feet away from 
them, but if they’re happy then who am I to judge?

8. Loosened up, they next embark on what might be the most disgusting act of 
BDSM ever screened in public – putting on cable-knit sweaters, sailing a boat 
and smiling. Phwoar, eh? No wonder your mum loved this book so much.

9. But trouble lies ahead. There is a flare-up at work, and Anastasia bursts 
out of the Seattle Independent Press offices. “What do you mean you’re 
replacing my column with a bunch of funny dog gifs?” she yells. Her boss 
stutters: “We’re just trying to adjust to a difficult commercial environm–” 
“Hooey!” she screams. “This is the death of journalism! What next? Are you 
going to get a writer to screen-grab a trailer for a film he has no interest in 
seeing, and hope that one self-referential paragraph at the end makes up for 
his total lack of effort? Get real!”

10. And then the girl from The Ring eats her. The end.

 