
Britain’s growing appetite for services such as Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> and Amazon has helped push 
streaming and downloads of films and TV shows ahead of sales of DVDs and 
Blu-ray discs for the first time.

The rise in popularity of paying for TV content helped power total UK revenue 
from music, TV shows, films and video games to a record £6.3bn last year.


Video: the death of the DVD

Total revenues from digital video – which includes services such as Apple’s 
iTunes as well as Sky’s store and Now TV – surged almost 23% to £1.3bn last 
year.

The digital boost came as high street sales of DVDs and Blu-ray discs fell 17% 
to £894m – the first time it has fallen below the £1bn mark. The once mighty 
physical rental market fell 21% to just £49m.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffilm-and-tv-streaming-and-downloads-overtake-dvd-sales-for-first-time-netflix-amazon-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bbda9bbb4af023cefb9b5bdab3f617d4c913f1e%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Film%20and%20TV%20%E2%80%8Bstreaming%20and%20downloads%20overtake%20DVD%20sales%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffilm-and-tv-streaming-and-downloads-overtake-dvd-sales-for-first-time-netflix-amazon-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Film%20and%20TV%20%E2%80%8Bstreaming%20and%20downloads%20overtake%20DVD%20sales%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffilm-and-tv-streaming-and-downloads-overtake-dvd-sales-for-first-time-netflix-amazon-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bbda9bbb4af023cefb9b5bdab3f617d4c913f1e%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The further decline in DVD sales does not mean the death knell for the format 
– yet. Photograph: Alamy 
Total revenue from physical and digital sales rose 2.2% to £2.25bn, with the 
biggest seller of the year Star Wars: The Force Awakens with sales of 2.3m .

“We’ve seen an explosion of technology that has allowed people to consume 
entertainment in different ways,” said Kim Bayley, chief executive of the 
Entertainment Retailers Association, which compiles the annual figures.
streaming chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-05T19:04:37/embed.html>
Netflix has rapidly grown to 6 million UK subscribers since launching in 2012. 
Amazon, which has shows including The Man in the High Castle as well as Jeremy 
Clarkson’s The Grand Tour, is estimated to have attracted 2.3 million regular 
users of to its UK video service since its launch in 2014, according to Ampere 
Analysis.

Sky had more than 3 million customers to its Sky Store in the year to the end 
of June, while its “buy and keep” service – where by customers download a film 
and get a DVD posted out – grew by 80%.

Despite the digital revolution, Bayley said that it was too soon to ring the 
death knell of the DVD, with physical sales of music, TV shows, films and 
computer games still worth £2.2bn annually.

“Physical entertainment retailing is clearly off its peak,” she said. “A 
multichannel economy is going to exist for some years to come. The strength of 
the DVD and CD formats over the Christmas period shows that physical still 
dominates when it comes to gifting, for instance.”

Music: digital, Adele and compilations

The digital onslaught is also continuing in the music market, with 
subscription revenues increasing by 65% to £418m, driven by services such as 
Spotify, Apple Music, Amazon Music and Deezer.

Physical sales of CDs fell by 13%, a steep decline after a 3.7% fall in 2015. 
Consumer spend in £m 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-04T15:35:54/embed.html>
 Consumer spend in £m 
Overall physical sales were 7.3% down as a surge in vinyl sales, up by 56% to 
£65.6m, helped stabilise the decline.

Total music revenues were up 4.6% to £1.1bn, with the top two sellers Now 
That’s What I Call Music compilations followed by Adele’s 25, which was the 
biggest-selling album by a single artist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffilm-and-tv-streaming-and-downloads-overtake-dvd-sales-for-first-time-netflix-amazon-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff91456bb7a5bab375925f93c77b672aad91ecf1d%2F284_1391_3094_1856%2F3094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Film%20and%20TV%20%E2%80%8Bstreaming%20and%20downloads%20overtake%20DVD%20sales%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffilm-and-tv-streaming-and-downloads-overtake-dvd-sales-for-first-time-netflix-amazon-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Film%20and%20TV%20%E2%80%8Bstreaming%20and%20downloads%20overtake%20DVD%20sales%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffilm-and-tv-streaming-and-downloads-overtake-dvd-sales-for-first-time-netflix-amazon-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff91456bb7a5bab375925f93c77b672aad91ecf1d%2F284_1391_3094_1856%2F3094.jpg>
 Adele’s album 25 on CD. Photograph: Alexander Schippers/AFP/Getty Images 
Digital services now account for 57% of all music sales.

Video games: the back of the digital net

Total revenue from games grew 2.9% to £2.95bn last year. Digital sales from 
online and mobile grew by 12% to £2.2bn, while physical sales of games fell 16% 
to £776m.

The biggest selling game of the year was Fifa 17, with sales of 2.5m. This was 
almost the same number as its chart-topping predecessor Fifa 2016.

Almost three-quarters (74%) of the UK games market is now accounted for by 
digital revenues.

Last year marks the second in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/06/netflix-spotify-apple-uk-entertainment-revenue-adele>
 that the UK entertainment industry has seen growth after almost a decade of 
declining sales as businesses struggled to take advantage of the digital 
revolution.

“The music, video and games industries were understandably nervous about the 
advent of new digital services, but these figures provide resounding evidence 
of the benefits of our members’ investment in innovation,” said Bayley. “Take 
away today’s digital services and the entertainment market would be barely a 
third the size it is today.”
 