
In some ways Firewatch, the beautiful and intriguing game recently released by 
San Francisco-based studio Campo Santo, is a mystery adventure. You play as 
Henry, working for a season in a firewatch tower, far out in the Wyoming 
wilderness. He is alone except for a walkie talkie, but very quickly he 
realises that something is going on out there amid the endless ochre tinted 
forest. There are kids letting off fireworks and leaving threatening messages, 
then someone ransacks his tower. Something is happening.

But then, right from the start, we realise that Henry is in turmoil. A 
mini-text adventure at the beginning of the game tells us that his wife is very 
ill, he has come here to escape his life. Quietly and subtly, we are encouraged 
to ask questions about what’s really going on. Can we trust Henry?


(Spoiler alert: next paragraph contains Bioshock and Heavy Rain spoilers)

Games have, of course, played with the literary device of the unreliable 
narrator for many years. The first-person shooterBioshock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2007/aug/24/bioshock> used it 
to devastating effect in its tale of a failed underwater utopia, experienced 
via the duplicitous voice of Frank Fontaine; while the psychological horror game
Heavy Rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2010/feb/17/heavy-rain-sony-playstation-ps3>
 famously pulled a character plot twist so audacious, some players could barely 
forgive the writers for their transgression.

(End of spoilers!)

Firewatch is certainly more subtle than those examples, but it cleverly 
explores the conflicted emotions of its lead character, while allowing the 
player to maintain a skeptical distance. In a medium where the default mode is 
for us to identify with the character, it’s a refreshing change to be told that 
the person we’re ostensibly controlling may not be entirely trustworthy. And 
it’s an approach that’s becoming more common.

I added real things from my life so that people could understand who I was 
from many different angles
Nina Freeman 
Another intriguing example released this year is Cibele, a 
semi-autobiographical game about designer Nina Freeman’s relationship with a 
man (known as Blake) she meets in an online role-playing adventure. The player 
effectively takes on the role of Nina as she meets her boyfriend online, and we 
listen in on her conversations with him, in a familiar adventure game style. 
But at the same time, Freeman wanted us to understand the friction between the 
way the in-game Nina presents herself to Blake and what she’s actually 
thinking. To this end, the player gets access to in-game Nina’sPC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> desktop, which contains poems, 
journal entries and photos – these are all genuine relics from Freeman’s life. 
And they often contradict the story she’s telling Blake.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffirewatch-experimental-games-character%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7b713bd28252a03ae3f6d6382f0568222916719%2F80_0_1199_720%2F1199.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Firewatch%3A%20how%20games%20are%20getting%20inside%20the%20heads%20of%20their%20characters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffirewatch-experimental-games-character%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Firewatch%3A%20how%20games%20are%20getting%20inside%20the%20heads%20of%20their%20characters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Ffirewatch-experimental-games-character%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7b713bd28252a03ae3f6d6382f0568222916719%2F80_0_1199_720%2F1199.jpg>
 Nina Freeman is both the designer and ‘star’ of Cibela, a game that analyses 
her online relationship with a gamer named Blake 
“I kind of realised I had to establish a critical distance from what was 
happening,” explains Freeman. “As I was writing the script, I realised there 
were things I want to express that I couldn’t through dialogue alone; I decided 
it had to be more than just playing in this online game and listening to 
conversations. So I added real things from my life so that people could 
understand who I was from many different angles – they could infer what I was 
like without really being with me. That’s where the folders full of my 
pictures, blog posts and poems came from – it was to give the player context so 
that they can feel like they understand the character outside of what she’s 
just saying.”

What both Firewatch and Cibele have in common is the idea of experience being 
the central component rather than action or puzzle-solving. They do, of course, 
belong to a loose genre known as experiential games, most commonly associated 
with two titles –The Chinese Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/oct/15/horror-amnesia-a-machine-for-pigs-chinese-room>
’s Dear Esther and Fullbright’sGone Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/apr/26/gone-home-telling-everyday-stories>
 – which stripped back all interactive components, and put the focus on simply 
experiencing the environment and narrative. Again, this isn’t a new idea, but 
the rise of indie game development (facilitated by digital game distribution 
and the availability of cheap development tools), has made it easier for 
smaller, more experimental teams to start exploring more personal, more 
challenging game design concepts. There’s an emerging generation of designers 
who are asking more questions about how we relate to the games we play and the 
characters that inhabit them.

There are several fascinating examples on the way – and all, in some ways, 
insert the same sorts of questions between player and character.Fragments of Him
 <http://fragmentsofhim.com/> is a forthcoming PC game designed by Mata Haggis, 
a professor at Breda’s NHTV University. It’s a narrative adventure, following a 
fatal car crash in which one of the four player-characters is killed. In a 
series of interactive scenes, we explore that character’s last thoughts, as 
well as the aftermath of the accident for his closest friends and ex-lovers.

Importantly, though, the player doesn’t really control any of the characters 
first-hand. Instead, they can only prompt them to interact with key nostalgic 
objects. “The player sees the world from a first-person perspective, like many 
classic video games such as Doom,” explains Haggis. “But unlike those games, 
the player is not in the head of the character; instead, our player is their 
‘mind’. The mind can wander around the rooms in the game, but nothing happens 
without them interacting with pre-defined objects. Those interactions prompt 
the character to perform an action that fits precisely with who they are, and 
so there is no way that the player can force the people in the story to perform 
actions that break their character. The people in Fragments of Him always 
remain consistent in the narrative.”

This system came from combatting a truth of traditional video games – that the 
player, through in direct control of the character, always has the ability to 
subvert, halt and break the story. The emotional impact of any moment can 
easily be destroyed by simply jumping on a table during a romantic monologue, 
or trying to punch the non-player character conveying some devastating plot 
point. In most games this is fine, it’s part of interactivity. But for the 
small minority of games looking to provide an emotional experience, that want 
the player to investigate the character as much as the environment, this is a 
barrier.


“In Fragments of Him, we have removed difficulty, puzzles, timers, scores and 
all forms of challenge, and kept the core storytelling experience,” says 
Haggis. “It is impossible to ‘fail’ in our story. Some might argue that taking 
away all of these elements stops Fragments of Him, and games like it, from 
being games at all. I think that there is something in that, but at the same 
time it also feels like a built-in limitation of the term ‘games’ to describe 
the true potential of interactive media. We sometimes semi-jokingly refer to 
Fragments of Him as a Playable Interactive Narrative Experience, partly because 
we like the acronym ‘Pine’, but mainly because we feel that discussions about 
what truly is, or is not, a ‘game’ is besides the point of what we are trying 
to achieve.”

Also due later this year is Elsewhere Company’s a.part.ment 
<http://apartmentga.me/>, in which a character, Nick Connor, wanders his home, 
analysing the reasons for a recent relationship breakdown. Wherever you go as a 
player, certain objects and areas unlock partially interactive memory 
sequences, that slowly build a picture of the love affair. But again, we’re 
invited to ask how reliable these fragments are. Memories are subjective. At 
certain points we’re able to explore the apartments and romantic memories of 
the lead character’s neighbours, and these enhance, compliment and contrast his 
own reminiscence.

This whole question of memory and reality is also explored in Town of Light, a 
forthcoming psychological adventure from Italian studio LKA. Set in the 
real-life Volterra asylum, it concerns the story of a woman named Renee who 
returns to the creepy, now derelict building having been a patient there in the 
40s. Again, though, as she explores the wrecked building, reliving what she 
thought had happened, she discovers her clinical records and realises that her 
memories are inaccurate.

Inspired by creative director Luca Dalcò’s own experiences of how depression 
affected a close friend, there is, once again, this disconnect between the 
player and the character – we’re partaking in their experience, but as a 
discreet entity. We have to question Renee in a way we may not question a 
character like Nathan Drake or Lara Croft.

We’re entering into a new era of game design in which studios are using the 
standard conventions of interactivity to ask questions about what it means to 
“be” a character on screen. Narrators are becoming unreliable, stories are 
becoming character studies. The Henry we see in Firewatch is not the actual 
Henry, it’s not even the interpretation of Henry experienced by every 
individual player. It’s a strange amalgam of all those elements. In Cibele, we 
play as Nina, but we’re simultaneously watching, being and judging her, and we 
can’t trust all that she says to Blake or to herself.

We are seeing the limits of what​ a ‘game’ is being tested
Mata Haggis 
“It is an incredibly exciting time for stories in games,” says Haggis. “We are 
seeing the limits of what a ‘game’ is being tested, we’re part of a new wave of 
experiments in how interaction can produce meaningful experiences.

“Fragments of Him and other games in this emerging field still use very 
familiar mechanics, but with the aesthetics altered from battlefields into 
spaces for stories to be told. All the pieces of interaction and mechanics 
design for this emerging field are in place, now we just need passionate 
storytellers who understand those mechanics to step up and explore.

“In our game, the player can choose small alternative paths for the people in 
the story, giving a slightly different angle on the events. These are things 
that are not possible in a film or in most theatrical performances.

“Fragments of Him is certainly not a film, but it may be something other than 
a ‘game’”.


This is, in a way, the theme that links all of these games. They are all 
mystery adventures, but the mystery is about our relationship with them and the 
people they invite us to be.

 * Firewatch review – a small game with a big story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/08/firewatch-review-first-person-simulation-adventure-game>

 * Video games aren’t about power – they’re about agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/16/video-games-power-agency-control> 