
The outdoors in Firewatch isn’t like the outdoors in most games. It feels 
somehow bigger. This is a game set in Wyoming’s Yellowstone national park, a 
vast wilderness of lakes, mountains and hiking trails. When the sun began to 
set on my first day in the park – as the lead protagonist Henry, the volunteer 
fire lookout – it reminded me of rushing home at dusk while playing out as a 
kid, of escaping the dark as a small person in a big world.

This is all very deliberate. Firewatch is a relatively small and simple game, 
designed to engage players emotionally with a handful of basic, believable 
parts. It comes from a new studio, Campo Santo, though its dozen members have 
worked on lots of other games at various other studios. The lead artist, Jane 
Ng, worked on The Cave at Double Fine, while the writer/director pair, Sean 
Vanaman and Jake Rodkin, led the team behind the hugely acclaimed first season 
of The Walking Dead at TelltaleGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dce229a7b8c09d63adb34948d4ae4ed950795df%2F189_0_2811_1688%2F2811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Firewatch%3A%20hope%20and%20heartbreak%20in%20the%20American%20wilderness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Firewatch%3A%20hope%20and%20heartbreak%20in%20the%20American%20wilderness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dce229a7b8c09d63adb34948d4ae4ed950795df%2F189_0_2811_1688%2F2811.jpg>
 Firewatch Photograph: Campo Santo 
Campo Santo exists partly because of The Walking Dead. After its success, 
then-flatmates Vanaman and Rodkin realised if they didn’t strike out on their 
own at that moment they probably never would. The Walking Dead had given them 
experience of leading a team, and after 10m sales, games publishers were keen 
to talk business. There were offers, too, some for more money than they needed, 
but the pair were looking for an unusual level of creative control. Too much 
money, says Vanaman, comes with “too many meetings.”

In the end Campo Santo went into business with Panic, Inc, a software company 
from Oregon, better known for its FTP clients and MP3 players. This will be 
Panic’s first game, an unlikely departure which the company agreed to in part 
because of what Vanaman describes as an existing “personal, professional 
relationship.” Rodkin interrupts: “Let’s be honest about this professional 
connection, Sean. I made skins for their MP3 player when I was in college.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb36fa3e50d9012c586d8306eb0ea1336c8f91fd4%2F133_0_2811_1688%2F2811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Firewatch%3A%20hope%20and%20heartbreak%20in%20the%20American%20wilderness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Firewatch%3A%20hope%20and%20heartbreak%20in%20the%20American%20wilderness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb36fa3e50d9012c586d8306eb0ea1336c8f91fd4%2F133_0_2811_1688%2F2811.jpg>
 Firewatch Photograph: Campo Santo 
It all adds to the slightly unusual mix. Campo Santa seems a particular kind 
of place – with creative control written into its contract, the studio is happy 
to be completely open with its publisher (Panic has access to the team’s 
internal Slack chat) and development has been, if not without the odd bump, at 
least unfettered. The British artist Olly Moss, a friend of Rodkin and Vanaman, 
came on board early, and his artwork helped to explain the project to other 
prospective members of the team. They were looking for experienced developers 
who recognised the risk of a start-up (“If anyone ever said ‘This sounds 
perfect!’ I would stop them,” says Vanaman “It will not be perfect.”) and 
though there were some fixed ideas about the game Firewatch would eventually 
become, it was also shaped by who else joined the studio. “You design by 
hiring, sometimes” says Vanaman.

What Firewatch became is a first-person game primarily about exploration and 
story, rather than action or combat, nudging at the edges of a genre 
established by games like Dear Esther and Gone Home. Firewatch is not really 
about watching for fires, but what happens to Henry when his life reaches a 
point where the isolation of a lookout tower makes more sense than anything 
else. It’s a narrative game, with a mystery to unravel, though little is known 
beyond the fact that Henry finds evidence that something strange is going on 
out there. Deepening the interactivity of the experience are classic adventure 
game-style mechanics (picking up, inspecting and using items) and the game’s 
dialogue options, something carried over from Vanaman’s work on The Walking 
Dead. As Ng points out, at this level of production, and for a studio’s first 
game, it makes sense “to do what you’re good at.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ea768b7870435efabfa2fb21dc197fd78bd591%2F71_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Firewatch%3A%20hope%20and%20heartbreak%20in%20the%20American%20wilderness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Firewatch%3A%20hope%20and%20heartbreak%20in%20the%20American%20wilderness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffirewatch-american-wilderness-campo-santo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ea768b7870435efabfa2fb21dc197fd78bd591%2F71_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Firewatch Photograph: Campo Santo 
In Firewatch these dialogue options shape what is, along with the American 
wilderness, another of the game’s key fixtures - the relationship between Henry 
and his unseen, distant supervisor, Delilah. Actually they start before that, 
in a text-only prologue sequence that, in a few economical minutes, establishes 
the reason Henry has volunteered for the Forest Service, devastates the player 
emotionally in a confoundingly straightforward way, and makes that first breath 
of mountain air seem like welcome escape from a decade-long slide into shadow.

It works. We totally get why Henry needs this job, why he’s quiet, and why the 
friendly Delilah – who he contacts via walkie-talkie and is his only contact 
with HQ and the world – is so appealing to him (and to us).

Vanaman stresses the importance of naturalistic writing to this kind of 
investment, with which he wants to “play on your emotions as an actual person.” 
Firewatch’s drama is all the more compelling precisely because its parts are 
unremarkable. There’s that feeling of the outdoors, the lack of a safety net 
afforded by streetlights and civilisation (there are no mobile phones in 
Firewatch’s 1989, and all in-game navigation is done with map and compass). And 
there’s the comfort and precariousness of the relationship with Delilah, who 
gains a certain power from being Henry’s only point of contact. The 
walkie-talkie through which they communicate is the focus of the game’s 
interaction, with Henry reporting objects and observations to her. She becomes 
his world - a subtle, human feeling of dependence that can easily shift into 
vulnerability (at one point I choose an undiplomatic response and Delilah steps 
away from her walkie-talkie, leaving me bereft).

Delilah and the walkie-talkie weren’t always this central. At one point, Ng 
says, Henry was going to interact with various people – other hikers, for 
example – but in terms of resources and time, having other characters 
physically appear in your game is “really expensive”. The realisation seems 
similar to that of UK developer The Chinese Room which adopted an equally 
lonely setting for its own rural drama, Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture.

Without physical interaction, Campo Santo re-focused on what was really 
important, a process of design by subtraction. “Sometimes when you accept your 
constraints completely, and design within them, you forget whether it was the 
constraint or the idea that drove it first,” says Vanaman. Henry and Delilah’s 
relationship now seems to be “what this is fundamentally about.”

Because of this, finding a voice for Henry was always going to be crucial. 
It’s not enough for the dialogue to read realistically, Vanaman says, it’s got 
to be spoken that way, too. The team drew up a wishlist of names, some based on 
the notion that the actor should resemble Henry physically - a stocky, Fred 
Flinstone type - and somewhere near the top was Mad Men’s Rich Sommer. Sommer, 
it turned out, is a big fan of board games, and followed Campo Santo’s 
programmer Patrick Ewing - who runs a blog about board games - on twitter. 
“Patrick said ‘I could just DM him…’” remembers Ng. He came in and impressed. 
“He’s energetic, interesting, fun to be around,” says Vanaman, who laughs about 
the sadsack on-screen image Sommer gained from Mad Men. “In street clothes, 
he’s the best-looking guy in the room.”

Vanaman and another member of the team, Nels Anderson, grew up in different 
parts of Wyoming, and there’s a glow of nostalgia to the game’s toasted 
sunsets, its stylised, airbrushed past. But setting Firewatch somewhere real 
and specific also made the storytelling easier, Vanaman says, and to help the 
team grasp the size and character of Yellowstone Campo Santo took a work field 
trip to the much closer Yosemite National Park. Rodkin says it was incredibly 
useful, especially for members of the team who hadn’t grown up in the States. 
Yosemite had a lookout tower built from the same blueprint as Henry’s in the 
game, and the trip become a contrast of scales - the huge space of the park, 
and the tiny details and objects it contained. It was this trip which brought 
home the sort of space in which the game took place, and helped shape that 
feeling of the somehow bigger.

“We had the most cheesy movie moment, like if there was a documentary crew 
filming the making of Firewatch,” Rodkin says. “It was Olly sitting on the 
railing looking out into the middle of nowhere. And he said: ‘I get it’”

Firewatch is released on Linux, Mac, PC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> and PS4 on 9 February.
 