
Together with last year’s government aid strategy, the Department for 
International Development’s publication of two reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/01/uk-aid-reviews-trade-policy-sideline-poor-countries>
 of its approach to aid delivery provides a much clearer picture of how Britain 
will tackle world poverty.

There is much to welcome in last week’s reviews of bilateral 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/573889/Bilateral-Development-Review-2016.pdf>
 (pdf) andmultilateral 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/573884/Multilateral-Development-Review-Dec2016.pdf>
 (pdf) funding, not leastdevelopment secretary Priti Patel 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-12-01/HCWS296/>
’s forthright and passionatecommitment to aid 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/reviews-set-out-uk-vision-for-an-open-modern-development-system>
 as a vital tool in the fight to end poverty. The reviews rightly stress the 
importance of aid effectiveness, innovation, impact and enhanced levels of 
national and internationaltransparency 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/overseas-aid-transparency>, scrutiny 
and accountability for every pound spent.

Plan to align UK aid with trade policy could sideline poor countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/01/uk-aid-reviews-trade-policy-sideline-poor-countries>
However, ambition may need to be partly tempered by realism. Having recently 
seen Oxfam’s work in Yemen, Iraq and Syria, I was reminded of just how hard it 
is to reach those in greatest need in fragile and conflict-affected states, 
where the department pledges to spend half of its aid. Prudence, patience, and 
a willingness to take risks – and sometimes get it wrong – are as important as 
backing world beaters and innovators. It is too easy for DfID to claim better 
performance management simply by passing the risks on to civil society and 
contractors. There will not always be a clear or immediate UK security or 
prosperity interest at stake, and nor should there be. The mandate to fight 
poverty and suffering wherever they exist remains paramount.

Five questions should help assess the impact of UK aid as the government 
finalises and implements its aid strategy.

The most fundamental is whether aid funding is meeting its core purpose. Is it 
consistentlydeployed in a way that fulfils the government’s legal commitment to 
use aid for poverty eradication? All aspects of British aid should be foremost 
driven and shaped by this goal. Impact – people moved out of poverty, lives 
saved, sustainable development goals met – is what the UK public expects of UK 
aid. Business investments, which may or may not directly benefit the poor, or 
the use of aid funding in areas that might be influenced by political or 
strategic factors, merit particularly rigorous scrutiny.

So too does the question of whether a legitimate interest in issues of 
security and prosperity, as judged from an exclusively British perspective, 
have a disproportionate influence on how aid is spent. There is already 
evidence of diminishing aid to poor but stable countries of limited strategic 
interest to the UK, such as Ghana, Tanzania and Zambia. Meanwhile, cooperation 
with emerging economies, where the UK has trade interests, is increasing. The 
bilateral review signals that the Sahel region will be a future priority for 
DfID, but the emphasis seems to be on tackling extremism and terrorism rather 
than responding to humanitarian need and local security.

No less worthy of scrutiny is the rapid and very substantial investment by 
DfID into economic development and stimulus of the private sector. Will this 
approach deliver for the poorest people? Only greater transparency, better 
scrutiny and closer monitoring of impact will allow us to answer that question 
with confidence. Like other investors, DfID faces challenges in ensuring that 
the poor receive demonstrable benefit from the growth, investment and trade 
agendas, rather than merely being “trickle down” beneficiaries. The 
government’s announcement that it wants to providebillions more in funding to 
CDC, its private sector arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>
 – a fund that theNational Audit Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/28/uk-aid-watchdog-calls-for-clearer-picture-of-how-investments-benefit-poor>
 says has improved but is still well short of demonstrating such direct impact 
– underlines the challenge. This weekend’sallegations about Adam Smith 
International 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3997782/Exposed-foreign-aid-giant-conned-MPs-fake-glowing-testimonials-overseas-work-snaffle-329million-taxpayer-s-cash.html>
 may also test DfID’s faith in the ethical standards of some private sector 
contractors.

A fourth question concerns the “global transparency revolution” promised by 
Patel. Will increased scrutiny of the aid community begin with the government’s 
own aid funding, where there are currently a number of blind spots? DfID, one 
of the most transparent aid agencies in the world, has led efforts to push this 
agenda right across the aid community. However, the audit trail for aid 
delivered outside DfID – for example, the cross-governmentprosperity fund 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/Approach-Paper-Rapid-Review-of-the-Prosperity-Fund.pdf>
 – is such that MPs have to resort to parliamentary questions to scrutinise 
even the most basic facts and figures.

The bilateral review promises to open “budgets at every level [globally] so 
that people around the world can see how their money is being spent and hold 
the powerful to account”. Now that really would be a revolution; one that would 
need to begin at home, not least to ensure that, collectively, we maintain 
public trust in UK aid and the development sector.

Finally, there is the question of how the government views the role of civil 
society 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/international-development-secretary-launches-civil-society-partnership-review>
 in supporting the UK’s vision for aid and development. Civil society is vital 
to achieving Britain’s priorities on areas including human rights, democratic 
participation, tackling corruption and promoting the rights of women and girls. 
It is also the vehicle through which millions of members of the public show 
their personal commitment to eradicating poverty every month. They want to see 
the government complement that. However, the limited engagement and ambition of 
the civil society review left many of us concerned as to whether DfID is 
wholeheartedly committed to building the partnerships with civil society that 
organisations need.

There is much to be positive about in the recent aid reviews, and we will back 
them in that spirit. But there is a thin line between making aid and 
development more effective for the world of 2017 and beyond, and a dilution of 
the primary purpose of eradicating poverty. That’s what we must all keep an eye 
on.
 