 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-ways-warehouse-is-rebranding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc58db79adddc269b9a6bb19ad75fac137e725707%2F174_84_1032_1626%2F1032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20ways%20Warehouse%20is%20rebranding&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-ways-warehouse-is-rebranding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20ways%20Warehouse%20is%20rebranding&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-ways-warehouse-is-rebranding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc58db79adddc269b9a6bb19ad75fac137e725707%2F174_84_1032_1626%2F1032.jpg>
 An oversize coat from Emma Cook’s Warehouse collaboration. Photograph: 
WAREHOUSE 
The rebooted Warehouse is coming for autumn. It’s gone fashion, which means 
out with the work blazers and Friday night dresses and in with the prints and 
tracky pants. Here are five things we learned at the preview.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-ways-warehouse-is-rebranding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe75edb84653fafa523ae770de55356b7327460d7%2F469_111_668_1853%2F668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20ways%20Warehouse%20is%20rebranding&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-ways-warehouse-is-rebranding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20ways%20Warehouse%20is%20rebranding&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ffive-ways-warehouse-is-rebranding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe75edb84653fafa523ae770de55356b7327460d7%2F469_111_668_1853%2F668.jpg>
 Tie-dye blouse from the Warehouse collection. Photograph: WAREHOUSE 
There have been some personnel changes 

Alasdair Willis, who oversees Hunter and is married to Stella McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/stella-mccartney>, is brand consultant. 
Emma Cook, who used to show poppy prints and retro dresses at London fashion 
week, does the designing. An odd couple of quirk and commerce, it shouldn’t 
work but it does.

It’s now the destination on the high street for blouses

There are tons of them, from daisy-printed ones to puffed-sleeve and 
satin-and-tie-dye silk T-shirts. The stand-out is a Hold Up yellow wide-neck 
blouse with sailor’s bib at the back. Subtly referencing the Prada AW16 
nautical collection is very clever.

The prices are pretty good

Most pieces come in at less than £250 which, considering we’re getting into 
four figures at some high street stores, is pretty good. A bonded coat is £89, 
while T-shirts are less than £30. Cook said it was important to her that you 
could still “buy something nice even if you only have £40”. Quite right.

The focus is the U.K.

Cook said she wanted to bring the “British unselfconsciousness” into the 
collection, which basically means there are loads of things that shouldn’t go 
but do, such as clashing prints on a slip dress or a slightly weird peplum on a 
blouse.


They’re going big on the branding. 

Anyone used to the justified font that has been above the door of Warehouses 
for the past 40 years will be surprised. The new logo is quite first generation 
emoji, with square brackets and a very grammatically correct full stop. There’s 
also ‘Warehouse’ printed on ribbons down a pair of skater shorts and on a bag, 
something that pleases Cook greatly. “I like the cheekiness of it,” she says. 
“It’s unexpected.” Just like the rest of Warehouse for autumn then.
 