
Opposition caught napping

The bulk of Chris Froome’s time gain came against the watch but the two key 
attacks he made wereat the top of the Peyresourde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/09/tour-de-france-2016-stage-eight-live>
 and on the stage into Montpellier. They were particularly important because of 
what they expressed rather than the time he gained, which was minimal in both 
cases. In both instances, over the top of the last climb of the day and at the 
end of a tough stage in cross winds, most general classification contenders 
would be content to sit back with the bulk of the day’s work done. But seizing 
the initiative as Froome did sent out a powerful message: he would take time 
wherever he could no matter how small the potential gain. It also underlined 
that physically he was in good shape at both these moments rather than merely 
hanging on.

Team Sky show power of the pack is key to Tour de France dominance | William 
Fotheringham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/team-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome>
Team was impeccable


The mountain power work by Waut Poels, Mikel Nieve, Mikel Landa and Sergio 
Henao was highly visible, a matter of hiring five of the best climbers in 
cycling and then making best use of them to intimidate the opposition. The work 
by Ian Stannard and Luke Rowe on the stage to Montpellier was less visible but 
just as important as this was a stage where Nairo Quintana suffered. But Geraint
Thomas was most valuable, partly for his ability to seize the moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/15/tour-de-france-2016-stage-13-live>
 on the road to Montpellier, when Froome absolutely needed that fourth rider 
with him, Bodnar and Sagan to keep them clear of the peloton, and also for the 
coolness he showed whenFroome fell on the Saint Gervais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/tour-de-france-2016-romain-bardet-chris-froome>
 stage. The Welshman’s all-round ability is exceptional, meaning he can fill 
the role of fifth climber if needed as well as the Classics rider’s role of 
providing shelter when the wind blows.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-wins-for-the-third-time-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20France%202016%3A%20Chris%20Froome%20wins%20for%20the%20third%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-wins-for-the-third-time-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20France%202016%3A%20Chris%20Froome%20wins%20for%20the%20third%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-wins-for-the-third-time-video-highlights&media=>
Tour de France 2016: Chris Froome wins for the third time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/25/tour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-wins-for-the-third-time-video-highlights>
Key names went missing

With an in-form Alberto Contador, Vincenzo Nibali and Thibaut Pinot racing for 
the win and Richie Porte closer in the standings, the past three weeks might 
have been a very different proposition. That is not to say Froome would not 
have won, more that he might have been pushed harder and that Team Sky might 
not have been so dominant. For all that,Contador has had a tendency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/11/alberto-contador-withdraws-from-tour-de-france>
 to fall off in recent seasons, Nibali, the Italian, made a conscious decision 
to go for the Giro d’Italia rather than the Tour and Pinot’s self-destruction 
was as much down to coaching weaknesses as ill‑luck. Riders make their own good 
fortune at the Tour and it is no coincidence that multiple Tour winners do not 
have many things go wrong. There is one mystery, however: quite why Nairo 
Quintana, the Colombian, did not come in better form and shine on a mountainous 
course.

Alberto Contador withdraws from the Tour de France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/11/alberto-contador-withdraws-from-tour-de-france>
The other man in form had a nightmare

Richie Porte, left, was probably the strongest climber in the Tour but his 
misfortunes and miscalculations played into Froome’s hands. His puncture at 
Cherbourg meant that from day two Froome knew that probably the second biggest 
threat in the race – after Quintana – was already on the back foot. In spite of 
its epic budget, BMC do not field the same climbing firepower that Sky do and 
it is hard to see Skygiving one of their strongest riders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/team-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome>
 carte blanche to burn energy for two days as BMC did with Greg Van Avermaet. 
That showed split priorities. Tejay van Garderen should have acted as a second 
foil to the Australian but was not in form. Porte rode strongly at Mont Ventoux 
but he probably took the most impact in the three-man collision with the 
motorbike; that probably impacted on his ride in the time trial the following 
day where he lost 2min 5sec, to all intents ending his chance of victory. Porte 
started too fast in that time trial, and also in the Megève test, which looked 
like nerves getting the better of him. And he crashed on the Saint Gervais 
stage, which again may have meant he was unable to take full advantage of 
Froome’s crash.

Incumbency is a massive plus

Past multiple winners such as Greg LeMond (three victories), Lance Armstrong 
(seven), Bernard Hinault and Miguel Indurain (both five), and their respective 
teams began to take on an impregnable air once they reached their third Tour 
wins – and that applies in spite of the fact that Armstrong and his team were 
blood doping. There are good reasons for this. For one, the opposition are 
intimidated – they are almost conditioned to expect to be beaten. Mainly 
experience matters immensely in winning the Tour, both for team leader and for
domestiques. It means they are more relaxed faced with whatever the road throws 
at them, and the day-to-day tasks related to controlling the race become 
normalised – dealing with the media, figuring out whom to let into each day’s 
escape, making the pace in the mountains. Winning is a habit.
 