
There are very few Hollywood film-makers who could have made Dunkirk. The 
cinemagoing public is not crying out for an epic war film about the desperate 
evacuation of Allied troops at the peak of Hitler’s hold on Europe in May and 
June 1940. ButChristopher Nolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/04/-sp-christopher-nolan-interstellar-rebooted-blockbuster>
 doesn’t make turkeys: this is the director of theDark Knight trilogy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/12/christopher-nolan-batman-movies-superhero-escapism-fad>
, of brain-bamboozling sci-fi thriller Inception, and of the equally far out 
space adventure Interstellar. His movies make money – more than $4.2bn (£3.3bn) 
at the global box office – and studio Warner Bros has duly stumped up the cash 
for what is expected to be the most ambitious historical war movie since the 
glory years of Steven Spielberg and Oliver Stone. Nolan was even reportedly 
given $5mto spend on a vintage Nazi war plane 
<https://indierevolver.com/2016/06/06/rumor-warner-brothers-purchased-a-5-million-ww2-plane-for-christopher-nolan-to-crash/>
, which he is said to have cheerfully smashed to smithereens for the film’s 
denouement.

Dunkirk stars a cavalcade of British and Irish talent, from Tom Hardy and Mark 
Rylance toKenneth Branagh <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-branagh>
, Cillian Murphy and ... ahem ... Harry Styles from One Direction. Here are 
five takeaways from the first trailer proper.

The Nazis were rotters
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d46b7a23f384124e3e8248617d42317e179468b%2F262_95_877_526%2F877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan's%20Dunkirk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan%27s%20Dunkirk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d46b7a23f384124e3e8248617d42317e179468b%2F262_95_877_526%2F877.jpg>
 Under fire … Allied troops in Dunkirk. Photograph: Warner Bros 
As if it were not bad enough for the allied troops to be surrounded by the 
armies of the Third Reich in a small corner of northern France, the Nazi 
blighters are scattering leaflets highlighting the end of all hope over the 
once-picturesque villages and towns of Normandy, then bombing our chaps as they 
sit helpless on the beach awaiting rescue. Thankfully, the propaganda artists 
responsible have foolishly also included the gleaming shores of Albion on their 
nasty little map, thereby giving hope to both the poor doomed soldiers of 
Blighty, not to mention Nolan’s audience.

Mark Rylance is the worst possible person to be rescued by

Poor Cillian Murphy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cillian-murphy>. Thrown 
out of a British ship, then pulled from the waters against all odds by a kindly 
gentleman in a tiny fishing boat. Farewell Nazi hordes, hello Blighty. We’ll be 
wrapped up warm in a Dover pub with a pint of something tepid by dinner time. 
But what’s that? Rylance is taking our hero back to France, returning him to 
the heart of darkness, death and destruction.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94be296a33c251ff550d5f44fb4cecfd8531d2d7%2F160_95_879_527%2F879.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan's%20Dunkirk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan%27s%20Dunkirk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94be296a33c251ff550d5f44fb4cecfd8531d2d7%2F160_95_879_527%2F879.jpg>
 A doomed voyage? Mark Rylance and Cillian Murphy. Photograph: Warner Bros 
Nolan’s hardly known for his grasp of comedy, but this scene appears to be 
unintentionally hilarious, as if the trailer has somehow warped momentarily 
into the wartime gallows humour of Catch-22 orBlackadder Goes Forth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/06/blackadder-michael-gove-historians-first-world-war>
. Still, at least it looks like the incomparable Murphy might be getting a 
proper lead part for once, after taking countless supporting roles for the 
British-American maestro of widescreen cinema.


Kenneth Branagh is king of exposition
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d4be116c7b98f7d09a52c6f341d171d16bacb51%2F167_95_881_528%2F881.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan's%20Dunkirk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan%27s%20Dunkirk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d4be116c7b98f7d09a52c6f341d171d16bacb51%2F167_95_881_528%2F881.jpg>
 King of the setup … Kenneth Branagh. Photograph: Warner Bros 
In case that Nazi map hadn’t made things abundantly clear, Ken is here to 
illustrate exactly how near – yet horribly far – the Brits and their allies are 
from English soil. “You can practically see it from here,” he tells a minion, 
usefully. Branagh also reveals there are 400,000 men on theDunkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dunkirk> beaches awaiting rescue. Some are so 
shellshocked they appear to be walking into the sea to their apparent deaths.


One Direction fans might be in for a shock

There has been palpable excitement among hardcore Directioners that 22-year-old
Harry Styles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/harry-styles> is making his big 
screen debut in Dunkirk. But if the foppish singer is being set up for 
Hollywood heroics, Nolan has a funny way of showing it. There’s poor Harry, 
apparently drowning in the English channel as Spitfires and Hurricanes battle 
with the Luftwaffe in the skies. This never happened to the Spice Girls.


This is Nolan’s answer to Saving Private Ryan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd8badc2adb63e8f1f75b8aebdfe4c89c9d7887c%2F271_94_872_523%2F872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan's%20Dunkirk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Christopher%20Nolan%27s%20Dunkirk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftrailer-christopher-nolan-dunkirk-cillian-murphy-mark-rylance-harry-styles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd8badc2adb63e8f1f75b8aebdfe4c89c9d7887c%2F271_94_872_523%2F872.jpg>
 Extravagant spectacle … Dunkirk. Photograph: Warner Bros 
The combination of Nolan’s eye for extravagant spectacle, Hoyte van Hoytema’s 
searing cinematography and Hans Zimmer’s gloomily beguiling, gorgeously 
resonant and typically minimalist score suggests Dunkirk could be a homegrown 
answer to Spielberg’s relentlessly torrid paean to American second world war 
heroism, a brutally epic exploration of British pluck, duty and desperation in 
the face of Hitler’s ghastly might.

 * Dunkirk <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dunkirk> will be released in UK 
and US cinemas on 21 July.  