
With more than half the global population aged under 30 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/unesco/events/prizes-and-celebrations/celebrations/international-days/world-radio-day-2013/statistics-on-youth/>
, issues affecting young people are receiving greater attention from 
policymakers. Tackling high youth unemployment and low school attendance rates, 
and providing greater access to sexual and reproductive health services, are 
now top priorities. Leaders are beginning to realise that responding to young 
people’s needs is the only way to meet thebiggest challenges 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300> facing the world.

But how involved are young people in the decisions that affect them? We asked 
campaigners involved with the youth-led NGORestless Development 
<http://restlessdevelopment.org/> what needs to be done to bring them closer to 
the heart of development.

Offer us a seat at the table

Though there are more young people 
<http://www.un.org/youthenvoy/2015/04/10-things-didnt-know-worlds-population/> 
than ever in the world, youth campaigners remain underrepresented in global 
decision-making. “We feel that local and national leaders don’t hear us,” says 
Joseph Buyaga, president of Tanzanian NGOYouth Vision Sound 
<http://youthvisionsound.blogspot.co.uk/>. “This comes from negative cultural 
perceptions of young people in society – they don’t always value our 
contributions at village meetings, for example.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ffive-steps-young-people-heart-of-development-global-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e199dc468249cb56de2bd1edf316645ddf3aa2%2F121_282_780_655%2F780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20steps%20to%20put%20young%20people%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20development%20%7C%20Carla%20Kweifio-Okai&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ffive-steps-young-people-heart-of-development-global-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20steps%20to%20put%20young%20people%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20development%20%7C%20Carla%20Kweifio-Okai&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ffive-steps-young-people-heart-of-development-global-goals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e199dc468249cb56de2bd1edf316645ddf3aa2%2F121_282_780_655%2F780.jpg>
 Amro Hussain 
Campaigner Amro Hussain, 25, agrees. “I think the main issue facing young 
people is underrepresentation in the institutions that govern their lives, as 
this negatively impacts every other issue affecting young people,” he says.

Don’t make us your tokens

Once there are more young people included in policy talks, what next? “Commit 
to it,” says Hussain. “Young people need to be offered a genuine opportunity to 
change the narrative that they are apathetic or incapable, but this requires 
both meaningful inclusion and time.”
 Ronagh Craddock 
Ronagh Craddock, a youth delegate 
<http://restlessdevelopment.org/news/2015/09/22/generation2030-and-the-global-goals>
 at the UN summit for sustainable development, says involving young people from 
the start is the most effective way to ensure their views are included. “One of 
the main challenges, I find, is that young people are often involved by 
government and development organisations at a late stage – to deliver 
development messages and enthuse the public – but we need to be involved from 
the beginning.”

Ani Hao, a 24-year-old researcher based in Rio de Janeiro for the youth-led 
project Case for Space, agrees that young people are too often “add-ons” to 
existing forums or policies: “There has been significant tokenism and a lack of 
real space for young people to truly influence agendas and gain power and 
autonomy. Still, there is now more awareness and conversation about this.”

Fund youth-led, grassroots projects
 Ani Hao 
The antidote to tokenism, Hao argues, is meeting young people where they are – 
and that means venturing outside the formal NGO sector. “Many youth-led civil 
society organisations around the world, especially in the global south, are 
informal – that is to say, unregistered – and there are a variety of reasons 
for this,” Hao says. “Many governments actively monitor andcrack down on 
registered civil society organisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/26/incivil-societies-free-expression-civil-crackdown-social-media>
, knowing that these organisations represent movements and voices that 
criticise government activities and often corruption. Other youth activists 
simply prefer to remain independent and not become ‘NGO-ised’, or, in their 
eyes, increasingly divorced from grassroots activism and the real movements. 
These youth-led movements simply do not get the attention that they deserve 
from their own societies, let alone the world. They are starved for funding, 
capacity-building and networks.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ffive-steps-young-people-heart-of-development-global-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb36f27e5c03d255d1e77d460d7cb7aecc45dc19%2F0_0_3500_2336%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20steps%20to%20put%20young%20people%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20development%20%7C%20Carla%20Kweifio-Okai&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ffive-steps-young-people-heart-of-development-global-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20steps%20to%20put%20young%20people%20at%20the%20heart%20of%20development%20%7C%20Carla%20Kweifio-Okai&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Ffive-steps-young-people-heart-of-development-global-goals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb36f27e5c03d255d1e77d460d7cb7aecc45dc19%2F0_0_3500_2336%2F3500.jpg>
 Young men take photos in front of graffiti depicting poverty and homelessness 
in the Egyptian capital Cairo. Photograph: Amr Dalsh / Reuters/Reuters 
Collect data on the issues that affect us

To engage effectively with young people, leaders have to know the issues that 
affect them most, says Buyaga. He recommends governments recruit young people 
to collect information in order to fill data gaps about under-30s, helping to 
inform national development plans in the process. “We can collect and analyse 
the data that is missing on young people, and share this with the big 
decision-makers,” he says.

Buyaga says this is particularly important in countries with hard-to-reach 
communities, or where young people feel marginalised and misunderstood by their 
leaders. “Young people in Tanzania face various issues like youth unemployment, 
poor education systems, lack of livelihood or entrepreneurial skills, lack of 
capital. If given a chance, the young campaigners can improve this. We can 
provide a voice to government to inform policies that enable young people in 
Tanzania to participate effectively in the economy.”

Teach us what you know

If young people don’t know their rights, they can’t improve their futures, says
Prince Mthandazo Khumalo, 29, from Zimbabwe. “Many young people are still 
[languishing] in excruciating poverty without job prospects. They still lack 
the platform to exercise their rights and without that they lack prospects for 
change.”

Young people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> are keen to 
learn how to campaign on their own behalf, says campaigner Hussain. “States and 
development organisations need to target the factors that limit youth 
involvement. They need to empower youth through education, training and the 
creation of networks. Lots of young people are increasingly involved in 
development and social change but most are still held at arm’s length, either 
left in the dark about their roles as agents of change or limited in those 
roles due to lack of support.”
 Primrose Manyalo 
Primrose Manyalo, global campaigns coordinator for Restless Development’s 
Youth Power <http://restlessdevelopment.org/youthpower> movement, says the 
perception of young people as leaders is improving, and was evident in recent 
consultations for thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
.

“In the spirit of leaving no one behind,” she says, “there were increased 
efforts by the UN, governments and civil society to increase young people’s 
participation in the SDG formulation process compared to the millennium 
development goals that came before them. Working directly with young people at 
grassroots, national, regional and global level, I have witnessed how, when 
young people are given enough capacity, support and trust, they are an 
unstoppable force for positive change.”
 