
Last week saw some interesting console news from games industry publication 
MCV.According to the website 
<http://www.mcvuk.com/news/read/slim-release-sees-xbox-one-hardware-sales-rocket-1-000/0173127>
, UK sales of Xbox One rose by almost 1,000% in the week ending 24 September, 
while sales of the slimline PS4 have been comparatively slow.

Data obtained from GfK, the market research company that compiles software 
sales charts in the UK, also showed that Microsoft’s machine had a 71% share of 
the hardware market for that week. The findings follownews in the US 
<http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2016-09-09-xbox-one-tops-us-console-sales-in-back-to-back-months>
 that the Xbox One has been the bestselling console for two months according to 
NPD Group data.

In the two years following the November 2013 launch of Xbox One and 
PlayStation 4, Sony’s console has consistently sold better, building a user 
base of over 40m by May 2016. In return, Microsoft has refused to provide sales 
figures for its own console, preferring to concentrate onmonthly active users 
for its Xbox Live service 
<http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2016-02-29-microsoft-mau-is-the-health-metric-of-any-service>
. However, Xbox One numbers are thought, until recently, to have been half 
those of PS4.

So why the upturn in performance from the once beleaguered machine? Here are 
five explanations.

1. Xbox One S is the console people actually wanted
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8225b52f68e44643cca80e5a13df9fa5590d877d%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20reasons%20Xbox%20One%20sales%20are%20booming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20reasons%20Xbox%20One%20sales%20are%20booming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8225b52f68e44643cca80e5a13df9fa5590d877d%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 The smaller Xbox One S and new wireless controller. Photograph: Microsoft 
Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> got off to the 
worst possible start in this generation. Its May 2013 Xbox One launch event was 
a hubristic shambles, where the company chose to concentrate on its Live TV 
offerings rather than games – and then it revealed a console that looked like a 
school VCR circa 1983. After launch, there were lacklustre exclusives and, 
crucially, the framerate and resolution performances of multi-platform games 
weren’t holding up to PS4.

But revealed at E3 this summer, Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> S is a sleeker, smaller 
chassis in a trendy “robot white” colour that completely differentiates it from 
the original machine. Improvements to the design and capabilities of the 
package (including adding an IR blaster for universal remote control 
capabilities and bluetooth support for the joypad), subtly increased its 
appeal. You can also put it on its side. Some people love doing that.


2. The price is now right for two key markets

You can buy the 500GB Xbox One S for £250, complete with a bundled game. This 
is tipping the console out of the enthusiast market, into the family purchase 
sector – at least for some households. This could mean that we’ll start to see 
more parents upgrading their Xbox 360s in the coming months. Furthermore, at 
this point we may also be seeing “hardcore” gamers who originally opted for PS4 
two years ago, now purchasing an Xbox One S as a second console to hoover up 
legacy platform exclusives like the Forza and Halo titles – and prepare for 
forthcomingXbox <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> One-only titles. 
More of that later.

3. Xbox has courted the young fans with the right games
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90fc3afea47996197011b0efe0a3557ec9f37357%2F0_43_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20reasons%20Xbox%20One%20sales%20are%20booming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20reasons%20Xbox%20One%20sales%20are%20booming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90fc3afea47996197011b0efe0a3557ec9f37357%2F0_43_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A moment from the 2015 Call of Duty European Championships final. Until this 
year, Xbox sponsored the game’s eSports events, attracting a huge audience of 
fans, pro gamers and YouTubers to the console Photograph: Rob Stothard/Getty 
Images 
Microsoft has done some canny marketing deals over the past few years, tying 
up exclusive downloadable and in-game content with theFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/30/fifa-17-review-ea-sports-story-mode>
 andCall of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/23/call-of-duty-infinite-warfare-were-going-for-a-classic-feel>
 titles, both hugely popular with the teen demographic. Specifically, the 
exclusive Ultimate Team Legends cards, and the Microsoft sponsorship of the 
Call of Duty (CoD) eSports finals have ensured that a lot of young gamers are 
playing those huge titles on Xbox. Furthermore, the deals have meant that 
influential pro-gamers, YouTubers and Twitch streamers are favouring Xbox for 
their Fifa and CoD content.

Basically, Microsoft has targeted titles that the next generation of 
‘hardcore’ gamers are playing with their friends – and that approach appears to 
be bearing fruit. Little wonder Sony is now moving into those markets,grabbing 
the Call of Duty (CoD) exclusivity package 
<http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2015-08-14-after-five-years-of-xbox-exclusivity-call-of-duty-switches-to-playstation>
 this year. And it’s no coincidence that one of the titles bundled withthe 
recent £149 flash sale for PS4 
<http://www.techradar.com/news/gaming/consoles/cheapest-ever-ps4-deals-get-the-ps4-with-fifa-17-for-just-149-1329524>
 was Fifa 17.


4. That whole 4K thing

Xbox One S was revealed with a strong message at this year’s E3: it will run 
4K video, it will process HDR visual effects and it’ll play 4K UHD Blu-ray 
discs. With prices of 4K televisions plummeting and sales growing, it was a 
smart move to immediately align this updated console with the improved 
resolution technology. The news thatPlayStation 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> Pro won’t play 4K 
Blu-ray discs has been greeted with surprise and derision by audio-visual 
enthusiasts, and that message can filter down to mainstream consumers who may 
like the idea of, say, owning all the new Star Wars films on UHD. Xbox One S 
also upscales current titles to 4K compatibility, adding an extra impetus.

5. The exclusives are coming
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124ae77300cb258460af4869dcbc992b450c1330%2F121_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20reasons%20Xbox%20One%20sales%20are%20booming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20reasons%20Xbox%20One%20sales%20are%20booming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fxbox-one-console-sales-booming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124ae77300cb258460af4869dcbc992b450c1330%2F121_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Gears of War 4: likely to be popular with fans of cover-based alien carnage 
Photograph: Microsoft 
Of course, PlayStation 4 has its own catalogue of exciting exclusives, but 
things are definitely hotting up for Xbox One. Forza Horizon 3 is already one 
of the great racing games of this generation, and there are big returning 
franchises to come in the shape of Gears of War 4, Halo 6, Dead Rising 4, State 
of Decay 2 and Crackdown 3 that won’t be onPlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> (of course they’ll all be 
on PC too, but we’re talking about the console market here). Newcomers like 
monster hunting adventure Scalebound, online pirate romp Sea of Thieves and 
idiosyncratic platformer Cuphead also look very interesting. As performance 
issues stabilise, the success of any console in a generation begins to rely 
much more heavily on the quality of the software itself. Microsoft is 
definitely doing its best to prepare for that stage of the war.
 