
There’s nothing new about staying in a monastery or convent. Monks and nuns 
have been offering refuge to travellers for centuries. But these days it’s not 
just pilgrims resting their weary legs. Visitors are more likely to be tourists 
on a tight budget or wanting to spend the night in a historic building in a 
spectacular setting. In Venice, for example, the 16th-century San Giorgio 
Maggioremonastery has views of St Marks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/oct/18/venice-monastery-stay-san-giorgio-maggiore>
 that a hotel would charge a premium for – yet the monks ask visitors to simply 
pay what they can.
Rome map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/travel_rome/giv-31075fw69Jf2iHEf0/>
This year, as part of Pope Francis’s Holy Year of Mercy 
<https://www.ncronline.org/news/vatican/francis-announces-new-global-jubilee-holy-year-mercy>
, 80 abbeys and monasteries, mostly in and around Rome, have opened their doors 
for overnight stays, most bookable online atospitalitareligiosa.it 
<http://ospitalitareligiosa.it/>. The initiative was launched to meet rising 
accommodation requests from pilgrims but they are open to anyone. As well as a 
peaceful, affordable base in beautiful surroundings, a stay in a monastery 
invariably means great food, too. Italians have a saying: “Nobody eats better 
than a monk.”

Here are five of the best monasteries close to the capital but far from the 
crowds at Saint Peter’s Square.

Santuario Santa Maria delle Grazie, Sant’Oreste
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0c57c5db932b2d93ba48c3e6b5fdba6fe6ff9de%2F83_0_1245_747%2F1245.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0c57c5db932b2d93ba48c3e6b5fdba6fe6ff9de%2F83_0_1245_747%2F1245.jpg>
 Photograph: Silvia Marchetti 
This tiny sanctuary 35km north of Rome, is in the wooded Monte Soratte nature 
reserve. In the fourth century, Pope Sylvester I is believed to have cured 
Emperor Constantine of leprosy on this hill, before converting him to 
Christianity. There’s no road access to the sanctuary, an old stone cottage 
painted yellow and orange; the way in is on foot from picturesque Sant’Oreste 
village along a steep path through purplish rocks riddled with caves where 
hermits once took refuge. The monastery is now home to just a few monks, and 
there’s no Wi-Fi or mobile coverage.

At dawn visitors are woken and taken to the 691-metre summit of Monte Soratte 
to admire the 360-degree view stretching all the way to the sea. Silence is 
broken only by the cries of eagles and falcons. Monastery rooms are simple, 
with single beds and stone walls. From the tiny wooden-framed windows the dark 
green of the river Tiber can be seen, snaking across the valley. Breakfast 
might include strawberry tarts and freshly bakedtorta della nonna (grandma’s 
cake), a custard tart with pine nuts. A three-course dinner might include 
bruschetta, pasta with porcini mushrooms or wild boar ragù, followed by grilled 
chicken or pork.
• Doubles from €50 half-board, +39 0761 578374, ospitalitareligiosa.it 
<http://www.ospitalitareligiosa.it/cerca-per-mappa/1765-eremo-santuario-santa-maria-delle-grazie-al-monte-soratte.html>

Monastero San Vincenzo Martire, Bassano Romano
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e04e075baa7b5eb8b5424190c9ecbe956af23a4%2F0_33_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e04e075baa7b5eb8b5424190c9ecbe956af23a4%2F0_33_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Monks on this large estate 50km north of Rome grow the fruit and vegetables 
used in the kitchens, and offer beds for 120 guests. Breakfast can include 
plums calledcoscia di monaca (nun’s thigh) because of their elongated shape, and
pane degli angeli(angel food cake). Products to look out for are handmade 
soaps, shampoos, body creams, cosmetics and the “abbot’s aftershave”, all made 
with herbs and spices grown on site. There’s no TV or radio but there is a pine 
forest to stroll in and a “garden of silence”. Double and triple rooms all have 
single beds.
• B&B from €30pppn, monastica.info/ospitalita 
<http://www.monastica.info/ospitalia/>, 11pm curfew 

Monastero di Santa Scolastica, Subiaco
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec63cefa2101e37adaa6311cda911e6beb2e7080%2F0_0_1680_1008%2F1680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec63cefa2101e37adaa6311cda911e6beb2e7080%2F0_0_1680_1008%2F1680.jpg>
Carved into a mountainside, this Benedictine monastery 60km east of Rome 
follows the rule that guests should be welcomed “as if Christ himself were 
knocking on the door”. Visitors are welcome to share prayer time and mass with 
the monks, and speciality dishes in the refectory often featuretagliolini alla 
norcina (pasta with truffles) and beef fillet in mushroom sauce. The brothers 
at the apothecary store sell all sorts of medicines made using old remedies for 
liver pains, dandruff or high blood pressure. There is a medieval library with 
ancient texts but also modern amenities including a communal TV, and a bar 
where light alcohol drinks such as Aperol and Campari are served. The vaulted 
rooms are all en suite, with telephones, frescoed ceilings and views of the 
cloister or down the rocky precipice. At breakfast, enjoycornetti (Italian 
croissants with cream and honey) and a selection of herbal teas.
• Room sleep up to four, in single beds, from €37pp B&B, 
benedettini-subiaco.org <http://www.benedettini-subiaco.org/>

Abbazia di Casamari, Casamari 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7017d4b83541135908918217292ff2821a2e269b%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7017d4b83541135908918217292ff2821a2e269b%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Photograph: Silvia Marchetti 
Around 100km south-east of Rome, this abbey has Roman columns, ruins of pagan 
temples, sarcophagi and a network of medieval chapels amid orchards, gardens of 
exotic flowers and palms. Enclosed by thick stone walls, this is one of the 
largest abbeys south of Rome,and has marble floors and views of lush gardens 
and ancient Roman architecture. During the day the brothers work their plots of 
land, growing plants and healing herbs. Their honeys – including orange, 
chestnut and mulberry varieties – are served at breakfast. There’s also an 
archaeological museum and a liqueur boutique where monks in brown robes and 
sandals chat with visitors about their fine herb liqueurs, artisan beers and 
grappas. Don’t expect a recipe though – that’s something the brothers are not 
prepared to share.
• Rooms with two singles €50 B&B, abbaziadicasamari.it

Abbazia di Santa Maria di Farfa, Fara in Sabina
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5506ee21745f4f6676e63e87a30920cad8f302d%2F0_418_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eat%2C%20pray%2C%20love%3A%20Five%20heavenly%20monastery%20stays%20near%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fmonastery-bed-and-breakfast-accommodation-near-rome-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5506ee21745f4f6676e63e87a30920cad8f302d%2F0_418_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Both monks and nuns live in this abbey 50km north-west of Rome (in separate 
areas, of course). Male guests sleep inside the monastery with the friars; 
women are welcomed in eight rooms next door, and at the adjacent convent run by 
Santa Brigida nuns. The cells have small beds, old wooden furniture including 
prayer stools, and views of the ancient bell tower and a maze of cobbled alleys 
surrounded by thick vegetation. The scenery is superb: green palms mingle with 
lemon orchards and rose shrubs. Handmade almond biscuits and coconut muffins 
are among the breakfast treats. Hymns and prayers can be heard all day, as 
guests sit under the shade of a gigantic oak tree. A small herbalist shop sells 
products such as ginger biscuits, vinegar, honey, chilli jam, cough syrups and 
devil’s claw healing cream – great for aching bones. There are even lessons 
available in Gregorian chanting.
• B&B from €30pp, abbaziadifarfa.com <http://www.abbaziadifarfa.com/>
 