
The UK chancellor, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, will deliver his maiden 
autumn statement against a backdrop of weaker growth prospects, rising 
inflation and a large deficit.

Scope for headline giveaways will be limited but Hammond is likely to 
signalmeasures to help so-called Jams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/20/autumn-statement-what-might-the-chancellor-have-up-his-sleeve>
 – those families who are “just about managing”. Here are five key charts to 
consider before he stands up.

1. Growth has been steady … but is likely to slow in 2017
GDP 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/gdp/giv-15726k2un52WttKZm/>
Britain has enjoyed steady growth over recent years, with 15 consecutive 
quarters of expansion. The economy has been more resilient in the months since 
the Brexit vote than many commentators were expecting. Back in August, the Bank 
of England was predicting growth of just 0.1% in the third quarter, butit 
actually came in at 0.5%. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/uk-economy-shrugs-off-brexit-uncertainty-with-05-growth>
 It ruled out a technical recession (two consecutive quarters of contraction) 
in the second half of 2016, as consumers appeared to shrug off any uncertainty 
resulting from the result of the June referendum.

But 2017 is expected to get tougher as household budgets are squeezed by a 
combination of rising inflation and weak wage growth. When the then chancellor 
George Osborne presented his budget in March, the government’s independent 
forecaster, theOffice for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/office-for-budget-responsibility>, was 
forecasting growth of 2.2% next year. That now looks very optimistic and the 
Treasury’s independent forecaster will undoubtedly revise the figure down on 
Wednesday.

2. The UK leads the G7 in 2016 … but not for long
international GDP 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-17T15:31:47/embed.html>
Britain will be the fastest growing of the G7 leading industrial countries in 
2016, according to theforecasts published in October by the International 
Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>
. As the chart shows, the UK economy is expected to grow by 1.8% in 2016, just 
ahead of Germany at 1.7% and the US at 1.6%. The Washington-based fund admitted 
its prediction of apost-Brexit-vote crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
 had proved overly pessimistic.

It’s a different story in 2017, when the Brexit blow begins to be felt and the 
UK slips down the international league table, with growth of just 1.1%. That 
would be the slowest rate of annual growth since 2009, when the UK economy 
shrank by 4.3% in the depths of the financial crisis.

3. Wage growth is weak … and inflation is rising
Inflation 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-17T15:34:47/embed.html>
The financial crisis took a heavy toll on living standards, with real pay 
falling for six years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/datablog/2014/nov/19/uk-workers-suffer-sixth-year-of-falling-real-pay-in-2014>
 from 2008 as inflation outpaced wage growth. As the chart above shows, by 2015 
things had started to look up for UK consumers. Pay growth was subdued, but 
inflation was even weaker, providing some respite for households.

But living standards are expected to decline again in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
 as pay growth remains weak but inflation rises. Consumer price inflation is 
expected to rise from a current rate of 0.9% to close to 3% next year, as the 
sharp drop in the value of the pound since the Brexit vote pushes up import 
costs and feeds into higher prices on the high street.

4. Unemployment forecast to rise from its 11-year low
Unemployment 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-17T15:46:32/embed.html>
Unemployment rose after the financial crisis but not as much as feared. After 
hitting a peak of more than 8% in 2011,the jobless rate has been steadily 
falling and currently stands at 4.8% – the lowest since 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/uk-unemployment-falls-september-office-for-national-statistics>
.

Economists and policymakers, including those at the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, are now expecting 
unemployment to rise as business takes a more cautious approach while Britain 
attempts to negotiate its way out of the EU. The Bank is predicting the jobless 
rate will rise to about 5.5% in the middle of 2018.


5. Borrowing expected to be £100bn more than anticipated
Updated borrowing 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/index-html-2-zip/giv-15726N2pUgf4QZMMk/>
The chart above shows the path for the public finances forecast by the OBR at 
the time of the March budget. That was two months before the UK surprised the 
world byvoting to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
, changing both the economic and fiscal backdrop in the months and years ahead.

The OBR itself said last month its forecast for borrowing of £55.5bn in 
2016-17 was “very unlikely to be met”. That point was underlined bythe latest 
figures, which showed the total for the first seven months of the fiscal year 
to October had already reached £48.6bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/boost-uk-public-finances-philip-hammond-autumn-statement>
 (as shown above). But it will have to rip up the forecasts for subsequent 
years too, taking into account the impact of weaker growth on the public 
finances.

The chancellor has already abandoned previous plans to return the public 
finances to surplus by 2019-20. Economists believe the OBR’s revised figures 
could put borrowing at £100bn more over the next five years than it was 
predicting in March. The surplus shown in the final two years in the chart 
above is therefore likely to be erased.
 