
1 Tracey Emin And William Blake

The raw reality of Tracey Emin’s My Bed is endlessly shocking. It is not so 
much the condoms, cigarette butts and empty vodka bottles as the sheer 
unvarnished factuality of a moment from someone’s existence permanently 
preserved that leaves you unsettled. My Bed is accompanied here by Blake’s 
images of souls in hell and the crucified Christ. Emin’s own drawings of a nude 
woman in agony and ecstasy hang well with his visions in a meeting of British 
genius old and new.

Tate Liverpool, to 3 Sep 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-liverpool/exhibition/tracey-emin-and-william-blake-focus>

2 Djordje Ozbolt

The Holburne Museum reflects Bath’s rich cultural history with works including 
portraits by Thomas Gainsborough, one of Britain’s most sensual painters, who 
made money depicting people who came to take the waters and show themselves at 
the Assembly Rooms. Belgrade-born Ozbolt interrupts this fine collection of 
Georgian art with paintings that parody Gainsborough, giving 18th-century 
gentlemen surreal masks and unleashing Disney birds upon them. The cleverest 
thing about these paintings is the bizarrely lurid palette that pushes the 
colours of rococo art into the realm of theme-park kitsch.

Holburne Museum, Bath, to 5 Mar 
<http://www.holburne.org/events/djordje-ozbolt-the-grand-detour/>

3 Game Plan: Board Games Rediscovered

People have been playing games throughout recorded history and probably 
before. This ideal exhibition for the holidays not only surveys the history of 
board games but explores their surprising renaissance in the digital age with 
the success of the likes of The Settlers Of Catan.

V&A Museum of Childhood, E2, to 23 Apr 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/moc/exhibitions/gameplan/>

4 Memorial: A Tribute To Taxidermy

Taxidermy was once regarded as a scientific pursuit. Today its academic errors 
are renowned – all those anatomically inaccurate dodos – but this curious craft 
has become an art form in its own right. This exhibition by “ethical 
taxidermist” Jazmine Miles-Long explores how the Victorian stuffed specimens at 
the Horniman were created and what they can still tell us about the natural 
world.

Horniman Museum, SE23, to 1 May 
<http://www.horniman.ac.uk/visit/upcoming-exhibitions/memorial-a-tribute-to-taxidermy>

5 Marcantonio Raimondi And Raphael

Raphael’s harmonious art is a miracle of mathematical and classical 
perfection. Yet he was innovative and experimental, too. Unlike most other 
Italian Renaissance artists, he took a big interest in printing. Raphael worked 
with the gifted Raimondi to create prints of his paintings that are among the 
earliest ever attempts to mechanically reproduce art.

The Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester, to 23 Apr 
<http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/upcomingexhibitions/raimondiandraphael/>
 