
Earlier this month, game designer and programmer Brie Code wrote an interesting
opinion piece for GamesIndustry.Biz 
<http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2016-11-07-video-games-are-boring>. 
Entitled “video games are boring”, the article questioned pretty much all our 
assumptions about what games are, how they work and what they can do. Her 
argument was that a huge number of people are locked out of playing games 
because of age-old conventions, mechanics and assumptions. If you look at the 
major output of the big publishers, it’s all first-person shooters, action 
adventures, sports sims and 100-hour role-playing epics, filled with complex 
controls, assumed knowledge, violence and dextrous challenge. Many millions of 
potential players aren’t into all that.

But even if we accept those genres and conventions as a given, games could do 
a lot more to be approachable and intuitive to a wider audience. In many ways, 
game designers could learn a lot from the way narrative television has evolved 
over the past few golden years. Here are five examples.

Provide a proper narrative on ramp
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F766a8f0af0e9fdb986a0f00af8de02120ce8d85a%2F143_0_3598_2160%2F3598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F766a8f0af0e9fdb986a0f00af8de02120ce8d85a%2F143_0_3598_2160%2F3598.jpg>
 In Call of Duty: Infinite Warfare players often only learn about the world by 
listening to breathless exposition from non-player characters. Photograph: 
Activision 
When you watch a good modern television series, there will often be an opening 
scene that sets up a sense of disorientating wonder or interest. The characters 
and relationships may not be explained and you’ll be thrust right into 
something dramatic, which may not be explained until much later in the episode. 
The sexually explicit beginning of Billionaires is a great example.

Games often do this too by introducing the player into the middle of a simple 
mission. The difference is that television dramas will then usually draw way 
back and start introducing characters, themes and relationships in an 
accessible, digestible way. In other words, they take their time.Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>, on the other hand, don’t draw 
back. You may get a cut-scene with some exposition, but there’s usually little 
sense of dramatic development. You’re just thrust right in and then 
breathlessly fed background information by some knowledgeable non-player 
character running alongside you. The Call of Duty titles are famous for this.

Of course, games are about action and they’re structured in a way that get 
players using the controller as soon as possible. But by just chucking people 
into the middle of everything and then relentlessly piling on mission upon 
mission, they’re not giving anyone the chance to settle in and learn the world. 
TV shows such as Breaking Bad, Hannibal and Jessica Jones all showed how action 
can be combined with a slow burn of enticing character information and 
narrative development to enhance immersion.

Introduce underlying concepts gradually
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bcc3b0cfd78072fd6f2d20aa6ead9cd1743e8ac%2F19_0_927_556%2F927.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bcc3b0cfd78072fd6f2d20aa6ead9cd1743e8ac%2F19_0_927_556%2F927.png>
 WatchDogs 2 features a lively and well-conceived hacker underworld, but 
players are given little chance to acclimatise. Photograph: Ubisoft 
WatchDogs 2 throws its whole systemic language at you in the very first 
practice mission. Suddenly, you’re in the HQ of a technology corporation and 
you need to understand how every single button on the controller (including the 
d-pad and click-down analogue stick buttons) is employed. Not only that, but 
many of the buttons have different contextual actions, depending on whether 
you’re traversing the environment, hacking a terminal or opening a door. It’s a 
mass of interlocking mechanics and for new players this is hugely alienating.

OK, so a lot of players hate those interminable tutorial missions that slowly 
and patronisingly introduce each mechanic as you fumble through a series of 
practice areas. But gradual systemic revelation doesn’t have to work like this. 
Shigeru Miyamoto perfected Nintendo’s “learn, test, master” approach to game 
design in which characters are gradually given new items and abilities while 
traversing fully formed, fully functioning game levels. They learn new items as 
they go, test them on increasingly challenging enemies and then master them in 
boss battles. Not all games can work like Super Mario Bros, but the point is: 
there are ways to introduce systems without requiring the player to learn 
everything at once, or to take the gaming equivalent of driving lessons.

In modern television drama, there are very few assumptions made about viewer 
knowledge, unless we’re being purposefully kept in the dark about an archaic 
world. The Wire is a perfect example of this. Anything we don’t know is usually 
being kept from us for a reason, and that will be slowly and carefully revealed 
to provide dramatic tension. In Jessica Jones, we don’t know the precise nature 
of the relationship between Jessica and Kilgrave until well into the season, 
but we’re certainly given enough to know he’s evil and that they have a 
history. That’s all we need for the first few episodes.

Gradual and highly choreographed revelation is a key component of all 
narrative media, but somehow games often fail at this. Input systems, like plot 
points, can be fed slowly and carefully – they can become an element of the 
drama. It’s really interesting how, when television programmes have learned 
from, or set out to critique video games, they have portrayed game conventions 
as problematic. Lost was essentially an action adventure filled with puzzles 
and arcane rules that hinted at the supernatural nature of the island, but also 
dehumanised its inhabitants. Westworld is in some ways an exploration of video 
game systems and the limitations of simulated worlds. It’s kind of an open 
letter, a challenge to game designers.

Allow characters to change
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F890a74af368c687e4a4dd76963380715540e1afc%2F36_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F890a74af368c687e4a4dd76963380715540e1afc%2F36_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Uncharted 4 treats its characters like functioning adults, with relationships, 
flaws and unexpected decisions Photograph: Sony 
Once again, because of their very interactivity, video games often work more 
like action movies than TV drama: they’re about kinetic thrills rather than 
character development, so they usually deal with archetypes – the jaded 
adventurer, the noble warrior, the power-hungry statesman, the naive innocent.

But as games and game audiences mature, this approach is feeling more and more 
incongruous. We have studios such as Arkane, Ubisoft, Rockstar and Bioware 
producing complex, mature narratives where the action sequences are combined 
with character and plot development. So it’s strange to see many games where 
the lead protagonists remain largely unchanged – either physically or 
emotionally – throughout the course of what may be a multi-release story arc.

Uncharted 4 provided a really affecting counter to this. Nathan Drake begins 
as an Indiana Jones archetype, and in some ways that’s how he closes out the 
series. However, along the way, he has a shifting friendship with Sully, a 
troubled history with his brother and one of the most authentic romantic 
relationships in the history of game design with Elena. Throughout the course 
of the four games, he learns that his impulsive nature is dangerous both to 
himself and his loved ones, and it almost destroys his marriage. The Nathan who 
completes the fourth game is different in many ways to the Nathan who begins it.

This is the very least we expect from good television drama – Tony Soprano is 
a great example of a “stock” character, who is given depth by his mistakes, his 
insecurities and his sudden, often violent swings in mood and intention. 
Characters who don’t surprise us feel flat and boring, and the most memorable 
games are the ones that allow for twists in accepted behaviours. Valve and 
Irrational were both great at this throughout the Half-Life, Portal and 
Bioshock titles.

Provide regular reminders
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe74258c631c883095b73da1af1e9ac832134cdb2%2F0_91_1400_840%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe74258c631c883095b73da1af1e9ac832134cdb2%2F0_91_1400_840%2F1400.jpg>
 Witcher 3 is a wonderful game, but returning to it after a few weeks can be 
confusing and frustrating. Photograph: PR 
As a whole, players are not binging on 100-hour games like they used to. 
There’s definitely still a hardcore gaming demographic that will play through 
Zelda or GTA or Elder Scrolls in a single lost weekend of energy drinks, 
takeaway pizza and pyjamas, but as the audience grows up, that sort of 
indulgence gets harder. The percentage of gamers in their 30s and 40s is 
growing, and many of those people have to fit in games between work and family 
responsibilities.

The problem is, most games still assume you’re going to do everything in a 
weekend – and so they’re structured for one long slab of attention time. Leave 
Deus Ex or Witcher 3 for a few weeks, and you have to relearn everything from 
scratch: what was the spell button again? How does this gun work? What was I 
doing in this mission? If you’re lucky, there will be a menu that lists your 
immediate mission objectives, but everything else is assumed.

When I raised this on Twitter this week, one gamer told me that Assassin’s 
Creed had a system that knew when you hadn’t played for a while and offered to 
go through the controls with you when you returned – as does Far Cry Primal. 
That’s a cool idea and well done Ubisoft for thinking about it, but games could 
go further. If you watch a weekly television drama, you’ll be used to the 
words: “previously on ... ” at the start of each episode, recapping the key 
events so far. Games could really use this sort of thing – especially between 
sequels that may actually be two years apart. But no, most games exist in a 
permanent present, where players are assumed to have an encyclopaedic knowledge 
and total recall of everything that’s gone on before. Either that, or you’re 
expected to go through all the logs, emails, scrolls and databank entries 
you’ve picked up along the way. That’s no good if you only have an hour to play 
between getting the kids to bed and going to sleep yourself.

Plan season arcs in advance
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff60396337d2cc11d51339d6c905470de0a0103a5%2F75_0_668_401%2F668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20lessons%20that%20video%20games%20could%20learn%20from%20television%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffive-lessons-that-video-games-could-learn-from-television-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff60396337d2cc11d51339d6c905470de0a0103a5%2F75_0_668_401%2F668.jpg>
 Mass Effect was apparently planned as a trilogy, but the ending still managed 
to disappoint a lot of fans. Photograph: Electronic Arts 
Making video games is an expensive and risky business – nothing is assumed, 
least of all success. So the way games are often greenlit is with a major 
launch title and seemingly only the roughest idea of where things go next. 
Alternatively, a successful series will be built upon endlessly, with the 
publisher keen to squeeze all the life it can from the concept – because 
success is so hard to capture. This leads to interminable franchises such as 
Resident Evil and Assassin’s Creed, which can often go on much longer than 
their imaginative lifespans are able to usefully uphold.

When the Guardian interviewed Uncharted 4 designer Ricky Cambier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/04/uncharted-4-how-stealth-and-exploration-will-shape-drakes-final-adventure>
 just before the release of the game, he said that developer Naughty Dog was 
lucky that Sony was allowing the studio to plan the ending of the series. There 
was no pressure to keep it rolling along until the sales stalled – they could 
end it at an emotionally satisfying and meaningful point. But that shouldn’t be 
luck, that should be the way the industry works. Game developers working on 
major new series should plan in the ending – it’s a vital element of longform 
narrative drama.

Mad Men, Breaking Bad, Lost at least appeared to have endings structured into 
the experience, so viewers knew they were going to get a satisfying conclusion 
(or in the case of Lost, just a conclusion). Mass Effect was apparently planned 
as a trilogy from the outset, but the way it ended made you wonder. Was that 
really the conclusion that Bioware planned from the very beginning of the 
project? If it was, video game studios have to start thinking about new 
methods, conventions and interactive narrative structures that allow for both 
choice and story arcs with genuine and emotional endings. It does happen, of 
course, with Red Dead Redemption, Portal, The Last of Us and Ocarina of Time 
being notable examples. But most of those were discreet experiences.

For long-running narrative games to mature, they can take many useful tips 
from multi-season television drama. They don’t have to change completely, but 
sometimes it feels like they need to let more people in.
 