
For a cycling holiday with children, it pays to pick your destination 
carefully: somewhere where the pedalling isn’t too demanding for little legs, 
somewhere that feels safe – but somewhere with enough distractions for kids and 
adults alike.

The Netherlands, I discovered on a trip with nine-year-old William and 
11-year-old Rose, ticks plenty of boxes. It’s flat and cycle lanes are not just 
an afterthought tacked on by politicians with an eye on the green vote. 
Well-signposted cycle routes crisscross the country, lanes are wide and 
generous, and cyclists have priority at roundabouts. While I might miss the 
exhilaration of a downhill swoop after a steep ascent, it’s a small price to 
pay for not having to sweet-talk them up the hill in the first place.

The overnight ferry from Harwich to Hook of Holland was a wild success: having 
a shower in a ferry cabin is hugely exciting if you’re nine. It was spring and 
we hoped to be riding through fields of bright tulips, but the flowers weren’t 
out yet – so we drove on to Edam to spend two days cycling through 
(flower-free) agricultural landscapes. No one was disappointed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffamily-cycling-holiday-netherlands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf8b1a3c59c08b3104dccc0c0d5c6295f55c717e%2F0_136_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flat-out%3A%20family%20cycling%20fun%20in%20the%20Netherlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffamily-cycling-holiday-netherlands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flat-out%3A%20family%20cycling%20fun%20in%20the%20Netherlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffamily-cycling-holiday-netherlands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf8b1a3c59c08b3104dccc0c0d5c6295f55c717e%2F0_136_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
 William and Rose cycled 100km in two days 
The common image of Edam is of windmills, canals and women in clogs and 
bonnets. There is a bit of that, but the reality is less picturesque and more 
interesting. The town of Wormer was an unexpected highlight: it’s home to one 
of the world’s largest cocoa factories, the Gerkens plant, and the air smells 
of chocolate.

From our base at De Fortuna <http://www.fortuna-edam.nl/>, a 17th-century, 
family-run hotel in several small buildings overlooking the canal in Edam town, 
we cycled two loops, totting up an impressive 100km in two days, with no more 
than a few cursory complaints from the children. It was a taste of a trip run by
InnTravel 
<https://www.inntravel.co.uk/holidays/cycling-holidays/Holland/A-Taste-of-Holland?pg=s>
, made enjoyable by comfortable bikes and detailed notes that made it 
impossible to get lost on interesting quiet routes along canals and polders.

From Edam, we took the coast road to the town of Monnickendam, where we 
stopped for coffee and almond biscuits. It was too cold to swim, but later in 
the year we might have tried.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffamily-cycling-holiday-netherlands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b2df0188fc4c6acb47f03241e5d63fc72342e78%2F0_750_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flat-out%3A%20family%20cycling%20fun%20in%20the%20Netherlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffamily-cycling-holiday-netherlands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flat-out%3A%20family%20cycling%20fun%20in%20the%20Netherlands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffamily-cycling-holiday-netherlands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b2df0188fc4c6acb47f03241e5d63fc72342e78%2F0_750_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
 William and Rose in Edam’s sweetshop 
The next day, we headed west to Zaanse Schans, where working windmills and 
preserved buildings recreate a 17th-century Dutch village. It was pretty but we 
preferred less touristy De Rijp, with great hot chocolate atHet Wapen van 
Munster <http://www.wapenvanmunster.nl/>.

Along the way we passed pretty pyramid-roofed stolp houses, with shaky wooden 
bridges over streams linking them to the canals. We saw lambs and goats and 
foals and a lot of agri-industry – huge factories and warehouses next to tiny 
wooden houses, plus industrial-sized greenhouses growing flowers. Finally, we 
cycled through the beautiful polders inland from Edam, along paths through 
nature reserves where people go to birdwatch. The flat landscape made the skies 
amazing.

In the evening, the hotel’s restaurant satisfied our ravenous appetites with 
great locally sourced beef and lamb, and fish with rocket salad. We bought 
cheese to take home, but there was more interest in Edam’s sweetshop, with its 
double-salt liquorice, pink striped mints and chocolate letters.

We fantasised about buying a small, green wooden-gabled house opposite the 
hotel, and relocating to Edam. Once the bother of learning Dutch was dealt 
with, I think it would be a happy place to live with children. We didn’t want 
to leave and almost weren’t able to, because the car battery had gone flat. The 
hotel management rounded up passersby to give us a push-start in time for us to 
catch the ferry back. A tour of the tulip fields would have to wait for another 
spring.
• The trip was provided by Inntravel <https://www.inntravel.co.uk>, whose 
Taste of Holland cycling break 
<https://www.inntravel.co.uk/holidays/cycling-holidays/Holland/A-Taste-of-Holland>
 costs from £590pp including four nights’ B&B, one dinner, luggage 
transportation and cycle hire. Ferry travel was provided by Stena Line 
<http://www.stenaline.co.uk/> (08447 707070) which has returns from Harwich to 
Hook of Holland from £150 for a family of four and a car
 