
Each Christmas, I place a stack of books on my bedside table, planning to read 
my way through the lot during my week off. And each Christmas, without fail, 
they remain precisely where I put them as I turn to old favourites instead: 
Dickens, Christie, Streatfeild, Rowling, Lewis. Christmas, after all, is a time 
for tradition. An unfamiliar book, like a new film or an untested recipe, has 
little place on myChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>
 Day.

From childhood, this has been my favourite time of year. Although I grew up in 
Australia, where Christmas Day regularly reaches 30 degrees, I relished stories 
where the characters are surrounded by snow, warming their hands by the fire. I 
have great affection for the platters of prawns, fruit-topped pavlovas and 
glorious sunshine I remember from my childhood Christmases – but it never felt 
like anything I saw in my favourite books.

Once I moved to England, much of the comfort and familiarity in the 
Christmases I have spent here comes from my books; on my bedside table, and in 
my kitchen. Here, the roast bird, the flaming plum pudding and the pastel-hued 
sweets so often found in stories make complete sense.

Roast bird


Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug of his 
shoulders.

“There is your hat, then, and there your bird,” said he. “By the way, would it 
bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I am somewhat of a fowl 
fancier, and I have seldom seen a better grown goose.”

The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle by Arthur Conan Doyle
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b479287f801a5eac4d310d3519ea258a4725d6%2F407_921_3457_3457%2F3457.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Christmas%20feasts%20from%20Conan%20Doyle%20to%20JK%20Rowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Christmas%20feasts%20from%20Conan%20Doyle%20to%20JK%20Rowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b479287f801a5eac4d310d3519ea258a4725d6%2F407_921_3457_3457%2F3457.jpg>
 A typical festive turkey lunch … a little less adventurous than Bridget 
Jones’s mum’s turkey curry buffet. Photograph: Dan Matthews/Weekend magazine 
Roasted goose was the Christmas bird of choice for most middle-class families 
in Victorian England and this is reflected in literature: the plot of Conan 
Doyle’sThe Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle 
<http://www.eastoftheweb.com/short-stories/UBooks/AdveBlue.shtml> hangs on a 
Christmas goose, and Dickens’s Cratchit family in A Christmas Carol eke one out 
with mashed potato and stuffing.

Though turkey was financially out of reach for most English families until the 
mid-20th century, the bird has long been associated with Christmas. Henry VIII 
is rumoured to have placed one on his Christmas table, and Edward VII made it a 
fashionable choice for the wealthy in the early years of last century. It also 
plays an important role in A Christmas Carol: Ebenezer Scrooge’s fowl gift to 
Bob and his family on Christmas Day is indicative of his newfound generosity.

“I’ll send it to Bob Cratchit’s!” whispered Scrooge, rubbing his hands, and 
splitting with a laugh. “He shan’t know who sends it. It’s twice the size of 
Tiny Tim. Joe Miller never made such a joke as sending it to Bob’s will be!”

This moment in fiction has had a lasting legacy; around 75% of us will have 
turkey this year, a truly staggering figure (especially if you share my opinion 
that a humble roast chicken is a vastly superior bird). Modern fiction 
continues to reflect this – think of the turkey curry buffet in Bridget Jones’s 
Diary (a little better thanBridget’s blue soup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2016/apr/21/food-in-books-not-blue-soup-from-bridget-joness-diary>
).

Christmas pudding

Flaming Christmas puddings followed the turkey. Percy nearly broke his teeth 
on a silver sickle embedded in his slice.

Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone by JK Rowling
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d805609bfdbb4eb3762114dc049438aa860cae2%2F0_0_750_750%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Christmas%20feasts%20from%20Conan%20Doyle%20to%20JK%20Rowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Christmas%20feasts%20from%20Conan%20Doyle%20to%20JK%20Rowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d805609bfdbb4eb3762114dc049438aa860cae2%2F0_0_750_750%2F750.jpg>
 ‘I have lost count of the number of fictional families who finish their 
Christmas dinner with a pudding.’ Photograph: Kate Young of The Little Library 
Café 
My great-grandmother spent long days each August boiling puddings in calico, 
and hanging them all over her house to dry. It’s a tradition the rest of our 
family has adopted. We’re in good company; the plum pudding has its origins in 
medieval England, and is still a common feature on Christmas tables across the 
country. I have lost count of the number of fictional families who finish their 
Christmas dinner with a pudding: the dessert is carried out by Percy inLucy M 
Boston’s The Children of Green Knowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/07/winter-reading-children-of-green-knowe>
, enjoyed by the Fossil sisters in Noel Streatfeild’s Ballet Shoes, and appears 
in the Great Hall at the end of Harry’s first Christmas in Hogwarts.

Sweets
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f9514677161691321e0e140c9de20da367d119%2F0_0_750_750%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Christmas%20feasts%20from%20Conan%20Doyle%20to%20JK%20Rowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Christmas%20feasts%20from%20Conan%20Doyle%20to%20JK%20Rowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffood-in-books-christmas-feasts-from-conan-doyle-to-jk-rowling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f9514677161691321e0e140c9de20da367d119%2F0_0_750_750%2F750.jpg>
 Edmund might have been a pain, but he had good taste in sweets. Photograph: 
Kate Young of The Little Library Café 
“It is dull, Son of Adam, to drink without eating,” said the Queen presently. 
“What would you like best to eat?”

“Turkish Delight, please, your Majesty,” said Edmund.

The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe by CS Lewis

Nothing feels more like Christmas to me than dishes, tins and bowls of sweets, 
placed at intervals around the house. At no other time of year does every 
retreat to the sofa involve a couple of Quality Street or mini Daim bars. If I 
am feeling slightly more ambitious, I’ll make the sweets that I read about:
crystallised ginger from Agatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2015/dec/24/food-in-books-crystallised-ginger-from-the-adventure-of-the-christmas-pudding-by-agatha-christie>
’s The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding, sugar plums fromA Visit from St 
Nicholas by Clement Clarke Moore 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/43171>, and soft 
pink cubes of Turkish Delight in CS Lewis’s The Lion, the Witch and the 
Wardrobe. Now, I can’t spend Christmas in Narnia with the Pevensie children, or 
solving crimes with Hercule Poirot – but it reassures me to see them similarly 
taken with decadent sweets.

A cook's books: a food blogger's recipes inspired by literature – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/gallery/2015/jul/09/cook-books-food-bloggers-recipes-inspired-by-books-in-pictures>
Food serves many functions in literature, providing us with a strong sense of 
time and place. From my years of reading about it, I felt I understood 
Christmas in England long before I ever experienced it. Moving to the UK was 
not unlike stepping through the wardrobe into Narnia; leaving the comfort of 
the familiar for the relative unknown. I spent much of my first year finding my 
feet. But that first Christmas, I lived the day that I had spent so many years 
dreaming about – and ate the meals I had spent so many years reading about.

 * Kate Young writes a regular series for the Guardian about food in 
literature and blogs atLittle Library Cafe <http://thelittlelibrarycafe.com/>. 
Her first cookbook will be out in October 2017.  