
The square outside the Sagrada Família <http://www.sagradafamilia.cat/sf-eng/> 
is thronged with tourist groups basking in the warmth of the October afternoon. 
I, too, am part of a group, but there’s a difference. There are just two of us 
– myself and my 80-year-old mother – and our guide, a young Catalan called 
Eloi, who works fortrip4real, <http://www.trip4real.com/> an innovative company 
offering bespoke experiences for travellers who want to move beyond the herd.

Eloi makes a speciality of little-known facts and he does enjoy an anecdote. 
Last year, 3.1 million people visited the Catalan architect’s unfinished 
masterpiece, he says. As we admire the soaring facade, he points out, in his 
idiomatic English, “See the guy there, leaning over the Virgin? That’s the 
Angel Gabriel, and what he’s saying is, ‘Y’know, Maria darling, this may be a 
shock to you, but somehow you’re gonna have a baby.’”

Mass tourism in the 21st century is close to killing the thing it loves, and 
cities like Venice and Barcelona are reaching saturation point. Meanwhile, the 
notion of “experiential travel”, offering a new sense of immediacy and 
authenticity, is gaining ground.

Trip4real, which was founded in Barcelona last year and is bankrolled in part 
by influential Catalan chefFerran Adrià 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/oct/19/ferran-adria-genome-of-cuisine>
, is already becoming well established in Spain, and plans to extend its reach 
to London by 1 January.

The guides, or “locals”, sign up, create and validate their profile with 
social media, plan their activity, and set the price; Trip4real then vets it 
for authenticity. Like eBay sellers orAirbnb 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/?af=1922719&c=A_TC%3Dycep4my3j2%26G_MT%3Db%26G_CR%3D37389906516%26G_N%3Dg%26G_K%3Dairb%26b%26G_P%3D&gclid=Cj0KEQiAhvujBRDUpomG5cq_mI0BEiQA7TYq-jNo7IVOOOuebivcnlHNEMmDKq-joA6rwoipTFEv3LsaAv7i8P8HAQ>
 hosts, the community self-regulates via reviews and ratings, but the site also 
secret-shops its guides and reserves the right to blacklist (though it says 
this has never happened yet).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417623462485%2F3e364425-3d10-4d29-b500-7bffef70f533-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%2C%20beauty%2C%20anarchy%3A%20new%20guided%20tours%20of%20Barcelona%20by%20the%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%2C%20beauty%2C%20anarchy%3A%20new%20guided%20tours%20of%20Barcelona%20by%20the%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417623462485%2F3e364425-3d10-4d29-b500-7bffef70f533-1020x612.jpeg>
 Trip4real’s guides are a mix of freelancers and professionals. The site 
specialises in tours for small groups 
Eloi Morte was a flight attendant who was forced to give up flying for health 
reasons, so he returned to his home town and set about studying the 
architecture of Catalan modernism – as practised byPuig i Cadafalch 
<http://www.barcelonaturisme.com/Josep-Puig-i-Cadafalch/_3Ngb8YjSpL1WFZzr8h4hs6WNVI6O0lVgxtd0GJ8wYBs>
,Domènech i Muntaner 
<http://www.barcelonaturisme.com/Lluis-Domenech-i-Montaner/_3Ngb8YjSpL1WFZzr8h4hs8vMPZRzLhnPsxsPRkWc5nI>
 andAntoni Gaudí 
<http://www.barcelona-tourist-guide.com/en/gaudi/barcelona-gaudi.html>. A year 
after joining Trip4real, Eloi’smodernisme tours are among the top-rated 
activities on the site.

“There are people who want to talk about politics, or they want tips on 
restaurants and tapas bars. I only do small groups, and always give people my 
email and phone number,” he says.

Trip4real has more than a thousand locals in Barcelona, and a series of 
blue-chip backers, such as Adrià, La Caixa bank and trendy Spanish ad agency 
SCPF. As of last summer it also boasts a link-up with Airbnb – those who make a 
booking on the accommodation website receive a follow-up email from Trip4real. 
Hitherto confined to Spanish cities, the company is poised to expand into 
Lisbon, Rome, Paris and the Netherlands, after launching in London next month.

I meet Gloria Molins, the 31-year-old founder of the site, for a beer in Bar 
Mut <http://www.barmut.com/>, in the Calle Pau Claris. Molins, also one of the 
local guides, tells me her start-up was conceived during a couch-surfing tour 
of south-east Asia in 2012. One night in Cambodia she had an epiphany: 
“Whenever I’d ever had a wow moment on a trip, it had been thanks to some kind 
of contact with a local person.”

Before long, Molins was heading back to recession-ravaged Spain with a domain 
name, Trip4real.com. Last year, keen to recruit the backing of a famous local 
name, Molins secured a meeting withFerran Adrià 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ferran-adria>, a personal hero of 
hers. The chef now says he barely knew what a start-up was at the time, but was 
struck by the idea that a new generation of micro-entrepreneurs might help to 
pull the Spanish economy out of its deep crisis.

“I know what it’s like to arrive somewhere and say, ‘My goodness, I would 
really love to fully experience this city!’” Adrià said. “Trip4real is a 
project that, apart from being creative, different and run by people from here, 
might be opening a path towards a social dimension too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417623602736%2F0bf47cf3-cb28-431f-bb4b-098ec59f9f85-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%2C%20beauty%2C%20anarchy%3A%20new%20guided%20tours%20of%20Barcelona%20by%20the%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%2C%20beauty%2C%20anarchy%3A%20new%20guided%20tours%20of%20Barcelona%20by%20the%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417623602736%2F0bf47cf3-cb28-431f-bb4b-098ec59f9f85-1020x612.jpeg>
 Trip4real has gone from being a tiny operation run from a flat to a a business 
with eight staff and 20,000 users in 50 cities 
Guides earn, on average, €30-40 per trip (at a cost usually of €15-40 per 
tourist), and Molins claims her locals can make between €400–700 a month.

Since launching the site in February 2013, Molins has seen it grow from a 
shoestring operation in her flat to a business with eight employees and an 
investment pot of €1m. It is now Spain’s premier peer-to-peer experiential 
travel website, with 20,000 users in 50 cities and 2,500 activities, from 
jet-skiing to mushroom-picking, to a night on the tiles with a local DJ.

The variety is impressive. There is a tour of Barcelona’s exclusive boutiques 
with a shopper who knows the city’s high-end retail universe intimately. There 
is a fishing tour and a farming tour, a percussion workshop and an anarchist 
walkabout. I liked the sound of the jazz concert at a private house. The guides 
are mostly freelance (though some are professional) and the only common 
denominator is their “local resident” status and passion for their subject – be 
it cannabis grow shops, modernista architecture, or the highways and byways of 
Catalan cuisine. Given the city’s stellar gastronomic reputation, it’s no 
surprise that the foodie is well catered for.

Later in the morning, my mum and I pitch up for our second activity of the day 
– a market visit and Catalan lunch with Barcelona-born lawyer, chef and 
hardcore foodie, Sonia Blasco.

We dive into the Boqueria market <http://www.boqueria.info/index.php?lang=en> 
just off La Rambla, where the shuffling tourists are three deep between the 
stalls. But Sonia knows the score, guiding us swiftly into the heart of a 
market where, she says, she shops on a regular basis. We are introduced to Rosa 
Mari atAlimentació Fores 
<http://www.boqueria.info/mercat-parada.php?codigo=986&lang=en>, from whom she 
buys her cheese.

Sonia’s crash course in Spanish food culture pushes all the right buttons of 
seasonality and tradition. Enthusiastic, and a born communicator, she is as 
happy explaining the difference between serrano and Parma ham or between a
boqueron 
<http://www.thetapaslunchcompany.co.uk/spanish-food/boquerones-anchovies> and a 
salted anchovy as she is expounding the rights of the Catalan people to hold 
their own independence referendum. In the shellfish section, a box ofpercebes 
(goose barnacles) sends her into raptures.

“They taste like a piece of ocean!” she says. “Why are they so expensive? 
Because women in Galicia climb the rocks to catch them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417623135253%2F6260574c-8431-404b-bb3b-4c925a7a2ae2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%2C%20beauty%2C%20anarchy%3A%20new%20guided%20tours%20of%20Barcelona%20by%20the%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%2C%20beauty%2C%20anarchy%3A%20new%20guided%20tours%20of%20Barcelona%20by%20the%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417623135253%2F6260574c-8431-404b-bb3b-4c925a7a2ae2-1020x612.jpeg>
 “They taste like a piece of the ocean!” At a seafood stall on a Trip4real 
foodie tour 
At a turron 
<http://www.thetapaslunchcompany.co.uk/spanish-food/turron-polvorones> shop 
outside the market, our local remembers fondly how her entire family used to 
come down here to stock up on this tooth-challenging Spanish sweet in time for 
Christmas.

The tour concludes with a sensational lunch at the Bar del Pla 
<http://www.bardelpla.cat/>, featuring some of the best chicken and 
mushroom-stuffed canelons I’ve ever tasted.

“This is a typical Catalan dish – my mother used to make it,” said Sonia. 
“See? I don’t just show you Barcelona – I show you my home.”
 