
“The last time we tried to calculate our strike rate it was around 99.5%,” 
says Football Manager head honcho Miles Jacobson. For him and his team at 
Sports Interactive, the aim is always to create the most real-life 
representation of football year after year. CreatingFootball Manager 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/02/football-manager-2017-review-the-best-in-the-series-but-only-for-dedicated-fans>
 has not just been about building a commercial product. It’s also about 
constructing a game they want to play over the next year until they release the 
next edition.

Jacobson strives to build the most realistic game yet so he can live out his 
dream of leading Watford to the Premier League title, albeit with the heavy 
heart that comes after he has relieved Walter Mazzarri of his duties in the 
process.

Football Manager 2017 review – the best in the series, but only for dedicated 
fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/02/football-manager-2017-review-the-best-in-the-series-but-only-for-dedicated-fans>
For the people who build Football Manager and enjoy it, the detail is what 
makes the game so compelling – detail built out of Sports Interactive’s pride 
and joy, their database. The Football Manager database originally included 
around 4,000 players and staff but it’s now nearing 700,000. The players in 
this database have been rated by an on-the-ground network of roughly 1,300 
scouts who span the globe – a network that football clubs would only dream of 
possessing.

“If a football club is going to sign a player they might watch him 10 times, 
where as we’re watching them over years and years,” says Jacobson. Football 
Manager’s local scouting team means they can find that next big thing quicker 
than anyone, whether the player is from Gibraltar or Guatemala. These scouting 
assignments judge a player on everything from their acceleration to work rate, 
place of birth to preferred moves. This information offer managers, virtual or 
professional, the insight needed to decide whether they players are worth 
buying or not.

How an obsession with Football Manager could earn you a career in the game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-set-pieces-blog/2016/sep/29/football-manager-2017-sport-plymouth-argyle>
Ever since André Villas-Boas openly admitted to using the database 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/05/how-football-manager-changed-the-game>
 to help source players during his time as chief scout at Chelsea, there have 
been a string of stories of Football Manager’s role in the professional game. 
While these stories are always countered by critics who focus on the few 
players who failed to live up to their potential –“But what about Freddy Adu, 
Maksim Tsyhalka, Andri Sigþórsson, Cherno Samba and Fábio Paím?!” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZgdWmuyg0ww> – there’s no denying that the 
successes have massively outweighed the disappointments. And, from licensing 
data to football clubs toSky Sports News’ use of the data to compare players 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/football/babb/11780655/Sky-Sports-use-Football-Manager-database-to-profile-players-in-real-life.html>
, the Football Manager office’s desire to create the most realistic football 
simulation game has had an impact on the sport they’re trying to simulate. This 
is how they do it:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMZz9lX_C7EE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMZz9lX_C7EE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMZz9lX_C7EE&media=>
Follow Copa90 on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/user/Copa90football>, 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/copa90> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Copa90>
 