
Toni Minichiello, the coach behind Jessica Ennis-Hill’s success, has called 
for football to do much more to catch drug cheats and said those within the 
sport are naive if they think there is no problem with doping.

Earlier this week Manchester City were charged by the Football Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/manchester-city-charged-anti-doping>
 with failing to provide accurate information about training arrangements and 
player whereabouts on three occasions over a 12-month period.

Minichiello, who is one of the most respected figures in British sport, told 
the Guardian he believes a bigger problem is the lack of testing in the game. 
Around 200 tests a month are carried out in English football among the 92 
Football League clubs and nine women’s Super League teams – a figure 
Minichiello believes is only a 10th of what is required.

“I hope the FA aren’t proud of that figure,” he said. “When it has a nought on 
the end then it’ll be a start. At the moment they are doing about 200 tests a 
month on average. Divide that by the 92 league clubs and the nine women’s Super 
League teams, and that works out at two players at one club a month. Jess would 
be tested between 12 and 15 times a year – how many footballers are tested that 
much?

The FA should go into clubs once a quarter and say, ‘OK lads, line up - you’re 
all being tested'
Toni Minichiello 
“The FA should go into clubs once a quarter and say: ‘OK lads, line up – 
you’re all being tested’. When you do that, you start to discourage doping. Add 
to that extensive post-match testing and you have a credible anti-doping 
system.”

The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> insists it has the most 
comprehensive drugs testing programme in world football and points out it pays 
Ukad to do a range of tests, including taking blood from players for an athlete 
biological passport programme. It also hopes to conduct 3,200 tests by the end 
of the season and says increases are planned for next year. Last season, some 
Premier League players were tested as many as eight times. Furthermore it 
stresses that top players will be tested more frequently than those lower down 
the leagues, and that they can also be tested at their home, even if they have 
been at training earlier in the day.

However, Minichiello said he was surprised the FA does not require clubs to 
provide player whereabouts in the close season; players have to provide only a 
residential address where they regularly reside overnight. That theoretically 
means that from late May to July, players could go away on holiday and take 
banned substances knowing they had a minimal chance of being caught.

Manchester City will get off lightly over breaking testing rules, say athletes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/manchester-city-testing-rules-athletes>
“The days when players spent their summer break eating chips are over,” 
Minichiello said. “They are professional athletes now. They keep training. So 
why aren’t all footballers across the globe required to state detailed 
whereabouts 365 days a year in the World Anti-Doping Agency’s administration 
and management system (Adams) so that their whereabouts can be checked by 
anti-doping officials?

“People tell me there is no drug problem in global football but to me that is 
naive. How do you know if you’re not really looking? If you don’t look for it, 
you ain’t going to find it. It’s a sport with speed and power at its core, 
therefore the use of doping is a distinct possibility.”

Paula Radcliffe, the women’s marathon world record holder, has said she 
believes footballers should take more responsibility for whereabouts 
regulations. “It would be better to fall on the individual,” she told the 
Times. “In terms of fairness to the players this is not the best system. 
‘Whereabouts’ puts a little extra onus on athletes, but footballers are paid a 
lot of money and have the time and ability to do it. It’s a case of trusting 
them to take responsibility on their own shoulders. It would restore 
credibility within football.”

The World Anti-Doping Agency has told the Guardian football still needs to 
“improve further” when it comes to drug testing. TheWada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> spokesman Ben Nichols said: “There are 
still countries where national anti-doping agencies are not permitted to test 
athletes or players, but instead the national federation is conducting the 
programme, and in many instances pursuant to rules which do not include correct 
results management.”

Nichols stressed that some federations, such as Uefa, were now performing 
“quality anti-doping programmes” and cited the FA as one of the better 
organisations. However, Wada’s view remains that all footballers should be part 
of its athlete management system to ensure they are more comprehensively 
monitored and tested.

“We are optimistic Fifa will begin using Wada’s Adams system in order to 
advance its use of the athlete biological passport, along with its other 
important anti-doping work,” said Nichols. “Wada looks forward to meeting with 
Fifa in the coming months to discuss the advancement of their anti-doping 
programme.”
 