
Should the hypothesised invitation to Buckingham Palace arrive, Melania Trump 
will not be able to do asMichelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/30/michelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy>
 did and haveTom Ford 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/fashion/news/tom-ford-reveals-why-he-wont-be-dressing-melania-trump-a3410836.html>
 run up a gown for the occasion. Neither will Marc Jacobs, Phillip Lim or 
Sophie Theallet – labels of choice for the current first lady – be taking her 
calls. All of these designers have taken a stand against the incoming 
administration by making it clear that, as of the inauguration in January, 
dressing the first lady will cease to be an honour they choose to accept.

This makes no material difference whatsoever. Melania Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump> will continue to wear 
designer clothes of her choice, simply by paying for them. She bought both the 
white Roksanda “Margot” dress she wore for her Republican convention speech and 
the Balmain camel coat in which she cast her vote on Net-A-Porter, paying 
around £1,000 and £2,500 respectively. Fashion industry website Women’s Wear 
Daily reported that the Ralph Lauren jumpsuit she wore for her husband’s 
victory speech, which retails for around £3,000, was purchased at full price at 
Lauren’s Madison Avenue boutique.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpolitical-women-jackie-kennedy-or-bust-melania-trump-theresa-may-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6439fc23113074080c8f22a030876a54e3cb12%2F475_211_3566_6257%2F3566.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20political%20women%20it%E2%80%99s%20Jackie%20Kennedy%20or%20bust%20%20%7C%20Jess%20Cartner-Morley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpolitical-women-jackie-kennedy-or-bust-melania-trump-theresa-may-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20political%20women%20it%E2%80%99s%20Jackie%20Kennedy%20or%20bust%20%20%7C%20Jess%20Cartner-Morley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpolitical-women-jackie-kennedy-or-bust-melania-trump-theresa-may-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6439fc23113074080c8f22a030876a54e3cb12%2F475_211_3566_6257%2F3566.jpg>
 Samantha Cameron repurposed the family dining room as a dressmaking studio, in 
preparation for the launch of her new fashion brand. Photograph: Darren Gerrish 
So it is fascinating that Ford, Jacobs and co seem to believe that by not 
dressing Melania Trump they can curb her powers. That by withholding their 
tailoring skills and their blessing from the first lady, the fashion 
establishment can somehow keep in check the powers of the Trump administration. 
As ifNew York fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/new-york-fashion-week> could stop the 
Trumps from overstepping the mark, should Congress and the supreme court fail 
to do so.

Perhaps they can. The link between fashion and politics is stronger now than 
at any time since Jackie Kennedy. Last week it emerged that Samantha Cameron 
had repurposed the family dining room as a dressmaking studio during her 
husband’s time in office, in preparation for the launch of her new fashion 
brand,Cefinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/30/sam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label>
. That a fashion house born out of Downing Street has been accepted as a 
natural extension of a power couple’s brand speaks volumes about the extent to 
which style has infiltrated political discourse.

Jackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
, the soon-to-be-released Hollywood biopic starring Natalie Portman as JFK’s 
widow, takes place over the three days following the assassination of the 
president in November 1963. But it is the first lady’s wardrobe that is at the 
heart of this film: the pink Chanel tweed spattered with blood; the black 
widow’s veil against the stark backdrop of a White House. Glamour and fashion 
are foregrounded, while the nuts and bolts of political grind are lost in the 
shadows. A film about politics as theatre and about the dynamic of male-female 
relationships amplified by power itself, Jackie will arrive in cinemas, with 
uncanny timing, around the time of the inauguration. When the young widow 
insists that the public mourning of her husband “has to be beautiful … a big, 
beautiful funeral everyone will remember”, her instinctive grasp of how 
aesthetics can shape history feels very modern.

The hostility towards Melania Trump runs against the grain of the fault line 
that has dominated recent debate about women in political life. FromCherie 
Blair in her nightie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/08/cherie-blair-nightie-downing-street-thats-me-in-the-picture>
 toHillary Clinton’s scrunchie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jun/10/hillary-clinton-scrunchie-hairstyle-accessory>
, most flashpoints have been around women refusing to expend the effort 
required to conform to celebrity levels of glamour.

Trump, by contrast, is too gaudy for some. “She looks like something out of 
The Only Way is Essex in those tight-fitting, mono-coloured dresses,”sneered a 
Spectator blog 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/12/fashion-world-no-moral-compass-melania-trump-came-along/>
. That she is reviled for being too glamorous, while Clinton was criticised for 
being too dowdy, pinpoints the impossibly narrow standards to which women are 
held. In the iconography of first lady style, it is Jackie Kennedy or bust.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpolitical-women-jackie-kennedy-or-bust-melania-trump-theresa-may-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1052814bc4db40b78709389df49e9a175a128244%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20political%20women%20it%E2%80%99s%20Jackie%20Kennedy%20or%20bust%20%20%7C%20Jess%20Cartner-Morley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpolitical-women-jackie-kennedy-or-bust-melania-trump-theresa-may-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20political%20women%20it%E2%80%99s%20Jackie%20Kennedy%20or%20bust%20%20%7C%20Jess%20Cartner-Morley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fpolitical-women-jackie-kennedy-or-bust-melania-trump-theresa-may-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1052814bc4db40b78709389df49e9a175a128244%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Natalie Portman as Jackie Kennedy in the film Jackie. ‘The first lady’s 
wardrobe is at the heart of this film.’ Photograph: AP 
Passing judgment on clothes is a coded way to upbraid women in political life 
for stepping outside the slender parameters of what is deemed acceptable. 
Theresa May came under fire this week for apair of leather trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/dec/07/theresa-mays-leather-trousers-you-need-a-tough-hide-to-wear-them>
 she was pictured wearing for a newspaper interview. The ostensible objection 
to the price tag of £995 was nonsensical: David Cameron wore suits costing 
more, while Samantha Cameron was routinely admired in dresses by Peter Pilotto 
or Emilia Wickstead, which cost around the same. May’s real fashion crime was 
to choose leather trousers – still a mark of rebellion, on a woman. Like 
leopard print and over-the-knee boots, both of which May is also fond of, 
leather trousers suggest a level of insubordination. An independently minded 
woman – or as Ken Clarke might have it, abloody difficult one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/05/ken-clarke-caught-camera-ridiculing-tory-leadership-candidates-theresa-may-michael-gove>
.

Such crass assessments reflect that how a woman looks is often conflated with 
the person she is. This does not happen to men. A man is not defined by his 
hair, his suit or tie, because the world takes it as read that such things are 
just part of an identity that is allowed to be – expected to be, even – complex 
and subtle.

As Jackie Kennedy grasped over half a century ago as she planned her husband’s 
televised funeral, an ever-more-visual culture changes how politics works. 
Fashion is part of the political picture now. A little more sophistication in 
the debate about what women in politics wear would be, as we say in fashion, a 
good look.
 