
This is a time of seismic global shifts. I am as anxious as any parent about 
her child’s future. I’m worried about the sudden shakiness of the systems that 
we trust to resolve disputes peaceably and to uphold universal human rights.

Does Trump's election mark the end of compassion in aid?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/11/trump-us-election-victory-end-compassion-aid>
But I believe fiercely that nothing good is ever beyond us if we work together 
as citizens. I think we’re now at a point on the road where we must actively 
try to shape events in order to fortify our relationships together, not rip 
them apart.

Inequality 
<https://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/bp210-economy-one-percent-tax-havens-180116-en_0.pdf>
,climate change 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/15/science/2016-hottest-year-on-record.html?rref=collection%2Ftimestopic%2FGlobal%20Warming&_r=0>
 andconflict 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjV94rPo6vQAhVU7mMKHXu0CAAQFggnMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.independent.co.uk%2Fnews%2Fworld%2Feurope%2Frefugee-crisis-2016-on-course-to-be-deadliest-year-on-record-as-thousands-of-asylum-seekers-drown-in-a7164271.html&usg=AFQjCNGk9hAAYh-qwzkjVW9Jy7ajmkf-SA&sig2=Mn5HrBO4hG9KbXejUk0Fbg&bvm=bv.138493631,d.amc>
 are evicting millions from their homes. But these perils are being met with 
“anti-answers” such as nationalism, closed borders, lies and hatred. Within 
this toxic discourse we hear calls to cut spending towards the world’s most 
vulnerable people.

Development cooperation between nations is very important because it is one of 
the building blocks of shared peace, prosperity and human rights for all. It is 
one of the antidotes to the poison of xenophobia.

Over the past 20 years, the world has seen a dramatic reduction in poverty 
<http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21578643-world-has-astonishing-chance-take-billion-people-out-extreme-poverty-2030-not>
, primarily driven by Chinese growth, but thanks also to collective efforts 
like the UN’smillennium development goals <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/>. 
However, recent rhetoric and events threaten to halt this progress.

Instead of boosting financial assistance to developing countries – at the time 
of the worst global refugee crisis since the Second World War, burgeoning 
levels of inequality, and the hottest year on record – we’re seeing foreign aid 
stagnate as a whole, and serious cuts in a number of traditional donors.

Aid is being diluted both in quantity and quality. Donors are increasingly 
using their funding to promote their own private sectors and, even worse, block 
people escaping war and injustice from reaching their shores. This flies in the 
face ofwhat aid should be 
<https://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/bp-accountability-and-ownership-140916-en.pdf>
 [pdf]: a tool to lift people sustainably out of poverty and strengthen 
countries’ ability to lead their own development.

Donor and recipient countries have committed themselves in summits such as 
Paris 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwj2w_nApKvQAhUK2oMKHXP5DVEQFgggMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.oecd.org%2Fdac%2Feffectiveness%2F34428351.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGr8jrwhO3DMorwpYKVUa3De3r7OQ&sig2=hrQ7oc20SfVTVAFr1BZ5HA&bvm=bv.138493631,d.eWE>
,Accra 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=4&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiN2KnNpKvQAhXs6IMKHUtZBbYQFggyMAM&url=http%3A%2F%2Feffectivecooperation.org%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2016%2F03%2FAccra%2520Agenda%2520for%2520Action%2520in%2520Brief%2520ENGLISH.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEDESRyGL1a20zy3TRPJZZuTNvNeg&sig2=vR4DxQHk4LnvYTqlXBDPkg&bvm=bv.138493631,d.eWE>
 andBusan 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/fourthhighlevelforumonaideffectiveness.htm>
 to uphold various principles in development cooperation and aid effectiveness.

But the reality is, they’re failing.

Diverted, degraded: the dark side of aid

The latest report 
<http://effectivecooperation.org/2016/11/2016-monitoring-report-released/> by 
the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC) shows that 
only 51% of aid is being channelled into a recipient country’s own state 
systems. This means that donors are still heavily bypassing the very 
institutions that they promised “by default” to strengthen.

In addition, progress in untying aid has stalled since 2009. Donors are still 
formally providing around 20% of their aid with strings attached, and many 
donors are now making troubling signals that this trend could deepen.

NGOs aren't just mute. They're being gagged
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/04/ngos-arent-just-mute-theyre-being-gagged>
Donors have made some progress. They’ve improved their reporting to bodies 
like theInternational Aid Transparency Initiative 
<http://www.aidtransparency.net/>. In making information publicly available and 
doing so in a more timely and comprehensive manner, donors will increase the 
legitimacy of development cooperation.

However, they still need to do more to help countries to effectively use this 
new information and improve the predictability of their budgets. It is very 
difficult for a country to strengthen its development programmes if it’s not 
sure how many resources they’re getting or when they’ll get it.

Societies are stronger together

That a country has a strong civil society is, I believe, particularly 
necessary for good development. My own life values were shaped in great part by 
my mother, who instigated women’s clubs in my village. Women were able to 
organise and stand together. What inspired me most about their work was the 
power it gave them to assert their rights, and the rights of their daughters, 
be it education or property inheritance.

The likes of local NGOs, rights groups, women’s movements and unions are 
important both in helping local people organise for their own community and in 
holding governments and donors to account for their promises.

However, since 2012, 75 countries have passed as many as 156 laws and 
regulations specifically to constrain these freedoms, for instance to associate 
or assemble. This throttling of civic space is diminishing the social contract 
between citizens and states.

Unless we actively change course in these areas, we risk leaving millions of 
families behind as economic security becomes harder to reach and democracy and 
rights deteriorate.

This week, leaders from all over the world will gather in Nairobi to discuss 
the future of development cooperation at thesecond High-Level Meeting of the 
GPEDC <http://effectivecooperation.org/events/2016-high-level-meeting/>. It’s a 
big chance to reject the degradation of aid. What is decided there could affect 
the lives of millions of people, for better or worse.

The meeting will chart a course for how the world can uphold the rights of 
countries to have a say in their own development and defend themselves against 
the backlash of laws that would limit their freedoms – especially those of 
women and girls.

It will colour how development cooperation can help fight against tax evasion 
and ensure that private sector investments meet the needs of the poor.

There’s a lot at stake.

Who is your NGO hero? Tell us about the people who lit up your 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/23/who-is-your-ngo-hero-tell-us-about-the-people-who-lit-up-your-2016>
Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam> and our allies will be working 
hard at the meeting to make sure we get back on the right track to ensure all 
people – and especially the poorest – have a shot at prosperity. The need to 
stand up for justice and to protect the vulnerable has never been more 
important than now.

This blog post was originally published 
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/11/foreign-aid-fix-development-cooperation>
 on the World Economic Forum.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. 
 