
Should old buildings be left in ruins or rebuilt? Does restoration bring 
beauty back to life or is it a betrayal of truth? We’re confronted with these 
questions more than ever as digital technology makes it ever more practical to 
repair or replicate lost masterpieces. From the possibility ofresurrecting the 
tragic ruins of Palmyra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/apr/11/palmyra-isis-syria-restored-3d-printers-vandalism>
 to the more comedic tale of English Heritage upsetting Cornish antiquarians by
carving Merlin’s face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/18/this-is-not-disneyland-its-cornwall-battle-tintagel-castle>
 near Tintagel Castle, restoration is an electric issue.

Spain's concrete castle: a case of accidental genius?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2016/mar/10/spain-concrete-castle-restoration-matrera-cadiz-accidental-genius>
I like ruins. I grew up a long way from London’s art galleries but very close 
to some of the finest medieval castles in Europe. The raw, real stone ofConwy 
Castle <http://cadw.gov.wales/daysout/conwycastle/?lang=en> is to my eyes more 
moving than a tarted up “restored” castle might be. Keep ruins as they are, I 
say – don’t rebuild them. Or at least that’s what I thought before I had a 
close encounter this summer with the genius of Eugène Viollet-le-Duc.

To climb the stone spiral staircase hidden inside the walls of Notre Dame in 
Paris and emerge onto a gothic parapet high above the river Seine is to enter 
Viollet-le-Duc’s wondrous world. Grimacing gargoyles – orchimeres – crouch and 
squat all around you, their bulging stone eyes gazing on the city far below.

What medieval mind invented these hideous yet pitiable monsters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/10/monsters-bestiary-of-the-bizarre>
? In fact, they are not medieval at all. The spectacular gargoyles that swarm 
the heights of Notre Dame sprang from the mind of Viollet-le-Duc, who could not 
resist addinghis own demonic touch 
<http://www.19thc-artworldwide.org/autumn10/the-gargoyles-of-notre-dame> when 
restoring this great building in the 19th century. Was it a crime against taste 
or truth? No, it was an act of love and imagination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fruins-restoration-palmyra-viollet-le-duc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F447f8bcf42d4ddf55feab77031fe4c4333a424db%2F0_0_4200_2799%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%203D-printing%20Palmyra%20%E2%80%93%20this%20is%20how%20to%20rebuild%20ruins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fruins-restoration-palmyra-viollet-le-duc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%203D-printing%20Palmyra%20%E2%80%93%20this%20is%20how%20to%20rebuild%20ruins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fruins-restoration-palmyra-viollet-le-duc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F447f8bcf42d4ddf55feab77031fe4c4333a424db%2F0_0_4200_2799%2F4200.jpg>
 Viollet-le-Duc’s gargoyles on Notre Dame Cathedral, Paris. Photograph: Charles 
Platiau/Reuters 
Today Viollet-le-Duc’s additions to Notre Dame – which go way beyond the 
gargoyles; there’s barely a detail of its fabric he didn’t restore – are 
inseparable from its genuine medieval glory. He is, in a way, the man who 
invented the middle ages. Our sense of the strangeness and mystery of medieval 
art owes a staggering debt to this visionary architect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fruins-restoration-palmyra-viollet-le-duc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127fea2cb702596ec9cc5dd3019d64252536f377%2F0_0_1994_2637%2F1994.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%203D-printing%20Palmyra%20%E2%80%93%20this%20is%20how%20to%20rebuild%20ruins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fruins-restoration-palmyra-viollet-le-duc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%203D-printing%20Palmyra%20%E2%80%93%20this%20is%20how%20to%20rebuild%20ruins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fruins-restoration-palmyra-viollet-le-duc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127fea2cb702596ec9cc5dd3019d64252536f377%2F0_0_1994_2637%2F1994.jpg>
 Gargoyle guru ... Eugene Viollet-le-Duc Photograph: Alinari Archives/Alinari 
via Getty Images 
I didn’t intend my summer trip to France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> to be a quest for the genius of 
Viollet-le-Duc. It just turned out that way, because we happened to visit a few 
medieval monuments all of which turned out to have been creatively restored by 
this passionate lover of all things gothic.

Where would movies such as Robin Hood Prince of Thieves and countless fantasy 
board games <https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/822/carcassonne> be without 
the perfectly preserved medieval city of Carcassonne? This real life film set 
in southwest France has shiny slate roofs on its lofty turrets and a double 
ring of walls inside which huddle half timbered houses in a labyrinth of narrow 
streets. Yet as you negotiate the souvenir shops and crêperies and walk the 
romantic walls, the past you’re reliving is more complex than it looks.

This town is Viollet-le-Duc’s masterpiece. He started work on it in 1851 and 
was still making interventions there when he died in 1879. Make no mistake. 
Carcassonne is real, a superb example of medieval fortification with a dramatic 
history – it was one of the strongholds of Cathar heretics besieged in the 
Albigensian crusade. Yet by 1850 it was in a parlous state, unsafe and unloved. 
Viollet-le-Duc resurrected the past here with a sympathetic imagination that is 
still infectious today. The towers of Carcassonne resemble the imaginary 
medieval world of Game of Thrones, or aBook of Hours miniature 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tr%C3%A8s_Riches_Heures_du_Duc_de_Berry#/media/File%3ALes_Très_Riches_Heures_du_duc_de_Berry_mars.jpg>
 come to life.

Destroying priceless art is vile and offensive – but it is not a war crime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/aug/22/ahmad-al-mahdi-war-crimes-the-hague-destroying-mausoleums-timbuktu>
Viollet-le-Duc occupies a place in French culture a bit like Walter Scott and 
John Ruskin in Britain, but he had better material to work with because France 
was the greatest kingdom of medieval Europe, the source of every idea in 
medieval art. It also experienced the French Revolution, which violently cut it 
off from that past.

The achievement of Viollet-le-Duc was to reconnect France with its own soul. 
He got some things wrong. At St Sernin in Toulouse I marvelled at the purity of 
one of world’s greatest Romanesque churches. Yet it had to be saved by recent 
restorers from Viollet-le-Duc’soverenthusiastic reworkings 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basilica_of_St._Sernin,_Toulouse#/media/File%3ABasilique_Saint-Sernin_-_Toulouse.jpg>
. As for gargoyles, it’s a relief to discover in the Musée des Augustins in 
Toulouse these creatures really do originate in medieval art. It has a row of 
thesefantastic howling monsters 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2c/Mus%C3%A9e_des_Augustins_Toulouse_05.JPG>
 that date from the 13th and 14th centuries. Their hellish brutality is starker 
and scarier than Viollet-le-Duc’s gargoyles at Notre Dame.Yet the very image of 
Paris is shadowed by his winged imagination. I would not have it any other way.
 