
The former Team Sky rider Jonathan Tiernan-Locke has questioned why his former 
team allowedSir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> to take a banned drug to 
treat his asthma.

Ukad investigates ‘wrongdoing within cycling’ after Team Sky and Wiggins 
allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-ukad-investigate-wrongdoing-allegations>
Tiernan-Locke, who was sacked by Team Sky for a doping violation in 2014, told 
the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/cycling/37577688> in an interview earlier 
this week that he believes the granting of a therapeutic use exemption (TUE) to 
take triamcinolone before Wiggins’s 2012 Tour de France win “looks suspicious”.

“I don’t want to insinuate anything, but the timing doesn’t look great,” he 
said. “You assume if you had a need for such a thing it would be consistent 
throughout his career, that you’d use it year in year out, so from that point 
of view it looks suspicious.

“But from the other perspective, we’ve got a guy who’s favourite for the 
general classification in these big races, so for a team like Sky who are so 
thorough, they don’t want to leave anything to chance so why risk these 
allergies derailing their best-laid plans, so I understand it.”

Tiernan-Locke also alleged that Great Britain’s cyclists were offered a 
controversial painkiller at the 2012 road world championships – even if they 
did not have a medical problem. “There was a time I rode the world 
championships and we were offered a painkiller called tramadol,” he said.

“I wasn’t in any pain so I didn’t need to take it, and that was offered freely 
around. It just didn’t sit well with me at the time. I thought: ‘I’m not in any 
pain, why would I want a painkiller?’”

On Friday, UK Anti-Doping said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-ukad-investigate-wrongdoing-allegations>
 it is examining an “allegation of wrongdoing within cycling”. The announcement 
came as the Daily Mail reported Ukad is investigating Team Sky and Sir Bradley 
Wiggins over the contents of a medical package.

Sir Dave Brailsford puts up stout defence but questions hang in the air
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/sir-dave-brailsford-stout-defence-team-sky-bradley-wiggins>
When asked if Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> has been 
tainted, Tiernan-Locke said: “That’s a difficult one. For me, not personally. 
What Bradley won in the run up to that 2012 Tour de France win I personally 
believe it’s a case of preventing anything that might have derailed their 
plans, but I do think they have become tainted.

“People I have spoken to, out of training, it has kind of tainted their image 
somewhat. I think their modus operandi was to put things out in the public 
domain and look transparent and not have anything to hide. It’s somewhat less 
than transparent.”

Now 31, Tiernan-Locke was banned for two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/17/jonathan-tiernan-locke-ban-sacked-team-sky-cycling>
 and sacked by Team Sky in July 2014 after violation of the biological passport 
held by the UCI, cycling’s governing body – the first time any British athlete 
has been sanctioned in this way.
 