
A former Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
union boss and stateLabor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> powerbroker has been 
hit with corruption charges after allegedly receiving more than $400,000 of 
work to his home in return for industrial harmony with a construction giant.

David Hanna, 52, was charged on Thursday with soliciting and receiving secret 
commissions from an agent, after being referred to a joint Queensland and 
federal police taskforce by theroyal commission into trade union governance and 
corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-trade-union-governance-and-corruption>
.

Hanna, a former state president of the Construction, Forestry, Mining and 
Energy Union <https://www.cfmeu.org.au/>, is accused of colluding with two 
former Mirvac managers to organise free renovations on his Cornubia home, south 
of Brisbane, in 2012 and 2013.

Police allege the work was performed by subcontractors paid to work on other 
building projects, as part of a deal for CFMEU cooperation with Mirvac over a 
shopping centre project at Springfield in the city’s south-west.

Former Mirvac Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> construction director 
Adam Moore, 53, and project manager Mathew McAllum, 41, were also charged with 
secret commission offences on Thursday.

The state of Queensland last Friday launched a legal bid to freeze Hanna’s 
property, estimated to be worth about $1.6m, under the Criminal Proceeds 
Confiscation Act.

A conviction for organising or receiving illegal secret commissions can bring 
up to seven years in jail.

Queensland police in a statement said they estimated “the quantum of benefit 
to the Shailer Park man was in excess of $400,000”.

Hanna, who quit the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> last year, is due to 
appear in the Brisbane magistrates court on 25 January along with Moore and 
McAllum.

Hanna did not return calls.
 