
Fortnum & Mason has said sales of its monogrammed hampers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/14/fortnum-mason-rise-in-christmas-sales-bumper-year-hampers>
 have risen by 20% this Christmas despite fierce competition from a cheaper 
rival.

Last month, Aldi raised eyebrows with the launch of its “Exquisite” hampers 
<http://www.foodbev.com/news/aldi-sets-sights-on-upmarket-retailers-with-new-luxury-hampers/>
 filled with Christmas puddings, truffles and chocolates in mint green 
packaging, the colour the Fortnum’s brand is most associated with, and selling 
for less than £100.

Fortnum’s chief executive, Ewan Venters, said: “We’ve been selling hampers for 
almost 300 years and are the undisputed king of hampers. I would like to thank 
the board ofAldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> for all they are 
doing to generate publicity for our hampers. Sales are up 20%.”

Fortnum’s hampers typically cost between £150 and £250, but it also sells a 
£6,000 version containing Beluga caviar, foie gras en croûte and Cristal 
champagne. Venters said the retailer had recorded an increase in overseas 
hamper orders this year as wealthy food-lovers cash in on the weak pound.

The company, founded in 1707 and best known for its flagship store in 
Piccadilly, central London, said an overall 17% increase in hamper sales had 
contributed to another record financial performance, with pre-tax profit up by 
27% to £6.2m in the year to July.

Sales increased by 12% to £98.7m. Fortnum’s, which holds two royal warrants, 
is owned by the Weston family, which has a majority stake in Associated British 
Foods.

Venters said the retailer was anticipating a successful Christmas trading 
period, but there would be “no hiding” fromfood price inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/uk-inflation-rises-near-two-year-high-consumer-price-index>
 in the new year, withmanufacturers seeking increases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/17/marmite-is-the-first-sign-of-cost-of-brexit-for-food-producers>
 of between 5% and 10%. Fortnum’s deals with 1,000 UK suppliers and Venters 
said they had all been affected by the decrease in thevalue of sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/pound-trump-euro-brexit-sterling>
 since the Brexit vote.
 