
Video game writing is still something of a misunderstood art form. Can’t you 
just pluck someone out of whatever breeding pool Michael Bay incubates his 
screen writers in? Surely telling a story is the same in any medium – you just 
call up some scruffy, caffeine-crazed underfed, and watch them work their dark 
art on your sprawling epic, right?

Hold your dismissive rhetorical tone, I’d say to me. It’s not quite that 
simple.


Not all writers have the flexibility to move from one medium to another. The 
switch from novels to comic books, for example, is one of the most brutal 
transitions. The Wicked and the Divine writer Kieron Gillen describes a comics 
script as a “love letter” to the artist, a document designed to woo your 
illustrator into a trancelike state that makes them want to draw your demented 
witterings. But it is a love letter that is often split into issues and pages 
and panels, ruthlessly cut up and structured, which to the long-form fan feels 
like pinning down your childhood pet and slicing it into neat compartments.

Writing for games is similar, but stranger still. You sometimes write a script 
for hundreds of people who are trying to help you out. You plot the beginning, 
middle and end, yet often the story is shaped by a structure that is defined by 
levels, maps and technological innovation. The “innovation” is not always a new 
platform, it can be a new design idea that the creator(s) want to show off. 
Often it’s not even a set of verbs that the game creators have finished 
experimenting with. The writing job becomes like wrestling some writhing 
chimera that keeps growing new heads.

With this in mind, here are four games that handle story really well – and how 
they do it.

Brothers: A Tale Of Two Sons

In this beautiful game by Starbreeze Studios, the design innovation is that 
you control two young brothers at the same time. A narrative designer’s job is 
to find ways to demonstrate what that means. When you make those two boys solve 
problems, cope with hardships, and attempt to address the loss at the centre of 
their story, what does it mean to the player to have simultaneous control over 
both? And how can you sculpt their relationship so that your player understands 
the two characters? How do you say to the player that each brother addresses 
life differently?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F333bbeab9712f7c6e1fe439f75fb9a6636490156%2F46_0_927_556%2F927.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20games%20that%20tell%20great%20stories%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20they%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20games%20that%20tell%20great%20stories%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20they%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F333bbeab9712f7c6e1fe439f75fb9a6636490156%2F46_0_927_556%2F927.jpg>
 Brothers: A Tale Of Two Sons Photograph: Starbreeze Studios 
Ultimately, one of the best ways that Brothers shows its skill in narrative 
design is by hardly using words at all. It uses actions – or “verbs”: when the 
older brother chooses to interact with a person he might help them, when the 
younger brother interacts with him he might play a trick on them. Both 
interactions are initiated by the player but defined by character. In the first 
instance, a player may also feel more warmth toward the older brother, and in 
the second feel guilt that they allowed the young whippersnapper to trick an 
old man. You learn to read how your characters will react, and learn to feel 
attached to them as much as you are responsible for them, because you are 
employing their verbs.

Journey
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe414d9ed59642cd08332ff7d8ce5adad05eecbe3%2F78_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20games%20that%20tell%20great%20stories%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20they%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20games%20that%20tell%20great%20stories%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20they%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe414d9ed59642cd08332ff7d8ce5adad05eecbe3%2F78_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Journey Photograph: Thatgamecompany 
In the award-winning adventure from ThatGameCompany, the verbs of the game are 
always the same: press a button to jump and fly, press a button to sing, get 
cloth, or light a stone. This makes the story more about what the environment 
and score tell you: the bright, fizzy sands of the desert fluff up in front of 
you in the sun, the dark corridors where snake monsters lurk, the freezing, 
treacle-slow trek up a snow-dredged mountain … these are all emotions. The 
player feels them just by walking or jumping through the virtual landscape.

In Journey there’s an optional, equally mute co-operative player who may join 
your experience via internet: sometimes it is a story of tragedy, as the other 
player leaves you to your lonely doom to go off alone. Or, they might jump and 
chime to you at every collectible, show you how to hide from every monstrous 
serpent, join you in the difficult press through the hopeless snow.

Journey’s world is your conductor, the player is an orchestra of one - you 
slip and staccato through the notes. Journey is more than a beautiful landscape 
on which you can stick your androgynous fuzzy felt character, and somehow it is 
simply that too. The story is the world.

Half-Life
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc19b9ca1a042876112fd59347521a484dfdb0480%2F0_96_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20games%20that%20tell%20great%20stories%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20they%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20games%20that%20tell%20great%20stories%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20they%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc19b9ca1a042876112fd59347521a484dfdb0480%2F0_96_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Half-Life Photograph: Valve 
Returning to comics, the author Warren Ellis is an exceptional talent at 
contextualising plot within the opening two or three pages, often merely 
visually, without signposting it, which is a considerable challenge in 
video-game world building.

One of the most famous openings to a game is Half-Life, and it’s for a good 
reason: the team thought about how to introduce the player to a world, and how 
to make that world both intimidate and dangerous to the player, without having 
to spend a lot of money on cutscenes. So they put you on a rollercoaster 
carriage into the dark to show you how messed up commutes get in the near 
future.

It’s also quite Spielberg-esque in the tension stakes: the player has control 
over the character’s movement, but the rhetorical effect of being stuck in a 
moving carriage going into a bunker-like lab full of radioactive slime and 
automated robots is that you become terrified of the prospect of your own role 
at the end. You know something is going to go wrong, and the more things you 
see and hear, the more you just want to know what the heck your verbs are going 
to be once you get out of the train car. That’s good intro.

Full Throttle
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa48e9392603625770eb4284a6543ee9aaaa1bdf7%2F0_12_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20games%20that%20tell%20great%20stories%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20they%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20games%20that%20tell%20great%20stories%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20they%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Ffour-games-that-tell-great-stories-and-how-they-do-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa48e9392603625770eb4284a6543ee9aaaa1bdf7%2F0_12_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Full Throttle Photograph: LucasArts 
Dialogue can be one of the strongest elements in a game, something that will 
often save the whole thing from one or two key mistakes in other areas.

The classic LucasArts adventure Full Throttle has one of the best opening 
lines of any video game ever made:

“Whenever I smell asphalt, I think of Maureen.”

This concise phrase, written by veteran game designer Tim Schafer, does many 
different things at once. At the mention of asphalt, the player knows they are 
dealing with characters whose lives are centred around roads. A lesser talent 
might well have gone for, “I’ve been around roads all my life,” for example, 
but that’s very boring and obvious. And not funny.

From this line, the player also understands that Maureen is a significant 
character in the story, perhaps a main character, or a character you must find. 
And they also understand that Maureen herself is connected to asphalt – a 
mechanic, a biker, a woman who is the journey itself?

Lastly, it is evocative of road images and sensations: it has a smell, this 
line, you smell asphalt, you smell what the game wants you to smell, you 
understand the speaker, whose entire life is asphalt, riding on it, being 
scraped by it, lying on it, looking at it.

So later, when you hit that literal brick wall-kicking puzzle (you know the 
one I mean if you’ve played the game) the player forgives it – because the 
writing is so good, the characters are so strong, the plot is so nicely put 
together. The writing sells Full Throttle. It’s still one of the only games I 
remember the ending of. It makes you want to open that next door, brick walls 
be damned.

In conclusion: understanding the verbs of narrative conflict

So often, the emphasis in video games marketing is on violence system at the 
core of the product; narrative designers, then, are viewed as the people who 
sew an emotional stitch through the levels to hold the thing together. But time 
and time again, players really turn up for the moment in which a story about a 
character or a world comes to the fore. In the recent smash hit indie game 
Undertale, for example, the innovation is the twist on the old JRPG battle 
system: what if, for one moment, you could talk to the monsters? It’s a clever, 
stylish narrative innovation that masquerades as a nod and a wink.

Shooting is the easiest way to put conflict into a virtual world, but the 
violence of our everyday lives is (hopefully) not always physical. Sometimes it 
is the violence of being let down, snuffing out the story we are making for 
ourselves. Sometimes a bully might hit us with verbal abuse, a good friend 
might get sick, you might be fired from your job. In life, these are problems 
that can be solved by a different kind of narrative interaction than merely 
punching someone in the face – there is room for games to explore that.

Much more can be done in games to give characters the ability to have you 
fight back - not just with shooting, but with other verbs - talking, solving, 
finding, making, building, creating, supporting, things that games like 
Minecraft are centred around. These too can be innovations in the game sphere, 
and many recent successes, particularly in the indie field, such as Firewatch, 
use those other verbs. Kindness, resilience, confidence, empathy, social 
acumen, tact: these can be interesting and fun to learn too.

The Ubisoft developer Liz England once wrote that in a team of game creators 
your role can be explained by what you dowith a virtual door 
<http://www.lizengland.com/blog/2014/04/the-door-problem/>. The narrative 
designer makes the player want to open the door. In general, life too is about 
what is going to happen tomorrow, and making sure you want to get there. The 
door question is much more complex than anyone thinks. It’s a mirror, but you 
have to make people think it’s a door.
 