
I am so proud to be a woman working in tech. Thanks to the digital revolution 
women are equipped and empowered to effect change like never before.

The internet has been central to driving the fourth wave of feminism – through 
factors such as exchange of information, access to investment opportunities and 
the democratisation of data. Now other emerging technologies have the potential 
to have a similarly profound effect.

The likes of virtual reality and 3D printing are a long way from finding the 
killer app that will makes them commercially attractive, but people and 
organisations are already using this technology in ways that positively impact 
upon women’s lives.


The virtual reality empathy effect 

It may not have hit the mainstream quite yet (though that could well change 
this year) but the potential offered by virtual reality technology is vast – 
both for commercial applications and those with a more social-oriented, 
not-for-profit purpose. For the latter, it’s all about the potential to 
generate empathy through immersion. What better way to promote understanding of 
a cause than parachuting potential supporters into the centre of it?

The award-winning VR film Clouds Over Sidra <https://vrse.com/watch/id/21/>, 
which follows the daily routine of a young Syrian girl in a Jordanian refugee 
camp, was funded by the United Nations as part of a campaign to highlight the 
plight of vulnerable, dispossessed communities. MeanwhileThe Kiya project 
<http://www.emblematicgroup.com/#/kiya/> takes the same immersive approach and 
applies it to domestic violence, by placing viewers in a story of a woman 
suffering from abuse, allowing them to see the situation through her own eyes.

 The empathetic potential of VR isn’t just being utilised to raise awareness, 
it is being used in situational training too. Last year Torbay hospitalcreated 
a virtual reality film 
<http://www.torbayandsouthdevon.nhs.uk/about-us/news-and-publications/press-release/2015/04/torbay-hospital-first-to-use-virtual-reality-technology-to-improve-patient-experience/>
 following a patient’s journey from ambulance to operating theatre, allowing 
doctors to share and appreciate a patient’s experience and potentially 
re-assess their patient-handling approaches. It’s easy to see how a similar 
approach could be used with frontline workers who have to interact with 
vulnerable women who have experienced violence or abuse.

3D printing empowering African women


This technology boasts life-saving credentials 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/innovations/wp/2016/03/07/3-ways-in-which-a-3d-printer-may-one-day-save-your-life/>
 and is even being heralded as thesaviour of the high street bank 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03lzxlm>. And even though we are a long way 
from the reality of a 3D printer nestling in a corner in every home, the 
technology is already starting to directly touch women’s lives. Research has 
found that take-up of artisanal 3D printing is moreprevalent among women than 
men 
<http://www.intel.co.uk/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/reports/makers-report-girls-women.pdf>
.

 Coming from the more commercial end of the spectrum is the Mink device, a 
pen-like digital printer that can create cosmetics of any shade. It’s not going 
to change the world, but it’s empowering to be able to choose and create 
nonetheless.

At the other end of scale, there is African NGO the Youth For Technology 
Foundation’s3D Africa project 
<http://www.youthfortechnology.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/3DAfrica_FactSheet1.pdf>
. Based around bringing new fabrication technologies into the classroom and 
wider communities, the initiative primarily targets young women. YTF’s founder, 
Njideka Harry, is keen to stress that it’s only not only about educating 
students about the intricacies of digital design but also their parents and 
guardians about its potential.


Five ways tech is crowdsourcing women’s empowerment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/03/five-ways-tech-crowdsourcing-womens-empowerment>
Taking on the Zika virus

The ease with which location-specific information can be shared – and analysed 
– has been one of the cornerstones of the digital age. The ability to 
accurately gather data, analyse it and then disseminate the findings in real 
time has countless applications. Also, the democratising principles of
crowd-sourcing that data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/03/five-ways-tech-crowdsourcing-womens-empowerment>
 lends the information a trustworthiness that can be critical in the pro-social 
sphere.

At the start of this month, for example, Google announced a new partnership 
with Unicef aimed at mapping, and ultimately halting, the spread of the Zika 
virus among pregnant women in Latin America. The open-source platform gathers 
data from a range of sources, including user-generated data, to create an 
accurate situational awareness of the Zika virus that 10 years ago would have 
been denied to the organisations combating the virus and those at risk from it. 
It is hoped that by analysing patterns and trends, governments and NGOs could 
better target their resources.


Unmanned aerial vehicles 

The delivery potential of drones isn’t necessarily limited to missiles and 
cheap books. California tech outfit Matternethas already conducted field trials 
<http://ideas.ted.com/6-ways-drones-can-be-used-for-good/> based around 
delivering medical supplies in Haiti, while a similar distribution trial in the 
Dominican Republic saw drones deliver medicines from healthcare hubs into small 
centres in remote, inaccessible areas, and return laden with samples taken by 
doctors ready to be analysed in a central lab.


In Germany, meanwhile, where abortion medication is legal activists used a 
droneto deliver abortion pills 
<http://www.womenonwaves.org/en/page/5806/abortion-drone-flight-success> across 
the border into Poland, where such medication is banned. While this second 
example may be more about activism than providing genuine medical utility – 
highlighting the way women on one side of a river have the right to choose 
while those on the other do not – it shows how this technology can be adapted 
to non-commercial purposes that help forward the women’s agenda.

Amanda McKenna is a partner at digital agency Zone 
<https://www.zonedigital.com/uk/>. 


Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.



 