
Foxtons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/foxtons> has unveiled a sharp 
drop in profits and has warned that housing sales would decline in the year 
ahead if demand for properties fails to pick up.

The London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> estate agent’s trading 
update added to fears over the state of the capital’s housing market, and 
traders were quick to offload shares in the company. Foxtons’ shares plummeted 
12% to 87p after the update was released, ending the day down 3.3% at 95.75p.

Those shares were valued at 230p when the business floated in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/10/foxtons-estate-agents-ftse-250-index>
 and hit 373p in early 2014.

Prices in central London’s top postcodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/17/house-prices-drop-london-luxury-postcodes>
, where Foxtons mainly operates, have fallen sharply in recent months. In order 
to reduce its reliance on central London, the company has been pushing into the 
capital’s outer areas such as Peckham and Vauxhall.

UK house price average surges by £4,000 in December
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/uk-house-prices-surge-4000-pounds-december-2016>
Nic Budden, its chief executive, said 2016 had been a challenging year, with 
revenues falling to £133m from £150m in 2015 after a significant drop in sales. 
Underlying earnings for the full year are expected to be £25m, down from £46m a 
year earlier.

“Looking ahead, we expect trading conditions to remain challenging in 2017. 
Should current levels of sales activity continue in the short term, it is 
likely that 2017 volumes will be below those in 2016,” he said.

A company spokesman said Foxtons had been hit by uncertainty caused by the 
Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/25/homebuyers-wobble-in-wake-of-brexit-vote>
, affecting foreign buyers in particular; the impact of lastApril’s 3% stamp 
duty rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/17/stamp-duty-rush-boosts-march-house-prices-ons>
 on the top end of the market; and general affordability issues, with rising 
house prices faroutstripping wage growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/16/average-uk-house-price-reaches-288000>
 in recent years.

Figures published last month by mortgage lender Nationwide showed house prices 
in London last year grew at aslower rate than the national average 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/29/house-prices-rise-by-45-in-2016-says-nationwide>
 for the first time in eight years.

Taylor Wimpey, one of Britain’s biggest housebuilders, said on Wednesday that 
lower selling prices in central London had also affected its performance, 
sending its shares 2.5% lower to 170.6p.

Budden said Foxtons was resilient against market cycles and had a strong 
balance sheet with no debt. “As the most recognised residential brand in 
London, we are uniquely positioned to manage through the market uncertainties 
and take advantage of any change in conditions,” he added.

The company’s lettings business performed better than sales in the fourth 
quarter, with revenue unchanged at about £13m as the number of new tenants fell 
but existing tenants renewed their contracts. But analysts at Peel Hunt said 
the government’sproposed ban on letting fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/22/philip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing>
 could lead to further pressure on profits.

Anthony Codling, analyst at the investment bank Jefferies, said 2017 would be 
a tougher year for Foxtons than 2016.

“Foxtons have said what most of London was already thinking, the housing sales 
market has slowed since a certain EU referendum, macroeconomic uncertainty has 
led to a fall in housing transactions and renters in sympathy seem to be 
staying put for longer. We are reducing our [earnings] estimates today, but 
Foxtons remains a fighter and its focus on cash should be rewarded.”

Foxtons, which opened its first branch in Notting Hill Gate, west London, in 
1981, now has 65 branches. It has scaled back new office openings this year, 
but is planning to open two more in outer London – Wembley and Wood Green – by 
the end of March.

The company will publish its 2016 results on 8 March.
 