
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is set to say au revoir to 
the couchette, as the country’s department of transport prepares to withdraw 
overnight train routes from Paris.

The French government, which owns the national rail operator SNCF, has said 
sleeper trains are too expensive to run; it has withdrawn financial support and 
invited bids to run the services. But unless a proposal is received by 1 July 
all but three of the dozen or so overnight services will be axed. The only 
remaining Intercités de Nuit will be from Paris to Briançon, Rodez and 
Latour-de-Carol, routes deemed socially necessary, according to rail websiteThe 
Man in Seat Sixty-one <http://www.seat61.com/index.html>.

The news is a further nail in the coffin for sleeper trains across Europe, and 
amajor blow for any travellers trying to reduce their carbon emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/18/save-night-trains-ticket-daughter-rail-greenest-travel-europe-sleeper-services>
. Overnight services between France and Germany hit the buffers in December 
2014 when Deutsche Bahn, the German rail provider, closed its night service 
between Paris and Berlin, Hamburg and Munich. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/12/europe-night-trains-sleeper-service>

A year earlier, night time connections between Paris and Madrid and Barcelona, 
run jointly by SNCF and the Spanish rail provider Renfe, were withdrawn when 
the high-speed TGV service between the French capital and Barcelona was 
introduced.

“The economics are stacked against night trains – once you add [competition 
from] budget airlines and hefty track access fees,” said Mark Smith founder of
The Man in Seat Sixty-one <http://www.seat61.com/index.html>.


However, Smith also said that new high-speed services, cited as one reason for 
closures, were not always a useful substitute for night trains: “Paris-Madrid 
still takes eight hours, so it makes sense to do it overnight – but you can’t.”

Daniel Elkan, who runs Snowcarbon.co.uk <http://snowcarbon.co.uk/> which 
promotes rail travel from the UK to Alpine ski resorts, believes more skiers 
would use night trains to the slopes if they knew about them. “Poor marketing 
of the overnight services by the train companies means that many skiers are 
unaware or have difficultly finding out about them; and much to the frustration 
of skiers, these journeys consistently go on sale later than they are supposed 
to.”

Tickets are currently still on sale for night train bookings beyond July 
although Smith said their survival is unlikely. Nevertheless, he has backed a
petition launched by Snowcarbon 
<https://www.change.org/p/sncf-save-the-french-sleeper-trains> calling on the 
French government to save the night trains, even if it means reducing the 
services to once a week.

Across Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> it looks 
increasingly like the era of the night train is coming to an end. Smith’s The 
Man in Seat Sixty-one website now reflects the lack of overnight services, with 
popular France and Spain pages focusing on day trains.

“It’s a bit like going back to the end of the 19th century – before George 
Nagelmackers founded theCompagnie Internationale des Wagon-Lits 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compagnie_Internationale_des_Wagons-Lits>,” said 
Smith.

In contrast, the UK is investing in sleeper services with 75 new coaches being 
introduced on the Caledonian Sleeper routes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/06/an-elegy-for-the-sleeper-train-a-waning-symbol-that-serco-has-made-into-a-brand>
 between London and Scotland in 2018, and amajor upgrade on the Night Riviera 
service between London and Penzance. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/30/night-paddington-penzance-sleeper-train>

• This article was amended on 10 May to include a link to the Snowcarbon 
petition.
 