
Steph Hoy has been following the news about the French fuel strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/french-police-water-cannon-strikers-marseille-fos-sur-mer>
 anxiously. On Thursday evening she is driving her 1960s Morris Minor to 
Portsmouth to catch the ferry to Cherbourg and begin a tour across France. Her 
car might have stood the test of time … but it still needs petrol. And right 
now, France is not coming across as the most inviting destination for a road 
trip.

“I’m pretty nervous,” she says. “If you look at the news, all you see is 
disgruntled workers burning piles of tyres and rioting.”

The transport problems began last week after a dispute between unions and the 
government over labour reforms broke down, leading to blockades at oil 
refineries and 20% of the country’s 12,500 fuel pumps running towards empty. 
With the British bank holiday weekend looming and the Euro 2016 football 
tournament three weeks away, thousands of travellers are bracing themselves for 
the worst.

As a result, Hoy’s packing list now goes beyond the 1979 French road map she 
found in a charity shop for the trip.

“We’ve got oil, coolant, lots of car spares, string, black tape and rope. 
We’re also packing food and water as, let’s face it, if you’re heading 
somewhere where petrol is scarce and no one is driving, supermarket 
distributors aren’t going to be racing to restock the shelves. We’re also 
planning on sneaking a jerrycan of fuel onto the ferry.”

She adds: “I fully anticipate it will be like a war zone once we cross over 
and I’m trying to look after us all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ffrance-fuel-strike-leads-to-tourist-anxiety-ahead-of-bank-holiday-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5732d9069db79ceab267f54b3bd2cfb755475711%2F0_293_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=France%20fuel%20strike%20leads%20to%20tourist%20anxiety%20ahead%20of%20bank%20holiday%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ffrance-fuel-strike-leads-to-tourist-anxiety-ahead-of-bank-holiday-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=France%20fuel%20strike%20leads%20to%20tourist%20anxiety%20ahead%20of%20bank%20holiday%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Ffrance-fuel-strike-leads-to-tourist-anxiety-ahead-of-bank-holiday-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5732d9069db79ceab267f54b3bd2cfb755475711%2F0_293_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Striking workers set up a burning barricade to block access to the harbour of 
Saint-Nazaire in western France, on May 24, 2016. Photograph: Jean-Sebastien 
Evrard/AFP/Getty Images 
The fuel shortage situation, which started in the north but has since spread 
across the country, is bad enough to have prompted the UK Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office to updateits travel advice for France 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/france>. It warns travellers that 
fuel-purchasing restrictions have been put in place by local authorities in 
some parts of France, and fuel rationing may be imposed.

The RAC has warned that although it helped a number of members in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> to find fuel last week, this kind of 
rescue will no longer be possible.

“Anyone currently in France is going to struggle to find fuel for their return 
journey and probably should not even attempt to get home unless they can do so 
on one tank,” said RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams. “We suspect finding 
somewhere to fill up in the worst affected areas will be extremely difficult.”

His advice to drivers is: “If you are just about to go to France, you should 
fill up in the UK before your crossing to give you the best chance of reaching 
your destination in one go. If you are travelling a very long distance, you 
will obviously need to refuel, which could mean a long wait at a service 
station due to rationing in some areas. Motorists should also be mindful of not 
running out of fuel and finding themselves stranded.”

P&O Ferries says that drivers can bring up to five litres of spare fuel on 
board with them, provided it is in an approved container.

Guardian Travel has heard from several UK travellers who are considering 
cancelling trips for half-term and Euro 2016, or looking into alternative forms 
of transport. There have also been reports of tourists becoming stranded.

Niall O’Reilly, who runs the French Dining School in Brittany, says the petrol 
strikes are causing “havoc” for the school and its clients.

“Queuing for petrol can take over an hour and this has delayed our cooking 
schedule twice this week,” he says, adding that not only do most of its clients 
arrive by hire car, but that the school relies on vehicles to get its 
ingredients.

“None of our students have cancelled, as yet, as the problem has only recently 
become evident and we hope the issue will be resolved before our next cooking 
course in June,” says O’Reilly. “In the meantime we are depending on our 
network of friends and neighbours to tip us off about the situation at local 
petrol stations and keeping our menu flexible.”
 