
In the early 1950s the anthropologist Francis Huxley, who has died aged 93, 
undertook pioneering fieldwork among the Urubu people of the Amazon basin. The 
resulting book,Affable Savages 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Affable-savages-anthropologist-Indians-Francis-x/dp/B000OJ0OWG>
 (1956), adopted a new, “reflexive” approach to the study of culture in which 
the author’s encounters with the “other” are reflected as much in personal 
reactions as in objective descriptions.

Francis was a pioneer of this form of anthropological writing – a style that 
much suited his lifelong interest in shamanism and the altered states of 
consciousness often experienced by religious healers. While this novelesque way 
of writing was largely shunned by his contemporaries, eventually it became 
commonplace.

In the meantime, apart from a period as a lecturer and research fellow at St 
Catherine’s College, Oxford (1962-68), Francis followed his own path outside 
the academic mainstream. InThe Invisibles: Voodoo Gods in Haiti 
<https://www.amazon.com/Invisibles-Voodoo-Gods-Haiti/dp/0070315604> (1969), he 
described vividly his encounter with possession, magic and psychic healing; and 
in The Way of the Sacred (1974) he expanded this personal perspective on 
healing to include the study of myths, religious rites and sacred symbolism. 
While Francis’s interests were diverse –The Raven and the Writing Desk 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Raven-Writing-Desk-Francis-Huxley/dp/0060121130> 
(1976) was a study of the riddles of Lewis Carroll – his fascination with 
sacred healing remained constant. With his fellow anthropologist, Jeremy Narby, 
he co-edited Shamans Through Time (2001), a collection of five centuries of 
writing on the subject.

Francis was also an activist for the indigenous peoples he studied and loved. 
A Sunday Times article byNorman Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jul/23/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
 in 1969 had pointed to the killing of the native peoples of the Amazon basin 
and the taking of their land, prompting Francis, along with several other 
anthropologists and the explorerRobin Hanbury-Tenison 
<http://www.robinsbooks.co.uk/>, to found Survival International 
<http://www.survivalinternational.org/info>, an NGO devoted to protecting the 
rights of indigenous peoples worldwide. Over the years Survival International 
has provided a platform for exposing genocide, violence, slavery and 
exploitation.

In 1972 Francis was a member of a four-person mission, sponsored by the 
Aborigines’ Protection Society and aided by the Brazilian government 
<http://www.penn.museum/sites/expedition/peoples-who-perish/>, to investigate 
the plight of Native South American tribes. Their report, Tribes of the Amazon 
Basin in Brazil (1973), identified groups threatened by Brazilian economic 
expansion and described the sad impact on their religious, spiritual and 
psychological health and wellbeing.

Born in Oxford, Francis was the son of Julian Huxley, the noted biologist and 
first director general of Unesco, and his Swiss wife, Juliette (nee Baillot), a 
writer and sculptor. He joined a remarkable dynasty that included Julian’s 
brother, the author Aldous Huxley, and half-brother, the physiologist and Nobel 
laureateAndrew Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/may/31/sir-andrew-huxley>. Francis 
was also the great-grandson of Charles Darwin’s friend Thomas Henry Huxley, and 
as a child knew such luminaries as Bertrand Russell and TE Lawrence.

Educated at Gordonstoun, the school in Moray, Scotland founded in 1934 by the 
educationistKurt Hahn <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-35603975> after he 
left Germany, Francis joined the Royal Navy in 1943 as assistant navigating 
officer on HMS Ramilles. In 1946 he went to Balliol College, Oxford, where he 
gained a degree in zoology, working under Peter Medawar, who regretted that 
Francis did not continue in that field.

In 1958, while undertaking an anthropological study of Weyburn hospital, 
Saskatchewan, Francis participated inHumphrey Osmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/feb/26/mentalhealth.guardianobituaries>
’s research on the therapeutic value of LSD for alcohol addiction. Indeed, 
Francis was the family’s true pioneer of the psyche, countingthe radical 
psychoanalyst RD Laing <https://www.theguardian.com/books/rd-laing> amongst his 
closest friends. As director of studies at Laing’s London-basedPhiladelphia 
Association <http://www.philadelphia-association.com/> (1972-82), Francis acted 
as teacher, supervisor, therapist, and writer. In 1984 he returned to Oxford to 
give a well received lecture on Psychoanalysis and Anthropology.

He retired to New Mexico in 1990, and to California in 2006. The Mutual Self, 
his last unfinished book, is a musing on the fact that: “We swim in a sea of 
mutualities whether we like it or not, and mutuality changes us as we change 
each other.”

Though his third marriage, to Adele Getty, ended in divorce – as did his first 
two – she looked after him throughout his final decade. Above all, Francis will 
be remembered for his insatiable desire to know things and for his wholesome 
and robust laugh.

• Francis Huxley, anthropologist and author, born 28 August 1923; died 29 
October 2016
 