
Fremantle has bowed to pressure from the federal government and agreed to 
reinstate its citizenship ceremony onAustralia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day>.

The federal government and the Western Australian city council have been 
embroiled in a public spat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/australia-day-government-could-block-fremantle-from-moving-citizenship-ceremony>
 over the latter’s plans to hold its citizenship ceremonies on its “culturally 
inclusive alternative” to Australia Day, which Fremantle named One Day.

Fremantle council had intended to stand its ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/australia-day-row-fremantle-to-fight-ban-on-one-day-citizenship-ceremony>
.

But on Thursday Alex Hawke, the federal assistant immigration minister, 
informed the council it could not hold the ceremonies “under any circumstances” 
and imposed a 5pm deadline for their reply.

Fremantle conceded, with new citizens to be given the option of attending a 
ceremony on 26 January or 14 March.

Australia Day row: Fremantle to fight ban on 'One Day' citizenship ceremony
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/australia-day-row-fremantle-to-fight-ban-on-one-day-citizenship-ceremony>
The mayor, Brad Pettitt, told WA Today 
<http://www.watoday.com.au/wa-news/citizenship-stoush-fremantle-forced-to-back-down-after-turnbull-government-threat-20161208-gt7fqd.html>
 an informal ceremony would be held at the One Day event on 28 January “in 
recognition of the many migrants who have chosen to make Fremantle their home”.

He said new citizens had told him they would be happy to have their new status 
conferred at the One Day event, and he had received “strong support from our 
community, and beyond, about this decision”.

“This was never about the timing of the citizenship ceremony – it was included 
in the One Day program, as we felt that new citizens would enjoy the 
opportunity to be welcomed to our community at such a large and exciting event.”

Fremantle announced plans for One Day, on 28 January, early this year out of 
respect for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who regard 26 January 
as Invasion Day.


It said the event was not intended to be a political statement, but rather, a 
celebration of “the wonderful and diverse place in which we live”.

“This was never about the citizenship ceremony,” Pettitt told ABC radio on 
Friday.

Hawke had said a citizenship ceremony on One Day “would be a serious breach of 
the Australian citizenship ceremonies code with respect to ceremonies being 
apolitical”, and threatened to revoke the council’s ability to preside over 
them.

In a statement on Friday, he commended Pettitt for his “commonsense decision”.

“Australia Day is our national day and is a perfectly appropriate and suitable 
choice for an Australian citizenship ceremony to be held.”

Greens MLC Lynn MacLaren called the government’s stoush with Fremantle “petty 
and ridiculous” on Thursday, particularly in the face of strong public support.
 