
France has become the first country in the world to ban supermarkets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets> from throwing away or 
destroying unsold food, forcing them instead to donate it to charities andfood 
banks <https://www.theguardian.com/society/food-banks>.

Under a law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/22/france-to-force-big-supermarkets-to-give-away-unsold-food-to-charity>
 passed unanimously by the French senate, as of Wednesday large shops will no 
longer bin good quality food approaching its best-before date. Charities will 
be able to give out millions more free meals each year to people struggling to 
afford to eat.

The law follows a grassroots campaign in France by shoppers, anti-poverty 
campaigners and those opposed tofood waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/26/world-leaders-urged-to-tackle-food-waste-to-save-billions-and-cut-emissions>
. The campaign, which led to a petition, was started by the councillorArash 
Derambarsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/25/french-supermarkets-donate-food-waste-global-law-campaign>
. In December a bill on the issue passed through the national assembly, having 
been introduced by the former food industry minister Guillaume Garot.

French 'food waste' councillor calls on EC to adopt supermarkets law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/09/french-food-waste-councillor-calls-on-ec-supermarkets-law>
Campaigners now hope to persuade the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/09/french-food-waste-councillor-calls-on-ec-supermarkets-law>
 to adopt similar legislation across member states.

The law has been welcomed by food banks, which will now begin the task of 
finding the extra volunteers, lorries, warehouse and fridge space to deal with 
an increase in donations from shops and food companies.

Supermarkets <https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets> will also be 
barred from deliberately spoiling food in order to stop it being eaten by 
people foraging in stores’ bins. In recent years, growing numbers of families, 
students, unemployed and homeless people in France have been foraging in 
supermarket bins at night to feed themselves. People have been finding edible 
products thrown out just as their best-before dates approached.

Some supermarkets doused binned food in bleach, reportedly to prevent food 
poisoning from items taken from bins. Other supermarkets deliberately binned 
food in locked warehouses for collection by refuse trucks.

Now bosses of supermarkets with a footprint of 400 sq metres (4,305 sq ft) or 
more will have to sign donation contracts with charities or face a penalty of 
€3,750 (£2,900).

Jacques Bailet, head of Banques Alimentaires 
<http://www.banquealimentaire.org/>, a network of French food banks, described 
the law as “positive and very important symbolically”. He said it would greatly 
increase an already emerging trend for supermarkets to donate to food banks.

“Most importantly, because supermarkets will be obliged to sign a donation 
deal with charities, we’ll be able to increase the quality and diversity of 
food we get and distribute,” he said. “In terms of nutritional balance, we 
currently have a deficit of meat and a lack of fruit and vegetables. This will 
hopefully allow us to push for those products.”

Until now French food banks received 100,000 tonnes of donated goods, 35,000 
tonnes of which came from supermarkets. Even a 15% increase in food coming from 
supermarkets would mean 10m more meals being handed out each year, Bailet said.

Food banks <https://www.theguardian.com/society/food-banks> and charities 
will, for their part, be obliged to collect and stock the food in properly 
hygienic conditions and distribute it with “dignity”. This means the food must 
be given out at a proper food bank or centre, where human contact and 
conversation is fostered, rather than, for example, simply organised as 
handoutson the street.

Crucially the law will also make it simpler for the food industry to give some 
excess products directly to food banks from factories. Until now, if a dairy 
factory made yoghurts carrying the brand name of a supermarket, it had been a 
long, complex process to donate any excess to charity. Now it would be faster 
and easier. “That is very important for food banks because this is a real 
source of quality products, coming straight from the factory,” Bailet said.

Derambarsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/25/french-supermarkets-donate-food-waste-global-law-campaign>
, who is a municipal councillor for Courbevoie, about five miles north-west of 
Paris, said: “The next step is to ask the president, François Hollande, to put 
pressure on Jean-Claude Juncker and to extend this law to the whole of the EU. 
This battle is only just beginning. We now have to fight food waste in 
restaurants, bakeries, school canteens and company canteens.”

Carrefour, France’s biggest supermarket group, said it welcomed the law, which 
would build on food donations its supermarkets already made.

France, so far, goes further than the UK, where the government has a voluntary 
agreement with the grocery and retail sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/21/uk-supermarkets-pressure-cut-food-waste>
 to cut food and packaging waste in the supply chain and does not have 
mandatory targets. However, a UKfood waste bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2015-16/foodwastereduction.html>, with 
similar provisions, was introduced to the Commons last September by the Labour 
MP Kerry McCarthy.

Of the 7.1m tonnes 
<http://abonnes.lemonde.fr/les-decodeurs/article/2014/10/16/chaque-annee-1-3-milliard-de-tonnes-de-nourritures-gaspillee_4507636_4355770.html>
 of food wasted in France annually, 67% is binned by consumers, 15% by 
restaurants and 11% by shops. Each year 1.3bn tonnes of food are wasted 
worldwide.

A report published in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/26/world-leaders-urged-to-tackle-food-waste-to-save-billions-and-cut-emissions>
 showed that UK households threw away 7m tonnes of food in 2012, enough to fill 
London’s Wembley stadium nine times over. Avoidable household food waste in the 
UK is associated with 17m tonnes of CO2 emissions annually.

• This article was amended on 8 February 2016 to correct the penalty that 
could be imposed on supermarkets that flout the law. An earlier version gave 
this as fines of up to €75,000 (£53,000) or two years’ imprisonment.
 