
The founder of French Connection has shrugged off pressure from an activist 
shareholder to surrender his dual role as chairman and chief executive of the 
retailer as it continues to nurse heavy losses.

The company’s chief operating officer, Neil Williams, said any change to 
Stephen Marks’s responsibilities would run the risk of derailing its turnaround 
plan. “Stephen is inherent to this business,” he said. “We are in the middle of 
a turnaround and it would be destabilising to change the situation.”

Williams’s comments came as the retailer reported a pre-tax loss of £7.9m for 
the six months to 31 July, which was unchanged from a year ago. Sales at 
established stores were up 6.5% but trading at its wholesale arm was dire, with 
sales tumbling nearly 17% as department store buyers stocked up cautiously 
after its ranges sold badly in 2015. French Connection closed five loss-making 
stores during the period and plans to shut another five in the coming months.

French Connection boss 'refusing to sit down to discuss turnaround plan'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/18/french-connection-stephen-marks-refuses-discuss-turnaround-plan-fashion-retail>
Gatemore Capital Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/18/french-connection-stephen-marks-refuses-discuss-turnaround-plan-fashion-retail>
, a US hedge fund that has built an 8% stake, thinks better corporate 
governance would improve French Connection’s financial performance. The 
retailer is in its fifth loss-making year and Liad Meidar, a managing partner 
at Gatemore, said it was time to “rip off the Band-Aid”.

Meidar believes the company should shut nearly half its stores over the next 
two years, leaving it with about 30. “The turnaround plan has not gone far 
enough,” he said. “Corporate governance is a continuing issue and this needs to 
be improved across all levels if we are to see meaningful change.”

Marks, who founded the business in 1972, owns a near 42% stake. Williams said 
Gatemore’s concerns had not been echoed by other shareholders.

The analyst Sarah Johns of Verdict Retail said French Connection was 
struggling to compete with the likes of H&M, Zara,Topshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/18/london-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags>
 and Asos: “The FCUK branding on selected lines is outdated, collections can be 
hit-and-miss while upper-mid and premium price points make it difficult for 
shoppers to justify paying full price when similar styles and quality can be 
found for less elsewhere.”

Johns said store sales only looked stronger because it had closed loss-making 
outlets and its performance a year ago had been so dire. She also pointed to 
its dwindling cash reserves, which have fallen from £22.3m three years ago to 
£7.7m.

“The business requires a serious cash injection to prevent further periods of 
tumbling top-line sales, profit losses and disappointed shareholders,” she 
said. “A revised strategy which prioritises investment in product lines, 
product cost reduction and brand differentiation is desperately needed.”
 