
Among the tiniest of the premature babies slumbering in incubators at the 
Mirwais hospital, one bore a name chosen by hospital staff. At five days old, 
“Fatima” had been abandoned by her mother after being born so early that her 
family assumed she was destined for the grave.

Had her relatives grasped the welcome transformation unfolding at the 
government-run medical centre in Kandahar, the largest city in southern
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, they might have 
held their newborn a little tighter.

Where once children crowded three to a bed, single occupancy is now the norm. 
The number of nurses making the rounds among the rows of infants has doubled, 
and new incubator units help neonatal specialists nurture the most fragile of 
lives through their first, vulnerable days.

Motherhood in Aleppo: 'Did I give birth to him to see a life like this?' | Umm 
Leen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/30/motherhood-syria-did-i-give-birth-to-him-to-see-a-life-like-this-umm-leen-msf>
While much of the news from southern Afghanistan over the past year has been 
dominated by reports ofTaliban advances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/us-troops-sent-afghanistan-taliban-lashkar-gah>
, the creation of a new paediatric unit at Mirwais hospital has opened a new 
front in a different campaign: the struggle to reduce extremelyhigh mortality 
rates among Afghan infants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2009/nov/20/children-unicef-report-2009-afghanistan>
.

Luis Tello, a Spanish paediatrician seconded to the unit by the International 
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), said the expanded facilities had already 
helped to persuade more Afghan mothers that, with the right care, even the 
weakest babies might survive.

“For me, the most astonishing improvement is with [premature] newborns. 
Before, nobody was taking care of them,” said Tello, speaking in a ward where 
young children lay on crisp white sheets, mothers at their bedsides. “But we’ve 
managed to change people’s minds.”

The new unit, which opened in September, is housed in a former nursing clinic 
in the hospital grounds, converted in a year-long project funded by the ICRC. 
It has 186 beds, including 15 for mothers – twice the number in the old 
paediatric wing.

The number of incubators has risen from six to 10, while another new ward 
caters for children suffering from thalassemia, a hereditary, incurable blood 
disease prevalent in southern Afghanistan that can be ameliorated with 
transfusions and medication.

By reducing overcrowding, the unit has dramatically cut the risk of contagious 
diseases skipping between patients. Staff who might previously have had to 
discharge barely improved infants to make room for even sicker children can now 
allow everyone time to recover.

“We won’t force them to go home early,” said Dr Muhammad Sidiq, the unit’s 
director. “We can let them stay here until they are completely cured.”

The unit is a tangible sign of broader progress in improving infant and 
maternal health. In contrast to thebleak picture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/taliban-launches-major-assault-on-afghan-city-of-kunduz>
 on the battlefield in much of Afghanistan, years of painstaking efforts by the 
government and donors to improve access to basic healthcare, and train 
community midwives to assist at births – the vast majority of which take place 
at home – are yieldingsignificant results 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2016/06/24/afghan-babies-have-been-dying-in-huge-numbers-for-decades-now-something-is-changing/>
.

I’m better off than some people – they’ve lost both their legs and arms
Abdul Matin, 22, student 
In 2000, Afghanistan had one of the highest infant mortality rates  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2009/nov/20/children-unicef-report-2009-afghanistan>
in the world, with almost 10% of babies dying before their first birthday, 
according to UN data. Since the overthrow of the Taliban in 2001, the picture 
has changed.

According to a comprehensive health and demographic survey 
<http://www.dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/PR77/PR77.pdf>, published by the Afghan 
government in May, the nationwide mortality rate for all infants fell from 66 
to 45 deaths for every 1,000 live births between 2001 and 2015. Similarly, for 
all children under five, the death rate per 1,000 fell to 55 from 87.

Despite these achievements, infant mortality rates still remain high in many 
areas, partly due to a lack of basiceducation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/31/girls-gain-ground-in-kandahar-culture-wars-as-education-prospects-improve>
 about the importance of hygiene during births. Tello explained that deadly 
sepsis infections could result from the common practice of using a knife to cut 
an umbilical cord on the sole of a shoe.

Beyond Mirwais, meanwhile, large numbers of rural women have no access to even 
basic clinics. Some of the mothers arriving at the unit with infants swaddled 
in shawls had travelled hundreds of kilometres from remote areas. Escalating 
violence in many parts of Afghanistan has also made facilities harder to reach: 
aUN study 
<http://unama.unmissions.org/education-and-healthcare-risk-children-afghanistan>
 published in April documented reports of 125 security incidents affecting 
access to healthcare in 2015, compared with 59 in 2014 and 33 in 2013.

While the fighting begins to intensify each spring in Afghanistan, paediatric 
illness also follows a seasonal cycle, with diarrhoea more common in the summer 
and pneumonia and other respiratory diseases rife in winter. Doctors have 
witnessed a marked increase in malnutrition this year, possibly tied to the 
increasing numbers of peopleuprooted by fighting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/oct/12/destitute-afghans-fleeing-fighting-seek-refuge-in-kandahar-afghanistan-taliban-in-pictures>
 in the south. Some of the victims have been brought to a new therapeutic 
feeding centre in the unit for the most severely underweight.

Making a brisk round of the new wards, checking on patients and issuing 
rapid-fire instructions to nurses wearing gowns and surgical masks, Tello soon 
encountered one of the deadliest killers. Holding up a chest x-ray from a tiny 
boy named Hekmatullah, he scrutinised an image of a ribcage dotted with 
hundreds of tiny lesions – telltale signs of miliary tuberculosis.

Destitute Afghans fleeing fighting seek refuge in Kandahar – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/oct/12/destitute-afghans-fleeing-fighting-seek-refuge-in-kandahar-afghanistan-taliban-in-pictures>
“He’s lucky because he has this x-ray, which is very clear for TB,” Tello 
said, before hurrying to the next ward, where another listless child was 
battling pneumococcal meningitis.

That such children can even reach Mirwais hospital reflects the shifting 
contours of the war in the south. At the height of the US troop surge in 
Afghanistan in 2010 and 2011, intense fighting in Kandahar provinceflooded 
wards and corridors with casualties 
<https://www.icrc.org/eng/resources/documents/photo-gallery/afghanistan-photos-2010-11-18.htm>
 bearing blast and gunshot wounds. As the vast majority of western forces 
withdrew ahead of a security handover in 2014, the locus of the conflict in the 
south shifted into neighbouring Helmand and Uruzgan provinces, which continue 
to provide the hospital with a steady stream ofwar-wounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/24/sons-of-afghanistan-leaders-have-forgotten-us-war-against-taliban>
.

In the main hospital, a 22-year-old student named Abdul Matin was undergoing 
treatment after losing his right arm when a mortar round crashed into his 
family home in the district of Marjah in Helmand province a month earlier. 
Sitting up in a bed near other patients lying swaddled in bandages concealing 
even more grievous wounds, he greeted his injury with a certain degree of 
resignation.

“This is the situation,” he said. “I’m better off than some people – they’ve 
lost both their legs and arms.”

Despite the overwhelming challenges many patients face, Tello and his 
colleagues are starting to offer hope for sick children that many families 
might once have imagined possible. Though young “Fatima” did not survive, many 
more Afghans may one day look back and thank the staff at Mirwais hospital for 
giving them a second chance when they were most in need of help.
 