
As fashion accolades go, it doesn’t get any better than staging the opening 
catwalk at London Fashion Week.

But fashionistas will not be greeted with the usual glitz and glamour 
associated with catwalk fashion when London label Teatum Jones opens 
proceedings on Fridayat the capital’s biannual event 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/>. Instead, the duo have taken their 
inspiration from the backstreets of Glasgow, in a show that will kick off 
similarly inspired spectacles from a growing breed of British designers keen to 
shrug off the elitism of luxury fashion.

“We’re driven by a love of human stories,” says Catherine Teatum. “We started 
hanging out with the LGBT community in Glasgow. That was it. We wanted to tell 
their story.”

Teatum and her co-designer Rob Jones spent months seeking out and talking to 
people in the community. Not just talking, they filmed them, too, became 
immersed in their lives and then set about trying to translate what they heard 
and saw into a collection of designer clothing. The result is what Teatum 
describes as vibrant clothes with lots of harsh geometric patterns. “We’ve kept 
them quite tough and oversized. They’re a reflection of all those conversations 
we’ve been having.”

For Teatum and Jones, the mission is not simply about creating clothes from 
everyday stories. They, along with Molly Goddard, another catwalk debutante at 
fashion week, have been casting models from people they spot on the street. 
They claim this helps their efforts to encourage “everyday people” to have 
access to their clothes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffresh-generation-of-british-designers-takes-to-the-catwalk-with-stories-from-the-streets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59b06db9775c17e199cd6d70e32ee056ef0b234e%2F347_0_3498_4371%2F3498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fresh%20generation%20of%20British%20designers%20takes%20to%20the%20catwalk%20with%20stories%20from%20the%20streets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffresh-generation-of-british-designers-takes-to-the-catwalk-with-stories-from-the-streets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fresh%20generation%20of%20British%20designers%20takes%20to%20the%20catwalk%20with%20stories%20from%20the%20streets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffresh-generation-of-british-designers-takes-to-the-catwalk-with-stories-from-the-streets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59b06db9775c17e199cd6d70e32ee056ef0b234e%2F347_0_3498_4371%2F3498.jpg>
 Catherine Teatum and Rob Jones. Photograph: sent by them 
It might seem an unrealistic ambition for a brand making merino wool coats 
priced at £995 in Harvey Nichols. Yet the company, winner of this year’s 
International Woolmark Prize, is part of a wider move to try to change the 
focus of the fashion world. “Just as we’ve democratised the way we get taxis, 
the same is happening in fashion. In the future, I think instead of huge brands 
we’ll start to see lots of smaller pockets of brands catering to different 
customers and lifestyles,” says Teatum.

Arthur Yates, founder of unisex label Bruta, showing in the Future British 
Showroom next week, agrees. He believes that social media has helped young 
designers build what he calls “a real life community of people”.

“Inclusive is cool right now,” says 25-year-old Yates. “And innovation in 
social media is where we [young designers] have a fighting chance. The big 
brands don’t have the flexibility to take the same risks.”

Inclusion is a buzz concept that the big fashion brands are trying to embrace 
too. Burberry, for one, is pushing the message that its forthcoming show in 
London will be all about the customer. Its menswear and womenswear lines will 
be shown at the same time, a big break with tradition. And its new season 
clothes will be available to buy immediately after the catwalk.

Andrew Groves, course director of fashion design at the University of 
Westminster, is not convinced by talk of inclusion and accessibility, and 
reckons Burberry has made an irrevocable mistake with its see-now, buy-now 
model.

“The problem that brands like Burberry face is that the high street has been 
able to copy high fashion and get products to market quickly. But I don’t think 
that’s the issue. What’s missing in fashion is the magic and intrigue and 
excitement – that’s what they should be looking at.”

Karinna Nobbs, a lecturer at the London College of Fashion, agrees. “The true 
fashionistas will always wait when they want something,” she says, though 
another designer showing for the first time in London, Huishan Zhang, says he 
is constantly fielding requests from his clients on Instagram.

Groves thinks there is a risk of being too accessible, however, whether in 
terms of price, availability or even attending a catwalk. “I quite like the 
fact that it’s hard for me to get into a show. If it’s too easy, what’s the 
point?”
 