
Driving east from Venice along the autostrada, it only takes half an hour to 
leave the tourists behind and cross into the very different world of Friuli. 
This autonomous and proudly independent region is officially known as 
Friuli-Venezia Giulia, a wild and still little-known corner of Italy that has 
its own language, a distinctive local cuisine, and a host of world-famous wines 
grown on rolling hillside vineyards. Strategically located at the crossroads of 
central Europe, Friuli stretches over Italy’s north-eastern border, from the 
lagoons and sandy beaches of the Adriatic coast to the grand maritime port of 
Trieste, along the frontier with Slovenia, then up into wild Alpine scenery and 
the border with Austria. The first visit here can come as a surprise, compared 
with Tuscany or Umbria. But it is so easy to fall under the charm of the 
unspoilt landscape and the warm welcome that many travellers find themselves 
returning.
 See the full visual 
TRIESTE AND THE ADRIATIC COAST

What to see and do

Just as Friuli is very different from the rest of Italy, its capital, Trieste, 
is unlike other Italian cities – more Mitteleuropa Vienna than Venice. Over the 
past few years, it has been transformed from a gritty frontier crossing point 
to a vibrant multicultural hub. Let the monumental grandeur ofPiazza Unità 
d’Italia impress you, but then fall under Trieste’s more subtle charms: antique 
stores in the narrow lanes of the ancient Jewish ghetto, a promenade down the
lungomare (seafront), or just a seat at one of the waterside cafes that line the
Canal Grande for an sundowner aperitivo. 
 Sunset over Trieste. Photograph: Getty Images/iStockphoto 
The Adriatic coastline stretches north and west of the city encompassing the 
family-oriented beach resorts of Grado and Lignano. But the main attraction is 
the awesome natural beauty of immense lagoons that hug the coastline. Visitors 
should explore the waterside walking and bike tracks ofValle Cavanata, by 
Grado’s lagoon, a natural paradise for wild birds, or head to Marano Lagunare 
and either follow a guide through theValle Canal Nuovo nature reserve, or sail 
across the lagoon in a tour boat, past distinctivecasoni, white-thatched 
fishermen’s cottages seemingly floating on the wetlands. Just inland, there are 
the breathtaking Roman mosaics ofAquileia’s Unesco-listed basilica.


Where to eat
 Ristorante Al Bagatto. Photograph: Dean Dubokovic 
For the freshest fish and seafood in Trieste, it is worth splashing out on the 
gourmetRistorante Al Bagatto (mains from €25, Via Luigi Cadorna 7, +39 040 
301771,albagatto.it <http://www.albagatto.it/index.html>). A guilty pleasure 
not to be missed is a plate of succulent pork (porcina) smothered with grated 
horseradish in a traditional spit-and-sawdust buffet bar such asBuffet Da Rudy 
(mains from €7, Via Valdirivo 32, 039 040 639428). Health-conscious foodies are 
saved by the newly opened040 Social Food (salads €5, Via Rossini 8, 39 040 
7600869,on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/040socialfood>), which offers big 
organic salads or grilled octopus, topped with creamy jerusalem artichoke. 
Grado has some great, but often expensive, fish restaurants, but an affordable 
option is afritto misto of baby squid, anchovies, sardines and red mullet at 
the watersideOsteria Zero Miglia (mains from €14, Riva Dandolo 22, 39 0431 
80287,zeromiglia.it <http://www.zeromiglia.it/>).

Where to drink
 Caff è San Marco. Photograph: Alamy 
Trieste is famed for its opulent literary cafes and, to soak up this belle 
époque grandeur, visitors should order cappuccino and sachertorte at Caffè San 
Marco (Via Battisti 18), James Joyce’s favourite hangout. The historic city 
centre is thronged by partygoers hopping from bar to bar, from the early evening
aperitivo till late. Caffè Urbanis (Piazza della Borsa 15) serves the best 
Aperol spritz with live DJ sets, whileSuper Bar Stella (Largo Pitteri 4) has 
great Friuli wines and craft beer, live music and closes at 3am. In Aquileia, 
after marvelling at the mosaics of the cathedral, let yourself be tempted by 
the dazzling array of pastries atPasticceria Mosaico (Piazza Capitolo 17, 
pasticceriamosaico.com <http://www.pasticceriamosaico.com/cms/>) – perfect with 
a chilled glass of prosecco.


Where to stay
 Albafiorita Agriturismo. 
Hotels can be expensive in Trieste, so it’s worth booking a reasonable B&B, 
such as the comfortableResidenza le 6A (doubles €70, residenzale6A.it 
<http://residenzale6a.it/>), or venturing just outside the city in the rural 
Carso plateau atAzienda Agricola Lupinc (doubles from about €80, lupinc.it 
<http://lupinc.it/it/>), a winery that has a garden restaurant and osteria, 
with four comfy apartments. Down the Adriatic coast, there are breathtaking 
sunrises to be viewed at a hostel right in the middle of the wetlands, which is 
at theIsonzo nature reserve’s visitor centre (dorm bed €21, 
parks.it/riserva.foce.isonzo 
<http://www.parks.it/riserva.foce.isonzo/Eindex.php>). Alternatively, 
Albafiorita (doubles from €76, albafiorita.com <http://www.albafiorita.com/>) 
is a rustic agriturismo, where the young owner’smamma bakes cakes, tarts and 
flans each morning for breakfast.

COLLIO, CIVIDALE AND THE NATISONE VALLEY

What to see and do

 Ponte del Diavolo, Cividale. Photograph: Alamy 
Related: Discover the place where ice-cream was invented: Valle di Cadore, 
Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/29/place-where-ice-cream-was-born-italy-valle-di-cadore>

Right at the beginning of the Collio wine route, visitors should wander past 
the medieval arcades and baroque palaces of one of Europe’s unique border 
cities,Gorizia, divided in half since the Cold War from Slovenia’s Nova Gorica. 
The entrance to the town of Cividale could not be more imposing, crossing over 
the majestic 15th-century Ponte del Diavolo, with the turquoise river Natisone 
flowing far below.

While this still grandiose town was officially founded by Julius Caesar, its 
roots go back further to the Celts and Lombards (known asLongobardi) vividly 
documented in the outstandingArcheological Museum 
<http://www.cividale.com/citta/_uk/museo_uk.asp>, which stands in the imposing 
Piazza del Duomo. The scenery changes abruptly a half hour’s drive from 
Cividale, when narrow roads branch off into the wild wooded valleys ofNatisone, 
perfect for hiking, mountain biking and trout fishing.

Where to eat 


Expect generous portions of traditional, no-frills friulano cooking served in 
family-run osterias and agriturismos that open up as restaurants at the weekend.
Agriturismo Stekar (mains from €10, Localita Giasbana 25, San Floriano del 
Collio, +39 0481 391929,bio-stekar-it <http://www.bio-stekar.it/en/>) is a 
perfect example, serving delicious goulash, fruity plum gnocchi and home-cured 
sausages, accompanied by the farm’s own artisan wine and beer. The cosy 
oak-beamed osteriaTerra & Vini (mains from €10, Via XXIV Maggio 34, Brazzano di 
Cormòns, +39 0481 60028) is always packed with Collioviticoltori, feasting off 
tagliatelle with wild boar ragù, while in Cividale the latest hot address is
Osteria alla Speranza (mains from €15, Piazza Giulio Cesare 15, +39 0432 
731131).

The cuisine of the Natisone valley is a mix of Italian and Slovenian 
influences, ideally illustrated by a long, lazy Sunday lunch atTrattoria alla 
Posta (Localita Clodig 22, +39 0432 725000) in the frontier village of Clodig. 
The wonderfully creative chef, Maria Gilda, serves an eight-course tasting menu 
for a mere €30, with dishes such as stinging-nettle ravioli, slow-cooked veal 
cheeks with wild mushrooms and a to-die-for grape strudel.

Where to taste wine

 Vignaioli Specogna Photograph: PR 
Friuli produces some of Italy’s greatest white wines, from crisp friulano, the 
local favourite, to mineral malvasia and luscious late-harvest picolit. 
Winemakers generally give visitors a warm welcome, though it is always best to 
give them a quick telephone call before turning up. A good place to kick off in 
the wine-making capital, Cormòns, is at its eponymousenoteca (enotecacormons.it 
<http://www.enoteca-cormons.it/>), a pulsating bar with over 100 local vintages 
by the glass. Just out of town,Renato Keber (+39 0481 639844, renatokeber.com 
<http://www.renatokeber.com/en>) has an ultra-modern winery and bucks tradition 
by ageing whites, such as pinot bianco and ribolla gialla, for at least five 
years. A far more rustic address isVini Crastin (+39 0481 630310, vinicrastin.it
 <http://www.vinicrastin.it/>), a tumbledown garage winery in a tiny hamlet 
where the affable Sergio Collarig makes uncomplex and affordable wines, 
available in bulk as well as by the bottle – rare for Friuli. The wine route 
continues towards Cividale where, perched atop a hill,Vignaioli Specogna (+39 
0432 755840,specogna.it <http://www.specogna.it/>) surveys the vineyards of the 
Colli Orientali, Friuli’s eastern hills, that stretch into the distance as far 
as the eye can see. There is invariably a raucous crowd around the cellar table 
as the imposing figure of Graziano Specogna and his son, Cristian, open bottles 
and slice salami and cheese. The pinot grigio is unforgettable.

Where to stay

 Relais Russiz Superiore 
The vine-clad hills of the Collio are filled with inviting winemaker B&Bs. 
Marzia Buzzinelli of the rusticGallo Rosso (doubles €80,buzzinelli.it 
<http://www.buzzinelli.it/>) cooks up a storm at breakfast, while at Ronchi Rò 
delle Fragole (doubles from €90, +39 339 4067294), Romeo and Carolina Rossi 
have beautifully renovated an ancient hilltop stone farmhouse. For a more 
luxurious stay, bookRelais Russiz Superiore (doubles from €136, marcofelluga.it 
<http://marcofelluga.it/index.php?id=22&L=1>), a grand manor house with idyllic 
vineyard views as far as Slovenia. To explore the Natisone Valley, check in at 
the old-fashionedAlbergo Al Vescovo (doubles from €85, alvescovo.com 
<http://www.alvescovo.com/home.asp#>), with mountain vistas, a riverside 
terrace and hearty regional cuisine.

UDINE AND THE MOUNTAINS

What to see and do

 The Carnic Alps near Sauris. Photograph: Padraic Giardina/Getty Images 
Related: Italy’s best-kept food secret: the sagra festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/sep/22/italys-best-kept-food-secret-the-sagra-festival>

Udine is the undiscovered jewel of Friuli, a grand town of Venetian-Gothic 
palaces and Palladian churches, undisturbed by crowds. Walk from the 
magnificent portico-lined Piazza Libertà, across to Piazza Matteotti, the 
buzzing unofficial town centre, then visit the palatial home of Udine’s 
bishops, now theDiocesan Museum 
<http://www.musdioc-tiepolo.it/musdioc/index.php>, with a series of galleries 
covered with frescoes by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo. Friuli’s big foodie 
stop-off isSan Daniele del Friuli, whose small, artisan production of 
prosciutto has a reputation that often exceeds the better-known Parma ham. The 
family-runProsciuttificio Prolongo (prolongo.it) offers fascinating tours in 
English at €2pp. From San Daniele, the road quickly rises into the foothills of 
the rugged Carnia mountains. Perfect for hiking and biking in summer and 
cross-country skiing in winter, the two villages of upper and lowerSauris – 
Sopra and Sotto – resemble a fairytale kingdom with strange mythical 
sculptures. And don’t miss the Alice in Wonderland hamlet ofPesariis, one of 
the world’s clockmaking capitals, with an enchanting museum and 14 monumental 
clocks displayed throughout the village.

Where to eat
 Osteria Aquila Nera. 
A popular lunch hangout for local Udinesi is Enoteca Fred (mains from €18, Via 
del Freddo 6, +39 0432 505059,enotecafredudine.com 
<http://enotecafredudine.com/>), whose speciality is a memorable steak tartare. 
In the evening, visitors should consider reserving atAquila Nera (mains from 
€10, Via Piave 2/A, +39 0432 21645,aquilanera.biz <http://www.aquilanera.biz/>
), where the speciality is generous sharing plates of local salami, prosciutto,
lardo and mortadella. Albergo Morgenleit (mains from €10, Via Sauris di Sotto 
59, +39 0433 86166,morgenleit.it <http://morgenleit.it/>) in Sauris looks 
kitsch, but its innovative cuisine is a revelation, worthy of a Michelin star 
for dishes such as wild herb tagliatelle with pear and honey. Deeper into the 
Carnia mountains,Sot La Napa (mains from €10, Frazione Pesariis 61, +39 0433 
695103) is another revelation. Signora Eliana Solari follows more traditional 
recipes, such as a delicate flan of dandelion flowers direct from the family’s 
organic vegetable farm.

Where to drink

 Enoteca La Trappola. 
Udine metamorphoses at night; its narrow sidestreets and piazzas a goldmine of 
bars.Osteria Pierimortadele (Via Bartolini 8, pierimortadele.com 
<http://www.pierimortadele.com/>) specialises in crusty sandwiches bursting 
with mortadella, accompanied by a glass of friulano or the local craft beer, 
Gjulia, whileRetro Gusto (Via Val Vason 5) heaves from the start of the evening 
aperitivo – hardly surprising when a glass of wine is €1 including tasty free 
tapas. San Daniele is not just about its famed prosciutto.Enoteca La Trappola 
(Via Cairoli 2,enotecalatrappola.it <http://www.enotecalatrappola.it/public/>) 
has a 500-year-old vaulted cellar of hundreds of different wines, and though 
Sauris may seem like a sleepy mountain settlement, thePizzeria Pame Stifl 
(Sauris di Sopra 3) stays open well after midnight and has a lethal selection 
of herb grappas.

Where to stay

 Casa Angela, Udine, Italy Photograph: Franco Martelli Rossi 
Udine has several reasonably priced B&Bs, and while Casa Angela (doubles from 
€60,casaangela.it <http://www.casaangela.it/>) may be 10 minutes’ walk from the 
centre, guests get to stay in a grand art nouveau villa. In town,Hotel Suite Inn
 (doubles from €102 B&B,hotelsuiteinn-udine.com 
<http://www.hotelsuiteinn-udine.com/>) is a small boutique property with arty 
designer rooms. Up in Carnia, visitors are spoilt for choice in the lovely 
village of Sauris.Riglarhaus (doubles €80 B&B, riglarhaus.it 
<http://www.riglarhaus.it/it/>) is a traditional Alpine pensione, with a spa 
and an outstanding restaurant, but the unbeatable address isAlbergo Diffuso 
Sauris (lodgings from €70, albergodiffusosauris.com 
<http://www.albergodiffusosauris.com/en/home/>), an abandoned hamlet whose 
ancient wooden houses have been transformed into 40 cosy guest apartments.

• Ryanair 
<https://www.ryanair.com/gb/en/plan-trip/destinations/flights-to-trieste/> 
flies to Trieste from £34 return. Car hire was provided bycarrentals.co.uk 
<https://www.carrentals.co.uk/>. For more information about the region go to 
turismfvg.it <http://www.turismofvg.it/>.

 