
For the exiled and disenchanted figures of Iran’s recent history, Rome has 
served as a place of refuge. In the days leading to the 1953 coup d’état that 
overthrew prime minister Mohammad Mossadegh, the troubled sovereign Mohammad 
Reza Shah Pahlavi took flight to the Italian capital. Within the same decade, 
his wife’s favourite artist, the notoriously irreverent painter-sculptor Bahman 
Mohasses, traded Tehran for Rome, where he lived in self-imposed seclusion for 
the next 50 years. His legacy presents him as a cigarette-puffingenfant terrible
, who had a complex relationship with the authority of his royal Pahlavi 
patrons: he was once ordered to add underpants to his puckish Flute Player 
sculpture commissioned by the empress to stand outside the State Theatre in 
Tehran. The oeuvre from his years as an émigré in Rome forms the introductory 
sequence of the exhibition Iran: Unedited History, which opens from 11 December 
at the National Museum of 21st Century Arts in the Italian capital.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417543799692%2Fba9309d8-616f-4958-82fb-3a3af004a293-2060x1355.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20institution%20to%20Iranian%20revolution%3A%20Unedited%20History%201960-2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20institution%20to%20Iranian%20revolution%3A%20Unedited%20History%201960-2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417543799692%2Fba9309d8-616f-4958-82fb-3a3af004a293-2060x1355.jpeg>
 Ardeshir Mohassess (1938-2008) Jeune Afrique Numéro 626, 1973 Collection 
Groupe Jeune Afrique Photograph: Collection Groupe Jeune Afrique 
An impressive curatorial team is behind what is an extensive chronological 
survey, including Catherine David from Musée d’Art Moderne of Paris and Tate 
Modern’s Morad Montezzami. An ambitious feat by any measure, Iran: Unedited 
History showcases over 200 works by 20 artists, charting Iranian visual culture 
over the turbulence of the past half-century. The catalogue opens to a dazzling 
cross-section of modern Iranian art: Mohasses is here, as is his illustrator 
brother Ardeshir, minimalist contemporary Behjdat Sadr and new-wave film 
director Parviz Kimiavi.

What makes Unedited History so truly redolent of its time-span, however, is 
the inclusion of the peeling and scribbled paper spoils of popular culture and 
domestic life, from student-crafted agitprop posters to children’s drawings and 
a family photo album.


Unedited History guides viewers through three distinct chapters; each 
recreating a pivotal socio-political epoch perceived to have shaped, or even 
impeded, the development of modern arts and culture in Iran. In his recent 
culinary excursion to Iran, American chef Anthony Bourdain described the 
country as one “that can warm your heart one day and break it the next”. In a 
similar dichotomy, this exhibition possesses a wealth of beautiful and 
intriguing works from Iran’s modern masters that warrant feverish discovery by 
a European public. Other post-1979 material, the majority previously 
unavailable to eyes outside Iran, offers a less congenial unveiling for the 
visitor. However, these images are so raw, so unflinching, and so visually 
complex that the opportunity to view their reactionary power must not be passed 
up. Perhaps most importantly however, Unedited History brings any 
preconceptions that the revolution quashed the course of artistic modernism in
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> to task.

 Kazem Chalipa, Bassidjiy, 1985 Photograph: Iran: Unedited History 
The story begins in the 1960s during a brief state-backed drive for cultural 
modernisation, often referred to as the Pahlavi dynasty’s ‘White Revolution’. 
Sponsored events such as the Shiraz-Persepolis Festival of Arts, which ran from 
1967 to 1977, fuelled the progress of the Iranian art scene. Its key players 
found hitherto unprecedented expression and recognition on the international 
stage via biennials and performing arts festivals.


Part two shudders into an abrupt gear-change away from such official cultural 
abundance, reaching through the thickets of the 1979 Revolution and the 
Iran-Iraq war that immediately followed in 1980 until 1988. Unedited History 
ends by presenting contemporary perspectives from artists born during these 
tumultuous decades of the seventies and eighties.


Following its inaugural summer show at the Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de 
Paris, Unedited History is well-matched in Rome at Zaha Hadid’s MAXXI, a 
structure built as a labyrinthine station for contemporary art. The 
exhibition’s title borrows from the vernacular of filmmakers. The works are 
presented to us as “rushes”: the un-tampered with, immediate and raw 
documentations of current events. And so, the white chambers of MAXXI serve as 
editing suites, replaying the reels of Iran’s last half-century. But this is by 
no means the final cut. A sensitive line of visual enquiry is presented to the 
audience. Works are straightforwardly as possible, almost clinically. History 
is used to contextualise rather than to coerce the works into providing a 
charged agenda on the events themselves. Curatorial attention is paid instead 
to how people and pictures were mobilized across public spaces, propelled by 
the changing stage-set of Iran’s cultural circumstance.


Dubbed “the Persian Picasso”, Bahram Mohasses was an artist often seen to 
represent the zenith of Iranian artistic modernism whilst still retaining his 
outsider reputation. His works selected to open Unedited History present a 
large swathe of his career. At once grotesque and amusing, the characters that 
populate his canvases range from the beasts of classical mythology –The Minotaur
 with flaking flesh from 1966 – to his mother (1974) and the ever-present 
gape-mouthed creationFifi (1965). A series of untitled assemblages, or 
collages, produced intermittently between 1970 and 2008 feature off-kilter, 
woozy juxtapositions of the everyday. Whilst living and working in Rome, he cut 
and pasted his images from Italian lifestyle magazines with an irreverent 
touch. Given his sources, the scenes are set within glossy spreads of bourgeois 
living rooms. But the residents who lean on glass coffee tables and emerge from 
chintz duvet covers are sinister slices of skin – “the darling beast of our 
existence” as Mohasses dubbed them – grafted from the flesh and fabric of 
advertisement models, growling at us through their Tipex-ed teeth.


Behdjat Sadr, one of the first female artists to appear on the Iranian 
biennale scene in the sixties, eschewed figural symbolism altogether for her 
own brand of abstract geometry. A fragment of Sadr’s notes on art from 1980 
reveals a similar impulse behind her practice to that which drove Mohasses’
assemblages: “one must do everything to convey the meaning of our times. To 
tear it out of magazines, paste it and use other means too.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417543932724%2Fad5ae515-d44f-4557-b900-d1253e493508-2060x1440.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20institution%20to%20Iranian%20revolution%3A%20Unedited%20History%201960-2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20institution%20to%20Iranian%20revolution%3A%20Unedited%20History%201960-2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417543932724%2Fad5ae515-d44f-4557-b900-d1253e493508-2060x1440.jpeg>
 Behdjat Sadr, Untitled, 1974 © Galerie Frédéric Lacroix Photograph: © Galerie 
Frédéric Lacroix 
Unedited History features her untitled works created in the 1970s, including 
those in which Sadr worked in pure petroleum during the height of international 
activity surrounding Iran’s rich oil reserves. Each is a pattern scraped across 
an aluminium sheet with a palette knife, created out of that talisman of modern 
wealth that is Sadr’shuile of choice. The curves undulate slowly, twisting 
organically as spinal cords in monochrome waves, or quickening to the snowstorm 
of television fuzz. Other thicker, more sculptural, Untitled works bear a 
striking formal similarity to objects that surround us in the interior spaces 
of our modern consumerism; a canvas of Venetian blinds lacquered in oil ascends 
like an escalator in flickering shutters of orange, pink, and black.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417539396609%2Fbd56f71d-b9db-417f-9fd2-14d7cd17d4a4-1354x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20institution%20to%20Iranian%20revolution%3A%20Unedited%20History%201960-2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20institution%20to%20Iranian%20revolution%3A%20Unedited%20History%201960-2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417539396609%2Fbd56f71d-b9db-417f-9fd2-14d7cd17d4a4-1354x2040.jpeg>
 From Kaveh Golestan’s Prostitute series 
Kaveh Golestan’s 1979 Prostitute series, which captured life within Shahr-e 
No, or New City, Tehran’s former red light district, provides a bitter taste of 
the second portion of Unedited History. Taken in the last-throes of the 
seventies, Golestan’s photographs show a domesticity that is chipped and 
peeling. Brothel dormitories are lined with posters of Bond girls and male 
heartthrobs, complete with big hair and flared jeans, watching over each bed. 
Double-entendres are not lost in the décor of the bordellos: tissue boxes are 
omnipresent on each bedside table, pussycats are stroked in the laps of the 
madams, and cockerels strut in and out of brothel doorways. The terrible fate 
of Tehran’s “citadel of sin” is itemised in cuttings from theAyandegan 
(Posterity) newspaper. The sorry environ was burnt to the ground after the 
revolution, with its populace tragically going down with the ship. The national 
news used Golestan’s photos as unflinching portraits of those who once filled 
its bedrooms.


Film reels from 1 April 1979, the day on which the revolution was announced, 
spliced together in Bahman Kiarostami’s 2013 video edit Flowers, were the first 
to be broadcast on national television in Iran. They are replayed here on a 
small box monitor, in a manner analogous with how they first beamed into 
Iranian living rooms, changing history forever. A revolutionary painter in both 
subject and style, Kazem Chalipa presented the drama of protests and conflicts 
captured by his contemporaries on camera through the gravitas of 
ninetenth-century oil painting, drawing together traditions from the European 
salon and the walls of Persian coffeehouses. State organisations translated and 
graphicised many of his works, including his painting of Ali (the first Shi’a 
Imam) on his white horse Doldol, into agitprop poster designs. As the graphic 
arts dealt with increasingly graphic subject matter, they operated in a palette 
drained only to the tricolor of the national flag. The student-led Group 57 
collective fashioned a potent stylistic mix from the spindly grotesque of late 
eighteenth-century European satirical prints combined with the punchy 
rectilinear red and black aesthetics of Soviet graphic design. Compared to the 
Age-of-Aquarius flora and fauna in the promotional material of the 
Shiraz-Persepolis Festival of Arts (1967-77), an event charted extensively in 
Room 2, the development and severity of reactionary post-‘79 Iranian poster art 
flash past the eye in a sharp contrast. Raised fists clench guns, faces are 
distorted in screams and body bags line up. Even the emblematic “bird of 
freedom” is beheaded.


The closing scene of Unedited History, orchestrated by the latest generation 
of Iranian artists, is at once tender, nostalgic and brutal. Khosrow 
Khorshidi’s pen and ink drawings form his Good Old Days series (2009 – 2011) 
depict long-gone places that once stood on the streets of Iran from 1940 to 
1979. Illustrations of bookshops and atmospheric vignettes of café culture are 
laid onto paper as delicately as black lace. Snapshots taken between 2007 and 
2011 by Tahmnieh Monzavi tell small and unusual stories from the outskirts of 
Tehrani society. A quartet of black-and-white portraits shows Tina, a 
transvestite and a drug addict, visiting a market in her headscarf. Elsewhere 
in the capital, the Mokhberodowleh Tailors laugh as they try on white satin 
bodices for size in an inner-city bridal boutique.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417544132522%2F610c9c29-59ac-43b2-a756-3c164fa60abe-1402x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20institution%20to%20Iranian%20revolution%3A%20Unedited%20History%201960-2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20institution%20to%20Iranian%20revolution%3A%20Unedited%20History%201960-2014&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F03%2F-sp-iran-unedited-history-1960-2014-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417544132522%2F610c9c29-59ac-43b2-a756-3c164fa60abe-1402x2040.jpeg>
 Narmine Sadeg Man-bird, 2014 Collection of the artist Photograph: Collection 
of the artist 
The poetic heritage of Iran’s past is thrust into modernity through Narmine 
Sadeg’s surreal and disconcerting 2004 installation Office of Diverted 
Trajectories, which presents a multimedia interpretation of Attar’s mystical 12
th century Persian folk tale, Mantegh Ol-Teyr (The Conference of the Birds). 
Before departing the exhibition, visitors are invited to pull up a chair and 
gaze at the lifeless avian pilgrims who conversed together in the original 
text. The mythical fowl of Persian poetry, Simorgh, Hoopoe, and Bulbul, lie 
together in a backlit ring as Attar’s prose rolls up silently on the flat 
screen of a Macintosh computer from behind.


Unedited History is a marathon, one that is both emotionally and physically 
taxing. Yet, for the visitor wanting to learn about Iran, Unedited History 
offers the opportunity for an introduction of unprecedented quality and breadth 
to the complex and fraught recent history of the country, a topic so ingrained 
into modern memory but little understood by many. For the critic or passing 
Persianist, an essay could be written about every single piece in this show, 
such is its importance as an exhibition in the field of Iranian studies. And 
for an Iranian audience, as one blogger has described on the widely read youth 
collective joonies.com, the experience of Unedited History posits “a history 
lesson to Generation X, but a painful reminiscence to the generation of our 
parents.”


Parts of this article were originally published in REORIENT Magazine 
<http://www.reorientmag.com/2014/09/iran-unedited-history/>, August 2014. The 
article has been updated to reflect that the team behind the chronological 
survey included Catherine David from Musée d’Art Moderne of Paris, and that 
Mohammad Reza Shah took refuge in Rome in the days leading to the 1953 coup.
 