
Luvo Manyonga has already created my favourite story of the year but, on a 
gentle summer afternoon in Pretoria, the South African long jumper is just 
getting started. At the Rio Olympics in August,Manyonga conjured up a dizzying 
leap <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXIbLmlUdOQ&t=9m8s> when he transformed 
the desperate grind of poverty and drug addiction intoa beautifully shiny 
silver medal 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2016-08-14-luvo-manyonga-elated-despite-missing-out-on-olympic-gold-by-1-centimetre>
 and soothing redemption. It proved he had overcome the bleak hold that crystal 
meth once exerted over his township life.

Manyonga now looks like a million dollars. He might be wearing only a vest, 
shorts and flip-flops but he gleams with health at the University of Pretoria’s 
High Performance Centre – 900 miles from the meth dens of Mbekweni in the Cape. 
Manyonga talks with a Bolt-like conviction which only a gifted young athlete 
can carry off with style when he smiles as easily as this reborn Olympian.

“I can be the best jumper in the world right now,” the 25-year-old says with 
an assured grin. “It won’t take me long. By next year you will see flames.”

A former Irish street-sweeper and Coney Island strongman has played a 
significant role in this incredible story.John McGrath 
<http://johnmcgrath.co/about-john/> went “looking for Luvo” in 2013, at a time 
when Manyonga was a lost soul and few people outside his family seemed to care 
whether the athlete survived. McGrath eventually tracked him down and, after a 
few hard years of working together, Manyonga found the strength within himself 
to start jumping again.

I had spent the previous day with McGrath and Manyonga’s family in Mbekweni – 
an hour’s drive from Cape Town. I tell Manyonga now that, before I left the 
township, McGrath said he was certain his friend would become the greatest long 
jumper in history. “Yes, I believe that,” Manyonga says. “I was born in 1991 – 
the same year the [current] world record was set[8.95m by Mike Powell] 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T0WfsAwvTSU&t=0m51s>. So I think it is a 
calling for me.”

Can Manyonga become the first man to jump beyond nine metres – a mark as 
resonant in his event as dipping under 10 seconds was once in the 100m or when 
running a mile in under four minutes was a dreamily impossible landmark? “It is 
possible. Definitely. It can happen. I’m super hungry with the ambition of 
taking over the world.”

Alex Danson: ‘We won Olympic gold because we were a team, there were no 
superstars’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/alex-danson-team-gb-hockey-olympic-gold-rio-2016>
His ear studs flash and the tattoo spelling out LUVO on his arm flexes – 
almost in amusement at his bravado. But, as always with Manyonga, his past 
makes such boldness as moving as it is striking: “In life I have overcome so 
many obstacles. So to get a silver medal in the Olympics is a privilege. But 
this was my first Olympics – and still more is coming. I am the type of person 
where I don’t get overawed. I dreamed about the Olympics since I started. So it 
didn’t seem super-huge to me. Other people might feel different because they 
didn’t experience what I did.”

Manyonga leans back when I ask him to describe his mood before the final. “I 
was chilled out. I shared a room with Khotso Mokoena [who won silver in the 
long jump at the 2008 Beijing Olympics] and I told him: ‘Dude, I can’t wait for 
tomorrow.’ I’d been waiting for this moment so long. I was annoyed I even had 
to go to sleep first. But I slept beautifully. I even slept earlier so I could 
get the night over. When I woke up in the morning it was like …”

He searches for the right word. “Christmas?” I suggest.

“Two hundred percent,” Manyonga beams. “I just wanted the time to come right 
now. I wanted to show the world Luvo Manyonga is back.”

Manyonga jumped a personal best of 8.37m, a mark he has since smashed, and he 
was comfortably ahead of the 2012 Olympic champion, Britain’s Greg Rutherford, 
whose leap of 8.29mwould win him bronze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/greg-rutherford-olympic-long-jump-rio-2016>
. It was only on Jeff Henderson’s sixth and final jump that the American 
snatched the Olympic gold medal away from Manyonga with 8.38m. Those 10mm are 
just grainy specks of dust compared to the vast distance Manyonga has travelled 
out of the darkness and into the light of a new life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffrom-crystal-meth-to-olympic-glory-the-recovery-and-rise-of-luvo-manyonga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff296a7fbedd6b40ab52a5ba3fd87c0edc4d66e3f%2F0_126_5088_3053%2F5088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20crystal%20meth%20to%20Olympic%20glory%3A%20the%20recovery%20and%20rise%20of%20Luvo%20Manyonga&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffrom-crystal-meth-to-olympic-glory-the-recovery-and-rise-of-luvo-manyonga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20crystal%20meth%20to%20Olympic%20glory%3A%20the%20recovery%20and%20rise%20of%20Luvo%20Manyonga&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffrom-crystal-meth-to-olympic-glory-the-recovery-and-rise-of-luvo-manyonga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff296a7fbedd6b40ab52a5ba3fd87c0edc4d66e3f%2F0_126_5088_3053%2F5088.jpg>
 At the 2016 Olympic Games: ‘I wanted to show the world Luvo Manyonga is back.’ 
Photograph: Alexander Hassenstein/Getty Images 
‘Changing the narrative’

Modern sport is a tangled business. Today it is as much about money and image 
as glory and substance. But it seems appropriate that the world’s best athletes 
should be well-rewarded when millions of people watch them. I also feel 
gratified when sport offers a way out of impoverishment and despair for 
athletes as talented as Luvo Manyonga.


And so I have some familiar and pragmatic discussions with Lee-Roy Newton, a 
former athlete and Manyonga’s new agent, about this interview. Newton and 
Manyonga began working together six weeks after the Olympics and the agent 
explains it is important we “change the narrative”. I think the narrative has 
already been changed by Manyonga. Rather than remaining a victim of addiction 
he has become one of world sport’s most uplifting figures. But Newton points 
out that potential sponsors do not want to be associated with past negative 
stories.

I respect Newton’s professionalism and desire to create fresh opportunities 
for Manyonga – but it would be pointless to write about the athlete in a 
vacuum. There are countless other Olympic medallists but interest in Manyonga 
stems from his admirable ability to overcome his mistakes and years of 
adversity. His drug problem is public knowledge – and he was banned for 18 
months in 2012 for using crystal meth, the opposite of performance-enhancing 
doping. But Manyonga is now hurtling towards a different future where world 
records and Olympic gold medals may await.

I explain to Newton that I will travel first to Mbekweni to meet John McGrath 
and Manyonga’s family. Newton advises me not to emphasise the role of any 
individual who might have helped Manyonga – with the implication that a meeting 
with McGrath is not welcome.

The world’s strongest man

“Hey, it’s the world’s strongest man!” a voice cries out at Cape Town airport 
soon after John McGrath meets me for the first time. McGrath is engulfed by two 
friends who, it turns out, are actors. They worked with McGrath when he was 
part of a vaudeville show where he played the hammed-up role of the World’s 
Strongest Man.

“It was great fun,” McGrath says after reminiscing with the men before they 
catch a flight. “I did my usual thing. Bending iron bars and breaking out of 
steel chains.”

McGrath chuckles and, as we settle into his car for the long drive to Paarl 
and Mbekweni, the 49-year-old tells me he will soon attempt to enter the 
Guinness Book of World Records.

“It’s pretty easy,” McGrath says. “I just need to bend 10 six-inch steel nails 
in less than 21 seconds. I love the rawness of it.”

McGrath has performed around the world as a strongman, rowed internationally 
for Ireland and also fought as a kick-boxer for his country while earning five 
black belts in various forms of martial arts after studying hapkido with 
DoJuNim Ji, Bruce Lee’s teacher. As a party trick, he can tear up a pack of 
cards as if they are a flimsy sheet of paper. Yet his work with Manyonga 
carries the most magic for McGrath.

The drive from Cape Town to the pretty Afrikaans town of Paarl echoes with 
Irish affection for an extraordinary Xhosa long jumper. Manyonga & McGrath 
might sound like a new South African law firm but when they met in 2013 they 
were a tik user (tik being the township name for crystal meth) and an ex-refuse 
collector from Waterford in Ireland.

“I grew up in rural Ireland in the 1970s,” McGrath says over a coffee in his 
favourite cafe in Paarl. It’s the same coffee shop where McGrath and Manyonga 
hung out when the strongman was straightening out the jumper. “Ireland was not 
so compassionate then. It was dominated by the Catholic church and my education 
was narrow. But I always had hope that someday I could do something. It was a 
faint hope because I was bullied a lot. I got burned with cigarettes on my 
chest. That scars you even if you don’t realise it at the time. But I reached 
the tipping point of saying: ‘No more.’ I got into martial arts then. I started 
karate and read books. I was reaching out to the world and enjoyed the eastern 
philosophies and the path of the warrior.”

His physical strength was spotted by a rowing coach – as McGrath went to the 
local club where they offered free swimming lessons. “Irish people can’t really 
swim,” he smiles, “so I took my chance. After a few sessions this guy said: 
‘Why don’t you try rowing?’ That appealed to me because you have to be very 
strong for rowing. I would cycle to rowing, train, cycle back and do 
rudimentary weight-training with rocks.”

Greg Rutherford: ‘UK Athletics is more of a hindrance than a help’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/17/greg-rutherford-iaaf-uk-athletics-investment-funding-long-jump>
McGrath became an accomplished rower and, when he was picked for Ireland, he 
was in a boat with men studying to be doctors or lawyers. “I was sweeping 
streets in Waterford,” McGrath remembers, “and I did that for three years. But 
I was dreaming of a way out. Rowing was my ticket to freedom – otherwise I was 
destined to sweep those streets until this day. I had tenacity and was picked 
for Ireland at the age of 23. I was Irish Rower of the Year in 1999 … but then 
my back struck.”

McGrath suffered a bulging disc and he was told his sporting career was over. 
He ignored his doctors and made his mark in martial arts and kickboxing. Such 
grit helps explain his empathy for Manyonga. McGrath had fallen for a South 
African girl and he flew to Cape Town with her on holiday in 2008. He has 
remained in the Cape ever since. McGrath is now a well-known figure in Paarl 
where he runs a gym.

“In 2013 I was in Colombia as [South Africa’s] tug-of-war coach at the World 
Games,” McGrath explains. “It was then that the Sascoc [South African Sports 
Confederation and Olympic Committee] people and me first talked about Luvo.”

Manyonga had won the 2010 world junior championships and, a year later, he 
performed even more impressively. He finished fifth in the world championships 
in Daegu and, as McGrath says, “Luvo won a lot of money. But when he got back 
home he lost it and was back on crystal meth – or tik as it’s called on the 
street. The Sascoc people told me: ‘This kid is banned for 18 months and you’re 
not a qualified coach so you cannot work with him.’”

McGrath laughs. “Telling that to an Irishman is the biggest ‘fuck-you’ of all 
time. I thought: ‘I’ll fucking show you.’ But it took me a month to track down 
Luvo. I think word had reached him: ‘A two-metre tall, 120kg white guy is 
looking for you.’ I didn’t sound too appealing. But I got in touch with pastor 
Eugene Maqwelan in Mbekweni and he found Luvo. We met at his church office. 
Luvo looked dapper. He looked awesome. He was a tik addict but something shone 
out of him. I said: ‘If you want to take a new journey, I will walk it with 
you.’ I was convinced I could make him better. Luvo’s redemption would partly 
be my own.”

McGrath might have learnt a lot about strength and conditioning but he knew 
little about long jumping. “I had to reconnect him with Mario Smith – who had 
been his coach. Mario was a very good man and had great passion. But they had 
been through the wars and it took time. While we were trying to get them back 
together I worked with him in the gym and wherever I went, Luvo went. It was a 
slow process – with lots of relapses.”

Manyonga kept sliding back into the dark clutches of addiction and McGrath, 
three years later, sighs. “You had to have the wisdom of Solomon and the 
patience of Job to work with Luvo then. You never knew from one day to the next 
where he would be. But you had to make peace with that and believe things would 
get better.”

They got worse. Even when Manyonga somehow qualified for the 2014 Commonwealth 
Games his paperwork was mysteriously “lost”, allegedly in a mistake made by an 
administrator, for Manyonga was still an embarrassment. Soon afterwards, in 
June 2014, Smith died in a car accident while driving to meet Manyonga.


Manyonga was devastated but still missed the funeral after being waylaid by 
his tik buddies. Luke Alfred, writing for the Mail & Guardian, captured the 
desolation of that day as he and McGrath went looking for Luvo in Mbekweni. 
Alfred’s poignant article headlined“The impossibility of loving Luvo” 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2014-07-31-the-impossibility-of-loving-luvo>.

“The loss of Mario was a terrible blow,” McGrath remembers. “Luvo went into a 
downward spiral. He was staring death in the face. It would be an exaggeration 
to say then that the amount of people who believed in Luvo could be counted on 
one hand.”

When Alfred’s feature was published in August 2014 he quoted a trenchant 
McGrath: “There are only two ways Luvo can go: he’ll either be standing on an 
Olympic podium, or he’ll be dead from an overdose by the time he’s 30.”

It was one of the rare occasions when a journalistic feature had widespread 
impact. Manyonga and McGrath were summoned to parliament where they met the 
sports council for two hours. McGrath pleaded for help by stressing Manyonga 
needed a proper coach as well as refuge from the tik-riddled streets of 
Mbekweni.

“To be fair to him Gideon Sam [the president of Sascoc] came through for 
Luvo,” McGrath says. “But the ANC [the government party] instructed Sascoc to 
help Luvo and it took time for that to kick in. We couldn’t get a sponsor. Not 
even Adidas wanted to sponsor Luvo with some spikes. I got him a pair myself 
but I didn’t realise there was a difference between sprinting and jumping 
spikes. I got Luvo sprinting spikes. They stick to the board as you take off 
but Luvo still jumped 8.10m.”

Finally, in 2015, Manyonga left Mbekweni for Pretoria – where he benefits from 
the specialist coaching of Toby Sutcliffe and Neil Cornelius at the High 
Performance Centre. McGrath stresses that much credit should be paid to these 
men for unleashing Manyonga’s brilliance.

We are joined by the photographer Pieter Bauermeister and head for Mbekweni in 
McGrath’s car – an Irishman driving an Afrikaner and an English-speaking South 
African deep into the township. “What can go wrong?” McGrath quips before 
Bauermeister regales us with tales of a past tik-related assignment where he 
had a gun held to his head by a gang leader. It’s sobering to hear him relate 
reports that, in the Cape Town township of Ocean View, 80% of schoolchildren 
may be addicted to tik. The photographer explains that national statistics 
suggest there are as many as 250,000 crystal meth users in the Cape – with 36% 
being minors. Luvo Manyonga’s Olympic achievement becomes even more notable.

McGrath drives us through the dusty warren of ramshackle huts and houses until 
we reach the home of Luvo’s parents – Joyce and John Manyonga. Luvo’s dad, his 
sister, Vuyiseka, and her baby daughter are at home but Joyce is working. Her 
white madam, an Afrikaans woman whose home is cleaned by Joyce in the 
neighbouring town of Worcester, is unaware her domestic servant is due to be 
interviewed.

The Irishman rolls his eyes. “OK,” he says, “let’s go to Worcester.”

The return of Caster Semenya: Olympic favourite and ticking timebomb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/29/the-return-of-caster-semenya-olympic-favourite-and-ticking-timebomb>
Vuyiseka and her baby join us on the drive to Worcester. I feel like I am back 
in apartheid-eraSouth Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> as 
McGrath disappears inside to strike a deal with the white woman so Joyce can be 
released from her chores.

Joyce Manyonga finally climbs into the car us and we drive back to Mbekweni. 
“Thank you, Mama,” McGrath says.

“It’s such hard work,” Joyce replies in Afrikaans. “I get very tired. I have 
been a domestic worker since 1977. It’s a long time.”

Vuyiseka explains that her father lost his job seven years ago and that she 
and her dad have not been able to find work – as hard as they try. “Mama is the 
only breadwinner.”

But there is more joy than misery in the tiny Manyonga home – even when Joyce 
sheds copious tears. After they describe watching Luvo’s stunning Olympic feat 
in the early hours of a Sunday morning, Joyce rocks with pride. Her face then 
creases and tears roll down her cheeks as she turns to McGrath.

“John is like Luvo’s father,” Joyce says. “He looked after Luvo when nobody 
but his family wanted him. When Luvo was on drugs, John took care of him.”

McGrath looks down. He had suggested he would leave me alone with Joyce but I 
had asked him to stay. I feel compelled to speak: “I’m sorry, Joyce. I didn’t 
want to upset you.”

Joyce shakes her head. She explains that these are happy tears. “This man,” 
Joyce says, pointing at McGrath, “is very nice. John is such a good man to all 
my children.”

I ask Vuyiseka how they felt when Mario Smith died. “Luvo was on drugs and we 
were scared. But one day Luvo came to this house with John. He said: ‘This is 
my new coach.’ We looked at John and we liked him. John would fetch Luvo for 
training and he would give us money for food and electricity. My mother suffers 
with high-blood pressure and she worried about Luvo. But John helped so much. I 
could write 10 pages about how good John is to us. Years ago there was just 
John. Now so many people want to be with Luvo.”

There is no bitterness in Vuyiseka when she says Luvo would prefer them to 
visit him in Pretoria. Too many dark memories haunt him in Mbekweni. Last month 
he paid for his parents to fly north. It was the first time Joyce and John 
Manyonga had stepped aboard a plane. Joyce shudders and then exclaims with 
pleasure when she remembers the reaction in Pretoria.

“They kept saying to me – white and black people – ‘Luvo’s mother! We love 
you! We love Luvo!’”

Salty tears of pride fall from her eyes as Joyce embraces John McGrath – the 
Irish strongman who believed in her son.

‘This is the reason I am still alive’

“My mother always cries,” Luvo says affectionately when I tell him about my 
day in Mbekweni.


“So does mine,” I joke, before we agree that tears are not a sign of weakness. 
I tell him how much his mother impressed me. He nods and opens up. “I’m a 
simple person and I don’t mind about situations. If I don’t have it, I don’t 
have it. Growing up in Mbekweni, I would go to school and get R2 [the 
equivalent of 20p] for lunch. My mom is a domestic worker and she made sure we 
had food on the table – no matter what. The person I am today is because of my 
mom and my dad. This mentality I have now is because of what happened and what 
they taught me. Even going to sleep without food on the table made me stronger.”

Did that happen often? “It did. My mom would go to a neighbour and ask for 
food. I thought I would never do that. It was only one day. You won’t die from 
not eating something. But my mother wanted to feed us.”

Manyonga nods at Vuyiseka’s claim that he is happier seeing the family in 
Pretoria than at home in Mbekweni. “I think I need some more time to grow and 
heal,” he says quietly. “I will be a recovering addict the rest of my life and, 
as a [former] user, there are so many triggers there. Maybe the corner where I 
used to hang out, seeing old friends, maybe that’s going to trigger that. But 
it’s nice and safe here – the only thing you think about is training and 
competing. It’s the best way for me.”

I loved my day in Mbekweni but it was impossible to ignore the old gulf 
between black and white SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. 
Are lack of opportunities the cause of widespread substance abuse in the 
townships? “There are drugs in the township but if you want to make it you can 
do it without drugs. But some people can’t make it out of there because they 
don’t have help – or the hope there is something more in life. That’s where I 
learnt about life. It was a wake-up call for me.”

Manyonga told Luke Alfred he had to “jump or die” 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2015-09-17-luvo-manyonga-jumps-or-dies.>. Does he 
still believe that, if it hadn’t been for long jumping, he might be dead? “Yes. 
This is the reason I’m still alive. God gave me the talent to show what can be 
done in this world. It doesn’t matter what situation you are in … you can come 
back. I can spread the word to the world. But you won’t change the person until 
he changes himself.”

Manyonga thinks carefully when asked to remember the most difficult time of 
his substance abuse. “When I was starting to run away from Mario Smith’s home. 
I was scared when I was high. I was thinking I won’t go back. I was being 
paranoid thinking this is the best way to be.”

Was he lonely? “I really felt alone around three o’clock in the morning. 
That’s the hard time. You look around and there’s people who might know I used 
to be a superstar. But what if they kidnap or kill me?”

Did Manyonga ever give up the dream of jumping? “I always told the guys that I 
was using with that I’m going to jump again. I was the kind of guy that would 
jump over people or the fence or even cars.”

Even when he was high and not training? “Yes. I always had hope.”

That hope was dented by Smith’s death. “He was almost like a father. He taught 
me much about athletics and helped me become the person I am. He played the 
biggest role in my life.”

What about John McGrath? Manyonga’s body language changes and he looks 
awkward. “Ja, in a training point of view he did help. He did the best he can. 
I will give him credit also.”

It’s a clear sign Manyonga does not want to talk about McGrath. But I tell 
Manyonga how his mother and sister had reacted to McGrath.

“He did help me and he played a role in my life. I wouldn’t put him out of it. 
But so many people believed in me. They weren’t getting anything out of it if I 
am seeing it correctly. Maybe they want something out of it. I don’t know. But 
saying no one [else] believed in me is not true. [Sascoc’s] Gideon Sam, before 
I met John, flew to Cape Town to see me personally. He told me: ‘My boy, I 
believe in you ever since, I’m sorry for saying this, [your] fucked-up days. 
I’m going to try to change your life one day.’ He flew back to Johannesburg and 
then John came out and we tried to get some interviews and spread the word that 
I need help.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffrom-crystal-meth-to-olympic-glory-the-recovery-and-rise-of-luvo-manyonga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd03f989366eb4ade85265edae5adf64d0d92ecf3%2F0_186_4716_2830%2F4716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20crystal%20meth%20to%20Olympic%20glory%3A%20the%20recovery%20and%20rise%20of%20Luvo%20Manyonga&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffrom-crystal-meth-to-olympic-glory-the-recovery-and-rise-of-luvo-manyonga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20crystal%20meth%20to%20Olympic%20glory%3A%20the%20recovery%20and%20rise%20of%20Luvo%20Manyonga&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffrom-crystal-meth-to-olympic-glory-the-recovery-and-rise-of-luvo-manyonga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd03f989366eb4ade85265edae5adf64d0d92ecf3%2F0_186_4716_2830%2F4716.jpg>
 Luvo Manyonga, left, on the Rio podium with the Olympic long jump gold 
medallist Jeff Henderson, and bronze medal-winning Greg Rutherford, right. 
Photograph: Matthias Hangst/Getty Images 
Did his parliamentary meeting with McGrath help? “Those people from parliament 
didn’t come back. ANC people came to my place. But it was empty promises. Only 
Sascoc came back. Now I am saying Sascoc did the most.”

I wonder how Manyonga felt when, apparently, someone from Sascoc lost his 2014 
Commonwealth Games entry? “I got over it because they are still helping me a 
lot. I won’t say anything nasty about them. A mistake can happen to anyone. 
Sascoc took me from nowhere and now I am someone.”

Manyonga is truly “someone”. He is not only an Olympic silver medallist and an 
inspiration. He is also strong and free – and with an exhilarating future ahead 
of him. It does not really matter who helped him most. His decision to change 
was driven by his inner strength.

Manyonga won an Olympic medal with less than a year of proper training. His 
real potential was captured three weeks after Rio when he won a Diamond League 
meeting in Brussels and jumpedanother personal best of 8.48m 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZOemlxfrnXc&t=1m45s>. His face lights up. “At 
the Diamond League a miracle happened. I believe in God, so much, and the 
miracle happened when I was praying and saw a light there. I felt so light. I 
didn’t even feel that 8.48. When I landed I was thinking 8.20. The moment they 
showed it on the board I was like: ‘Oh My God!’ I was coming from the Olympics 
with a silver medal but I didn’t have to prove I deserved it. I just show the 
world I’ve still got it. Just give me the same beat and I’ll show you.”

We talk for another 10 minutes about his hopes for the future, his new 
girlfriend and inspiring South Africans. It feels right to tell Manyonga how 
impressive he has been this year – whether in Rio, Brussels or, today, in 
Pretoria. But I am still confused. I know he and McGrath were together less 
than a month ago. They looked happy and even shared a stage to relate their 
joint story. But now, despite the outpouring of love his mother and sister 
showed for McGrath, a mere mention of the Irishman’s name brings down a wall. 
Why?

Manyonga pauses. “Can I not comment on that?”

“Of course,” I say.

The night boxer Emile Griffith answered gay taunts with a deadly cortege of 
punches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/10/boxer-emile-griffith-gay-taunts-book-extract>
We talk some more before Manyonga thanks me for coming to see him. He smiles 
when I say I expect him to win the world championships in London next year.

“I’ll be ready,” Manyonga says as we shake hands.

A few days later I meet Luke Alfred. He has written three long features about 
Manyonga and McGrath – and interviewed both men in detail over the last two 
years. “I really like Luvo,” Alfred says. “And I really like John. They’re both 
great.”

Alfred laughs and shakes his head when I ask him about the changed timeline 
which suggests that Gideon Sam, and the administrators, did most to help 
Manyonga find redemption. My gut-instinct about McGrath chimes with his own.

I call McGrath and explain what happened with Manyonga. He sounds hurt – but 
not surprised. We had already discussed, even with Joyce and Vuyiseka, the 
likelihood that the Irish strongman might be airbrushed out of this story.

“It’s OK,” McGrath says. “I love Luvo. I just want the best for him.”

In the end the people who matter most are Luvo and Joyce Manyonga. The Olympic 
silver medallist and the domestic worker, a son and his mother, have both done 
wonders.

“Exactly,” McGrath says. “Luvo and Joyce have done it. They have found hope. 
Nothing can change that. It’s still a wonderful story.”

 * Luvo Manyonga portraits by James Oatway, John McGrath and Mbekweni 
photographs by Pieter Bauermeister  