

When it comes to establishing an Australian identity separate from the 
multitude of cultures brought to it, few art forms offer a stronger means than 
music. Long before the first sea shanty rang against the walls of the first 
penal colony, Australians have been singing about the land, what it means to 
them, and what it can do to its inhabitants.

On this Australia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day>, which has people 
across the country debating exactly what the anniversary says about our 
national identity, here’s how the idea of the nation has aged via popular song:


1. Slim Dusty – A Pub with No Beer, 1957

In a time before “the music industry” existed as we know it, songwriters were 
building on a long history of bush ballads and appropriated European folk songs 
to paint an Australia of rose-tinted nostalgia and hummable fictions.


Gordon Parsons’ million-selling ode to enforced sobriety is populated by a 
Lawsonsworth of internationally recognised Australianisms: dingoes, stockmen, 
blacksmiths, a swagman and a dog awaiting his master. Slim Dusty knew better 
than anyone how to sell a vision and get disparate towns singing the same 
optimistic songs, building an idea of Australia in the process.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8E0aZ387M_I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8E0aZ387M_I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8E0aZ387M_I&media=>
On the road his whole life (between recording a staggering 103 albums), Dusty 
sung about what he knew: bars, travel, human nature, work and how to reframe a 
story. Songs like 1960’sKing Bundawaal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BwXs2vjlHWY> honoured Aboriginal Australia’s 
connection with land with a reverence that was rare for the time.

2. Peter Allen – I Still Call Australia Home, 1980

Peter Allen was clearly far too busy selling out Broadway shows to hop a plane 
back to Sydney, so penned a showstopper about homesickness instead.


Now better known for its orchestral arrangement and the association of children
singing it in various picturesque locations 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r0mcjdbT4Hg>, I Still Call Australia Home 
spends most of its time describing places and people that aren’t in Australia 
at all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_OCKXLXWNXg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_OCKXLXWNXg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_OCKXLXWNXg&media=>
Allen may be one of the first people in the “home of the free”, the US, to 
sing about finding freedom by leaving it. His longing for this freedom remains 
a vague homesickness, a feeling to which anyone can relate, but which Allen 
makes a key quality of being Australian.

3. Goanna – Solid Rock, 1982

While Men at Work <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XfR9iY5y94s> could crank 
out a catchy pop tune and throw together Australian symbolism and a flute hook 
in a massively appealing way, only Goanna tried to channel the spirit of the 
country and the betrayal of colonialism into a stomping trans-Pacific pop hit.


Shane Howard sees irony in Australia Day award for song on Indigenous genocide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/26/shane-howard-sees-irony-in-australia-day-award-for-song-on-indigenous-genocide>
Rather than commemorate places or yeast-based spreads, the songwriter Shane 
Howard, approached the spirit of the land and the oppression of colonialism 
like a witness, poetically, radically and commercially finding a way to sing 
the slogan “always was, always will be, Aboriginal land”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcbASq3FMf70&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcbASq3FMf70>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcbASq3FMf70&media=>
Howard has just been appointed a Member of the Order of Australia for his 
service to the performing arts, butacknowledged the irony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/26/shane-howard-sees-irony-in-australia-day-award-for-song-on-indigenous-genocide>
 of being recognised for this particular song: “Australia Day is a complicated 
day and as a nation we have to deal with that, and it’s become a symbol of 
division and not unity,” he told AAP. “It’s lovely and ironic in a way that you 
are recognised for a song that criticises government policy.”

4. The Go-Betweens – Cattle and Cane, 1983


Mining the sight and smell of houses among cane fields to trigger a poignant 
memory is a popular move for Australian songwriters. In Cattle and Cane, 
Australia is evoked in flashback; singing in the third person, the lyricist, 
Grant McLennan, is given an omnipotence to move through time across the land, 
arranging images.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvkrEiD9s0pU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvkrEiD9s0pU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvkrEiD9s0pU&media=>
Like The Waifs’ London Still <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_emz0o638PQ>, 
McLennan’s vision of Australia came from a London bedsit, and like Gang Gajang 
below, he describes a life in Queensland as one fraught with peril: “In the 
sky, a rain of falling cinders.” Even more powerful than the violence of the 
weather is the power of forgetting, of escaping via books and memory and an old 
railroad.

5. Gang Gajang – Sounds of Then (This is Australia), 1985

It’s a safe bet that patios have never been more reverentially cited in a 
lyric than in the Sydney pop group Gang Gajang’s Sounds of Then. The lyricist, 
Mark Callaghan, refers to the song as a “Brick veneer drama 
<http://www.debbiekruger.com/writer/aprap/songs1.html>”, more inspired by 
family dysfunction than by the view from the veranda – but much like with Peter 
Allen’s best-known song, once you attach it to some stirring images and put it 
ina famous ad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mFVmuF0F9Hc>, it takes on a life 
of its own.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DML9h3I5Uktw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DML9h3I5Uktw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DML9h3I5Uktw&media=>
Here, while the land is dangerous (“we watch the lightning crack over cane 
fields”) there’s a resigned acceptance that nothing can change it. Living next 
to something that can kill you is as Australian as it gets, so why worry?

6. The Triffids – Wide Open Road, 1986

As the 1980s progressed, venues got big and bands started sounding bigger. 
Drums echoed, stars stalked across arena stages and, if you were writing about 
Australia, you could use echoes and emptiness to suggest the vastness of the 
country.


As with Icehouse’s Great Southern Land 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3mkidP2OUCk>, the Triffids needed big drums, 
airy synths and a man with a rich voice to bring the outback to life as a place 
whose scale could only be described by the vast space evoked by echo and reverb.

Australian anthems: the Triffids – Wide Open Road
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/18/australian-anthems-the-triffids-wide-open-road>
Few city-dwelling listeners would have encountered the vastness of the 
country, and those who lived there already knew that the southern land was 
great and the road was wide and open. Though penned for “the stretch of highway 
in between Caiguna and Norseman”, Wide Open Road was more favourably received 
in Europe, where it fitted in with an exoticised version of the country known 
from Nicolas Roeg’s film Walkabout andDavid Bowie filmclips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/12/how-david-bowies-lets-dance-shone-a-light-on-australias-indigenous-issues>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7N5akOOlGTI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7N5akOOlGTI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7N5akOOlGTI&media=>
7. The Seekers – I Am Australian, 1987


In a rare example of a modern populist historical song, the Seekers used their 
status as international pop legends to update the Australian identity, throwing 
in Aboriginal references right up top and name-checking Albert Namatjira. This 
pluralistic paean to openness proclaims the only prerequisite to being 
Australian is to understand the relationship between identity and the land.

The chorus, once sung in robust optimism and endowed with the ability to unite 
aAFL grand final <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v22SPtCFck8>, now sounds 
almost idealistic: “We are one / But we are many / And from all the lands on 
earth we come / We’ll share a dream.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaSoGJQkKDYk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaSoGJQkKDYk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaSoGJQkKDYk&media=>
8. Christine Anu – My Island Home, 1995

Originally written by the Warumpi Band’s Neil Murray in 1986, Christine Anu’s 
glorious appropriation of My Island Home is another song about pining for a 
place and shaping it in your mind. Elcho Island, home to Murray’s Warumpi 
bandmate George Burarrwanga (and coincidentally Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu), 
inspired a balance of specificity (“I’m holding that long turtle spear”) and 
universality. As one YouTube commentator notes, “It’s all one big island.”

Anu’s version forgoes Warumpi Band’s 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yZEodxUx2ME> slow-building folk anthem for 
shimmering mid-90s dance that somehow remains timeless. Unlike its film clip.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOSFGK9HlEto&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOSFGK9HlEto>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOSFGK9HlEto&media=>
9. The Paradise Motel – German Girl, 1996

While it’s easy to celebrate the sunshine-y wonder of being born and growing 
old in the lucky country, one overwhelming feeling accompanies the thought of 
actually being left on the land alone: fear.


The Paradise Motel’s noir-ish orchestral work German Girl uses the mysterious 
1993 death ofGerman backpacker Nancy Grunwaldt 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-03-12/family-marks-missing-tourist27s-anniversary-of-missing-woman/4566734>
 to examine this feeling in a niche of Australia often ignored: the Tasmanian 
wilderness. The songwriter, Charles Bickford, focuses on the sense of isolation 
and uncertainty, which is expressed by the piercing voice of Merida Sussex over 
a crescendo of fear and release.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrAnSVhvKy8Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrAnSVhvKy8Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrAnSVhvKy8Y&media=>
10. Illy – Our Country, 2009

If one genre of music has been committed to examining Australian identity and 
celebrating Australian symbols and totems of cultural pride more than any 
other, it’s Australian hip-hop. Illy’s Our Country puts its dedication to the 
land up front: “to Indigenous Australia and the soldiers and firefighters who 
protect it”. He later notes that it’s the land and people – not “galleries and 
museums” – that define Australian culture.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Oe7y-V_kRk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Oe7y-V_kRk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Oe7y-V_kRk&media=>
Unlike many artists on this list, Illy’s articulation of Australia’s strengths 
and problems is delivered in an accent that plants lines like “They wouldn’t 
call it the lucky country if it wasn’t, mate” in the heart of Australia’s 
suburbs.

11. Wildflower – Galiwin’ku, 2010

Like Gurrumul, Saltwater Band and other artists on Arnhem Land’s Skinnyfish 
Music roster, the music here seems sprung from the land itself.


Wildflower sing about relationships with the land, travelling, and – being 
based on an outstation in the Northern Territory – the interconnectedness 
between land and time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrmLVxRS_Sxs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrmLVxRS_Sxs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrmLVxRS_Sxs&media=>
Like most of their songs, Galiwin’ku is sung in the Kunwinjku language and was 
inspired by a story told by mentor Aunty Jill Nganjmirra. As the lead singer, 
Jean, told Triple J, “these songs are Aboriginal songs. They’re for the future.”

12. The Drones – Taman Shud, 2015

Gareth Liddiard of the Drones: 'It’s time leftwingers grew some balls'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/23/gareth-liddiard-of-the-drones-its-time-leftwingers-grew-some-balls>
At once a glorious celebration of the best qualities of Australiana and a 
vitriolic riposte to all that’s ill in the lucky country, the Drones’ Gareth 
Liddiard delivered a “big piss off [to those who] try to lay down the rules and 
the terms, tell you what you have to do to be Australian”. Looking to the land 
and sea for the answer to the unsolvable mystery suggested inthe title 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taman_Shud_Case>, his frustration turns to fury.


As Liddiard explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/23/gareth-liddiard-of-the-drones-its-time-leftwingers-grew-some-balls>
 to Guardian Australia, he rages against the version of the country reinforced 
by the mainstream media and promoted by conservative politicians. “I ain’t 
sitting around being gallipolised / One man’s BBQ’s another’s hunger strike.”

Despite a campaign <https://www.instagram.com/p/_GQXd-AUFs/> to get Taman Shud 
in the Hottest 100, thefailure 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-01-26/taylor-swift-banned-from-2015-hottest-100/6046156>
 of previous attempts suggests that YouTube may be the best place to hear the 
song that best captured Australia in 2015.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6OkgaCRII7I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6OkgaCRII7I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6OkgaCRII7I&media=> 