
When the Estonian graphic designer Anton Koovit first arrived in Berlin in 
2005, he did what most tourists do when they get to the German capital: he got 
lost at Alexanderplatz station. Berlin’s public transport system has had a 
standardised signage typeface called “Transit” in use since the mid-90s, but 
its application is erratic. Fonts differ between lines, sometimes between 
stations on the same line, and in a couple of instances even between platforms 
at the same station. At Alexanderplatz, where long-distance railways intersect 
with local overground trains and three separate subway lines, getting lost is 
par for the course, even for Berliners.


Yet in Koovit’s case, it turned out to be a blessing. He boarded the U8 line 
which cuts vertically across the city and fell in love with the font he 
discovered on the signs at the stops: a grotesque sans serif with a close 
resemblance to the New Johnston font in use on the London Underground since 
1916, yet somehow with more a “thought through” feel. Koovit calls it a “funny 
yet deeply serious font”. Some of the letters look like they’ve been 
sandpapered off with modernist zeal: the lower-case t is a simple cross. Others 
are higgledy-piggledy: the lower-case a’s, for example, look different at each 
stop.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425912682947%2F7233bc7c-9ac6-44f4-af02-35e28714a907-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20grotesque%20to%20quirky%3A%20a%20history%20of%20Berlin%20told%20through%20U-Bahn%20typography&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20grotesque%20to%20quirky%3A%20a%20history%20of%20Berlin%20told%20through%20U-Bahn%20typography&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425912682947%2F7233bc7c-9ac6-44f4-af02-35e28714a907-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A sign on the U8 line uses the deeply idiosyncratic Octopuss font. Photograph: 
Jon Worth 
When Koovit finally arrived at his original destination, he did some research 
and found not only that the design community was picking its brains over the 
origins of the U8 typeface – “Neuzeit Grotesk” and “Wiener Rundblock” were some 
of the names bandied about on forums – but also that no one had bothered to 
digitise the font since the U8 line was built at the time of the first world 
war. After research that nearly resulted in an entire PhD, Koovit’s homage to 
the U8 is now for salevia his website 
<http://files.korkork.com/index.php?/fonts/u8/>. “It was like an odd mix of 
archeology and trainspotting”, he says. “Given that it was so heavily bombed in 
the second world war, Berlin can look like most other European cities above 
ground. But under the surface there is all this amazing history”.

The quirky station signs at Berlin’s 81 listed subway stations are as easy to 
overlook on a first visit as they are hard to ignore once one has developed an 
eye for them. Each font spells out its own history of the city. If the U8’s 
avant-garde modernism seems a good fit for the graphic designers and 
fashionistas that now frequent the line on their way to trendy Neukölln, other 
station signs still hark back to the capital’s authoritarian past.

At Berlin Wannsee, site of the conference that resulted in the “final 
solution”, blackletter flashes past like memories of a nightmare. At Anhalter 
Bahnhof, a sign inTannenberg <http://signalarchiv.de/Meldungen/10001011>-Fraktur
 <http://signalarchiv.de/Meldungen/10001011> – a supposedly authentically 
German font once heavily used by the Nazis – is a reminder that the before 
wartime bombings, this was once one of the most important railway stations in 
the city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425898848551%2Ff26de3ce-11a4-45d0-a0e0-062a03449a37-2060x1482.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20grotesque%20to%20quirky%3A%20a%20history%20of%20Berlin%20told%20through%20U-Bahn%20typography&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20grotesque%20to%20quirky%3A%20a%20history%20of%20Berlin%20told%20through%20U-Bahn%20typography&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425898848551%2Ff26de3ce-11a4-45d0-a0e0-062a03449a37-2060x1482.jpeg>
 A Fehrbelliner Platz sign on the U3. Photograph: BVG Archive 
Some of the signs and stations have a grandeur in keeping with the swagger of 
the Wilhelmine era: many of the stops on the U3 line, opened in 1913, are built 
in a neoclassical style with stuccoed walls, period columns and mosaic station 
signs that spell out the names in confident capitals.


Yet incongruity is part of the game. At Fehrbelliner Platz the mosaics hang 
only a few metres away from another sign spelling out the same stop in late 70s 
Helvetica, on a backdrop of brown and orange. At Wittenbergplatz, one of the 
three platforms has a station sign in the style of the London Underground, 
gifted to the station by a British city commander in 1952.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425898071773%2Faf6f465e-d54b-42e0-a62b-f08d3dca1b67-2060x1076.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20grotesque%20to%20quirky%3A%20a%20history%20of%20Berlin%20told%20through%20U-Bahn%20typography&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20grotesque%20to%20quirky%3A%20a%20history%20of%20Berlin%20told%20through%20U-Bahn%20typography&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fberlin-u-bahn-typography-history-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425898071773%2Faf6f465e-d54b-42e0-a62b-f08d3dca1b67-2060x1076.jpeg>
 Konstanzer Strasse on the U7, using Helvetica. Photograph: Jon Worth/Flickr 
Sometimes fonts seem to hint at their line’s temperament. On the U6, a line 
once dotted with “ghost stations” closed during the GDR era, there are still 
some stops which look lost in time, such as Platz der Luftbrücke or 
Naturkundemuseum, their names spelled out in wobbly handcarved fonts.

The subliminal power of city fonts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jan/13/subliminal-power-city-fonts-typeface-design>
On the U7, which snakes coyly along Berlin’s underbelly as if to deliberately 
avoid the major intersections, the station signs are written in workmanlike 
Helvetica, the standard subway font across the world: you could be in New York, 
Vienna, Stockholm, or anywhere.

For contrast, there’s Pankstrasse on the U8: built in 1977 just a couple of 
hundred metres south of where the Berlin wall used to run, it was constructed 
to be used as a shelter in case of a nuclear war, with its own emergency 
kitchen and a filtered ventilation system. But the deeply idiosyncratic 
Octopuss font on the station sign is a reminder that ‘77 was also the year of 
Donna Summer’s I Feel Love and Saturday Night Fever: the end of the world may 
have been nigh, but one corner of Berlin was boogying the night away to uphold 
western civilisation.
 