
So the past winter has been all about showing off a sliver of the stomach. 
What body part will be fashionable next season?

Charlotte, by email

You know, of all the intriguing developments to have emerged in recent years – 
and, really, I think we might need a few new pads of paper to keep this list up 
to date – the one about women’s body parts being subject to fashion trends, 
well, it probably wouldn’t make the top five at the moment, but it would be in 
the top 15, maybe even 10. Perhaps somewhere betweenthe return of Craig David 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/02/im-realising-what-it-is-to-be-viral-the-return-of-craig-david>
 and Ella Mills (nee Woodward) disowning the term “clean eating”. AsRonan 
Keating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/02/ronan-keating-once-musical-west-end-stage>
 warned us years ago, life is a rollercoaster.

Anyway, we’ve had the butt 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/18/fashion/more-women-seeking-curvaceous-posteriors.html?_r=1>
. We had thesideboob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2012/may/29/side-cleavage-new-trend-born>
. We had thethigh gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/nov/03/thigh-gap-pressure-point-women-self-esteem>
 and, this winter, we’ve had theflat stomach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/14/ab-crack-taylor-swift-serena-williams>
 and the bony area between (some) women’s bosoms, now that thecleavage has been 
deemed officially over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/01/end-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback>
. It’s exciting, isn’t it, ladies? Which part of our anatomy shall we put in 
storage in 2017?

Of course, by and very large, this is all just a jazz hands-y, roundabout way 
of saying, when it comes to being in fashion, anyone over a size 10 need not 
apply. Because with the exception of the reverence of what the scribe Sir 
Mix-a-Lot famously called “the buns”, all of these so-called body-part trends 
are – and this is so obvious I’m embarrassed at condescending to all of you by 
writing it – yet another way to venerate female self-deprivation.

So much has been written about why fashion loves skinny women, and some of it 
has been written by me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/22/saint-laurent-skinny-model-fashion-industry>
, so I don’t think I need to contribute further to that landfill. A lot less, 
however, has been written about what, exactly, can be done to break this toxic 
love affair, and the reason for that is, quite frankly, because no one really 
knows the answer. I recently read an article in a fashion magazine advising 
women to wear low-cut dresses so as to show off … their clavicles. That was not 
where you thought that sentence was going, was it? Truly, only in fashion are 
bones seen as the sexiest part of a woman. Whatever next? “Hey gals, miniskirts 
are a great way to show your femurs! And then match yours with a cropped top so 
the world can admire your ribs!”

So what can we look forward to next year? Well, 2017 is already shaping up to 
be a doozy in the political arena, so fashion might as well go similarly 
apocalyptic on everyone’s asses. In that spirit, here are some advance tips: 
buy backless dresses, ladies, so as to flaunt your thoracic vertebrae. Bumpy 
vertebrae are thedernier cri in 2017! And only short sleeves, please, so as to 
show off that sexy hollow in your arm only those with a BMI of under 16 can 
pull off. And remember, if all else fails, just wear a skeleton costume. True, 
it might drive the fellas wild with your bony sexiness but such is the price of 
chic!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fsideboob-bones-fashion-new-obsession-women-low-cut-dresses-clavicles-femurs-trump-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F214a32a118143f4499626c3db1c56edd340fbba7%2F0_19_3150_1889%2F3150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20sideboob%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20bones%20%E2%80%93%20fashion%E2%80%99s%20new%20toxic%20obsession%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fsideboob-bones-fashion-new-obsession-women-low-cut-dresses-clavicles-femurs-trump-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20sideboob%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20bones%20%E2%80%93%20fashion%E2%80%99s%20new%20toxic%20obsession%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fsideboob-bones-fashion-new-obsession-women-low-cut-dresses-clavicles-femurs-trump-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F214a32a118143f4499626c3db1c56edd340fbba7%2F0_19_3150_1889%2F3150.jpg>
 Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump at The Metropolitan Museum of Art Costume 
Institute Benefit Gala, 2016. Photograph: Evan Agostini/AP 
You said last week that the Trumps wouldn’t be as loved by the fashion 
industry as the Obamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/14/fashion-trumps-obamas-elitism-snobbery-donald-melania-taylor-swift-election-result>
. But Donald’s son-in-law Jared Kushner is very handsome and his brother dates 
Karlie Kloss. So surely the shallow fashion industry will come round?

Diana, by email

Excellent question, Diana. Yes, that’s right, Jared’s younger brother, Joshua, 
is indeed the boyfriend of supermodelKarlie Kloss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/aug/12/-sp-karlie-kloss-for-chanel-stylewatch-coco-noir>
. However, Joshua was a vocal supporter ofHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, making the Kushner 
brothers – what? The Miliband brothers of the US? That comparison doesn’t do 
justice to what is going on here. Pause for a moment, please, and allow me to 
indulge my fascination with the Kushner boys.

Jared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/jared-kushner-harvard-donald-trump-son-in-law>
 and Joshua are the Orthodox Jewish sons of the absurdly wealthy real-estate 
developer Charles Kushner, and were raised in New Jersey. In other words, they 
are every boy I knew at Hebrew school in New York and summer camp in Maine in 
the 80s and 90s, and I can tell you that with boys like this, you either marry 
them immediately, or cross the room to avoid them. Joshua, who wears blue 
knitwear like a living J Crew advert, strikes me as being in the former camp. 
As for Jared – well. It was amusing a few years ago when news reports wondered 
how on earth a nice Jewish boy like Jared would fare with Trump as an in-law. 
Judging from how eagerlyhe exploited his grandparents’ story of surviving the 
Holocaust 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/jared-kushner-family-trump-holocaust-225210>
 to excuse his father-in-law’s fondness for retweeting antisemitic memes, I’d 
say he’s doing just fine.

In 2005, Jared’s father was sentenced to two years in the slammer for tax 
evasion, witness tampering and making illegal campaign contributions. This, 
understandably, wasquite the formative experience 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/key-figures-purged-from-trump-transition-team/2016/11/15/ed4e2a36-ab6b-11e6-8b45-f8e493f06fcd_story.html>
 for his oldest son and he now seems to be dealing with his demons – as his 
therapist probably puts it – by banning anyone involved from being near Trump, 
includingChris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/26/chris-christie-endorses-donald-trump-president>
.

The US media is already trying to style Kushner as Trump’s Rasputin, with 
reports of how Trump likes to listen to his “soothing, whispery voice” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/07/us/politics/donald-trump-presidential-race.html>
. Now, I’m loathe to cast the one Jew in Trump’s circle as Rasputin. But 
Kushner, clearly, is one scary mofo, and if there’s one thing Trump’s election 
hopefully taught people, it’s that there are few demographics more capable of 
destructive and petty vindictiveness than uber-privileged east-coast boys. You 
look at Kushner, Diana, and see a handsome man. I see Trump’s mini-me.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
 