
“It’s all about the new Gucci, isn’t it?” Since I don’t have a clue what the 
old Gucci is, I decide to keep my mouth shut.Top male model David Gandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/gallery/2015/jan/13/-sp-david-gandy-watch-london-collections-men>
 does not have the luxury of silence. As an ambassador – Our Man in Dolce & 
Gabbana – for the clunkily named London Collections Men, the bloke’s equivalent 
of London fashion week, he’s obliged to answer any question that comes along. A 
foreign TV crew stick a microphone in front of him and ask his considered 
opinion on the effects of weather on men’s fashion shopping patterns. David 
mumbles something along the lines that all weather patterns can be good for 
shopping and the TV crew leave happy.

Then the concrete basement darkens and Gandy takes his seat alongside some 
other eye candy bussed in for the benefit of the fashion writers strategically 
placed on the front row opposite them. I’m later told thatNick Jonas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/20/nick-jonas-review-islington-academy-jonas-brothers-dreamboy-aims-to-please-as-solo-act>
 andChloe Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/apr/09/chloe-green-shoe-collection> 
were there, although I’m not sure which was which. Or who they are. But this is 
theTopman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/08/topman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear>
 show, the LCM big-buck opener, so they must be important.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffrom-the-backbenches-to-the-front-row-what-would-our-sketchwriter-john-crace-make-of-mens-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8c6cfeac045ba981ce1b5ca90df6dc752f5e99f%2F0_305_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20backbenches%20to%20the%20front%20row%20%E2%80%93%20our%20Westminster%20sketchwriter%20goes%20to%20men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffrom-the-backbenches-to-the-front-row-what-would-our-sketchwriter-john-crace-make-of-mens-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20backbenches%20to%20the%20front%20row%20%E2%80%93%20our%20Westminster%20sketchwriter%20goes%20to%20men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffrom-the-backbenches-to-the-front-row-what-would-our-sketchwriter-john-crace-make-of-mens-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8c6cfeac045ba981ce1b5ca90df6dc752f5e99f%2F0_305_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
 John Crace and Guardian head of fashion Imogen Fox at the Topman show. 
Photograph: Imogen Fox 
The music is ramped up to volume 11 as the models stride unblinkingly up and 
down the runway. The whole show is done and dusted in about 10 minutes and I 
find I can remember almost nothing about the clothes, except possibly that 
pyjamas are going to be big this autumn, as I’ve been mesmerised by all the 
high male cheek bones and impossibly slim hips on display. I’m ticked off for 
this. “You’re supposed to be looking at the clothes,” I’m told. The models are 
merely moving clothes hangers.

Star Wars or slacker? Six key trends from London Collections Men 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/jan/12/star-wars-or-slacker-six-key-trends-from-london-collections-men-2016>
Gandy is also guest of honour at LCM’s launch party the previous evening, 
hosted by GQ editor Dylan Jones – thecapo di tutti capi of London fashion 
ambassadors – at Spencer House in St James’s, the heart of London’s clubland 
for gents d’un certain age. Rooms that could be decked out for a Julian 
Fellowes costume drama seem an unlikely venue for a congregation of London’s 
top fashionistas, but no one cares. The celeb count is all that matters. “Isn’t 
that a bloke who had a small part in The Hobbit?” someone whispers loudly. I 
thought all the parts in The Hobbit were small.

At last, I spot someone I recognise: Tory MP Damian Collins. He looks almost 
as out of place as I feel. “Nice suit,” I say, trying to break the ice (even if 
it does look a little on the tight side).

“Thank you,” he replies politely. “It’s a Romney tweed made from the wool of 
sheep who came from my constituency.”

“What brings you here?”

“I’m chair of the all party parliamentary committee for textile and fashion.” 
Not one of the most contested committee chairs in parliament.

“Which MPs have the best fashion sense?”

“There’s Chuka Umunna on the Labour benches ...”

“And on your own?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffrom-the-backbenches-to-the-front-row-what-would-our-sketchwriter-john-crace-make-of-mens-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4ee7d650e1fe4134b0e6f785300b1499aaff4e7%2F0_0_2329_3500%2F2329.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20backbenches%20to%20the%20front%20row%20%E2%80%93%20our%20Westminster%20sketchwriter%20goes%20to%20men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffrom-the-backbenches-to-the-front-row-what-would-our-sketchwriter-john-crace-make-of-mens-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20backbenches%20to%20the%20front%20row%20%E2%80%93%20our%20Westminster%20sketchwriter%20goes%20to%20men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffrom-the-backbenches-to-the-front-row-what-would-our-sketchwriter-john-crace-make-of-mens-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4ee7d650e1fe4134b0e6f785300b1499aaff4e7%2F0_0_2329_3500%2F2329.jpg>
 David Gandy arrives for the Burberry show. Photograph: Luke Macgregor/Reuters 
The silence is telling. Collins beetles off to find someone else to talk to. 
There is no sign of Ed Vaizey, the culture minister, whose name was on the 
guest list. I’m just about to leave when I see someone in a heavy patterned 
velvet suit who looks vaguely familiar. “That’s Judy Blame,” I’m informed. “The 
stylist. He designs accessories for Louis Vuitton and is one of the the key men 
in London fashion.”

“Now I remember,” I say. “The last time I saw him it was the late 70s, he was 
called Chris and I was crashed out in a dingy Kennington flat.” How time flies. 
I reintroduce myself to Judy. He has no idea who I am, but is very polite about 
it.

The next day sees me in a blacked-out people carrier, trying and failing to 
open a designer can of sparkling water – all black, of course – as I am whisked 
to the next show. The others in the car are talking about the relative merits 
of flocking; I am just thinking I am finally living the dream. No one who is 
anyone in fashion would travel in anything that had windows that the riff-raff 
could look into.

We arrive at Victoria House in Bloomsbury for another top-ticket show. Nasir 
Mazhar is one of Britain’s enfant terrible designers and, although Gandy isn’t 
in the audience, everyone else is. I’m thrilled to find there are free gifts 
laid out on the front row. I eagerly open mine, picking up dirty looks from 
everyone else. It’s not cool to open your freebies till you’re back home. 
Socks. Great socks in a hip black-and-white pattern. Comfortable, too. Not so 
sure about the show, though. Men wearing bee hives on their heads and 
open-crotched trousers with string thongs isn’t quite my thing. A word of 
advice, Nasir. Stick to the socks. You’ve nailed them.

I feel like I’m getting the hang of this. Close my eyes and I’m channelling 
1993. As an idea, not a year. With the right kind of flocking. Obviously. If 
you need any more ambassadors, Dylan, you know where to find me.
 