
Marks & Spencer faces a major overhaul. Over the next five years more than 80 
stores will be shut; 30 in the UK and the rest abroad. It’s part of plans to 
reduce reliance on its poorly performing clothing business, and focus more on 
food sales.

M&S culls clothing business as major overhaul curtails global ambition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/m-and-s-marks-spencer-close-80-stores-major-overhaul>
The decision has got our readers talking, and many of you took part in a 
callouton the best and worst of what M&S has to offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/what-are-the-best-and-worst-parts-of-ms-tell-us-your-views>
. Here are a selection of the responses, add yours in the comments.

Nicola Miller, 50, east of England: ‘M&S has forgotten why people go there: 
fundamentals, such as good cotton tights’

My favourite Marks & Spencer products have always been the food, lingerie and 
sleepwear, as well as basic accessories – scarves, hats and gloves. I am less 
keen on the newPer Una range <http://www.marksandspencer.com/l/women/per-una> 
because it looks like the clothes have been sprayed with glue and rolled 
through a haberdashery store. It’s also a shame that they don’t stock the Alexa 
Chung range (and the other more fashion-forward ranges) in provincial shops.

I believe that in M&S’s pursuit of the fashion and cultural zeitgeist the 
store has forgotten the core reason people shop there: fundamentals, such as a 
perfectly cut navy sweater, cotton tights that wash well and don’t sag, etc. 
It’s a store that’s always been there, in the background, and formerly a 
benchmark for a certain kind of quality, but that’s not the case any more. Many 
of their clothes are now badly made (the tights ladder and bobble) and there’s 
just something off about their design. I also find their shops hard to 
navigate. I often give up in irritation because wading through 20 rails of 
seemingly identical black work skirts is a waste of my time.

Annette Graat, 60, Maastricht: ‘It’s a popular store in the Netherlands. I 
like the scones’

I read today that M&S plans to shut 53 international stores, including all its 
shops in the Netherlands. This is really disappointing because the food 
department is great as it offers lots of products we don’t usually get here. I 
like their traditionally British foods, such as scones, and all their nice 
meats. The clothes are a bit traditional and not really exciting, however. They 
are also a bit overpriced, but I will definitely miss the food. I also feel 
it’s a missed opportunity as lots of people in this area could be potential 
customers and many are upset about the closure. I read a Twitter post today 
from a food blogger in the Netherlands who said: “No, not more bad news!”

Gregory Baser, 58, Plymouth: ‘The sizing has really changed over the years, 
which is frustrating’

I love the Sparks card and its targeted promotions, the underpants and socks, 
the trousers (especially the coloured ones). I like the suits. I am a loyal 
customer and have shopped there for more than 45 years, but even though I am a 
fan of the clothing I do feel it’s got worse over time. For example, with the 
shirts there are now much less options in terms of colour. Also the sizing has 
really changed over the years, and shirts I bought years ago that were XXLs are 
XXXLs today. Being forced up a size means there’s less on offer for me in terms 
of variety.


Marks & Spencer’s takeaway food is its strongest food selling point, but the 
lunchtime deals have got a bit more complicated. There’s now more on offer but 
that shouldn’t be at the detriment of losing classics, such as the cheese and 
tomato ones. They offer a nice in-store bakery in their main branch in Plymouth 
but sometimes the portions aren’t big enough.

I am disappointed that they are giving up on a lot of their clothes stores 
overall. I know it must be difficult with stores like Primark opening up but 
they used to be really great. And it felt like they were taking some steps in 
the right direction, for example by sorting out their website.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fnylon-knickers-to-posh-picnics-readers-on-the-best-and-worst-of-marks-and-spencer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb6e5d242e7f7d8337c56c5a4b1438b60a30a1c2%2F0_337_1823_2397%2F1823.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20posh%20picnics%20to%20nylon%20knickers%3A%20readers%20on%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20of%20M%26S&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fnylon-knickers-to-posh-picnics-readers-on-the-best-and-worst-of-marks-and-spencer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20posh%20picnics%20to%20nylon%20knickers%3A%20readers%20on%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20of%20M%26S&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fnylon-knickers-to-posh-picnics-readers-on-the-best-and-worst-of-marks-and-spencer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb6e5d242e7f7d8337c56c5a4b1438b60a30a1c2%2F0_337_1823_2397%2F1823.jpg>
 ‘Marks & Spencer’s takeaway food is it’s strongest food selling point.’ 
Photograph: Pål Hansen for the Observer 
Stephanie Wong, 38, London: ‘The only person the Alexa Chung range looks good 
on is, well, Alexa Chung’


They do the best lunch salads of any high-street chain. And all the fruit, 
sweets, drinks – basically, if you want a posh picnic in the summer you can’t 
beat M&S. It will cost a bomb though. Baby and children’s clothes, socks and 
underpants are always reliable, and good value.

I don’t know who 'Mrs M&S' is, but she has been wearing hideous T-shirts and 
cardigans in lurid reds for far too long.
Stephanie Wong 
They do some really lovely textured, super comfortable sleepwear too. I have 
these lightweight lounge pants that I am obsessed with. The crockery is also 
good value and reasonable quality. Their women’s daytime clothing range, 
however, is still terrible. The only person the Alexa Chung range looks good on 
is, well, Alexa Chung. On any average-sized woman, her whole range looks frumpy.

I don’t know who “Mrs M&S” is, but the poor woman has been wearing hideous 
T-shirts and cardigans in lurid tomato reds and hideous deep electric blues in 
stiff cotton for far too long. I would love it if M&S refocused its clothing 
line for women on “basics” along the lines of its children’s range. They could 
also take a leaf out of H&M in terms of basic design standards, fabrics and 
versatile colours. Or just copy their underpants, sock and children’s clothes, 
to be honest. Just don’t touch the children’s clothes, they are so good.

Callum, 35, Merseyside: ‘The high-quality food products are what makes M&S so 
brilliant’

M&S food products are brilliant and noticeably higher quality than many other 
food retailers for the most part. This is their strongest area. They do also 
have extremely well-designed homeware. This leaves their clothing ranges as the 
weaker link, but they definitely serve a core audience. Their attempts at 
chasing a younger market haven’t worked but it would be a shame if their ranges 
were removed completely. It seems like they need simpler and fewer ranges, with 
a clearer target market.

It would be sad to see stores close. As a British person it is reassuring to 
see M&S stores in other countries, particularly when buying food. Hopefully 
this will remain unaltered. I’ve shopped at M&S for more than 10 years, my 
family always went there and as a young child I was fascinated by their 
attractive packaging and well-designed food ranges. Their home products have 
become more contemporary and attractive, and much more informed by Scandinavian 
design, which is a good thing. Much of their range is similar to the likes of 
Habitat. So it has definitely changed and very much kept at the forefront of 
demand. Their staff are also considerably better than many other stores, and 
it’s good to see that they employ so many people that clearly have experience 
and manners.

Megan Peel, 38, Harrogate: ‘I used to shop at M&S food but don’t now – their 
food is so over-packaged to me’

They claim to be sustainable but how can they be when all their food is 
wrapped in so much plastic?
Megan Peel 
The only items I now really buy at M&S are clothes for my one-year-old. They 
are exactly what I want in terms of fabrics and patterns, but when I look for 
clothes for my four-year-old there’s much less on offer. It’s not stylish and 
it looks cheaper. I used to shop regularly at M&S food but I don’t any more as 
their food feels so over-packaged to me. They claim to be sustainable but how 
can they be when all their food is wrapped in so much plastic? So I shop less 
at M&S than I used to. I would definitely never shop for women’s clothes there: 
the price of their clothes is up there with the likes of Jigsaw, but the 
experience of shopping at Jigsaw is much better. Shopping in supermarkets is 
not nearly as nice. Strategically, I feel they are missing a massive 
opportunity; with British Home Stores closing they could champion British 
retail by promoting young British designers. They could also do more of their 
manufacturing in the UK.

Anonymous, 46, Sheffield: ‘ I have been forced to shop elsewhere for knickers 
for the first time in my life’

My current gripes about M&S are as follows: 


 * They no longer seem to stock ordinary cotton knickers in a variety of 
styles.

 * All of their individual knickers that are not part of a matching set seem 
to be nylon. 
 * You can only buy cotton knickers in bags of five, with very few 
styles/colours to choose from. 
The choice is so poor that I have been forced to shop elsewhere for knickers 
for the first time in my life. I never thought this would happen and I hate it. 
Their women’s clothing range is an incoherent mess. They seem to be trying to 
be all things to all people. They should get back to offering classic pieces 
for each season, reducing the number of stock items, and presenting them as 
outfits in the stores instead of just hanging all the trousers together, etc. 
I’m sick of having to schlep around the store to see if they have a scarf to 
match a jumper.

The quality of the finish needs to improve markedly. I am tired of hems coming 
down and buttons falling off. I have had to pay for two zips to be replaced on 
faulty M&S garments this year. I would gladly pay a bit more for better quality.

It seems sensible to focus on the successful part of the business – food – but 
this ignores the fact that M&S should be a clothing retailer, not a 
supermarket. They need to reconnect with their core customers and offer good 
quality pieces to middle-aged women, rather than trying to compete for the 
Topshop/Zara market.
 