
Diane Von Furstenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jul/01/diane-von-furstenburg-stuido-54-google-wrap-dress-oprah-warhol-anna-wintour>
 bowed out of the limelight at her own brand this weekend,ceding centre stage 
to the newly hired designer Jonathan Saunders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/16/jonathan-saunders-diane-von-furstenberg-creative-director>
.Donna Karan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/25/donna-karan-fashion-brand-to-be-sold-for-650m>
 was at the DKNY show, but sedately on the front row rather than strutting the 
catwalk, after her retirement last year. The great houses ofCalvin Klein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/19/all-change-at-calvin-klein> and
Oscar de la Renta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/oct/21/oscar-de-la-renta-sarah-jessica-parker-amal-alamuddin-jackie-kennedy-michelle-obama-oscars>
 are both keeping a low profile, finding themselves between headline designers. 
Of the old guard, onlyRalph Lauren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/18/ralph-lauren-new-york-fashion-week-autum-2016>
’s name remains in lights this season.

Sad times? Far from it. It’s the best thing that’s happened to New York 
fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/new-york-fashion-week> in 
ages. The New York catwalks had been living in the shadow of their very own 
Mount Rushmore. Ralph, Calvin, Donna, Diane, with their one-name-only 
presidential-style monikers, loomed over Seventh Avenue while the rank-and-file 
of designers tied themselves in knots overthinking the meaning of cashmere and 
racking their brains for 32 synonyms of grey to fill the programme notes.

Those who cover the international collections have long loved to moan that New 
York fashion week is sooo boring. This is mainly attention-seeking Wildean 
posturing, a staging of ennui for dramatic effect, but with a grain of truth. 
(There are only so many times you can engage with luxe-chic sportswear on the 
catwalk before you have to start stabbing your leg with a pencil to stay awake.)
 Kanye West Yeezy Season 4, New York September 2016. Photograph: Dimitrios 
Kambouris/Getty Images for Yeezy Season 4 
But this week was anything but boring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>. Kanye West’s hot mess of a Yeezy 
show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/08/kanye-wests-yeezy-show-fake-malia-obama-and-terra-firma-bodycon>
 set the tone, with a performance-art/catwalk event that managed to leave 
critics both bored (by the two-hour wait) and incensed(by the treatment of 
models, many of whom were clearly distressed by the length of time in scorching 
heat) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/08/kanye-wests-yeezy-show-fake-malia-obama-and-terra-firma-bodycon>
. Two days later,Tommy Hilfiger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/dec/02/tommy-hilfiger-designer> 
took the concept of democratised, consumer-facing fashion and ran with it, 
sending his models to parade through a pop-up funfair with a ferris wheel, a 
temporary tattoo parlour and the new collection for sale on stalls. The garish 
aesthetic of a funfair – a poppy sugar rush with zero aspirations to chic – was 
as defiant of the traditional mores of fashion week as Yeezy, in its own way. 
The Opening Ceremony label’s fashion-week moment was aPageant of the People 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/12/fashion/opening-ceremony-sends-a-message-new-york-fashion-week.html>
, a catwalk-meets-consciousness-raising hybrid event where models in the new 
collection shared the stage withRashida Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/feb/14/rashida-jones-quincy-parks-recreation>
 talking about refugees andWhoopi Goldberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/whoopi-goldberg> riffing on the 
presidential election. Makes a change from luxe trackpants, anyway.

See Now Buy Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/17/new-york-fashion-week-michael-kors-ready-to-wear-fall-2016-collection-designer>
 is still only patchily adopted as a business model, but it is hugely 
influential as a philosophy. It is the spirit forcing the fashion industry to 
address change. Ralph Lauren, who is 76, told Vogue this week that “showing 
clothes, then delivering them six months later … it’s over”. “Our girl lives on 
the internet,” commented Laura Kim of buzzy new label Monse. At theirDKNY show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/13/dkny-confirms-the-future-of-fashion-the-boilersuit>
, the designers talked about New York’s fabled style, and how “people talk a 
lot about our past, but we like to think about what’s next”. For the first time 
in ages, the chat about New York fashion is in the future tense.

Four trends from New York
 J Crew SS17, New York fashion week, September 2016. Photograph: J Crew 
Emoji fashion

“It’s all about Instagram” is this decade’s fashion cliche. Thing is, it’s 
still true. At New York, the Insta-influence is in the emoji-style prints, and 
in the rise of theDancing Lady emoji as the ultimate party girl silhouette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/08/what-wore-week-dancing-lady-emoji-dress-jess-cartner-morley>
. Altuzarra, designed by 33-year-old Joseph Altuzarra, was an out-of-the-box 
hit, with more lemons and cherries than a millennial WhatsApp group and a 
gorgeously sultry silhouette.J Crew <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/j-crew>
’s long, ruffled skirts in fine blue cotton gave a chic, toned-down take on the 
scarlet Dancing Lady.
 Monse show SS17, New York fashion week, September 2016. Photograph: 
Banica/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
Loose clothes and skin

AKA, the new sexy. The old paradigm was that one either wore small, tight 
clothes which showed shape and skin (sexy) or loose, oversized clothes which 
showed neither (not sexy) but the New Sexy plots a whole new axis. The modern 
way to look hot: slices of skin, between casually draped fabric. AtVictoria 
Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/11/victoria-beckham-steers-a-clever-course-through-new-york-fashion-week>
, bra tops were worn under duster coats, while at Monse, shirts were unbuttoned 
and shrugged back off the shoulder.
 Tom Ford cocktail party, SS17, New York fashion week, September 2016. 
Photograph: Neil Rasmus/BFA/Rex/Shutterstock 
The Gigi look

Anna Wintour <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour> better look 
out. Her position as the most powerful woman in American fashion is arguably 
challenged by the reach of supermodelGigi Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/27/gigi-hadid-new-face-of-topshop>
. Hadid hastwice as many Instagram followers 
<https://www.instagram.com/gigihadid/?hl=en> as there are people living in New 
York City. Tommy Hilfiger capitalised on this with a capsule collection 
designed in collaboration with her.Tom Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford> put her on his catwalk, and the 
influence of her style – which is sort of half cheerleader, half club kid – 
could be seen everywhere in the lampshading, the over-the-knee boots, the 
oversized sportswear.
 The AOxAW ad campaign for the Alexander Wang and Adidas Originals Debut 
Collaboration. Photograph: Juergen Teller 
Adidas

Yup, as a trend. Seems like even the publicity juggernaut that is Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest> isn’t big enough to contain the 
fashion ambitions of Adidas right now. Just three days after the Yeezy show,
Alexander Wang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/05/alexander-wang-interview-the-fashion>
’s show ended with a surprise mini-collection designed in collaboration with 
Adidas, in which the brand’s logo was turned upside down. What’s more, those 
three-stripe Firebird trousers have become as much a showgoer uniform as Helmut 
Lang’s flat-fronted trousers once were.
 