
Here are a few things I have recently been told should make me feel 
“empowered”:tweeting a naked selfie 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/kim-kardashian-powerful-essay-nudity-empowerment_us_56df1e3ce4b0000de4064317>
; beingMiley Cyrus 
<http://www.digitalspy.com/showbiz/news/a526773/miley-cyrus-im-a-feminist-and-empowering-to-women>
; beingGwyneth Paltrow 
<http://www.stylist.co.uk/people/stylist-interview-gwyneth-paltrow>; looking at 
advertisements 
<http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/these-women-empowering-ad-campaigns-win-inaugural-femvertising-awards-165949>
;watching TED Talks <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rqmrANg5r6I>; owning my 
feminism 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/jane-fonda-all-that-mattered-was-how-i-looked-39c8bg70s>
;disowning my feminism 
<http://www.ijreview.com/2014/07/156463-15-women-share-reasons-dont-need-empowered-feminist-movement/>
;buying leggings 
<http://www.phillymag.com/be-well-philly/2015/06/23/b-activegirls/>; buying 
designer clothes <http://www.amandawakeley.com/shop/lifestyle/empowerment>; 
masturbating 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/ninamohan/is-hailee-steinfelds-love-myself-really-about-masturbation#.wozxN2aqpm>
.

It’s quite an exciting time to be a woman, I can tell you. Feminism might not 
have quite finished its work yet – there are still niggly little things such as
unequal pay <https://www.theguardian.com/society/equal-pay> and female genital 
mutilation <https://www.theguardian.com/society/female-genital-mutilation>, 
and, unbelievably,abortion remains an actual issue in the US elections in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/31/donald-trump-abortion-remarks-biggest-campaign-crisis>
. But never has it been easier for a woman to feel empowered. Indeed, a woman 
would now struggle to fail to feel empowered every minute of her day, going by 
the current definition of the word; pretty much everything a woman does – from 
eating breakfast to being online – has been described as a means to empower 
her. What girl power was to the 90s, empowerment has become to the 2010s: a 
catch-all and therefore empty word denoting a watered-down feminism, one 
beloved of bubbly celebrities andcanny advertisers alike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/12/femvertising-branded-feminism>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd83194b92d24900942da90de2da847ab4878d4e2%2F0_317_4500_2303%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20'empowerment'%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20%27empowerment%27%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd83194b92d24900942da90de2da847ab4878d4e2%2F0_317_4500_2303%2F4500.jpg>
 What girl power was to the 90s, empowerment has become to the 2010s. 
Photograph: Fiona Hanson/PA Archive/Press Association Ima 
To understand how such indignity has been visited upon this innocent word, we 
need to look at what it was supposed to mean in the first place. So, asJennifer 
Aniston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-aniston> would say – she of 
the now-very-empowering“Because you’re worth it” advertising slogan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=17Uhv131Ggk> – here comes the science part. 
Empowerment – referring to the idea of providing autonomy and strength to 
marginalised people – first came into popular use in the English-speaking west 
in the 70s and was used primarily in reference to black people. 
African-American magazines such as Jet and Essence used it in encouraging 
self-help articles, and scholarly books with titles such as Black Empowerment: 
Social Work in Oppressed Communities were published. Feminism increasingly used 
the term in the 80s and 90s, often referring to women and girls in third-world 
countries and other unquestionably terrible situations. Rather sweetly, given 
that “empowerment” now denotes everything from deodorant to chocolate, back 
then it was considered rather radical, with its suggestion of revolution. 
Almost certainly the first time I heard it was in the 90s when my school held a 
fundraiser to buy computers for a school in India so as to “empower Indian 
girls through computer literacy”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b631c70812d6af4c2a3884be64ba3f34da623c7%2F0_0_768_1038%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20'empowerment'%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20%27empowerment%27%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b631c70812d6af4c2a3884be64ba3f34da623c7%2F0_0_768_1038%2F768.jpg>
 African-American magazines such as Essence and Jet used the word ‘empowerment’ 
in encouraging self-help articles. 
By the late 90s and early 2000s, women’s magazines and adverts aimed at women 
started to pick up on the word. I remember one particular American fashion 
magazine article in about 2001 urging women to empower themselves by “getting 
ahead on next season’s looks”, which sounded a lot easier than sending 
computers to India. No longer did the term refer to the idea of a demographic 
gaining power for the good of the group, but just one woman gaining power for 
the good of herself – a shift from the collective to the individual, if you 
prefer the lingo, and the TV programme most associated with this change in 
attitude is, of course,Sex and the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sex-and-the-city>.

Sex and the City is now frequently – and unfairly – dismissed as the TV 
programme that suggested that buying designer shoes was a feminist act (in 
fact, as any SATC devotee could tell you, far from celebrating shopaholism, 
Carrie nearly goes bankrupt from her shoe-shopping habit and is only rescued 
from homelessness by one of her girlfriends). However,until the show lost its 
mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/23/sex-and-the-city-film-terrible> 
and nerve in the last series, if Sex and the City was about anything, it was 
that independence is great, but be prepared to take responsibility for your 
actions. Whatever the show’s intentions, there is no doubt that it became the 
face of a somewhat tedious school of thought that suggested feminism could be 
found at the bottom of a Harvey Nichols bag. The early 2000s was the era of 
commodified feminism, when women’s magazines would crow that maxing out your 
credit card was a feminist act (such a Carrie thing to do!) because, damn, go, 
girlfriend! In 2003, satirical website the Onion ran the headline“Women Now 
Empowered by Everything a Woman Does” 
<http://www.theonion.com/article/women-now-empowered-by-everything-a-woman-does-1398>
, and the accompanying article captured the absurdity of this thinking. 
“Shopping for shoes has emerged as a powerful means by which women assert their 
autonomy. Owning and wearing dozens of pairs of shoes is a compelling way for a 
woman to announce that she is strong and independent, and can shoe herself 
without the help of a man. She’s saying, ‘Look out, male-dominated world, here 
comes me and my shoes.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61b16dde78d93b01720a9dc27e898694e3216d61%2F0_0_1653_2808%2F1653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20'empowerment'%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20%27empowerment%27%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61b16dde78d93b01720a9dc27e898694e3216d61%2F0_0_1653_2808%2F1653.jpg>
 Paris Hilton in Juicy Couture. Photograph: Most Wanted/REX/ Shutterstock 
While this approach to feminism blessed one with shoes, it didn’t really have 
much staying power. By the time the first Sex and the City movie came out in 
2008 – in which all Carrie wanted was “a really big closet” – a new generation 
of young women was already starting to trash the show and its money-obsessed 
mentality as an embarrassing throwback, as dated and tasteless as a photo of
Paris Hilton in a Juicy Couture tracksuit 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-SeWWJG-3yJU/T-Q82YU-_FI/AAAAAAAAAcU/NIesN5PA8L8/s1600/paris-hilton-juicy-couture-wax-figure.jpg>
.

Yet, just as this idea of feminism as something you bought alongside your 
Manolo Blahniks <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/manolo-blahnik> was being 
denigrated, a strong mentality was emerging fromfourth-wave feminism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/10/fourth-wave-feminism-rebel-women>
, one that at least partially defines the movement: to judge other women for 
choosing to do something – anything – is inherently anti-feminist, because 
those women made their choice and therefore it is a feminist act. The word 
“empowered” regained traction and women who lived their lives according to 
their own choices and desires were described as “self-empowered”. “Choice 
feminism” replaced “consumer feminism”, but the two ultimately come down to the 
same thing: that is, if a woman does something of her own free will – whether 
it’s pole-dancing or buying shoes – then it’s a feminist act. And more than 
ever, it’s not only about feminism; it’s about empowering the woman as an 
individual.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F778367d04e074d32018329e9dbbf9cdb947eb95b%2F0_147_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20'empowerment'%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20%27empowerment%27%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F778367d04e074d32018329e9dbbf9cdb947eb95b%2F0_147_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Former White House intern Monica Lewinsky speaks at the TED talk. Photograph: 
James Duncan Davidson/TED 
To a certain extent, this is a good thing. After all, it’s nice for women to 
cheer each another on, right? We 21st-century feminists have learned from the 
mistakes of our elders and we won’t judge one another about our sexuality (as
Betty Friedan <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betty_Friedan> did) or sleeping 
with married men (as certain feminists did in the 90swhen writing about Monica 
Lewinsky 
<http://time.com/92989/monica-lewinsky-slut-shaming-feminists-media-apology/>), 
as it was precisely this kind of internal sniping that bogged down previous 
waves of feminism. We should encourage each other, not push each other down. 
When one woman casts judgment on another woman, according to today’s feminism, 
she is behaving worse than a misogynist man or (and this is almost worse in 
today’s feminism, so concerned as it is in overturning the past and forging its 
own newpath) an old-schoolsecond-wave feminist 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second-wave_feminism>.

The problem with this approach is that it leads to a great big pile of 
nothing. The suggestion that women should unthinkingly celebrate one another 
purely out of sisterly feeling is about as patronising as the idea that women 
shouldn’t trouble their brains with opinions. Moreover, the idea that 
fourth-wave feminists don’t judge will provoke mirthless laughter from any 
woman who has been on the web recently – feminists don’t just judge, they judge 
each other, and they do so often. However, they now do it with the added 
complication that they’re judging one another for judging. Feminists who query 
whether things such as prostitution, pole-dancing or larking about naked while 
being filmed by self-described “pervert” Terry Richardson (asMiley Cyrus did 
for her video Wrecking Ball 
<http://flavorwire.com/414323/lets-blame-terry-richardson-not-miley-cyrus-for-the-awful-wrecking-ball-video>
) are really empowering themselves are shouted down as angry anti-sex 
harridans. In recent years, there have been feminist revisions of everyonefrom 
Margaret Thatcher 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/margaret-thatcher/9979922/Margaret-Thatcher-a-pioneering-woman-with-no-time-for-feminists.html>
 toKim Kardashian 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/kim-kardashian-explains-why-doesnt-label-herself-a-feminist-at-commonwealth-club-talk-10357332.html>
, simply because they were their own self-empowered women, even though both of 
them explicitly distanced themselves from the label in their respective times. 
Yet whenKardashian tweeted a topless selfie last month 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/topless-kim-kardashian-emily-ratajkowski-7658788>
, she claimed that she was empowered by her sexuality and, thus – via the media 
of her iPhone and her breasts – she was striving to “encourage the same 
empowerment for girls and women all over the world”. Anyone who queried this 
philosophy was shouted down as an out-of-date loser who encouraged 
“body-shaming”. Empowerment has become the cover for doing whatever the hell 
you like. It is a self-created safe space: as long as you say you are 
empowered, anyone who complains is trying to oppress you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33f296aac7334db083e988a1035a8a9b795fb575%2F40_0_1217_730%2F1217.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20'empowerment'%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20%27empowerment%27%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33f296aac7334db083e988a1035a8a9b795fb575%2F40_0_1217_730%2F1217.jpg>
 Miley Cyrus claimed that her raunchy Wrecking Ball video was empowering. 
We could sit around and argue about where the line lies between sexual 
empowerment and sexual objectification until the self-empowered cows come home. 
Personally, I’d rather not see yet another wave of feminism die on the hill 
over whether or not pole-dancing is a feminist act. So maybe the easiest way to 
deal with the kinds of arguments raised by choice feminism is to end with this 
simple truth: while the ability to choose is feminist, that doesn’t mean the 
choice itself is. As Carrie Bradshaw, that icon of self-empowerment, could tell 
you, do whatever you like, but don’t kid yourself that you’re doing anything 
more than pleasing yourself. Buying shoes is not a strike against the 
patriarchy. Telling other women to shut up online is not a feminist act. 
Tweeting photos of your boobs is not empowering the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38fca58f00902205543a473edffbf08cf509e980%2F0_0_1024_1024%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20'empowerment'%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20%27empowerment%27%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38fca58f00902205543a473edffbf08cf509e980%2F0_0_1024_1024%2F1024.jpg>
 Jennifer Lopez’s new single, Ain’t Your Mama, has been sold as being about 
empowerment. 
Nowhere is the word’s meaninglessness more obvious than in consumerism. 
Advertisers have, unsurprisingly, latched on to a term that suggests worthiness 
but has really become about promising an aspirational female identity. As Jia 
Tolentinorecently wrote in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/17/magazine/how-empowerment-became-something-for-women-to-buy.html?_r=0>
, empowerment is now something women “can purchase while conditions determining 
who can access and accumulate power stay the same”. Most people would struggle 
to argue that telling women to lose weight or look thin is an empowering act. 
But, asonline magazine Jezebel pointed out last week 
<http://jezebel.com/the-logical-conclusion-of-empowerment-marketing-is-comp-1770767705>
, Weight Watchers and Spanx are now selling their products in the US by 
promising that they provide empowerment. We’re not telling you to be thinner, 
these adverts say, we’re telling you that you’ll love yourself if you are, and 
that will make you feel empowered.

Similarly, Jennifer Lopez <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jennifer-lopez>
’s new single,Ain’t Your Mama <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ykTs-0IpsL0>, 
has been sold as being about empowerment, instead of just boring ol’ feminism 
or independence, as the similarly themed 1999 Destiny’s Child songIndependent 
Women <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0lPQZni7I18&list=RD0lPQZni7I18> was. 
Unfortunately for Lopez and her PRs, the single wasproduced by Dr Luke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/08/jennifer-lopez-dr-luke-produced-single-criticised-i-aint-your-mama>
, who wasaccused by Kesha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/14/singer-kesha-sues-producer-dr-luke-sexual-battery>
 of somewhat less than empowering behaviour around her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85554c79a4e9c80cd842518d1a456f3342b65eed%2F0_0_1996_3000%2F1996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20'empowerment'%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20shopping%20to%20naked%20selfies%3A%20how%20%27empowerment%27%20lost%20its%20meaning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Ffrom-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85554c79a4e9c80cd842518d1a456f3342b65eed%2F0_0_1996_3000%2F1996.jpg>
 Gwyneth Paltrow is one of many celebrities who peddle empowerment. Photograph: 
FilmMagic/D Dipasupil 
But the biggest irony about empowerment is not just how utterly meaningless – 
disempowered, I guess – it has become as a term, but how those who claim to 
feel it and those to whom it is sold are the ones who need it least. It is no 
surprise that I see so many adverts promising empowerment, because I am 
precisely the kind of person to whom empowerment is now marketed: white, 
thirtysomething, educated, middle class with disposable income. I don’t need to 
be empowered anymore than Kardashian does. Only those already in possession of 
quite a lot of power would feel empowered by leggings, or a TED talk, or naked 
selfies. Empowerment has become not only a synonym for self-indulgent 
narcissism, but a symbol of how identity politics can too often get distracted 
by those with the loudest voices and forget those most in need of it. “I think 
the most clear, direct way to empowerment is to be really, really true to 
yourself. It’s only recently that I’ve fully understood that,” Paltrow recently 
opined while promoting some designer perfume. I should have told that to those 
Indian schoolgirls back in the 90s: forget the computer literacy, just know 
yourselves. Feel the empowerment.
 