
The Fed Ex guy is always delivering intriguing parcels to Mini Museum 
<http://minimuseum.com/>’s headquarters in Fairfax, Virginia, but he’s never 
allowed to see what’s inside.

On Wednesday, it was something very cool from Norway, co-founder Jamie Grove 
explains – though he can’t say any more. But Mini Museum has the fascinating, 
rare and bizarre delivered every day; it’s a unique startup that collects 
scientific and historic artefacts from around the universe, meticulously 
divides them and presents them encased in clear acrylic as a “mini museum”.

First Oculus Rift virtual reality headsets shipped to Kickstarter backers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/28/oculus-rift-virtual-reality-headsets-shipped-facebook>
Its first edition 
<http://shop.minimuseum.com/collections/mini-museums/products/mini-museum-kickstarter-edition-acrylic>
 included part of the Berlin Wall, some dinosaur dung, part of a palm tree from 
Antarctica and a sample of the oldest matter ever collected – 4,568,200,000 
years old, to be precise. It’s an imaginative and eccentric project, but one 
that would not have been possible without a funding campaign that began on 
crowdfunding siteKickstarter <https://www.kickstarter.com/>. 

Hans Fex, the founder who first had the idea at age seven, was in something of 
a rut in early 2014 but, within a month, aKickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> campaign had raised $1.2m 
from more than 5,000 backers, and the idea propelled him and his co-founders 
into a new life running a thriving business.

“The community rallied around us,” says Grove. “There are just lots of really 
excited people and that carried over from the first project into the second. We 
got lucky.”

Grove is one of three people, including Fex, now working full time on Mini 
Museum alongside five part-time staff. Thesecond Mini Museum project 
<http://shop.minimuseum.com/collections/mini-museums/products/mini-museum-2-second-edition-acrylic>
 is now shipping with a new array of of curiosities including a piece of the 
skin of the Hindenburg airship, part of theCray-1 supercomputer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cray-1> and a sample from a fallen limb of a 
“moon tree” – a tree grown from a seed that went to the moon in 1971 on Apollo 
14.

Mini Museum might be unique in its quirkiness, but its crowdsourced success is 
not unusual. Professor Ethan Mollick, assistant professor at the University of 
Pennsylvania’s Wharton School, has been researching Kickstarter since 2012. His
latest research <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2808000> 
analyzed 61,654 projects from 2009 to 2015 and found that those successfully 
funded through the platform have created 8,800 new businesses and organizations 
over those six years.

For every dollar pledged by a project’s backers, another $2.46 is generated in 
extra revenue for the creator and Mollick estimates that, in total, Kickstarter 
has generated more than $5.3bn of economic value for project creators.

The site has created 29,600 full-time jobs, Mollick estimates, and 283,000 
part-time roles. Nineteen percent of creators said they found a new job 
opportunity as a result of their Kickstarter project.

“Kickstarter has made a really big difference,” said Mollick. “Crowdfunding 
conceptually completes the circle. We lead elaborate online lives but they 
rarely touch the real world – Kickstarter and others let virtual communities 
affect the real world.”

Mollick pointed to virtual-reality headset Oculus Rift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/28/oculus-rift-virtual-reality-headsets-shipped-facebook>
 as Kickstarter’s biggest success, which received $2.5m from backers, largely 
supporters in the video game community. The success led to interest from 
venture capital firms and eventually Facebook, whichbought Oculus for $2bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/25/facebook-buys-virtual-reality-gaming-firm-oculus>
 in March 2014, but it couldn’t have started (or reignited the 
decades-old-but-tired virtual reality market) without the early support and 
commitment of its crowdfunders.

“VR was dead until Oculus. It was a 90s dream, a flop – and venture 
capitalists run from flops,” he said. “It was the same with thePebble Watch 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pebble_(watch)>, a category [smartwatches] that 
had died. Board games. 3D printing. And the resurgence of indie video games – 
these industries have been transformed by Kickstarter.”

In some ways Kickstarter is a new model. But it has its roots in patronage, 
and that’s how the renaissance happened
Yancey Strickler, Kickstarter CEO and co-founder 
“I teach entrepreneurialism and see people pitching and failing all the time,” 
he said. “That failure can be down to gender, education or race – it’s a system 
designed to help entrepreneurs who are white guys from good schools.” He thinks 
that Kickstarter has become a popular part of the funding ecosystem because it 
allows creators to bypass those systemic biases, yet he has also identified how 
existing attitudes towards gender influence funding choices on Kickstarter.

When the gender of the creator is disguised, Mollick found, women’s 
Kickstarter ideas are 13% more likely to be funded than men’s. When the 
creator’s gender was shown, he found that one third of women could be 
identified as “activists”, proactively seeking out and funding projects by 
other women – yet two-thirds of women were disinclined to vote for other women.

In September 2015, Kickstarter’s board voted unanimously for it to officially 
become apublic benefit corporation <https://www.kickstarter.com/charter>, a 
type of US for-profit organisation obliged to consider the social impact of its 
business. “It means we operate with the mentality of a public utility,” says 
Yancey Strickler, Kickstarter’s CEO and co-founder. “[The co-founders] all have 
the same ethos and came from that kind of creative background in the 90s where 
selling out what the worst thing you can do. That’s what we were raised in 
culturally.

“A challenging commercial landscape can push standards lower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/kickstarter-chooses-public-good-over-private-riches>
, introduce bias or encourage short-term decisions.”

Strickler says Kickstarter has hardly changed since it launched in 2009, and 
that its mission has remained the same. “We’ve made it OK to be an amateur or a 
semi-professional … Kickstarter gives people the chance to live out a dream or 
give it a shot. The world can be quite dismissive of creativity, but you don’t 
have to be rich or famous or crazy to set ideas free into the world.”

Where does Kickstarter go from here? Strickler feels the site has only 
scratched the surface. It is strong in technology and the arts, but could 
expand into many more sectors. “In some ways Kickstarter is a new model. But it 
has its roots in patronage, and that’s how the renaissance happened. It’s our 
responsibility to do better.”

Grove says creators need to tackle the “App Store” problem – it is hard to get 
noticed on a site with so many projects vying for the attention of funders. 
Creators must mobilise their own social-media audience and community, he says, 
and follow Kickstarter’s own guidelines on how to put a compelling campaign 
together. “You have to be awesome – and put the work in.”
 