
Chris Froome and Bradley Wiggins have defended their use of therapeutic use 
exemptions (TUEs) following the news overnight thatthey are among five British 
athletes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-and-bradley-wiggins-targeted-in-wada-hacking-scandal>
 whose medical records with the World Anti-Doping Agency have been leaked by 
computer hackers.

What is a TUE? 11 key questions on the Fancy Bears Wada leaks | Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/tue-fancy-bears-wada-leaks> 
Froome said he had “no issues” with the leaks, pointing out he has spoken 
publicly about being granted TUEs before. The 31-year-old told the Scotsman 
newspaper this summer that he had used TUEs twice during his career, in 2013 
and 2014.

He said in a statement on Thursday: “I’ve openly discussed my TUEs with the 
media and have no issues with the leak which confirms my statements. In nine 
years as a professional I’ve twice required a TUE for exacerbated asthma, the 
last time was in 2014.”

Chris Froome and Bradley Wiggins targeted in Wada hacking scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-and-bradley-wiggins-targeted-in-wada-hacking-scandal>
A statement on behalf of Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> was similarly issued, which 
stated: “There’s nothing new here. Everyone knows Brad suffers from asthma, his 
medical treatment is British Cycling and International Cycling Union approved 
and like all Team GB athletes he follows Wada regulations to the letter. The 
leak of these records is an attempt to undermine the credibility of Wada and 
that’s something for them to deal with.”

As well as the two leading cyclists, golfer Charley Hull, rower Sam Townsend 
and rugby union player Heather Fisher are included in the second batch of 
athletes whose details have been made public by cyber-espionage group Fancy 
Bears, which is believed to be from Russia. There is no suggestion of any 
wrongdoing by any of the athletes.

In a separate development, UK Anti-Doping (Ukad) has written to Team GB 
athletes warning them that their medical records could be at risk of exposure.

The letter states: “Ukad is in close contact with Wada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> and it has been confirmed to us that 
the group has accessed some athlete data. As a result, and as a member of Team 
GB, we are writing to let you know that your information may potentially be at 
risk.

“Please be assured that we are treating this matter with the utmost concern 
and seriousness. We are working hard to urgently determine what impact, if any, 
this may have on you and other British athletes, and exactly what information, 
if any, may have been compromised.”

Ukad also urge athletes to be vigilant where use of computer passwords is 
concerned. “Remember, no sporting or anti-doping organisation, including Wada, 
will ever ask you for your password, and you should not divulge this to anyone 
under any circumstance. If you are concerned about the security of your 
password, we strongly recommend that you take steps to change it.”

Wada first fell victim to hackers on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/13/wada-russian-cyber-attack-espionage-group>
 when medical records relating to TUEs granted to certain athletes were leaked. 
TUEs can be issued to athletes who have an illness or condition which requires 
the use of medication that is on WADA’s prohibited list.

The latest leaks suggest that Rio gold medallist Wiggins, who has never made 
any secret of the fact he suffers from asthma, has several TUEs for salbutamol, 
a substance commonly used in an inhaler.

Meanwhile, the three-times Tour de France winner Froome has TUEs for 
prednisolone, a steroid that can be used to treat chest complaints. In a 
statement on Thursday, Team Sky, for whom Froome rides, said: “Applications 
made by Team Sky for TUEs have all been managed and recorded in line with the 
processes put in place by the governing bodies. Team Sky’s approach to 
anti-doping – and our commitment to clean competition – are well known.”

A British Cycling spokesman also followed suit, saying: “We’re proud of our 
strong anti-doping culture at BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling>. As the national governing body for 
the sport in Britain and a supporter of the Wada code, we condemn the 
publication of any individual’s medical information without their permission.”

American tennis stars Serena and Venus Williams and the four-time Rio 2016 
gymnastics gold medallist Simone Biles were among those whose information was 
initially revealed earlier this week. And on Thursday, Wada confirmed another 
leak of “confidential athlete data” had taken place – although it did not 
identify the athletes affected.

The statement said that the hackers “have leaked another batch of confidential 
athlete data from Wada’s Anti-Doping Administration and Management System 
(Adams).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fchris-froome-defends-use-tues-wada-hacking-leaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa66a19f7aeb4114adc5ca961fd26c647c9d54b91%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Froome%20and%20Wiggins%20defend%20TUEs%20use%20as%20Team%20GB%20athletes%20warned%20over%20leaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fchris-froome-defends-use-tues-wada-hacking-leaks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Froome%20and%20Wiggins%20defend%20TUEs%20use%20as%20Team%20GB%20athletes%20warned%20over%20leaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fchris-froome-defends-use-tues-wada-hacking-leaks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa66a19f7aeb4114adc5ca961fd26c647c9d54b91%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 A screenshot of the Fancy Bears website, seen on a computer screen in Moscow. 
Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP 
“Similar to the leak that the Agency announced on 13 September, this time the 
group released the confidential athlete data of 25 athletes, from eight 
countries, into the public domain. The targeted athletes include 10 from the 
United States, five from Germany, five from Great Britain, one from the Czech 
Republic, one from Denmark, one from Poland, one from Romania, and one from 
Russia.”

The organisation revealed that hackers had illegally gained access to its 
anti-doping administration and management system database via an IOC-created 
account for the Rio Games.

Wada’s director general Olivier Niggli said: “Wada is very mindful that this 
criminal attack, which to date has recklessly exposed personal data of 29 
athletes, will be very distressing for the athletes targeted and cause 
apprehension for all athletes that were involved in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games.

Wada hacking scandal: debate turns to the use of powerful legal drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/wada-hacking-abuse-debate-theraputic-use-drugs>
“To those athletes that have been impacted, we regret that criminals have 
attempted to smear your reputations in this way and assure you that we are 
receiving intelligence and advice from the highest level law enforcement and IT 
security agencies that we are putting into action.

“Given this intelligence and advice, Wada has no doubt that these ongoing 
attacks are being carried out in retaliation against the agency, and the global 
anti-doping system, because of our independent [Dick] Pound and [Richard] 
McLaren investigations that exposed state-sponsored doping in Russia.

“We condemn this criminal activity and have asked the Russian government to do 
everything in their power to make it stop. Continued cyber-attacks emanating 
from Russia seriously undermine the work that is being carried out to rebuild a 
compliant anti-doping program in Russia.

“We still believe access to Adams was obtained through spear phishing of email 
accounts, whereby, Adams passwords were obtained enabling access to Adams 
account information confined to the Rio 2016 Games. We have no reason to 
believe that other Adams data has been compromised.

“Wada is reaching out to Nados (National Anti-Doping Organisations) and IFs 
(International Federations) whose athletes are impacted by this new data 
release so they can provide them with the necessary support.”
 