
Beneath leaden, rain-lashed skies on the Rio coast, Tour de France winner 
Chris Froome <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> failed in his bid 
to add a golden sheen to his triumphant summer at a time trial event low on 
crowds but rich in sporting stories.


Between them, 35-year-old Fabian Cancellara, who beat Froome to gold eight 
years after winning in Beijing, and the American Kristin Armstrong, who won the 
women’s race for the third consecutive time the day before her 43rd birthday, 
struck a blow for experience.

The backstory of the latter, in particular, was a gift to the watching 
International Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach, who is desperate to 
shake off the fug of cynicism caused by its mishandling of the Russian doping 
scandal on the eve of the Olympics.

Racing last, Armstrong, who came out of retirement just 18 months ago, 
narrowly came in under the time of Russian Olga Zabelinskaya, who would not 
have been on the start line had an IOC plan to ban those who had previously 
been suspended for doping not been overturned on the eve of the Games.

Fabian Cancellara wins Rio time trial gold as Chris Froome takes bronze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/fabian-cancellara-rio-2016-olympic-time-trial-cycling-gold-chris-froome>
The normally steely and focused Armstrong, who suffered from a nosebleed mid 
race, was unbowed but overcome with emotion as she realised she had seized gold.

First she collapsed to the ground and then headed straight for her 
five-year-old son Lucas on the finish line.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Ffroome-fails-to-add-gold-medal-in-time-trial-to-tour-de-france-title%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86e1bc414b1ad6f91b6a42578bcbce870429ccd5%2F0_210_4725_2835%2F4725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Froome%20fails%20to%20add%20gold%20medal%20in%20time%20trial%20to%20Tour%20de%20France%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Ffroome-fails-to-add-gold-medal-in-time-trial-to-tour-de-france-title%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Froome%20fails%20to%20add%20gold%20medal%20in%20time%20trial%20to%20Tour%20de%20France%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Ffroome-fails-to-add-gold-medal-in-time-trial-to-tour-de-france-title%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86e1bc414b1ad6f91b6a42578bcbce870429ccd5%2F0_210_4725_2835%2F4725.jpg>
 Armstrong, whose five-year-old son was in Rio to see her win, with her gold 
medal. Photograph: Bryn Lennon/Getty Images 
“I knew other women who would come back and race and I thought it was so 
selfish. But here I am today and with the two experiences in London and Rio ... 
I can’t imagine not having shared them with him,” she said.

“He sees me work really hard, he sees me be healthy. The first question he 
asked me was ‘Mama, why are you crying, didn’t you win?’ There’s another life 
lesson I have to teach him – why you cry when you’re happy.”

Armstrong is something of a throwback amid the money, commerce and cold 
cynicism of modern sport.

She works as a community health director for the St Luke’s health system at 
home in Idaho and, as ESPN sportswriterBonnie D Ford explained in a recent 
profile 
<http://www.espn.com/olympics/cycling/story/_/id/17259580/why-two-gold-medal-road-cyclist-kristin-armstrong-gives-everything-has>
, only started cycling seriously after entering a local triathlon called the Y 
Not Tri in her mid-twenties.

Almost two decades later, Armstrong capped off her career with a remarkable 
hat-trick and became the oldest woman to win gold in an individual event since 
1908, when 53-year-old British archer Sybil Newall triumphed in London.

Her husband, Joe Savola, said afterwards that part of her motivation was to 
prove those who said she was too old to be on the team wrong. He had helped her 
train, as she always does, by overlaying the topography of the Rio course on 
her local Idaho roads and endlessly pounding them.

Some may try to turn her triumph into the latest chapter in a so-called cold 
war that erupted in the pool between US swimmer Lilly King and Yulia Efimova, 
the Russian who also received a last-ditch reprieve to be able to compete.

British cyclist Emma Pooley, who finished 14th, said she could never shake the 
hand of Zabelinskaya. But Armstrong refused to bite, saying she could only race 
those on the start list.

The Russian, one of 278 Russian athletes in Rio after the IOC ignored loud 
calls for a blanket ban in the wake of evidence of widespread institutional 
doping, insisted after the race that the substance she was banned for, 
octopamine, could be found naturally after eating seafood.

She said that when she failed the drugs test, during competition in Costa Rica 
in spring 2014, she was breastfeeding her third child and was taking no 
medication at the time. “Any mother knows that if you breastfeed you can’t take 
anything,” she said.

Somewhat improbably, Zabelinskaya also insisted she did not believe that 
either Russia or sport had a widespread doping problem.

“I don’t believe when I hear that somebody have problem with doping, I don’t 
believe. I think there has been some mistake, because I don’t believe that 
somebody take this. I believe the people and I believe that all athletes are 
clean,” she said.

The omnipresent gaggle of tracksuited Team GB officials had been hoping for a 
repeat of London 2012, when gold medals in the men’s time trial and on the 
rowing lake had kickstarted a record gold rush.

But with the rowing cancelled due to the blustery weather and Froome unable to 
breach the gap to the untouchable Cancellara, they were left looking elsewhere 
for the gold medals to shift the momentum perhaps dented marginally by a run of 
near misses.

On a day when the wind tore at the hastily assembled temporary structures that 
fringed a starting ramp chosen for its picturesque location, the testing 
two-lap 54.5km time trial course on sweeping coastal roads should have suited 
Froome.

At the start, with a number one on his back, he fiddled with his zip, adjusted 
his grip and stared into the middle distance. He had prepared meticulously, as 
he always does, and oozed confidence he could secure Britain’s second gold of 
the Games.

But Cancellara, who finished 47 seconds ahead of Dutchman Tom Dumoulin and 
more than a minute clear of Froome, enjoyed a close to perfect ride.

Afterwards, wreathed in a Swiss flag, he was a picture of contentment. “I knew 
this would be one of my last races. I didn’t want to fail. It was a perfect 
day.”

Froome, who won his third Tour de France in July, said that winning his second 
time trial medal to add to the bronze he earned in London behind Bradley 
Wiggins was still a special moment.

“I know some people may see a bronze as a disappointment but I’m extremely 
happy to have medalled again,” he said. A letter from the Queen following 
another summer of stunning achievement would be “a nice surprise”, he added.
 