
On a busy day for corporate and economic news, leading shares have turned 
their attention away - briefly - from the shock Donald Trump victory in the US 
election.

The FTSE 100 is currently up 60.05 points at 6813.23, while the pound is on 
the slide after weaker than expected UK inflation figures dampened the 
prospects of a Bank of England rate rise in the near future. Chris Beauchamp, 
chief market analyst at IG, said:

An unexpected drop in UK prices has sent the pound into freefall again versus 
the dollar, which has meant that the FTSE 100 is enjoying the benefits of a 
weaker currency. The fall in both headline and core price growth will have 
caught many by surprise, but a steady rise in producer prices signals that 
weakness in consumer prices may not last for ever.

Supermarkets are in demand after overall grocery sales rose in the 12 weeks to 
November 6, according to Kantar Worldpanel, although the individual pattern was 
mixed.Tesco, up 7.35p to 213.2p, saw sales grow at their fastest rate in three 
years whileMorrisons, 8.4p better at 221p, reported a 2.4% fall, which 
reflected some store closures.

Elsewhere pharmaceutical group Hikma is 66p higher at £16.90 after a positive 
note from Morgan Stanley. The bank put an overweight rating on the business 
with a £22 price target, saying:

Lack of pipeline visibility has been our main concern. Our new deep dive into 
Hikma’s medium term pipeline and long term opportunities gives us increased 
confidence. While it doesn’t change the near term trajectory, it points to a 
pathway for sustained growth and should lead to a multiple re-rating.

Our estimate of a $600m generic pipeline brings clarity. We have uncovered 
what we believe to be 70% of Hikma’s filed pipeline. Clarity on the nature and 
timing of projects removes a key overhang. Hikma’s acquisition of Roxane was 
not only for its pipeline, but also its legal and R&D expertise, which helps 
position Hikma to deliver and enter a higher value add market.

We worked our way down from the 800+ drug list of pending generic filings and 
found that Hikma is well placed to capitalise long term. A third of this list 
are Central Nervous System drugs, an area the company has expertise in. We 
estimate a further combined value of $750m comes from scheduled and extended 
release drugs, two areas Hikma has been explicit in targeting. While we do not 
know if Hikma is behind these specific filings, these areas represent the 
generic opportunity set where Hikma is well placed and likely to pursue, 
providing a healthy LT pipeline.

With Hikma trading at 15 times 2017 estimated earnings, a substantial discount 
to history, we see limited downside near-term. The stock has underperformed by 
19% over the past 3 months; we see upside as we view the stock as oversold.

Land Securities has been lifted 33p to £10.18 following a lower than expected 
fall in net asset value, a 4.5% rise in revenue profit - although it fell into 
a £95m pretax loss after property revaluations - and comments that it was 
“relatively insulated” against any weakness in the property market following 
the “uncharted territory” after the Brexit vote.

Tobacco group BAT is 26p better £43.07 despite reports that US target Reynolds 
had rejected its $47bn bid.

But mining shares have lost ground after their recent gains, with Antofagasta 
falling 40.5p to 665.5p andRio Tinto down 130p at 3015.5p. The sector had been 
boosted by hopes of increased demand if Trump fulfils his pledge to boost US 
infrastructure spending.

Among the mid-caps, TalkTalk is down 10.8p at 190.3p following its figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/talktalk-shares-fall-despite-big-jump-in-profits>
, while biotech groupBTG has lost 27p to 619p despite a 24% rise in half year 
revenues. Analysts said foreign exchange movements had hit earnings, with 
Jefferies saying:

Management envisages a £25m full year charge for losses on foreign exchange 
forward contracts, which is not included within our current £123m adjusted 
pretax profit forecast. Following expiry of most foreign exchange contracts the 
full benefits of a weaker pound should benefit profits from 2018.

[A] lack of meaningful updates on a possible Varithena inflection and PneumRx 
coils revenues down year on yearmay still weigh on sentiment, in our view. We 
remain optimistic longer-term.
 