
Helped by the late night deal over Greece and better than expected US housing 
figures on Tuesday, stock markets are moving higher again.

Banks are among the main risers, as investors bet they will benefit if the 
Federal Reserve sanctions an interest rate hike in June or July.Royal Bank of 
Scotland, which raised £85m in a share offering, is up 7.8p to 253.1p, HSBC is 
10.15p higher at 444.4p whileBarclays is 2.9p better at 184.3p.

Mining shares have also gained ground as risk returns, with BHP Billiton up 
18.6p at 835.3p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 38.71 points at 6257.97. Tony Cross, market analyst 
at Trustnet Direct, said:

It was a broad-based rally as stockmarkets rode the wave of improving economic 
conditions in the US, dampening Brexit fears, and a “major breakthrough” on 
Greece, which secured bailout loans from the Eurogroup and the IMF to avert an 
uncertain default.

But Marks & Spencer has slumped 35.1p to 409.6p on disappointment with its 
results, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/marks-spencer-boss-says-recovery-plan-will-weigh-on-profits-clothes>
 dragging Next 135p lower to £53.75p.

But Dixons Carphone has climbed 2.4p to 450.5p as it said full year pretax 
profits would be at the top end of expectations, boosted by a strong 
performance from its UK mobile phone business. It said profits would be between 
£445m and £450m, compared to its earlier forecast of £440m at the lower end. 
The forecast came after fourth quarter like for like sales rose 5%. In a buy 
note Investec analyst Alistair Davies said:

A strong finish to the year sets Dixons Carphone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dixons-carphone> up well heading into 
2017. UK performance is becoming more balanced between mobile and electricals, 
and the Nordics like for like growth is likely to be ahead of the market, with 
a more stable gross margin outlook likely in our view. No further updates are 
given on CWS [its Connected World Services division] at this stage, but we 
would expect more colour on the business and its opportunities at June’s 
prelims. Valuation (12.5 times 2017 PE) and 5% sector discount are not 
reflective of core business growth and longer-term potential.

Intertek is down 119p at £31.78 after the testing equipment specialist 
reported slower organic growth.

Among the mid-caps Serco’s update pleased the market, and the outsourcing 
group’s shares have climbed 10.4p to 101.9p.

But transport group Stagecoach has slipped 14.8p to 242p after JP Morgan 
downgraded from overweight to neutral on concerns about slowing revenues at its 
rail business, especially the East Coast franchise.
 