
Shares in Europe have followed the US and Asia lower as a poll showing Donald 
Trump in the lead in the presidential election spooked investors.

But easyJet is bucking the trend, up 30.5p to 971p as it settled a dispute 
with its pilots and HSBC analysts double upgraded from reduce to buy. HSBC said 
the airline had a strong strategic position and would benefit from fuel price 
improvements next year. Its shares had lost around 45% so far this year after 
warning on trading, particularly in the wake of the Brexit vote. HSBC also 
raised its rating on Ryanair, up 1.5% to €12.93, from reduce to hold and said:

Next year Ryanair and easyJet will benefit from significant fuel price 
improvements, in contrast to their low cost competitors, whose fuel hedging has 
seen the benefit from falling market prices sooner.Ryanair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair> and easyJet remain the long-term 
strategic winners in the market with solid strategic positions and strong 
balance sheets. Despite easyJet’s current short-term commercial and operational 
challenges, we continue to see it as one of the two market leaders.

Meanwhile Next is up 230p to £50.40 after the retailer maintained its full 
year profit forecast at £805m, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/next-cuts-sales-forecast-after-tough-third-quarter>
 helped by cost savings and despite tough trading conditions. The news helped 
lift peerMarks & Spencer by 7.5p to 349.7p.

Overall however, the FTSE 100 has fallen 25.30 points to 6891.84. Connor 
Campbell, financial analyst at Spreadex, said:

A fresh batch of pre-US election jitters has swept the markets this morning, 
investors fretting over news that Trump has taken the lead in a national poll.

While Clinton is still ahead in the majority of surveys, the fact that the 
orange-faced Republican nominee has clawed his way back to being a potential 
victor in the aftermath of the FBI email scandal has sent a wave of fear 
through first the Asian markets, and now the European open.

Investors are also cautious ahead of the latest Federal Reserve statement 
later, even though most pundits expect the central bank to keep rates unchanged 
as the election looms.

A warning from Moody’s that it would downgrade the UK’s sovereign rating if it 
lost access to the single market has not helped matters.

Standard Chartered is leading the fallers, down 25.2p to 648.1 after Tuesday’s 
disappointing update.

Mining shares are also under pressure on growth concerns, with Glencore down 
6.8p at 239.65p andAntofagasta falling 12.5p to 540.5p.

But precious metal specialists have moved higher as gold and silver continue 
to be seen as havens for nervous investors.Randgold Resources has risen 130p to 
£75.25 andFresnillo is up 35p to £17.53.

Persimmon has put on 20p to £17.57 as the housebuilder said sales were upu 19% 
since July despite the Brexit vote, but said it would be more cautious about 
land buying as the UK begins talks to leave the EU.

Among the mid-caps G4S has climbed 17.5p to 237.6p following an announcement 
that nine month revenues had risen 5.7%. But pubs groupJD Wetherspoon is down 
50.5p at 837.5p as it warned of higher costs in terms of wages and rates, and 
said sales had slowed in the UK and Ireland. Pro-Brexit chairman Tim Martin also
hit out at European leaders over the leave negotiations. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/wetherspoon-boss-eu-leaders-brexit-talks-tim-martin>
 