
Leading shares are on the rise, with overseas earners lifted by a stronger 
dollar and commodity companies boosted by the prospect of increased 
infrastructure spending from president-elect Donald Trump.

So Anglo American has added 40p to 1188.5p and BHP Billiton is 40.5p better at 
£13.40.Barclays has climbed 6.75p to 208.5p on hopes of looser regulation in 
the US under the new president.

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 67.32 points at 6797.75, with support services group
DCC the biggest riser, up 450p at £64.85 as it said full year profits would be 
ahead of expectations. Mike van Dulken and Henry Croft at Accendo Markets said:

A positive start to the week comes from further easing of concerns about a 
Trump presidency. Certain appointments (chief of staff, chief strategist) have 
proved more conventional than feared, while certain populist issues aren’t 
being focused on so much. Expectations of an infrastructure spending spree, 
fiscal stimulus and deregulation are, however, intensifying the bond market 
sell-off via hopes of growth, inflation and, more importantly, interest rate 
rises.

Markets are also following the lead of Japan, where the Nikkei added 1.7% 
following news of a forecast-beating 2.2% rise in the country’s GDP.

Marks and Spencer has added 12.3p to 339.5p after Citigroup issued a buy note, 
but more defensive stocks such as utilities were out of favour, withNational 
Griddown 18.5p at 937.2p and Severn Trent slipping 38p to £21.39.

Elsewhere there was some takeover news, with Irish food business Greencore 
climbing 12% to 327.3p as said it would pay $747.5m for US convenience food 
business Peacock Foods, a specialist in sandwiches and children’s chilled 
meals. Peel Hunt said:

This acquisition transforms the shape of the group, resolves the issues in the 
US and brings a significant new growth opportunity. The terms of the deal look 
sensible. At first sight, this looks like a deal that should be well received. 
We like what we see so far and have upgraded our recommendation from add to buy.

Meanwhile William Hill has added 1.7p at 285.3p after slightly better than 
expected growth of 6% in third quarter revenues. It kept its full year guidance 
unchanged, with full year earnings forecast to be at the upper end of a £260m 
to £280m range, but identified £30m of cost savings.

The company had been struggling with its online business, and plans to use 
£15m of the cost savings to drive faster online growth.William Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill> was also the centre of 
failed merger attempts, and analysts believe further consolidation attempts are 
likely. Liberum said:

The shares are trading around 10% below our target price of 323p but there is 
upside towards 400p (on the back of cost savings) if M&A materialises.

Neil Wilson at ETX Capital said:

Shares in William Hill are up this morning as it seems the bookmaker is 
turning things around at last and it looks like a very desirable merger target 
again – if the right suitor emerges. At 290p a share the stock is trading 
around 10% lower from its August highs, when takeover talks were pushing up the 
price.

So far we’ve had a couple of false starts, with the unsolicited bid from Rank 
and a proposed merger with Amaya both ending in failure. With the industry 
going through a phase of consolidation amid tightening regulation, higher taxes 
and greater competition online, William Hill will still have its eyes open for 
a strategic deal, but it can afford to wait a little longer for the right 
partner.

On the figures, Numis analyst Richard Stuber said:

William Hill’s trading was reassuring in a context of recent disappointments. 
No division reported a decline in net revenue growth. Reassuringly, management 
has reiterated full year operating profit guidance at the top end of £260-280m 
range, 3% above consensus at the top end.

Meanwhile the company has shaken its board up by appointing three new 
non-executive directors, in the wake of its strategic struggles.
 