
Financial shares have led the market higher despite a last minute sell off 
which saw the leading index come sharply off its best levels.

Having climbed as high as 6315 and ahead around 70 points at the closing 
auction, theFTSE 100 finished the last day before the EU referendum with a 
34.64 point rise to 6261.19. The close of the market coincided with a new poll 
showing a one point lead for the campaign for the UK to leave the EU.

Overall it was a fairly uncertain day as investors who had driven the market 
higher as the Remain camp seemed to be gaining ground, paused for breath. 
Still, leading shares have recovered from their recent falls and now stand at a 
two week high. Chris Beauchamp, senior market analyst at IG, said:

 As the final day of campaigning goes on, with both sides looking to wring 
every last vote from the British public, markets have remained positive, with 
further solid gains for the FTSE 100 and European indices. London’s leading 
index has enjoyed a round trip of around 800 points since 9 June, with the 
country’s Brexit referendum the chief culprit for the move. Remarkably, the 
index finds itself within touching distance of its June high, a clear sign that 
investors at least are now relatively confident that the UK will vote to remain 
in the EU on Friday. And, in a further sign of confidence, financial stocks 
dominate the leader board in London, with those with a strong UK focus some of 
the biggest gainers.

Hargreaves Lansdown was the leading riser, up 54p to £13.81, while Old Mutual 
added 5.6p to 193.4p andStandard Life was 9.3p higher at 340.7p.

But Primark owner Associated British Foods dropped 99p to £28.02 as Morgan 
Stanley moved its recommendation from overweight to equal weight on concerns 
about the growth outlook for the discount fashion retailer. Adisappointing 
update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/22/debenhams-sales-hit-by-change-in-shopping-habits>
from Debenhams, down 4.55p to 69.70p, did not help matters.

Commodity shares also came under pressure, as a lower than expected fall in US 
oil stockpiles sent Brent crude down 1.6% to $49.80.

A profit warning from speciality chemicals group Elementis saw it plunge 
nearly 8% to 208.7p.
 