
Capita is leading the market higher after an upbeat trading statement from the 
outsourcing group.

Ahead of its annual meeting it said it had made a solid start to the year and 
was confident it would grow revenues by at least 4% this year. It has won 
£4580m worth of contracts, including Volkswagen and Debenhams, although some 
decisions have been taking longer than expected to come through.

The company’s shares have climbed 44p to £10.68, but not everyone was 
convinced. UBS analysts issued a neutral recommendation and said:

With £458m aggregate contract wins year to date (versus £1,200m this time last 
year, and £1,800m in 2015 overall)Capita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> has made a slower start as 
expected. It notes that some pipeline decisions have been slower than 
anticipated, but still expects most to convert this year. It sounds like the 
‘transactional’ businesses and client expansion are picking up some of the 
slack.

Peel Hunt remained at hold:

Trading year to date is in line and there is no change to expectations for the 
full year. We continue to believe that Capita is well positioned to capitalise 
over the medium term on a wide range of both organic and acquisition 
opportunities. However, organic growth in 2016 is likely to remain relatively 
muted, with management targeting at least 4% (2015: 4.3%).

Stifel was more negative:


Capita has published an annual meeting statement and trading update today 
maintaining its 4% organic growth target and highlighting its confidence in the 
structural growth opportunities. However, we think that year to date contract 
wins is on the low side and acquisition spend is also surprisingly light. We do 
not anticipate making any changes to our forecasts and remain sellers of the 
stock.

But Jefferies issued a buy note, saying:

Although the statement contains little new information, 2016 estimated organic 
revenue growth visibility has improved from 0.7% in February to 2% currently, 
which is slightly better than anticipated. We believe Capita’s valuation (the 
bottom of its 15-year range) offers an attractive entry point for a long 
duration compounder.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 49.03 points at 6163.84, despite the 
first quarter UK trade gap widening to its biggest since 2008. Optimism over 
the Greek crisis following Monday’s Eurogroup meeting is helping sentiment.

But with the rising dollar and renewed fears of a slowdown in China hitting 
commodities - copper is at a four week low and iron ore continues to be under 
pressure - mining shares are once more among the fallers.Antofagasta is down 
5.9p at 410.7p,Glencore is 1.4p lower at 131.15p and Rio Tinto has lost 12.5p 
to £19.52.

Next has fallen 30p to £52.95 after the latest British Retail Consortium 
figures showedthe sharpest drop in sales for eight months in April. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/10/uk-retailers-suffer-sharp-drop-sales-experience-economy>

But easyJet is up 39p at £15.09 following an update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/10/easyjet-24m-pound-loss-dividend-terrorist-attacks>
, with British Airways ownerInternational Airlines Group also moving higher, up 
7.5p at 521p.

Among the mid caps, Restaurant Group has risen 9.2p to 283p, recovering some 
ground after its recent profit warning, amid vague takeover talk in the wake of 
its recent share price slump.
 