
Leading shares are heading for a new all time high as the slump in the pound 
continues to benefit the exporters and dollar earners which dominate the top 
index.

The FTSE 100 is currently up 6.51 points at 7104.01 and although it is off its 
best levels and has failed to reach an intra-day high, if it ends at this level 
it will be a new closing record.

The main risers are a mixed bunch, with overseas earners such as mining groups 
edging back on a touch of profit taking.

But some domestic stocks are on the rise, with housebuilders lifted by 
comments from retirement home specialistMcCarthy & Stone, which said business 
had returned to move normal levels after the immediate slowdown after the 
Brexit vote.

McCarthy is up nearly 8% at 175.4p, helping Barratt Developments climb 7.6p to 
478.4p andTaylor Wimpey move 2.2p higher to 146p.

A number of retailers have been boosted by a British Retail Consortium survey 
showing a rise in takings last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/retailers-warn-weak-pound-blows-consumer-confidence-british-retail-consortium>
, albeit with a cautious outlook.Next is up 132p to £46.66 while Marks & Spencer
 has added 4.7p to 326.2p.Burberry is 43p better at £15.22, also lifted by 
hopes the weak pound will help its overseas business.

Clothing retailers were also lifted by a better than expected update from 
Jacamo and SimplyBe businessN Brown, up 18.5% at 208.5p. It said first half 
profits had fallen 19.8% but it reported strong growth in online sales and was 
on track to meet market expectations for the full year.

But Dixons Carphone has dipped 2p to 335.9p.

Andy McLevey, head of dealing at stockbroker Interactive Investor said:

 Investors pause for breath after yesterday’s gains with the FTSE 100 index 
now nudging higher in early trading having initially opened in the red in a 
narrow trading range. While sterling remains under pressure having slipped 0.6% 
against the dollar a trade group survey showed UK retail sales rose in 
September providing some respite for retail stocks.

Old Mutual is the leading faller, down 3% at 202.6p ahead of a meeting with 
City investors later in the day. But Shore Capital’s Eamonn Flanagan remained 
positive:

Although showcasing the various parts of which group, much attention is likely 
to focus on the progress of and implications for the forthcoming demerger of 
the company into its constituent parts, namely Emerging Markets,Old Mutual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oldmutual> Wealth, Nedbank and OMAM. An 
adjusted NAV of 193p as at June 2016, up 8% in H1 16, forms the starting point 
for this process, with the stock still offering good upside potential from the 
current 1.1 times level.

We reiterate our buy recommendation on the stock, believing that the demerger 
of the business will release significantly more value than implied by the 
current rating.
 