
Leading shares in the UK are dipping lower again but reasonable eurozone 
services surveys are providing some support, even helping European markets edge 
higher.

Mining shares are among the biggest losers on the FTSE 100 on continuing 
concerns about the strength of the global economy and thus demand for 
commodities, butBAE Systems has climbed 1% to 481.2p after saying it had made a 
good start to the year. The statement comes ahead of its annual meeting, but 
analyst Sandy Morris at Jefferies remained cautious:

The AGM statement says BAE has “good momentum”, but provides no real substance 
for that assertion, in our view. The breadth of BAE’s business and programmes 
does make it robust, even were there no further export for Typhoon, but we 
believe there is arguably still some uncertainty about the rate of growth BAE 
can sustain over the next three years.

BAE appears to have made a satisfactory start to 2016, but has arguably not 
been able to generate any excitement. We recognise the backdrop looks more 
positive. Certainly, the conflict in Yemen appears intractable despite the 
recent peace negotiations in Kuwait (although the Saudi-led coalition has 
halted the bombing campaign). On the other hand, the Russian defence budget is 
under pressure and may now reduce. Looking across BAE’s major US peers, we 
think it fair to summarise the first quarter of 2016 as having been pretty 
uneventful in terms of organic growth in sales and the development of order 
backlogs. We venture BAE is in the same camp.

Next has also moved higher, up 212p at £51.90, leading the FTSE 100 risers and 
recovering from weakness despitedowngrading its profit forecasts for the third 
time in five months. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/next-warns-on-sales-profits-cold-weather>

But Sainsbury disappointed with its results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/sainsburys-sales-and-profits-fall-amid-price-cuts>
, falling 16.1p to 269.6p and helping drag rival Morrisons down 7.7p to 183.2p 
andTesco 5.25p lower to 164p.

As for the mining shares, BHP Billiton is down 58.9p at 816.4p as copper 
continued to slide and, perhaps more significantly, Brazilian prosecutors filed 
a $43.5bn lawsuit against the company and peer Vale for a dam collapse last 
year which killed 19 people and polluted a major river.

Elsewhere Royal Dutch Shell A shares are down 15.5p at 1739.5p after the oil 
company cut its 2016 spending by 10% following the completion of its takeover 
of BG, citing continuing low oil prices.

Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 38.33 points to 6147.26, not helped by news 
that the UK construction sector had grown at its slowest rate in nearly three 
years, albeit bad economic news delays the prospect of any UK rate rise.
 