
A rise in oil prices on hopes of an Opec deal next month has lifted commodity 
stocks, but not enough to push leading shares into positive territory.

Brent crude is currently up 1.2% at $47.43 a barrel, helped by a softer dollar 
as well as renewed optimism that oil producers might seal an agreement to cut 
output. Commodities are also higher, with copper climbing more than 2% on hopes 
of increasing demand for metals.

So mining shares have gained ground, with Glencore 5.3p higher at 267.2p and 
Antofagasta adding 12.5p to 678.5p, while Royal Dutch Shell A shares has risen 
26.5p to 2011.5p andBP is 5.5p better at 453.15p.

A rise in gold and silver once more has helped Randgold Resources rise 135p to 
£59.25 andFresnillo climb 27p to £13.16.

But the FTSE 100 has slipped back 7.13 points to 6768.64. Connor Campbell, 
financial analyst at Spreadex, said:

There wasn’t much for the markets to go off of this Monday, causing the 
current macro-issues (US election fallout, Fed rate hike, Brexit) to mingle 
with the week’s main events (the Autumn Statement, Thanksgiving) for a fairly 
dull start.

 The FTSE has really looked lethargic in the last week or so; bar some post-US 
election theatrics the UK index has struggled to manage anything resembling 
momentum, leaving it seemingly perpetually trapped below 6800. This week, at 
least, has Wednesday’s Autumn Statement as a focal point, something that could 
help certain sectors, like infrastructure and home building, if Philip 
Hammond’s first real performance as Chancellor follows what reports have 
suggested.

For today, however, there isn’t much for the FTSE to latch onto, with a 
rebound from its oil and mining stocks, inspired by sharp rises from Brent 
Crude and copper.

Nerves have been rattled a little as packaging company Essentra, down 20% to 
395.9p, cut its full year profit forecast due to a slowdown in China, and 
outsourcing groupMitie, 10% lower at 188.7p, issued a second warning this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/mitie-withdraws-healthcare-second-profit-warning-shares>
, as customers delayed placing orders amid the uncertainty following the Brexit 
vote.

Retailers and banks were also under pressure, with Next down 113p at £49.77, 
andLloyds Banking Group 1.5% lower at 58.57p.
 