
As leading shares head towards their high for the year and investors tend 
towards riskier assets once more, precious metals have lost some of their 
lustre.

Gold and silver have slipped as their attraction as a safe port in a storm 
fades, leaving precious metal mining groups lower. SoFresnillo has fallen 23p 
to 984p whileRandgold Resources is down 140p at £65.15, the two biggest 
declines in the FTSE 100.

Egyptian gold miner Centamin has taken the bottom slot in the FTSE 250, down 
2.9p at 94.55p.

Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said:

Solid risk appetite into the end of what has been a busy week for central bank 
updates, and a US dollar off its dovish Fed-inspired 5-month lows, is seeing 
gold and silver come off their recovery highs (stronger US dollar makes them 
more expensive for non-dollar buyers).

Overall though the FTSE 100 is up 18.52 points at 6219.64 having earlier 
reached 6223, close to its high for the year of 6242. Positive moves on Wall 
Street and in Asia overnight have carried through into Europe. In the wake of 
the US Federal Reserve cutting back its expectations for interest rate rises, 
the dollar has weakened and helped support commodity prices, although Brent 
crude has dipped a little in early trading, down 0.5% at $41.31 a barrel.

Also among the fallers is Berkeley, down 62p at £31.95 as the housebuilder 
said profits would be at the top end of expectations this year but warned 
housing supply could be hit by planning issues, reducing public sector 
resources and “one of the world’s highest property taxation regimes.”

Elsewhere Sainsburys has slipped 1.6p to 279.9p as it is expected to raise its 
bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/17/sainsburys-set-to-raise-bid-as-argos-takeover-deadline-approaches>
 for Argos ownerHome Retail, up 1.4p at 182.6p, to as much as £1.5bn by the 
deadline at the end of the day.

Still with retailers, Debenhams has dropped 1.7p to 74.55p as Investec issued 
a sell note:

A new chief executive does not alter the structural challenges Debenhams 
faces. Sales, margin and cost focused strategies have all be tried and failed 
to deliver growth. WhileDebenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> has self-help opportunities 
(space optimisation; operating efficiencies and mark down), we expect these to 
be offset by material wage inflation and margin reinvestment back into 
differentiating the offer. With little profit growth expected over the medium 
term, we cut to sell (from reduce). Our target price, based on a 35% sector 
2017 PE discount, falls to 67p {from 70p].

But Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct International is up 12p at 413.5p, its last 
day in the FTSE 100 after the recent index reshuffle.

But banks are in demand as part of the general recovery, with Standard 
Charteredup 16.3p at 475.35p on hopes of progress in Asia. It shrugged off a 
reduce not from Nomura, but the bank’s analysts boostedRoyal Bank of Scotland, 
up 3.5p at 234.4p, andLloyds Banking Group, up 1.16p at 70.46p.
 