
As sterling recovers some of its recent heavy losses, leading shares have 
taken their cue from falls in overseas markets.

The prospect of a full debate on Brexit as now promised by prime minister 
Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/theresa-may-accepts-need-for-brexit-debate-in-parliament>
 has awakened hopes that a hard line in negotiations with the EU may be 
moderated, lifting the pound by more than 1% to $1.2272.

But a disappointing start to the US results season in the shape of Alcoa 
pushed US markets lower, and this fed through to Asia and now Europe. There is 
also some caution ahead of the release of the latest Federal Reserve minutes 
later, which could give more clues as to the likelihood of a US rate rise this 
year.

So the FTSE 100 has fallen 31.31 points to 7039.57, continuing the slide from 
its record intraday high on Tuesday.

But airline shares are in demand, helped by news that Monarch has received a 
£165m lifeline to keep flying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/monarch-airlines-gets-165m-lifeline-to-stay-afloat>
 as well as an announcement that the UK and Chinese governments had agreed to 
increase weekly flights between the two countries. Sentiment in the sector was 
also helped by an upgrade of Deutsche Lufthansa by analysts at Kepler Cheuvreux.

So easyJet has climbed 20.5p to 921p, as Cantor Fitzgerald issued a buy note 
after the budget’s airline’s bond issue. Analyst Robin Byde said:

EasyJet has issued a new 2023 bond at an attractive low coupon rate. To us 
this suggests market confidence in its budget airline business model and 
balance sheet. It follows a tough 2016, in which exceptional events (e.g. 
terrorist acts and air traffic control strikes) cost the airline over £200m. 
The stock has been weak, underperforming the European airlines sector in the 
past quarter and is good value, trading on a calendar 2017 estimated PE of 9 
times. This is a 30% discount to its long-run average PE. The dividend yield is 
5%. We note that consensus forecasts for this year (2017) have fallen sharply 
and now suggest no growth year-on-year. If 2017 proves to be less turbulent 
there could be good upside to consensus. We view the current price as an 
attractive entry level point and reiterate buy, with a target price of 1,300p.

Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said: 

It’s been a while since easyJet <https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> 
was top of the FTSE leader board. At least a week. Today’s gains come thanks to 
a welcome hat-trick of; 1) the pound regaining some poise versus the euro; 2) 
another successful €500m 7 year bond sale, and; 3) bargain hunters jumping 
on-board the current 8% bounce from an 850p level last traded in Jan 2013.

British Airways owner International Airlines Group is also better, up 3.2p at 
379.3p.


Meanwhile InterContinental Hotels has climbed 26p to £32.70 despite JP Morgan 
issuing an underweight recommendation with a price target of £29.25, up from 
£27.23.

Among the fallers, Fresnillo has fallen 35p to £16.12 on profit taking after 
it reported a 6.7% rise in silver production in the third quarter. Numis said 
the report was disappointing:

Fresnillo’s third quarter production results were a miss in terms of silver 
production (10.6Moz) but in line in terms of gold 219.8koz. The miss was driven 
by lower grade at theFresnillo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/fresnillo> 
mine with the remedial programme that the company has taken at the operation 
taking longer than expected. Management have also pushed out the commissioning 
of the second phase new 10Moz/year San Julian mine back to the second quarter 
2017 from 2016. We view these results as incrementally negative but move from a 
sell to a reduce on unchanged multiples of 2 times net asset value and 15 times 
cash flow following the pullback in the share price.

Sports Direct International, which warned on Friday about the negative effects 
on its business of the slump in sterling, is down another 12.5p to 281p 
following the most recent decline, making it the biggest faller in the FTSE 
250. Cantor Fitzgerald cut its price target from 320p to 260p, saying:

The news is obviously disappointing as not many forecasters would have 
predicted such further falls in sterling against the dollar. However, the 
company is not ‘out of the woods’ yet and faces further possible downgrades to 
earnings. It is also radically changing its strategy, which is not without 
risk. It will lead to an increase in debt levels eliminating the chances of a 
dividend increase and buyback in the medium term. In the meantime, the company 
will have difficulty in shrugging off its discount heritage; the currency led 
downgrade, in our view, represents a step down in profitability while the stock 
is now not ‘stand-out’ value on the basis of our revised forecasts, 13.7 times 
2017 earnings forecasts. We are retaining our hold recommendation but 
downgrading our target price to 260p from 320p.



 