
Last spring, when one US dollar got you a paltry €0.72, Americans visiting to 
Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> needed to fork out $17 for a 
€12 entrance ticket to the permanent collections of the Louvre. Today the same 
ticket will set them back barely $13.

Likewise, a reasonable three-star hotel in Rome: perhaps $350 last year, more 
like $275 this. Or three courses for two – plus a few beers – in one of an 
Amsterdam eetcafe: about $100 just 18 months ago but $75 now.

“Europe feels like it’s on sale this year for Americans,” said Barrie 
Seidenberg, CEO ofViator <http://www.viator.com/>, a US-based company that 
allows tourists to pre-book entrance tickets to the big attractions and 
small-group “jump the queue” tours before leaving home.

As the euro currency sinks ever closer to parity with the dollar, the fact 
that a European vacation is now about 25% cheaper than it was last year has not 
escaped the attention of US holidaymakers. Although for some of the old world’s 
more popular attractions, that could cause problems.

Over the last bank holiday weekend, the Wall Street Journal reported 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/europe-braces-for-a-summer-travel-crush-1432847803>
, the Palace of Versailles – despite recently investing €15m to revamp its 
entrance hall – was forced to post a message on its website asking tourists not 
already armed with an advance ticket to postpone their visit, or at least to 
confine it to the gardens.

Versailles, the resplendent centre of French royal power until the 1789 
revolution, drew more than 7.5 million visitors to its palace and gardens in 
2013.


But even that was comfortably exceeded by the world’s busiest museum, the 
Louvre <http://www.louvre.fr/en>, which is expecting to welcome well over 9 
million people this year.

Seidenberg said searches and bookings on the company’s site for attractions 
like the Louvre and the Sistine Chapel in Rome were up by 60%, while advance 
sales for the Eiffel Tower had soared by 170% this year.


“Paris is on fire,” she said. “But really any place in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> that people feel is iconic, 
that they have to see, and especially any place they fear there might be queues 
... Much as people want to see the Sistine Chapel, they don’t want to queue for 
five hours in the Roman sun first.”

Savvier American visitors have already learned that advance booking is now 
essential. “We planned it all online months ago from the US,” said Cindy Sohn, 
who is from southern California and visiting Paris with friends.


“We spent two weekends meeting up over a bottle of wine deciding what to do, 
then I spent a day on museum websites booking everything for scheduled time 
slots.”


Add to the surging US influx the growing number of Asian (particularly 
Chinese) holidaymakers eager to tour Europe’s most famous attractions, and it 
is hard to see how the visitor experience at many of Europe’s more venerable – 
and overcrowded – landmarks is not going to suffer.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Feuro-rate-american-tourists-europe-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433529678295%2F70e549c8-c822-4680-a35e-813f83f82d6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaining%20currency%3A%20fall%20of%20euro%20has%20American%20tourists%20flocking%20to%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Feuro-rate-american-tourists-europe-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaining%20currency%3A%20fall%20of%20euro%20has%20American%20tourists%20flocking%20to%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Feuro-rate-american-tourists-europe-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433529678295%2F70e549c8-c822-4680-a35e-813f83f82d6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Palace of Versailles recently asked prospective visitors, who had not 
bought an advance ticket, to consider postponing their visit. Photograph: 
Charles Platiau/Reuters 
Some tourists plainly have a miserable enough time already. “The lines are 
total chaos with little help from the staff and I couldn’t really advance 
purchase in this case: the website is terrible,” a recent US visitor to the 
Eiffel Tower wrote on the travel site Tripadvisor.


Another agreed: “Lines were crazy, people trying to get you to buy things 
everywhere, trapping you and begging.”


Of the Louvre, one Las Vegas tourist recorded that despite going late in the 
day, “It’s chaotic and a madhouse inside. It’s very disorganised too, even if 
you have the map.”


A visitor from Virginia said the museum was “total and utter chaos” and that 
to see its main draw, the Mona Lisa, visitors should expect to “fight your way 
through a frenzied crowd pushing and shoving just to get a glimpse of it.”

According to Atout France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, the 
French tourism development agency, a record 3.2 million US tourists visited the 
country in 2014, encouraged by the euro’s gradual weakening over the course of 
the year. The number is expected to increase further this year.


Anne-Laure Tuncer, director of the agency’s New York bureau, said early 
indications were that reservations for some categories of flights to France 
from the US were up by as much as 7% this April compared with last year. “It’s 
an indication of the way things are going,” she said.


Tuncer added that a recent Gallup poll showed 82% of Americans had a broadly 
favourable image of France and the strong dollar-euro exchange rate was “a real 
bonus”.


The impact should be felt not just in increased tourist numbers, she said, but 
“in upgrades – people tend to book more excursions, for example, or a better 
class of hotel. They’re easier with their money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Feuro-rate-american-tourists-europe-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433530029040%2F482b3d5b-bdfe-4201-8962-31ab001112dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gaining%20currency%3A%20fall%20of%20euro%20has%20American%20tourists%20flocking%20to%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Feuro-rate-american-tourists-europe-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gaining%20currency%3A%20fall%20of%20euro%20has%20American%20tourists%20flocking%20to%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Feuro-rate-american-tourists-europe-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433530029040%2F482b3d5b-bdfe-4201-8962-31ab001112dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rome’s Sistine Chapel now stays open until nearly midnight for one day each 
week to help deal with its 6 million visitors a year. Photograph: Musei 
Vaticani/Ansa/Claudio Peri/EPA 
In Venice, Florida-based tour organisers Randall and Dorothy Smith said their 
business had done well this year because the trips it runs, booked a year in 
advance with prices locked down in euros, are paid for only 30 days before they 
begin. “This year has been a banner year,” Randall said. “There’s money to be 
made.”

For tourist attractions, there is also money to be spent. The Louvre is 
currently in the throes of a major £40m renovation programme aimed at helping 
it handle up to 14 million visitors a year – more than three times the number 
it was getting at the turn of the century.


According to the museum, up to 40,000 people a day now jostle to see the Mona 
Lisa alone – funnelled towards it by a visitor flow system redesigned last year 
specifically to reflect the fact that, for many visitors to the Louvre, the 
enigmatic smile is all they really want to see.

In Amsterdam, the celebrated Rijksmuseum reopened last year after a monumental 
£275m revamp that should allow it to cope with up to 5 million visitors a year. 
Along with several other major museums, it is also considering extending its 
hours (the Louvre, currently closed on Tuesdays, is thinking about staying open 
seven days a week).


In Rome, the Sistine Chapel, expected to pull in 6 million visitors this year, 
is now staying open until nearly midnight one day a week.

Even attractions outside city centres are also noticing a rise in US visitors. 
The Fondation Claude Monet, which runs the impressionist’s house and garden in 
Giverny, west of Paris, saw 625,000 visitors in the seven months it was open 
last year, 20% of them from America. “This year, the number of US visitors has 
already risen – and it’s around 27% of our total so far,” a spokesman said.


Italy

Just outside of Giolitti, one of the oldest gelaterias in Rome and a top 
tourist attraction, students Navi Atwal and Julia Spencer, both from 
California, admitted it was the favourable exchange rate that encouraged them 
to travel in Italy after their study abroad programme in Spain ended for the 
year.


Spencer said she fully realised just how much the weakened euro helped her 
finances while she was studying in Spain: her monthly rent in euros stayed the 
same, but the dollar cheques she was receiving from her parents were buying her 
more and more.

“I would feel like I had more money by the end of the month – $50 to $70 a 
month,” she says. “Coming here, I knew I had to be really careful with my 
money. But then later, as the price went down, I could be a little more 
flexible,” she said.

Tennessee newlyweds Kevin Maggard and Sharmaine Hunt say they did not come to 
Italy especially because of the exchange rate, but noted that lots of people at 
home had mentioned to them that it was a “good time to go. You feel like you 
can spend a little more money,” Hunt said.

On their first day in the Eternal City prices at lunch seemed “reasonable” and 
they calculated that an €8 dish would only set them back about $10

In Venice, Pam Sammartino, from Denver, Colorado, said the exchange rate had 
definitely helped her budget, allowing her to stay at a nicer hotel – one with 
a pool – than she otherwise would have.

But Franco, a gondolier, said whatever the exchange rate, people were spending 
less money than they used to. The day of long lunches and gondola rides have 
been replaced by take-out pizza by the slice and public transport, he said.

France

Like hundreds of others, Scott Sohn, a building contractor from southern 
California and his wife, Cindy, had been queuing for over half an hour to climb 
the bell tower of Notre Dame Cathedral. “We got here well before opening time 
to stand in line because in the afternoon the line is twice as long,” he said.

The Sohns and their fellow holidaymakers, the Phillipses from Palm Springs, 
are seasoned travellers from previous trips spent fighting the crowds in Rome. 
They had seen scores of pre-planned sights from the Normandy D-day beaches to 
their special queue-jumping pass and guide at the Louvre.

“There were such crowds in front of the Mona Lisa that you had to push and 
shove to get close,” Cindy said. “If I was a first time visitor from the US and 
I went there on my own, I’m not sure what kind of impression I’d have. There’s 
a lot of pushing and a lot of tight corners,” Cohn said.

At the Louvre, the crowd in front of the Mona Lisa is now almost as famous as 
the painting. “I took a photo of people taking photos of the Mona Lisa,” said 
Jon Gabrielson, a major in English and history.


Further back in the queue, Rachel Tierney, an English major from Oshkosh, 
Wisconsin, said the impressionists at the Musée d’Orsay had proved tricky due 
to the wall of people taking selfies in front of the works of Degas. “You 
couldn’t see anything, we were 30 feet away from the pantings.”

Maggie Finch, an English major in the same group of friends, had been “very 
surprised” in London to have to queue for half an hour to get a picture of 
platform nine and three quarters at Kings Cross station. Likewise, Paris’s 
recently restored gothic chapel La Sainte-Chapelle was stunning “but if you 
turned around you bumped into other tourists”.

Most felt the queues in Paris were small-fry compared to Italy. “Rome was far 
worse,” sighed a pensioner from Texas waiting to get into Notre Dame.

 