
Gambian president Yahya Jammeh said he would not step down and condemned 
efforts by west African regional leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/african-leaders-back-adama-barrow-as-new-president-of-the-gambia>
 to get him to hand over power after helost an election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
 to challenger Adama Barrow.

Adama Barrow: from Argos security guard to president of the Gambia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/adama-barrow-gambia-president-argos-security-guard-london>
 The comments on state television late on Tuesday were a hardening of the 
veteran president’s position after days in which hopes mounted he couldbe 
persuaded to hand over power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/the-gambias-president-urged-to-accept-defeat-by-new-government>
 at the end of his mandate on 18 January, when Barrow is due to be inaugurated.

 “I am not a coward. My right cannot be intimidated and violated. This is my 
position. Nobody can deprive me of that victory except the Almighty Allah,” 
Jammeh said.

 “Already the Ecowas [economic community of west African states] meeting was a 
formality. Before they came, they had already said Jammeh must step down. I 
will not step down,” he said.

 Jammeh initially accepted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
 the results of the 1 December election, whose outcome was seen across Africa 
as a moment of hope. He is accused by human rights groups of the detention, 
torture and killing of perceived opponents during his 22-year rule.

 On 9 December, he reversed his position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-results-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow>
 and said he would challenge in the country’s supreme court the results of an 
election he said was riddled with irregularities.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambian%20president%20rejects%20election%20result%20in%20television%20address%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambian%20president%20rejects%20election%20result%20in%20television%20address%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video&media=>
Gambian president rejects election result in television address to the nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
Jammeh will not face prosecution on leaving office, a spokesman for the 
opposition coalition that backed president-elect Barrow told AFP late on 
Tuesday.

“Ecowas wanted to know whether the incoming administration plans to prosecute 
outgoing President Yahya Jammeh,” spokesman Halifa Sallah said following talks 
on the peaceful transfer of power.

“There is no indication of a threat [of prosecution] or the need to threaten 
outgoing President Yahya Jammeh,” he said.

“President-elect Barrow says he is going to treat outgoing President Yahya 
Jammeh like a former head of state and would consult him for advice,” Sallah 
added.

On Tuesday, French president François Hollande said the results of the 1 
December polls were “indisputable” and that Barrow “must be installed as soon 
as possible”.

“The matter is non-negotiable,” Hollande said after a meeting in Paris with 
visiting Senegalese president Macky Sall, whose country nearly surrounds the 
Gambia.

Last week, Ecowas said Jammeh must step down next month when his term runs out 
and vowed “to take all necessary action to enforce the results” of the poll, 
without spelling out what those measures might be.

Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report.
 