
Every year, the GameCity festival in Nottingham provides a showcase for new 
and innovative game developers and thinkers. Now based at the National 
Videogame Arcade (NVA) and in shops and cafes around the city centre, the event 
is a celebration of independent development and a focal point for thinking 
about what games are and can be.

Each morning of the festival, the Guardian has been running a chat show in the 
NVA toast bar, meeting some of the developers showing their new projects, as 
well as academics analysing the place of games in modern culture. Luckily we’ve 
been recording the audio, so more people can get to hear them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS_im_qGqqKg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS_im_qGqqKg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS_im_qGqqKg&media=>
On Wednesday, Guardian games editor Keith Stuart and writer Jordan Erica 
Webber spoke to Party for Introverts, a new UK-based independent studio made up 
of Russian designer Arseniy Klishin and artist and designer Laura Gray. Their 
first game Thing-in-Itself is an interactive short story that explores the 
relationship between lead characters Molly and Ted, inspired by Immanuel Kant’s 
distinction between how objects appear differently to different people and the 
idea of the “thing in itself”. Through Ted’s eyes, interacting with objects in 
his room and having conversations with Molly, the player witnesses how 
relationships inevitably look different to the various parties involved. It’s a 
really fascinating way to think about Kant’s philosophy, and Klishin tells a 
nice story about the person who influenced him to become a programmer.

We also spoke to Elizabeth Simoens, a writer and director of live-action video 
games for international specialistFire Hazard <http://games.fire-hazard.net/> 
her own companySeaSlyph <http://seasylphgames.com/>. She tells us about how 
live video games work, how they combine actors, strange locations and large 
groups of players – and what happens when you end up running a live game for a 
group of art historians who’ve never played video games.


Our final guest that day was games writer and academic Kat Brewster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kat-brewster>, who recently completed an 
MA dissertation on the ways in which gamers subvert games and find their own 
ways of playing. Examples include speed-runs through Dark Souls, abusing the 
character creation tools like Polygon’s Monster Factory, and trying to play
Skyrim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2011/nov/10/elder-scrolls-v-skyrim-review>
 as a a non-player character.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-cBmhTJMAhs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-cBmhTJMAhs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-cBmhTJMAhs&media=>
On Thursday morning we spoke to Humble Grove <http://humblegrove.tumblr.com/>, 
creators of the much-discussed 29, a magic realist point-and-click adventure, 
that follows two graduates – Bo and Ao – as they prepare to move out of their 
shared flat. Developers Tom Davison and Hana Lee tell us about how the game is 
semi-autobiographical, taking place in a flat which is designed to closely 
resemble their own.

We’ll be posting another collection of interviews on Monday.
 