
You've got to love LA. Any town with a pro shop called The Merchant of Tennis 
gets my vote. And it's appropriate that E3, the Electronic Entertainment Expo, 
one of the world's biggest video games conferences, should take place near 
Hollywood. Not that you can see the studios from the smog-encrusted city centre 
that houses the two giant Expo halls, but their closeness brings home that 
games could challenge movies as the 21st century's most dynamic art form.

Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> are already rivalling 
Hollywood economically. In the US last year, gamers shelled out $8bn (£5.65bn) 
for their fix, as much as was taken at the box office. Worldwide, the industry 
is worth at least $30bn, yet how many people in the UK have heard of grands 
fromages of the industry such as Ken Kutaragi, the father of PlayStation? There 
are more PS1s in the UK than digital set-top boxes, and no one gave them away. 
But there is little mainstream interest in this extraordinary industry compared 
to the forest's worth of column inches dedicated to Big Brother, Survivor, 
Pearl Harbor, Don Giovanni and Hear bloody 'Say.

In part, I suspect this is because, to outsiders, the games world seems 
trivial and unstimulating - the preserve of spotty teenage boys who have only 
two uses for their right hand, neither of which involves writing. At E3, there 
was undoubtedly a large coterie of boy-men with goatee beards, long, surfers' 
trousers, blocky shirts and a complexion resulting from chemicals and pizza. 
But equally, one could detect significant creative and business changes in the 
industry that will enable it to reach out beyond its hardcore following.

For example, Myst III, an already popular title, has 45 minutes of embedded 
live-action sequences, as well as quality animation and graphics. What is this 
new form of content? A movie? A game? TV? The edges blur as this new medium 
appropriates the lessons of the old, with swooping tracking shots and 
close-ups, while resolutely charting an interactive path that produces an 
intensely satisfying experience of being in the movie.

Narrative is important in the best of this new output, and it's not simply a 
question of how many gory, slimy things you can chop the head off in 60 seconds 
(nothing wrong with that, I might add). Some of the new breed of creatives are 
searching for characterisation and identification in just the same way as drama 
writers and directors have done since the Greeks.

The other two major events of the E3 week were the launch with much hoopla and 
tub-thumping of Microsoft's chunky X box and the emergence of the PS2 as a 
multimedia entertainment centre, with a Netscape browser, AOL content and 
services, flash technology and Real Media streaming.

I was at the Sony press conference, along with 400 of its closest friends, to 
share in the announcement of Telewest's deal with Sony to link the PS2 to our 
set-top box. This will deliver games on demand and multi-player gaming, and 
possibly trigger a new creative approach to gaming - episodic rather than one 
big hit. More like TV drama than a movie.

The quality of consumer feedback on characters, situations, ease of use and 
level of interest will allow games developers an in-depth sense of what the 
customer wants. But it should also enable them to take risks with different 
forms and formats, rather than simply create more mega games.

There is a strong argument that games may be as important to the development 
of broadband as football is to multi-channel TV. We wait to see. But we know 
that games will be as important as movies. This will be even more the case if 
the games community moves deeper into the mainstream.

 Evidence of the emergence of a new obsession with online gaming was 
demonstrated by the two days the inhabitants of E3-world spent discussing the 
subject. Massive multiplayer games, in which hundreds of thousands of 
subscribers play one another across the web, have grown enormously in the past 
few years, but again if this is to break into the mainstream (other than as 
bridge, chess or poker), it has to find its audience in a simple, compelling 
way. As I sat listening to panellist after panellist trying to work out ways to 
make broadband gaming pay, I was reminded of multi-channel TV. At first there 
was deep scepticism in the traditional industry. Then some brave souls made 
investments in kids' networks, education channels, movies. Then some really 
brave souls bought a shed-load of sports rights and changed the face of the 
industry. Advertisers and consumers paid, and the rest, as they say, is 
Rupert's balance sheet.

The games world could look like this - a basic offering funded by advertising, 
an on-demand business paid for by subscriptions and big events, the Pearl 
Harbor or FA Cup Final of Gaming, as a form of premium purchase. Highly 
creative, two-way broadband games are the industry's next big challenge. On the 
evidence of E3, I've no doubt that they'll be up for it.

 David Docherty is managing director of broadband content at Telewest
 