



When a 24-year-old American called Eron Gjoni posted a blog complaining about 
the behaviour of his ex-girlfriend, it is unlikely that he expected to ignite a 
culture war which is still reverberating through the industry six months later.

“The Zoe post”, published in August 2014, made a series of unfounded 
accusations that Gjoni’s former lover Zoe Quinn, an independent games 
developer, had traded sex for positive reviews. Soon, an army of internet 
dwellers had seized on this opportunity to police a woman’s sexual behaviour 
under the guise of promoting “ethics in games journalism”. What was most 
astonishing aboutGamergate <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamergate> 
was how quickly it grew. Like a hurricane, it ripped new grievances out of the 
ground and rolled them up with long-established hatreds and arguments. Its 
supporters call their enemies “social justice warriors” and worry that they 
will usher in a new age where the latestCall of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> won’t let you shoot 
nameless baddies - but instead ask you to talk about your feelings.

Over the course of the autumn, Gamergaters seemed angry about many things: the 
increasing number of women playing and featuring in video games; the sometimes 
overly cosy friendships between games developers and the journalists who 
covered their work; and the meaninglessness of “gamer” as an identity in an age 
where your grandma can play a £2.99 puzzler on her iPhone.

For Gamergaters, the “good old days” were the time when games were designed 
with teenage boys in mind, and were deliberately tasteless, violent and macho. 
So it is no wonder that many of them hate Twine – a simple tool which allows 
anyone to build a text adventure on a web page. The Twine scene is also notably 
liberal and progressive: several of its leading lights are gay or transgender, 
and subjects include mental illness, gender dysphoria, sadomasochism and kinky 
sex. Twine games are unavoidably lo-fi – a stark contrast to the lavish visuals 
and A-list voice acting found in blockbuster console releases. Many titles are 
designed as a deliberate rebuke to the mainstream, which rarely shows much 
interest in depicting alternative lifestyles or engaging with social issues. 
For these reasons, it’s unlikely Twine will become the next YouTube or Vine: 
its fans love it precisely because it is a niche community rather than a 
venture capital-chasing startup.

Which brings us to the subject of money – another Gamergate grievance. Because 
Twine developers do not have access to the vast marketing budgets of major 
studios, many games journalists who sympathise with their artistic and 
political aims have championed them. Some writers have contributed to 
crowdfunding appeals for independent games. On a site calledPatreon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/19/crowdfunding-patreon-creators-musicians-youtube>
, both games journalists and developers have solicited donations from friends 
and fans.

This activity fostered the idea of a network of friends who had financial 
stakes in promoting each other’s careers. The Patreon concept was seized upon 
by Gamergaters – though there are larger ethical issues to address, such as the 
alleged practice of publishers offering YouTube stars money to cover their 
games positively.

Nonetheless, in the wake of the online storm, sites such as Kotaku 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/13/gawker-future-lifehacker-kotaku-uk>
 – part of the Gawker network – banned their writers from contributing to 
crowdfunding appeals. Kotaku’s US editor Stephen Totilo wrote that Gamergate 
“has been, if nothing else, a good warning to all of us about the pitfalls of 
cliquishness in the indie dev scene.” While Gamergate had sporadic victories –
Intel pulled ads from a site called Gamasutra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/07/intel-pledges-300m-diversity-tech-sector>
 after a letter-writing campaign – its main legacy seems to have been to 
entrench existing divisions.

Five months on, the movement has faded to a background hum. Gamergate 
supporters still congregate on sites such as Reddit to discuss how to persuade 
advertisers to boycott websites they dislike, but much of the energy has 
dissipated. Like many Twitter campaigns, the ease of joining – which made it so 
powerful initially – eventually destroyed Gamergate. It became a magnet for 
sexist bullies who drowned out any substantive points. That said, the forces 
that drove it have not abated, soGamergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamergate> is unlikely to die – it will 
simply mutate.
 