
Game Digital has hired an external distribution company to handle all the 
games consoles sold onBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> as it expects the 
US-inspired discount day to be bigger than ever this year.

The company was forced to issue a profit warning in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/jan/14/game-digital-slumps-after-profit-warning-as-ftse-falls-on-commodity-collapse>
 afterheavy competition on Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/28/black-friday-fever-police-battle-shoppers>
 in 2014 forced it to give away some of its top-quality games in order to sell 
new consoles.

The problems at the retailer, which listed on the stock market last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/06/game-digital-lowers-flotation-price>
, were partly responsible for a 4.5% fall in underlying profit to £38m in the 
year to 25 July. Sales rose 2.3% to £962m.

Game Digital recovers from profit warning but console sales slip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/11/game-digital-recovers-from-profit-warning-but-console-sales-slip>
Martyn Gibbs, the chief executive, said he still viewed Black Friday as an 
opportunity to recruit new customers to Game’s loyalty scheme and so encourage 
them to spend more in the long term.

“We could hit a higher margin for one day but then we would not recruit 50,000 
or 100,000 customers. It’s very simple for us.”

He said selling a console could start a relationship with a customer that 
could affect the outlook of the company for the next eight years.

This year Game Digital <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gamegroup> is 
likely to sell a broader range of products as the potential market for the 
retailer’s games has vastly increased, with more than a million more people in 
the UK now owning one of the new generation of gaming consoles such as an Xbox 
One.

After last year’s profit hit, Gibbs believes Game has also struck a better 
balance on the package of consoles and games it will be offering this Black 
Friday.

He said handing over all the distribution of consoles to a third party over 
Black Friday would enable Game Digital’s own warehouse in Basingstoke, 
Hampshire, to focus on getting its software and other products out to shoppers.


The move comes after a number of businesses, including Marks & Spencer and 
delivery company Yodel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/11/amazon-yodel-christmas-parcel-delivery-backlog>
, struggled to cope with a surge in demand for deals over Black Friday last 
year. This year Yodel is recruiting 7,000 extra delivery drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/yodel-to-recruit-7000-drivers-festive-season-christmas>
 for the festive season as it expects four times as many people to take 
advantage of the Black Friday promotions this year.

The company is also substantially increasing staff in its stores for the day 
and has invested in its website to handle the expected surge in demand.

“We are planning for it to be bigger,” Gibbs said.

Another likely area of focus on Black Friday and into next year will be 
toys-to-life games – children’s computer games linked to physical toys. Games 
such asSkylanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/nov/10/skylanders-parents-guide> 
enable children to place a toy on a “portal” and see it come to life in a game. 
Gibbs said sales of such games rose 80% in the yearafter Lego entered the market
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/09/lego-dimensions-skylanders-toy-to-life-genre-gaming>
.

Gibbs said the games were opening up the market to a completely different type 
of customer. Nearly 60% of the games are bought for young girls.
 