
It now feels like such a fait accompli that Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> will go from caretaker 
manager to full-time occupant in the coming weeks, or even days, that in his 
latest audience with England’s press corps there was a subtle change to the 
line of questioning.

Nobody expects a late twist in the aftermath of Friday’s 3-0 victory against 
Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
 and, barring a shattering result against Spain, the final match of his initial 
four-game run, we have moved beyond the point whereby anybody seriously 
imagines the Football Association might look elsewhere when it comes to 
identifying Sam Allardyce’s successor.

Southgate, once again, was at pains not to say anything that could open him to 
allegations of being overly presumptuous but this was the chance for England’s 
manager-in-waiting to start talking about what needed to be done with the team 
and, in the process, deliver the first insight into the style of football he 
would like.

Spain are fitting opponents for Gareth Southgate’s England template | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/13/england-spain-gareth-southgate-wembley-template>
What quickly became clear was that England, under his management, would 
operate with greater emphasis on the pressing tactics that have become de 
rigueur in the Premier League but, as Southgate pointed out, have actually been 
used by successful teams going back decades. There was an acknowledgement that 
“the last two tournaments are a benchmark of where we are” but Southgate did at 
least sound like a man with his own vision, in particular when it came to his 
views on John Stones and the unmistakable sense that he felt it was timeEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> started making the most of their 
more talented players.

“I remember playing Germany in Euro 96,” Southgate, a man who knows a thing or 
two about the art of defending, recalled. “Everyone was talking about Matthias 
Sammer and asking: ‘Where’s our Sammer?’ It didn’t prove to be me, 
unfortunately. We had a dabble with Rio [Ferdinand] – did we allow Rio to be 
quite as good as he might have been, or did we inhibit his progress at times? – 
and John Stones is that type of defender: a No6 instead of a No5, to use the 
old fashioned term.

“In my mind we have to encourage those players to play. Otherwise we’ll keep 
watching the [Gerard] Piqués and saying: ‘Why can’t we get those players in?’ 
If we don’t allow our players to express themselves we’ll never progress to be 
a top team.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fengland-enjoying-their-time-with-gareth-southgate-says-joe-hart-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20enjoy%20working%20with%20Gareth%20Southgate%2C%20says%20Joe%20Hart%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fengland-enjoying-their-time-with-gareth-southgate-says-joe-hart-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%20enjoy%20working%20with%20Gareth%20Southgate%2C%20says%20Joe%20Hart%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fengland-enjoying-their-time-with-gareth-southgate-says-joe-hart-video&media=>
England enjoy working with Gareth Southgate, says Joe Hart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/15/england-enjoying-their-time-with-gareth-southgate-says-joe-hart-video>
That process begins on Tuesday against a Spain side who reminded England on 
their last encounter,the 2-0 win a year ago in Alicante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/england-spain-friendly-football-match-report>
, that if teams give away the ball at the highest level it can be an awfully 
long time before they see it again. Spain do not, perhaps, look so imperious 
this time when their list of injured includes Andrés Iniesta, Diego Costa, 
Sergio Ramos, Jordi Alba, Javi Martínez and Piqué. Yet even with all those 
absentees it still probably sums up the imbalance between the two sides that 
Juan Mata, Nolito, Isco and Ander Herrera were among their substitutes in 
Saturday’s 4-0 win against Macedonia, while Cesc Fàbregas and Pedro did not 
even get in Julen Lopetegui’s squad.

The best way to counter them, according to Southgate, is to adopt the kind of 
tactics that have been prevalent at Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester City, 
among others. “Our pressing has to be spot on because if you don’t get that 
right againstSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> they can carve 
you apart. Our work with and without the ball has to be immaculate and that’s 
going to be a great challenge for us.

Gareth Southgate calls for quick decision on England manager’s job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/13/gareth-southgate-quick-decision-england-manager-job>
“We can’t be the same as Spain because their players have been brought up in a 
different way. But maybe we have more power, more pace, more strength. At the 
moment we have several top teams [in the Premier League] playing in a certain 
way: a high-pressing, possession-based game. I don’t remember seeing many good 
teams over the years that weren’t very good at pressing, whether that was 
Holland going back to the 1970s or Milan going back to their successful teams. 
That is a fundament core of what we need to do to be successful.”

Jamie Vardy’s probable return to the starting lineup helps on that count given 
his ability to chase down defenders but Southgate also made it clear he wanted 
his side to be adventurous in possession. “What’s the plan? Go selfish, shut up 
shop and try to eke out a 1-0 win, or do we say ‘no lads, let’s play with 
belief and go with what we think is the right way to play’?

“It would have been easy to say [of Scotland]: ‘OK, we have to win this match, 
we’ll go solid, soak up pressure, hit teams on the break and play all our 
experienced players.’ Or do we try to build from the back, play with some risks 
and involve some younger players who we think are the future?

“My view is you manage every game like you’re going to be there for ever and 
make decisions for the long term. That’s why I admire Mauricio Pochettino and 
the way he puts Harry Winks into the north London derby. If that doesn’t work 
for us, fine, but we have to think about the long term. We’ll get some of those 
things wrong but we’ll get a lot right, too.”
 