
Not since Celia Johnson laid eyes on Trevor Howard has the nation been so 
captivated by abrief encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/brief-encounter-review-70th-anniversary>
. But the anticipation will finally come to an end on Saturday night when Gary 
Lineker, in front of a likely audience of more than 4 million people, presents 
Match of the Day in his underpants.

Will Gary Lineker really present Match of the Day in his pants?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/aug/11/gary-lineker-pants-match-of-the-day>
At least, we think he will 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/aug/11/gary-lineker-pants-match-of-the-day>
. As of Friday morning, the BBC presenter and former England striker was still 
being a little coy about his imminent striptease on the first weekend of the 
Premier League season.

“We’ll have to wait and see what happens,” Lineker told the Guardian, when 
asked to confirm his partly clothed punditry. “It depends on how cold the 
studio is. If they get it nice and cosy, it might just work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fgary-lineker-says-pledge-to-appear-in-his-pants-depends-if-the-studio-is-cosy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7df42a6cbb178558060e6ad460941c49c98e12ea%2F1158_89_2860_2860%2F2860.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gary%20Lineker%20says%20vow%20to%20appear%20in%20his%20pants%20'depends%20if%20the%20studio%20is%20cosy'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fgary-lineker-says-pledge-to-appear-in-his-pants-depends-if-the-studio-is-cosy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gary%20Lineker%20says%20vow%20to%20appear%20in%20his%20pants%20%27depends%20if%20the%20studio%20is%20cosy%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fgary-lineker-says-pledge-to-appear-in-his-pants-depends-if-the-studio-is-cosy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7df42a6cbb178558060e6ad460941c49c98e12ea%2F1158_89_2860_2860%2F2860.jpg>
 At the King Power stadium last season Leicester fans hold a poster showing 
Gary Lineker in underpants. Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty Images 

Later on Friday he continued to tease his social media followers, posting this 
on Twitter.
Gary Lineker (@GaryLineker) 
Big thank you to Jim in lighting for standing in for me in rehearsals today. 
#motd <https://twitter.com/hashtag/motd?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/vPYwoWRpEs 
<https://t.co/vPYwoWRpEs>
 <https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/764126709620871168> August 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/764126709620871168> 
Lineker also refused to specify which brand of underpant he would be wearing, 
saying “I generally have a brand of brief on every day,” although the BBC’s 
commercial rules would probably necessitate any logo being covered in 
double-sided sticky tape. “I’ve given it a lot of thought, and again you will 
have to wait and see, but apparently there’s been a lot of betting on the 
outcome,” he said.

One detail Lineker was willing to divulge was that, if the strip goes ahead, 
it will certainly not be for the duration of Match of the Day’s 90 minutes. 
When asked how he would hope to extract tactical analysis from Alan Shearer 
while largely in the buff, Lineker’s velvet voice turned steely. “Doing the 
entirety of the show in my pants would become a bit farcical,” he said.

This moment has been in the offing since December, when Lineker tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/garylineker/status/676520648097865728?lang=en-gb> that he 
would present the venerable highlights show in “just my undies” if his beloved 
Leicester City won the league. At that point, the Foxes sat on top of the 
table, but remained rank outsiders. Five months later and Claudio Ranieri’s men 
hadwon the title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
 by 10 points.
Gary Lineker (@GaryLineker) 
Gulp! https://t.co/zzbaVj2Nya <https://t.co/zzbaVj2Nya>
 <https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/763784181344301056> August 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/763784181344301056> Gary Lineker 
(@GaryLineker) 
If that's what does it for you Claudio. https://t.co/7TzX9IwVLJ 
<https://t.co/7TzX9IwVLJ>
 <https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/763751920016252928> August 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/763751920016252928> 
“I think Leicester’s win was a one-off, which makes their achievement all the 
more special,” Lineker said. “Last season was nothing short of a sporting 
miracle and it’s not going to happen again. That said, I think there’s 
something of the unknown about the Premier League now.

“Look at the other European leagues and there are one or two likely 
challengers for the title. In our league this season, there are quite 
comfortably five or six. Plus we’ve had an influx of the world’s big-name 
managers and are starting to attract big players too. It’s astonishingly 
difficult to predict a winner.”

When asked to complete the phrase “the Premier League is the _____ league in 
the world,” Lineker replied: “Richest.”

The former Everton and Spurs forward’s potential trouser-free appearance comes 
in the week that his fellow BBC presenter Helen Skelton was chastised for her 
choice of clothing duringOlympics coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/12/bbc-olympic-coverage-review-smart-background-films-skirt-scandals-and-007>
. Via traditional and social media, critics claimed that her skirt was too 
short, despite the fact that it was longer than the shorts worn by her 
colleague Mark Foster. While Lineker professed to being ignorant of the 
specific furore, he said controversy was becoming all too easy to generate.

“There is Twitter outrage at everything,” he said. “Be it a pair of trousers 
or a short skirt, somebody, somewhere will not like it. It’s best completely 
ignored. It will just be some silly keyboard warrior taking umbrage, often just 
to troll. I’ve got about 5 million followers on Twitter and if I tweet anything 
there will be faux outrage. What you learn is that you can’t please everyone 
all the time. But, for the press, this outrage is sometimes quite useful.”

Anyway, back to the matter in hand. Lineker has always been renowned as a 
remorselessly dedicated athlete and posted Instagram photos of himself in the 
gym ahead of this weekend’s date with under-fate. Was not even a small part of 
him looking forward to baring his bod for the nation? “You are joking aren’t 
you?” he asked. “No, it’s terrifying!”
 Lineker 
Gary Lineker will be presenting Match of the Day on BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> on Saturday at 10.30pm 
 