
With its reputation for socially permissive, non-stop nightlife and a 
perpetually burgeoning arts and culture scene (often compared with New York in 
the 1970s), Berlin remains one of the world’s top destinations for LGBTQ 
travellers. The city’s gay history includes a period from 1919 to 1933 when it 
was home to the pioneeringInstitute for the Science of Sexuality 
<http://www.hirschfeld.in-berlin.de/v_institut_en.html>, whose works were 
destroyed during the Nazi book burnings.

Poignant reminders of the past surround Berlin, including the Memorial to 
Homosexuals Persecuted Under Nazism 
<http://www.visitberlin.de/en/spot/memorial-to-the-homosexuals-persecuted-under-the-national-socialist-regime>
, on the edge of the Tiergarten – a concrete cube where a video shows gay and 
lesbian couples in various embraces. In Nollendorfplatz, small memorials 
commemorate the neighbourhood’s many firsts in gay history, including the 
world’s first gay demonstration, which took place in 1922.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fb2c4d4e5a12efd9c3d3b58cc67289017ff14de%2F0_0_4368_2618%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fb2c4d4e5a12efd9c3d3b58cc67289017ff14de%2F0_0_4368_2618%2F4368.jpg>
 Memorial to Homosexuals Persecuted Under Nazism, Tiergarten. Photograph: Alamy 
Gay London: a guide to clubs, bars, cabaret and culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/oct/08/gay-london-gay-friendly-clubs-bars-cabaret-pubs>
Expats, such as the influential English novelist Christopher Isherwood, 
immortalised the free-spirited culture of cabaret-era Berlin in books and 
music. Schöneberg, where Isherwood and other gay icons lived, remains a hotspot 
for fetish clubs and famous events such asFolsom Europe 
<http://folsomeurope.co/?lang=en>.

Considering Berlin’s many fights for freedom, the city’s art and nightlife 
scene has continuously benefited from an open-minded and dynamic population. 
And while long-running clubs such as cult-favouriteChantals House of Shame 
<https://www.facebook.com/ChantalsHouseofShame/> and Berghain still draw in the 
crowds, new bars and club nights often just pop up. Monthly techno queer 
parties likePornceptual <http://pornceptual.com/category/party/> at Prince 
Charles andHomopatik <http://www.homopatik.com/> have moved the crowds into 
alternative venues and neighbourhoods, ones not traditionally LGBT. Berlin’s 
Christopher Street Day gay pride parade isn’t the only one anymore, with the
Kreuzberg CSD <https://www.facebook.com/transgenial> taking place annually on 
the same day.

Clubbing
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fc59499c9b1774350bdf66e63690e91a6c7b59b%2F0_328_4896_2934%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fc59499c9b1774350bdf66e63690e91a6c7b59b%2F0_328_4896_2934%2F4896.jpg>
 Berghain nightclub. Photograph: Alamy 
By Joey Hansom <https://www.facebook.com/joeyhansom/>, musician and DJ, 
English language editor ofSiegessäule <http://www.siegessaeule.de/> (Berlin’s 
free monthly LGBT magazine )
You can’t talk about Berlin’s gay nightlife without mentioning techno mecca, 
Berghain. Even Hollywood celebrities talk about the world-famous nightclub on 
daytime talk shows! Homeland star Claire Danes called Berghain the “best place 
on Earth 
<http://www.thelocal.de/20150929/berghain-best-place-on-earth-says-clare-danes>
” onThe Ellen Show in September 
<http://www.electronicbeats.net/feed/claire-danes-explains-berghain-to-ellen-degeneres/>
 – which made lots of news in Berlin. It’s been in a former power plant since 
2004, but the nightclub’s roots go back 20 years to a gay sex party called 
Snax, which still happens twice a year (at Easter and in November). But the 
sexually permissive atmosphere happens every weekend.

Once inside, there are no mirrors in the bathrooms to possibly judge your 
decisions, and the club enforces a no-camera policy to preserve its mystique. 
On Fridays, only the house-centric Panorama Bar is open. It closes sometime 
after sunrise and the sweat and broken glass are mopped up before Saturday 
night when the massive main techno floor opens. Because the queue gets very 
long at peak hours, locals tend to get a full night’s sleep and eat brunch 
before going on Sunday afternoon. The club is open until Monday morning.

Many Berliners feel the “underground vibe” of Berghain has been overshadowed 
by tourists seeking spectacle, creating space for other parties and venues to 
open up. When theGegen <http://gegenberlin.com/> crew stepped into KitKat 
<http://www.kitkatclub.org/Home/Club/Index.html> a few years ago, the swinger 
club found itself home to one of the city’s most successful parties. DJ Warbear 
and VJ Boxikus maintain their brand with a music policy of hard techno and 
experimental sounds, along with an adventurous visual aesthetic created by
Stefan Fähler <http://stefanfaehler.blogspot.co.uk/>. They also abolished the 
dress code, allowing a greater influx of guests. Gymrats with tight shirts rub 
against hipster goth lesbians through industrial caverns as a black-lit dragon 
sculpture on the ceiling shoots fire and screams “GOA!” Gegen happens on the 
first Friday of every other month.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F18%2F1447868047895%2Fc253f367-1838-453e-8afd-98ae0d72c2b0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F18%2F1447868047895%2Fc253f367-1838-453e-8afd-98ae0d72c2b0-1020x612.jpeg>
 The bar at Monster Ronson’s 
Every second Friday of the month is D.U.M.P., where the usually men-only sex 
clubMutschmann’s <http://www.mutschmanns.de/>, in the gay district of 
Schöneberg, opens its doors to all genders. From the bar to the tiny dancefloor 
to the darkrooms, it’s a mixture of chic and sleazy. GMF at2BE Club 
<http://www.2be-club.de/> in Mitte is the posh weekly party where you’ll hear a 
mix of chart hits, EDM and house every Sunday night.

Gay Sydney: a guide to clubs, bars, cabaret and culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/oct/21/gay-sydney-australia-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture>
In Berlin, the weekend only ends if you let it. Every Monday night at Monster 
Ronson <http://www.karaokemonster.de/>’s is Multisexual Boxhopping. The 
glitter-bombed karaoke bar hosts a free-for-all in which all 10 of its private 
booths are fair game, allowing you to bounce around and share the mic with 
strangers or, if you prefer, step into the lounge where you can strain your 
vocal cords in front of a larger audience.

The SchwuZ <http://www.schwuz.de/en/home.html> club, short for Schwules 
Zentrum (gay centre), has been a community institution since 1977. In 2013, 
SchwuZ tripled in size by relocating to a former brewery in the city’s rapidly 
gentrifying Neukölln district. The club caters to all colours of the LGBTIQ 
rainbow, with teens to silver foxes passing under the disco ball. Its DJ 
bookings are equally diverse, from Aérea Negrot playing tech-house to Lotic 
playing abstract beats. On Fridays and Saturdays, up to three floors open with 
occasional shows onstage. The most popular party is Madonnamania, on every 
three months, where all 16 Junior Vasquez remixes of Don’t Cry for Me Argentina 
get played.

Bars
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa54d84b65608707ec0ed024a7a07da8b3475758d%2F0_312_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa54d84b65608707ec0ed024a7a07da8b3475758d%2F0_312_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Barbie Deinhoff’s club and bar in Kreuzberg. Photograph: Alamy 
By Federica Calbini <https://www.facebook.com/federica.calbini>, cultural 
anthropologist, event organiser and roller derby player and coach for the 
Berlin Bombshells
Südblock <http://www.suedblock.org/wp/>, in the heart of Kreuzberg, is a bar 
and restaurant serving vegetarian and vegan food. It also hosts many diverse 
queer events such as Queerblock Female hip-hop gigs and a meet-up of Berlin’s 
queer disabled community every first Tuesday of the month.Facciola 
<http://facciola-berlin.de/> is a lesbian-owned and operated wine bar – where 
everything is possible. Warm and welcoming, you might find yourself singing 
karaoke with broomsticks with the table next to you while throwing back grappa 
shots. The bar also runs regular queer events and cultural activities, such as
Cabaret Opera <https://www.facebook.com/OperaVino>.

Barbie Deinhoff’s <http://barbiedeinhoff.de/>, also in Kreuzberg, is a gay bar 
featuring art on the walls, often with political or dissident themes. The 
mismatched chairs and couches, colourful walls and smoke-filled rooms make it a 
warm place to spend a leisurely evening.Himmelreich 
<http://www.gay-friedrichshain.de/himmelreich/>, on Simon-Dach-Straße, is a 
lesbian hangout, with happy hours, suffused lights, music that’s not too loud, 
and plenty of tables, making it a great bar for casual conversations and 
meeting new friends.

One of Kreuzberg’s legendary nightlife spots, Roses, is undoubtedly the 
kitschest bar in town thanks to its red velvet-lined walls and fake leather 
chairs. You go there when you want to feel furry and glittery. Drinks are cheap 
and the social atmosphere inside (plus long hours: often open until 8am or 
later), make it the perfect bar for a debaucherous night out.

Drag
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf4b37808f8f7f9ca2ad6ea0d121d1944ff37284%2F0_53_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf4b37808f8f7f9ca2ad6ea0d121d1944ff37284%2F0_53_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Drag queen Gloria Viagra AKA The Empire State Building of Drag. Photograph: 
Adam Berry/Getty Images 
By Pansy, founder and co-director of the YO! SISSY music festival
Hamburger Mary’s <http://www.hamburgermarys.com/category/berlin/> in 
Schöneberg puts on polished shows with hostesses Ryan Stecken and Kristelle 
Airlines, but in general drag in Berlin is a bit rough around the edges – like 
the city itself – and lower key. It relies much more on quick wit and politics 
than big wigs and fake tits. But if there is a drag queen working the door, you 
can expect it to be an open-minded, comfortable place.

Gloria Viagra, a Berlin drag icon known as The Empire State Building of Drag, 
has a huge heart. Her most popular event, the popPartysane at SchwuZ 
<http://www.schwuz.de/en/party/details/partysane.html>, is always dedicated to 
good causes, raising money for refugees or the recently homeless. Near SchwuZ,
The Club <http://the-club-berlin.de/> is a cosy, candlelit neighbourhood queer 
bar with sketches and other simple art hanging on whitewashed walls. The bar 
puts on regular film screenings and other drag events, but the real attraction 
isOlympia Bukkakis’s <https://www.facebook.com/OlympiaBukkakis/> drag nights 
every Friday. Her shows are terrifying, hilarious and tragic.

Siegessäule <http://www.siegessaeule.de/>, a free monthly LGBT magazine, has 
an extensive list of Berlin’s LGBT nightlife events in both German and English. 
Mostly, though, the best way to find out about events is by word of mouth, or 
posters on the street.

Culture
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F238b34f75c94ad00a29236316d24f6bd7d1e458a%2F0_0_1689_1689%2F1689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F238b34f75c94ad00a29236316d24f6bd7d1e458a%2F0_0_1689_1689%2F1689.jpg>
 Photograph from a series of images in the exhibition Homosexuality_ies at both 
the Deutsches Historisches Museum and the Schwules Museum 
By Tulio Edreira, founding editor of AwesomeBerlin <http://awesomeberlin.net/>
, an independent website dedicated to discovering and sharing Berlin’s secret 
corners
Berlin’s queer arts and culture is inclusive, exhilarating and above all, 
liberating. Nowhere else will you find a world-renowned art institution working 
with a local queer museum to co-curate a top-notch queer-themed exhibition. The 
not-to-be-missed Homosexuality_ies exhibition is showing simultaneously at the 
mightyDeutsches Historisches Museum <https://www.dhm.de/en.html> and at the 
Schwules Museum <http://www.schwulesmuseum.de/en/> (until December 2015). The 
Schwules Museum, the world’s first queer museum, is always worth a visit. It 
regularly organises talks, events, festivals and movie screenings.

Visit the Ballery <http://theballery.com/> in Schöneberg, and look out for 
events byCoven Berlin <http://www.covenberlin.com/>, a self proclaimed 
“sex-positive transdisciplinary genderbender collective focused on feminism, 
love, gender, sexuality and art”.

For literature, visit one of Berlin’s queer booksellers. Prinz Eisenherz 
Buchladen <http://www.prinz-eisenherz.com/>, the oldest gay bookstore in 
Berlin, is a must-stop in Schöneberg even if most titles are in German.Another 
Country <http://www.anothercountry.de/>, the darling English-language 
secondhand bookshop, has a respectable number of queer titles, and also hosts 
the monthly Queerstories reading events. Almost always the last Tuesday of the 
month, many queer, female, and trans writers meet to share their work publicly.

Movie fans should head for Kino International 
<http://www.kino-international.com/> (a GDR-era cinema open since 1963). Every 
Monday it shows international and award-winning LGBT films as part of its 
“Mongay” series. The decadent space and the high-ceilinged bar is also used for 
gay parties and art exhibitions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67f96189d464aff4f2dcbaa13338d311afcd031%2F0_64_3681_2210%2F3681.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20Berlin%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20culture%20and%20drag%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fgay-berlin-guide-to-clubs-bars-cabaret-culture-drag-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67f96189d464aff4f2dcbaa13338d311afcd031%2F0_64_3681_2210%2F3681.jpg>
 Reveller at the annual Christopher Street Day parade. Photograph: Rick 
Gerharter/Getty Images/Lonely Planet Images 
Berlin also throws one of the biggest gay pride festivals in the world each 
June (known asChristopher Street Day <http://csd-berlin.de/>). A week of 
celebrations kicks off with the popular Gay and Lesbian Street Party in 
Schöneberg. Partake in the two annual gigantic fetish festivals:BLF 
<http://www.blf.de/cms/pages/en/home.php> (Berlin leather fetish week) during 
Easter weekend andFolsom Europe <http://folsomeurope.co/?lang=en> in 
mid-September. In February, Berlin rolls out the red carpet during theBerlin 
film festival <https://www.berlinale.de/en/HomePage.html>. The Panorama “art 
house section” of the festival dedicates a significant portion of screen time 
to gay and lesbian films. In addition, queer movies from all over the world 
compete for the respected Teddy Award. A smaller film festival, theXposed queer 
film festival <http://www.xposedfilmfestival.com/xposed/index.html> (in May), 
is dedicated solely to queer film talent. It is now on its 11th year.

Adam Groffman blogs at Travels of Adam <http://travelsofadam.com/> and tweets 
@travelsofadam <http:>

• This article was amended on 18 April 2016 to correct the name of Coven 
Berlin.
 