
Great Britain left the opening World Cup of the new Olympic cycle having 
topped the medal table and with every right to ask the question, “crisis what 
crisis?”, in spite of the current search for a new performance director and 
chief executive, not to mention the various off-the-bike issues that have 
marred a golden summer. With virtually all the Rio gold medallists resting, the 
next wave of young riders provided two further gold medals on the final day 
thanks to Emily Kay in the omnium and Ryan Owens, Jack Carlin and Joe Truman in 
the team sprint.

After the trio, all academy riders, and aged 21, 19 and 19 respectively, 
posted a rapid 43.479sec against France in the final, Owens stated that they 
would like to stay together all the way to next April’s world championships in 
Hong Kong. “We only really came together for the European under-23 championship 
in July, we are such a good unit, we got better as the day progressed, and I’d 
like to think we could be there and could be very competitive.”

Katie Archibald and Manon Lloyd win Madison gold at Track World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/katie-archibald-manon-lloyd-win-madison-gold-track-world-cup>
On Sunday they built on their silver medal in the recent European 
championships, qualifying third fastest before posting the quickest time in the 
second round to win through to the gold-silver ride-off. In the final, while 
the starter Carlin posted a blistering 17.3 to launch the effort, neither of 
his team-mates faltered as they gained time on the French on each of the three 
laps to close almost a second ahead.

If there was a downside to the weekend for the national team it was in the 
crash 19 laps into the women’s madison on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/katie-archibald-manon-lloyd-win-madison-gold-track-world-cup>
 that has stalled Katie Archibald’s promising autumn campaign by leaving the 
Rio team pursuit gold medallist racing here with two broken bones in her wrist. 
The Scot is due to see a specialist on Monday in Manchester to assess the 
implications, but has been forced to cancel her plan to ride six events at the 
Scottish national championships next weekend.

“I knew I’d hurt it as soon as I went down,” said Archibald, who had time out 
last winter after injuring her knee and fracturing her elbow in a motorbike 
accident. “I went to shake it and it wasn’t a shaking job. I thought ‘oh, I’ll 
see if I can get back on’ and I got back on. ‘I’ll see if we can do the first 
sling’ – and we couldn’t really. But we had to keep going anyway.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Femily-kay-team-sprint-gold-track-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd30bc1a35c388f56ca771a6ec4fc57b0a6d268e3%2F0_89_3077_1846%2F3077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GB%20youngsters%20defy%20crisis%20talk%20to%20top%20track%20cycling%20World%20Cup%20medal%20table&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Femily-kay-team-sprint-gold-track-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GB%20youngsters%20defy%20crisis%20talk%20to%20top%20track%20cycling%20World%20Cup%20medal%20table&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Femily-kay-team-sprint-gold-track-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd30bc1a35c388f56ca771a6ec4fc57b0a6d268e3%2F0_89_3077_1846%2F3077.jpg>
 Emily Kay celebrates winning the women’s omnium during day three of the Track 
Cycling World Cup at the Sir Chris Hoy Velodrome, Glasgow. Photograph: Jane 
Barlow/PA 
As well as the women’s madison, the other novelty was the new omnium format. 
The flying lap, individual pursuit and short time trial are dropped, the event 
is cut from two days to one with the elimination, scratch and points races 
joined by a new event, the tempo race, a 30-lapper in which a single point is 
on offer to the first rider across the line for the final 25 laps.

Four points are on offer for those riders who gain a lap, but those who come 
close to lapping the field must choose between latching on to the back of the 
peloton, gaining an immediate four points, or staying close behind and 
continuing to gain lap points. That dilemma could clearly be seen as Kay, 
Japan’s Yumi Kajihara and Tatsiana Sharakova of Belarus got within reach after 
making a strong break, then visibly slowed for half a dozen laps before finally 
making contact.

Second in that event, plus fourth in the scratch and a clinically taken second 
in the elimination left Kay six points behind Kajihara in second overall going 
into the closing points race. The 80 laps turned into a five-way battle between 
Kay, Kajihara, Sharakova, Lotte Kopecky of Belgium and the Italian Simona 
Frapporti, with eight points spanning the quintet going into the final sprint, 
where Kay had only to ensure she kept a two-point lead.

In the final gallop, with 10, six, four and two points on offer, only Kopecky 
scored, and her tally of four meant Kay landed her second gold medal of the 
weekend. The Bromsgrove rider, already a gold medallist in Friday’s team 
pursuit, has her eyes firmly on Tokyo and with Archibald taking the European 
title two weeks ago, the double Olympic champion Laura Kenny could face a 
three-way fight for her place.
 