
When George RR Martin announced this weekend that he still hadn’t finished the 
sixth book <http://grrm.livejournal.com/465247.html> in A Song of Ice and Fire, 
the reaction took two broad themes. One, as we chronicled here, saw fans of the 
booksbeing broadly supportive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/04/george-rr-martin-support-deadline-game-of-thrones-winds-of-winter-a-song-of-ice-and-fire>
 of his slowness and evident agony over the same. The competing attitude was 
more usually subtly expressed, surfacing in aggregated news stories that 
observed that Martin might become “less relevant 
<http://www.wired.com/2016/01/george-rr-martin-game-of-thrones/>” to the series 
if he did not catch up to the television show soon.

Get off the pot, old man, went the not-so-subtle subtext of such stories. His 
problem to them seems unfathomable. The man now has all the money and time in 
the world, and yet he can’t be bothered to produce this book? To them, the 
statistics speak for themselves. “In the four years from 1996 to 2000 he 
published three books; in the 15 years since he’s published part of one,”wrote 
Tim Marchman at Deadspin 
<http://theconcourse.deadspin.com/grrm-has-no-pages-1750057530>, in a piece 
published a few days before Martin’s admission. Plainly, this line of thinking 
held, Martin is physically and intellectually capable of producing faster. Does 
he ever plan on finishing the thing, before he dies?

Well, the muse doesn’t quite work like that, most writers would cluck. In 
fact, Martin is just another in a long and sometimes highly literary line of 
authors who have conceived grand projects and ultimately can’t finish their 
work. Both Chaucer’sThe Canterbury Tales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/04/chaucer-canterbury-tales-2012-multimedia>
 and Spenser’sThe Faerie Queene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/19/poem-week-faerie-queene-edmund-spenser>
 are, for example, technically unfinished. Those two examples would suggest, 
actually, that leaving a grand-scale creative project unfinished at your death 
is actually a mark of greatness. Not that Martin is dead yet.

Things get worse when your fame is not posthumous, of course. Dickens – the 
literary patriarch of popular serials – was lucky that he could crank out copy 
for most of his life without suffering writers’ block. (The one exception was
Dombey and Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/23/charles-dickens-favourite-dombey-son>
, but there his interruptions were all of a personal nature, the endless 
illnesses of his extended family.) Dickens always preferred to neglect his 
family rather than his fans, as you’ll learn from just about any book on him 
published after about 1935.

Still, he died mid-novel, just a few months after beginning to publish The 
Mystery of Edwin Drood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/24/patricia-cornwell-solves-mystery-of-edwin-drood-kay-scarpetta-charles-dickens>
 in serial in 1870. At the time of his death, Dickens had completed more 
installations than he’d published, but not yet the entire series. As a result 
we don’t actually know who the killer is in Drood, having only speculation and 
guesses. Thus followed a century of devoted fans guessing the answer for 
various stagings andBBC television productions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2012/jan/06/edwin-drood-dickens-mystery-solved>
.

So obsessed were some prominent Dickens fans with the outcome of Drood that in 
1914, the Dickens Fellowship staged a full mock trial of one of the suspects. 
(Mindful of spoilers, I shall not here reveal the name of the defendant or the 
outcome of the trial.)GK Chesterton  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gk-chesterton>acted as judge, and George 
Bernard Shaw <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/bernardshaw> as foreman of a 
jury of fellow writers that included the likes ofHilaire Belloc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jun/05/archive-1925-chesterton-belloc-review>
. Yet none of this cultural ephemera threatened to eclipse Dickens’ involvement 
in the story, nor make him “less relevant” to it in the first place.

Granted, Martin has made things more complicated for himself by handing the 
stories over to HBO,creating a competing cultural product 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/09/game-of-thrones-season-five-book-adaptations>
 in a time when far more people probably watch prestige television than read 
books. (Though one longs for a study about that, actually.) That said, the 
existence of an energetic Dickens fandom, one which long before the era of 
snarky users of internet message boards found speculating about his books 
delightful, suggests that authors are always running against a couple of 
pressures: mortality being one, but the appetite of loyal readers another, an 
appetite which can grow so all-consuming

But perhaps reasonable people can disagree over the appropriateness of 
comparing Martin to Dickens. A closer analogue might be the case ofRobert Jordan
 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/pop/Wheel-Of-Time-Author-Robert-Jordan-Dies-6375.html>
, a former military man from North Carolina who wrote a series of bestselling 
fantasy novels, inflected by the author’s personal interest in ancient history, 
calledThe Wheel of Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jan/17/wheel-of-time-hugo-award-tolkien-robert-jordan>
. (I haven’t read them so shan’t attempt to summarize with any authority, but 
suffice to say there seems to be lots of Dark Forces and channeling involved. 
And a large wheel.)

Whatever their merits, these books were at the top of the lists all through 
the 1990s and have a devoted following. Yet Jordan, like Martin, saw his 
project spiral out of control, from a six-book original plan to a 12-book 
actual one. When he tried to take time out from the project to do other things, 
online fan communities bristled about it. Then, as he was working on the 12th 
book, in 2006, he was diagnosed with cancer and died within months. He had 
assured his fans, though, that he was leaving plot-prescribing notes so that 
the books could be finished by someone else. His widow chose a young novelist 
named Brandon Sanderson to write the books.

Sanderson was chosen in part because he was a big fan. “I’ll be perfectly 
honest: when I heard the news [of his death], my first thought was of the big 
loss of someone extraordinary,” Sandersontold the LA Times back in 2008 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2008/dec/03/entertainment/et-wheel3>. “My second 
thought was … he was working on the last book, would we ever get to see it?” In 
the world of fantasy and science fiction, heavily reliant on serialized work, 
this was seen as a heavy responsibility, of course. But they were still greeted 
(Sanderson published the last book in three instalments, ending in 2013) as the 
work of Robert Jordan.

Martin may, as such, take succor. David Benioff and DB Weiss, the producers of 
the television show, may be ahead of him, story-wise. But those characters and 
events will always be his.
 