
Theresa May’s adviser on the future of work says the boom in the gig economy 
could have a significant impact on government finances, with self-employed 
workers and contractors paying more than £2,000 less a year on average in tax 
than employees doing equivalent jobs.

Matthew Taylor, the former Downing Street policy expert who the prime minister 
has appointed to review modern employment practices – including in the 
fast-growing sector of app-based work for companies such as Uber andDeliveroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deliveroo> – said on Tuesday: “There is 
no question that the growth of self-employment and incorporation is having a 
significant impact on our revenues.”

It is not known how many of the UK’s 4.7m self-employed workers are engaged in 
work that could also be classed as employment, but if only 10% were, that could 
imply an annual loss to the exchequer of close to £1bn, according to the 
Guardian’s estimate.

The exchequer does not receive employer national insurance contributions on 
behalf of self-employed workers.

Taylor’s warning, as the review was formally launched, comes amid growing 
scrutiny of the employment status of workers in the gig economy. Last month, 
Uber, a taxi app relying on 40,000 self-employed drivers,lost an employment 
tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
 case when judges asserted that drivers should be classed as workers. That 
could mean Uber must pay national insurance contributions, as well as sick pay 
and paid holiday. Uber is appealing against the ruling.

The chancellor, Philip Hammond, also warned last week 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammonds-speech>
 of the “structural effect of rapidly rising incorporation and self-employment, 
which further erodes revenues”.

Writing in the Guardian, Taylor says Britain’s employment system “has 
weaknesses and is not future-proof”, and adds that the gig economy is only set 
to grow. He says some retailers are considering adopting Uber-style 
self-employment models, and are asking whether “they need people employed to 
work a full shift in our shop and can instead have people on call who come in 
for an hour or two during busy periods”.

Taylor will report back to Theresa May next year on modern employment 
practices and says he is concerned about businesses which “impose the 
expectations and obligations of employees but, by defining workers as 
self-employed, deny them their due rights”.

Hermes, the parcel delivery giant which uses 10,500 self-employed couriers, is 
currentlyfacing an HM Revenue and Customs investigation  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/delivery-giant-hermes-faces-hmrc-inquiry-into-low-pay-allegations>
following multiple allegations from couriers that they should be classed as 
workers or employees rather than contractors. Several have said they are paid 
less than the national minimum wage.

The government has also announced the first official study of its kind into 
the scale of the gig economy and the reasons people join it, and appointed 
three experts to Taylor’s panel. They are Paul Broadbent the chief executive of 
the Gangmasters Licensing Authority, Greg Marsh, the founder of the web-based 
homes rental site Onefinestay, and leading employment lawyer Diane Nichol. From 
January to March the review will take evidence in public hearings across the UK 
in a tour planned to take in towns and cities including Glasgow, Coventry and 
Maidstone.


The business minister Margot James said the government recognised the need to 
be open to innovative working, but said: “It is crucial that workers receive a 
decent wage and that people working in all sorts of jobs are able to benefit 
from the right balance of flexibility, rights and protections.”

Taylor also suggested that companies which lost employment tribunals should 
face automatic investigations to check whether illegal behaviour such as 
underpayment of the minimum wage or false self-employment were endemic.

“If an employer is found to be paying under the minimum wage on one or more 
cases, it should be more automatic that we go in and find out if those 
behaviours are rife in that organisation,” he said.
 