
The Hadid sisters are back in the news. Why? Because in the same week, Gigi, 
21, revealed she keeps milk in her fridge 
<http://www.look.co.uk/news/what-does-gigi-have-in-her-fridge> and Bella, 19, 
stunned in a sheer skirt at Cannes 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3592319/Bella-Hadid-stuns-sheer-skirt-black-bodice-Australian-Fashion-Week-2016.html>
. To be fair, these models are never out of the news. At our last Google, they 
threw up 46m searches each. Not heard of them? How embarrassing.

In a nutshell, who are they? Sisters, models, easy on the eye, big on natural 
collagen. Gigi, 21, and Bella, 19, are daughters ofReal Housewives of Beverly 
Hills <http://www.bravotv.com/the-real-housewives-of-beverly-hills> star and 
former modelYolanda Foster 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3341938/RHOBH-star-Yolanda-Foster-announces-divorce-husband-David.html>
 and property developerMohamed Hadid 
<http://www.wetpaint.com/who-is-mohamed-hadid-the-ex-husband-of-real-housewives-yolanda-foster-and-how-much-did-she-get-in-their-divorce-738060/>
. They appeared on the show as teenagers, mostly leaving the house to go 
riding, became It girls and have since been signed to IMG Models and are, well, 
everywhere.

Where exactly? This week? Cannes, New York and the Daily Mail sidebar 17 times 
between them. Previously? Victoria’s Secret, Tommy Hilfiger, Chanel and Balmain 
catwalks.

I need more evidence. Where to start ... The Vogue covers (Gigi had 11 in one 
year, a triumph when you thinkKate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss> has 60 in total. Bella has 
one), the campaigns (both have appeared in Topshop campaigns, the acme of 
celebrity modelling), and the boyfriends (Gigi hasZayn Malik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/zayn-malik>, Bella has The Weeknd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-weeknd>).

So, standard model behaviour? Not exactly. Both have shtick that sets them 
apart from their counterparts. Bella is a nationally ranked equestrian player
who was forced to pull out of the Olympics because of Lyme disease 
<http://www.harpersbazaar.com/fashion/models/news/a12375/bella-hadid-2016-olympics/>
. Gigi has appeared in Vogue with Zayn (a meta concept previously modelled by
Kate Moss and Jamie Hince <http://www.vogue.com/865419/kate-moss-kiss-me-kate/>
) and is one of the world’s highest-earning models despite the fact that she’s 
“fat”.

Excuse me? By “modelling standards” and, indeed, the cruel eye of social media 
– she was publicly, brutally fat-shamed last year on Instagram.Her response 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/miss-vogue/whats-up/2015/09/gigi-hadid-body-confidence-instagram-message-fashion-week>
? “If I didn’t have the body I do ... I wouldn’t have the career I do.”

Anything else? They’re importantly, famously, post-Basic.

Come again? Bella does lame duck-face 
<http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-news/news/miley-cyrus-mocks-gigi-hadid-sister-bella-on-instagram-photos-2015113>
, Gigi wears lameslogan tees 
<http://lifestyle.one/grazia/celebrity/news/gigi-hadid-zayn-malik-tshirt/> – 
basic tropes of 2013 that are virtually nostalgic in 2016. Occupants of a 
post-Instagram world, they also transcend paparazzi (they regularly Instagram 
pictures of themselves before the paps can get there, cannily reclaiming fame 
from the very people who invented it. Even Rihanna’s behind here).

Bona fide millennial It girls, then. Big question: who’s better? Come on, mate 
(Bella. Obv).
 