
Giles Scott is all but guaranteed Olympic gold this week, continuing Team GB’s 
16-year sailing supremacy in the Finn class. With one race left, the 
29‑year‑old from Huntingdon is now to all intents unbeatable in the Olympic 
competition.

He will still have to race in the final on Tuesday but the result is 
immaterial: none of his rivals can touch him points‑wise. World champion for 
the past three years, he will still become Olympic champion, taking over from 
his old rivalSir Ben Ainslie <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie>, even 
if he dawdles all the way round the course and finishes last.

Scott’s medal promise came on the same day that his team-mate, the windsurfer 
Nick Dempsey, won his secondsilver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/nick-dempsey-gb-windsurfing-silver-medal>
 in the RS:X class.

Despite a sometimes bitter rivalry, Ainslie was one of the first to offer his 
congratulations, tweeting: “Huge congrats @GilesScott on winning Finn Gold in 
serious style. Hats off to you my friend #BringOnTheGreat #TeamGB”.

Scott has been open about how much he resented Ainslie taking the only Finn 
place in the London Games. They had a testy relationship, often arguing on the 
water. “We’d come together in training and he’d think I was in the wrong; I’d 
think he was in the wrong. I was getting a lot from seeing him so angry,” Scott 
oncewrote 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/olympics/article-2039783/London-Olmpics-2011-Giles-Scott%E2%80%93How-I-let-Ben-Ainslie-know-squad.html%C2%A3ixzz4HLGXEXuD>
. Ainslie, for his part, told theGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jun/07/ben-ainslie-interview> in the 
run-up to the London Games that “racing against someone who is a foot taller 
than you and 10 years younger poses its own issues”.

In reality Scott was and is actually “just” eight inches taller than the 
three-times Olympic Finn champion, standing at an intimidating 1.97 m 
(6ft 6in). Ainslie finished his Olympic career as the most successful sailor 
ever, with four successive golds and a silver in all.

As for Scott, few debutants arrived at Rio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> shouldering as much expectation. 
He was overwhelming favourite with bookmakers, having failed to win only two 
regattas in this Olympic cycle, getting silver in those two events. He made 
light work of that pressure and is now on the verge of continuing Great 
Britain’s 16-year golden Finn record in the Olympics, started by Iain Percy at 
Sydney 2000.

The result is subject to protest but an eighth and second on Sunday on the 
Niterói side of the Guanabara bay has made him uncatchable in the double-point 
finale. He is now 24 points clear of the Slovenian Vasilij Zbogar, with Ivan 
Kljakovic Gaspic of Croatia in third place.

Scott, who sails for Ainslie’s America’s Cup syndicate, had a frustrating 
start to the Olympic competition, finishing 17th in a messy, slightlybedraggled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/team-gb-giles-scott-finn-sailing-ben-ainslie-shadow>
 first race. But, as the competition has progressed, he has grown in strength 
and confidence. He has won three of his 10 races, with two second places and 
two thirds.

GB’s Nick Dempsey takes windsurfing silver and thinks twice about packing in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/nick-dempsey-gb-windsurfing-silver-medal>
Scott credits his parents with igniting his love of sailing when they chucked 
him in an oppie dinghy on Grafham Water in Cambridgeshire aged six, tied to a 
long line. He started to think about a career as a sailor after winning the 
National Championship at 14 but always had going into the armed forces as a 
back-up plan.

He once said the secret to his success was not overthinking things. “I turn 
pretty unemotional and I don’t let victories make me complacent as well as not 
letting defeats get me down,” he said.

Great Britain tops the all-time Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> medal table for sailing with 
26 gold medals, seven more than the USA in second place. The USA, however, has 
won the most medals in total, with 59. Norway, Spain, Denmark, France and 
Sweden are next on the all-time medals table, confirming Europe’s traditional 
prowess on the water.

Team GB’s Giles Scott takes first steps out of Ben Ainslie’s shadow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/team-gb-giles-scott-finn-sailing-ben-ainslie-shadow> 