
After eight days of competition in Guanabara Bay, Giles Scott returned to the 
shore on Tuesday with a union jack wrapped around his back, ready to receive 
his first Olympic gold medal in the Finn class. It was a fait accompli. By the 
end of the 10th race on Sunday, Scott had an unassailable lead.

Sailor Giles Scott seals Finn class gold to add to Great Britain medal tally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/giles-scott-sailing-finn-class-rio-2016-olympics>
The last two days had been “a luxury”, he said – the very happiest of a 
four-year wait which began when he was overlooked for selection in the same 
event at London 2012. “I was pretty disappointed not to get to compete in 
London,” Scott said. “But what came off the back of that was a lot of desire 
and the drive to right the wrongs I had made, get here and put on a good show 
in Rio.”

Scott’s victory means that Great Britain has now won the Finn at the last five 
Olympics, a run that started with Iain Percy in Sydney in 2000 and continued 
with Sir Ben Ainslie’s back-to-back wins at Athens, Beijing and London, the 
last of them achieved at Scott’s expense.

Whatever else we may lack, we’re not short of brooding, bearded, sailors to 
helm our dinghy yachts. The great Paul Elvstrøm, who competed at eight 
Olympics, described the Finn as the one class of Olympic sailing where there 
was a clear difference between the “good” and the “very good”, who “can always 
leave distance between himself and others”. And Scott has proved he is very 
good indeed.

Stephen Park, the manager of Britain’s sailing team, said Scott, 29, had a 
“psychological hold” on everyone else. “The others are all racing for second,” 
he said. “They look at Giles and say: ‘You know what, this guy is just faster 
than us.’” Park compared him to Lewis Hamilton. “In F1 terms, if you’re in the 
Red Bull or the Ferrari, you’ve got some good kit, but he’s in the Mercedes, so 
you just have to hope he makes a mistake.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fgiles-scott-sails-to-gold-in-rio-for-britains-fifth-olympic-finn-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbe43bceb0537153442fe8f1457a6248c19c3978%2F41_0_2750_1650%2F2750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giles%20Scott%3A%20London%202012%20heartbreak%20pushed%20me%20to%20Rio%20gold%20glory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fgiles-scott-sails-to-gold-in-rio-for-britains-fifth-olympic-finn-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giles%20Scott%3A%20London%202012%20heartbreak%20pushed%20me%20to%20Rio%20gold%20glory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fgiles-scott-sails-to-gold-in-rio-for-britains-fifth-olympic-finn-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbe43bceb0537153442fe8f1457a6248c19c3978%2F41_0_2750_1650%2F2750.jpg>
 Scott competing in the Finn medal race on Guanabara Bay. Photograph: William 
West/AFP/Getty Images 
On the first day of the competition, Scott did. He misjudged the tides and 
wound up 17th out of 23. “Some people would say it was his first Olympics, so 
he had a touch of nerves,” said Park. “I’m not actually sure it was that, but 
just a simple error.” Either way, he thinks it fired Scott up, and he has since 
finished first in three races, second in two, and third in two more.

Scott started sailing when he was six years old. His father John had spent a 
little time “mucking about in boats” when he was at university, but neither he 
nor his wife, Ros, had ever taken it seriously. They got their three boys into 
the sport while the family was living in Canada, just so they had something 
better to do than hang out at the local mall.

Great Britain’s Hannah Mills and Saskia Clark on brink of striking 470 gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/hannah-mills-saskia-clark-470-gold-rio-olympics>
Simon Cray, credited by Scott’s father as “the first man to say: ‘This guy can 
go places’”, coached Scott during his junior years from the age of 10 at 
Hollowell sailing club, Northampton. “I had the privilege of working with Giles 
during his junior years,” said Cray. “We knew he had a special talent then, and 
to see him now reaching gold at the Olympics is just absolutely wonderful.”

Asked if he knew the boy he had coached would climb to the top spot, he 
replied with a simple “yes”, adding: “I knew he would. He was good, had good 
talent – but above that he had the right sort of mental attitude. I had people 
who were perhaps at that time slightly better in terms of technical skills, but 
put them in a race and they didn’t perform. Giles, whatever race you put him 
in, he came out on top. He was a great talent to work with and I feel extremely 
privileged to have been part of that.”

When he was 18, Scott won the ISAF youth sailing world championships in the 
Laser, and by 2008 he was training alongside Ainslie in the run-up to the 
Beijing Games. They didn’t know it then, but three years later they would 
became fierce rivals for Team GB’s one spot in the Finn at London 2012.

Ainslie, who was 35, has since admitted that he felt threatened by Scott. He 
was so much younger and so much stronger, at a time when Ainslie felt he was 
beginning to reach his own sell-by date. Scott, who had a young man’s 
arrogance, was convinced that he was the better sailor. He won the World and 
the European Championships in 2011, but lost the two crucial Olympic trial 
races to Ainslie. “Giles was the only person who was beating Ben in the last 
few months leading up to the Games,” remembers Park. “If he had he been racing 
at the Games many people would say that he would have won the gold if Ben had 
not been there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fgiles-scott-sails-to-gold-in-rio-for-britains-fifth-olympic-finn-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F341c9bde239096c631d1f40d355f1440004391b2%2F0_153_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giles%20Scott%3A%20London%202012%20heartbreak%20pushed%20me%20to%20Rio%20gold%20glory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fgiles-scott-sails-to-gold-in-rio-for-britains-fifth-olympic-finn-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giles%20Scott%3A%20London%202012%20heartbreak%20pushed%20me%20to%20Rio%20gold%20glory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fgiles-scott-sails-to-gold-in-rio-for-britains-fifth-olympic-finn-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F341c9bde239096c631d1f40d355f1440004391b2%2F0_153_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 Scott, with Slovenia’s silver medallist Vasilij Zbogar (L) and USA’s bronze 
medallist Caleb Paine. Photograph: Damien Meyer/AFP/Getty Images 
Ainslie and Scott always insisted they were friends, but you wouldn’t always 
have known it from the way they behaved out on the water. “Ben was always 
simmering and occasionally that boiled over,” said Park.

“Giles is perfectly assertive and doesn’t let anyone take advantage of him.” 
Scott once said of his relationship with Ainslie that “there has been the odd 
shouting match in training. I know why he does it: to assert himself. And I do 
it to show that I won’t back down.” Park remembers that when Ainslie was picked 
ahead of him, Scott “was irritated and angry because he thought he was better 
than Ben at Games time.” In the end Scott spent a lot of the London 2012 
regatta on a drinking spree.

Giles Scott to maintain Britain’s Finn supremacy in sailing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/giles-scott-finn-sailing-rio-2016>
Scott and Ainslie have now teamed up for the America’s Cup. Ainslie, impressed 
by just how shrewd and tough Scott was, has made him a key part of the team. 
“They will be pretty intimidating for most other people,” says Park. “They’re a 
bit of a dream team. Ben has that outspoken drive and passion. Giles is the 
computer, still ticking, thinking: ‘This is our next best move, this is our 
next best move.’”

Park wants Scott to come back to compete at both the 2020 and 2024 Olympics. 
He believes he could well win three Olympic titles. Scott isn’t so sure. “I’ll 
never create a dynasty like Ainslie did,” he said. “I’m far too old already.

“But that doesn’t mean I don’t have my own ambitions in sailing: I’m going off 
to the America’s Cup and I’d love to be able to bring that back to the UK.” He 
flies home on Sunday, and will be back to work with Ainslie in just a couple of 
weeks’ time. But before that he is planning to enjoy a drink or two with his 
family and friends here in Rio.

This time round he will be celebrating – not drowning his sorrows.
 