
I love a bath, and if I am putting my hair up it’s better if it’s a bit dirty, 
so I won’t wash it. I backcomb and make a big bird’s nest of a hairdo, and 
spray it with Tresemmé Salon Finish hairspray. Then I pull it into place with 
hair pins and smooth it over. People think it takes a long time, but five 
minutes is standard.

Next, my base – Nars foundation and By Terry Touche Veloutée under my eyes. 
Then, powder – Studio Fix by Mac, Guerlain bronzer and Nars blusher. I like 
Nars eyeshadows or a Mac palette called Dusky Rose Times Nine. I enjoy doing 
makeup – even on photoshoots, I insist on doing my own brows and eyeliner. 
I always do a flick and I use two pen liners: I do a line in Revlon, then go 
over it with Eyeko. I like a thick brow – I have a little dent in one of them 
so I make them neater using a brown brow pencil. Yves Saint Laurent Faux Cils 
is a good, thick mascara, and if I am going to an event I put on individual 
lashes, too. I’ve started using a green lipstick byLipstick Queen 
<http://www.spacenk.com/uk/en_GB/brands/l/lipstick-queen/>, from the 70s. It 
adapts to your lip colour, going whatever pinky-red your lips should be 
naturally.

Gemma Cairney: ‘I have tried to refine the clown element to my outfits’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/06/gemma-cairney-presenter-clown-element-outfits>
I have a few go-to outfits I dress up or down in. If I’m going somewhere 
really gorgeous, I’ll go toWilliam Vintage <https://williamvintage.com/featured>
 for haute couture, and I am a fan ofNet-a-Porter 
<https://www.net-a-porter.com/?cm_mmc=GoogleUK--c-_-NAP_EN_UK_LDN-_-Brand_Other--Brand_Misspells_Exact-_-neta%20porter_e_kwd-5306112152_RegionINTL&gclid=CjwKEAjwudW9BRDcrd30kovf8GkSJAB3hTxFZduIRV_xt3WAsmpP_yNN6ZZLqurOmCytGR-DNue69hoCf_jw_wcB>
 andBrowns <http://www.brownsfashion.com/>. That said, one of my favourite 
dresses is black velvet and semi-fitted with three-quarter sleeves. It’s from 
the 80s, but looks 60s, and I’ve added a vintage white lace crochet bib. I 
bought it for pennies in Beyond Retro 10 years ago and the bib was £3 on eBay.

• Gizzi’s Season’s Eatings: Feasts & Celebrations From Halloween To Happy New 
Year <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/gizzi-s-season-s-eatings.html> is 
published next week by Mitchell Beazley at £25.
 