
Thighs, platforms and colour: that’s the message for spring if style seer Marc 
Jacobs and millennial TV programme Girls, are to be trusted as cultural 
touchstones. The new cover of Glamour magazine features the cast lined up in 
Marc Jacobs’s SS17 collection. The show’s styling – a re-imagined take on basic 
basics and student flatshare chic – hasn’t changed much in the five years since
Girls <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls> first aired, with the 
line between pyjamas and daywear barely perceptible. And this cover is simply 
an elevated version of that: truncated hemlines, baby-doll dresses and 
post-internet hoodies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fglamour-girls-behind-the-casts-trouserless-look-stylewatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03d4b0471f67774b8b31f283c3b8ad2158db0b1a%2F0_0_900_1280%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glamour%20Girls%3A%20behind%20the%20cast's%20trouserless%20look%20%E2%80%93%20stylewatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fglamour-girls-behind-the-casts-trouserless-look-stylewatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glamour%20Girls%3A%20behind%20the%20cast%27s%20trouserless%20look%20%E2%80%93%20stylewatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fglamour-girls-behind-the-casts-trouserless-look-stylewatch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03d4b0471f67774b8b31f283c3b8ad2158db0b1a%2F0_0_900_1280%2F900.jpg>
 Glamour magazine’s Girls cover. Photograph: Glamour 
As ever, Jacobs has tapped into the moment with his styling. Last year was a 
pretty sour one but, in contrast, Jacobs spring show – a neo-future imagined by 
Edward Gorey 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/16/fashion/marc-jacobs-new-york-fashion-week.html?_r=0>
 – was one of the season’s springiest, a stab at optimism and, as always, its 
own form of entertainment. Models with distressed dreadlocks, appliqué 
micro-dresses and hoodies featuring Julie Verhoeven prints walked in sky-high 
platforms (we haven’t seen them that high sinceAlexander McQueen’s 201o 
Armadillo boots <http://www.vam.ac.uk/museumofsavagebeauty/mcq/armadillo-boot/>
), all inside an ersatz club designed with noughties glitz and colour.

Equally glaring here is the feminist manifesto. First, the magazine was put 
together almost entirely by women. Second, with Girls being shorthand for the 
(sometimes contradictory) current feminist perspectives, the cast use agency 
and autonomy to turn the sexual objectification of women on its head. The 
trouser-less look, or at least the very short hemlines, is a middle finger up 
to slut-shaming – much like the past five seasons of the show where trousers 
have generally seemed to be an afterthought.
 