
International judges will take evidence from 30 witnesses and “victims” of US 
agri-businessMonsanto <https://www.theguardian.com/business/monsanto> in an 
attempt by hundreds of grassroots groups to hold the company accountable for 
what they allege are human rights violations, crimes against humanity, and 
“ecocide”, or widespread environmental damage.

High-profile witnesses, including former UN special rapporteur on the right to 
food Olivier De Schutter, will give evidence alongside Argentine doctors, 
Mexican beekeepers and toxicologists and scientists from 15 countries. The five 
judges will deliver what is expected to be a lengthy advisory legal opinion.


Sweet victory for Mexico beekeepers as Monsanto loses GM permit | Nina Lakhani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/aug/08/sweet-victory-beekeepers-monsanto-gm-soybeans>
The three-day peoples’ tribunal, <http://www.monsanto-tribunal.org/> which 
will be held in The Hague this weekend, will adopt the format of the UN’s
international court of justice <http://www.icj-cij.org/court/index.php?p1=1> 
but will have no standing in law.

Organisers have described the hearing as a “moral trial” and “a test of 
international law”.

“It aims to assess the allegations of harm made against Monsanto as well as 
the human health and environmental damages caused by the company throughout its 
history,” said a spokeswoman in London.

The agro-chemical company, which is the subject of a £51bn takeover by German 
conglomerate Bayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/26/farming-mega-mergers-threaten-food-security-say-campaigners>
, has declined to take part, or to defend its history at the tribunal.

The company, which manufactured hundreds of thousands of tonnes of Agent Orange
for use as a chemical weapon 
<http://www.monsanto.com/newsviews/pages/agent-orange-background-monsanto-involvement.aspx>
 in the Vietnam war, is the world’sbiggest genetically modified seed corporation
 <http://www.monsanto.com/products/pages/monsanto-agricultural-seeds.aspx>. 
Monsanto developed toxicpolychlorinated biphenyls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2007/feb/12/uknews.pollution> and also 
makes glyphosate, the primary ingredient in Roundup, a widely used but
controversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/controversial-chemical-roundup-weedkiller-escapes-immediate-ban>
 herbicide.

The firm’s accusers in The Hague will hold it and other major chemical 
companies primarily responsible for developing an unsustainable system of 
farming.

 “Monsanto promotes an agro-industrial model that contributes at least 
one-third of global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions; it is also largely 
responsible for the depletion of soil and water resources, species extinction 
and declining biodiversity, and the displacement of millions of small farmers 
worldwide. This is a model that threatens peoples’ food sovereignty by 
patenting seeds and privatising life”, said the spokeswoman.


“The tribunal will give a legal opinion on the environmental and health damage 
alleged to have been caused by the multinational. It will also give people all 
over the world a well-documented legal file to be used in future lawsuits 
against Monsanto and similar chemical companies.”

In an open letter, signed by three Monsanto directors, the company said it 
would not attend the tribunal because it was “staged and supported by” organic 
food organisations.

 “We welcome a genuine, constructive conversation with diverse ideas and 
perspectives about food and agriculture production. [But] this is not a real 
dialogue. It is a staged event, a mock trial where anti-agriculture technology 
and anti-Monsanto critics play organisers, judge and jury, and where the 
outcome is pre-determined,” wrote Martha Burmaster, Monsanto’s director of 
human rights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmonsanto-staged-stunt-gm-seed-firm-faces-moral-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb733d616202aea12aed2374be64ae97a96908fbf%2F0_289_4414_2649%2F4414.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GM%20seed%20firm%20Monsanto%20dismisses%20'moral%20trial'%20as%20a%20staged%20stunt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmonsanto-staged-stunt-gm-seed-firm-faces-moral-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GM%20seed%20firm%20Monsanto%20dismisses%20%27moral%20trial%27%20as%20a%20staged%20stunt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmonsanto-staged-stunt-gm-seed-firm-faces-moral-trial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb733d616202aea12aed2374be64ae97a96908fbf%2F0_289_4414_2649%2F4414.jpg>
 A sign on the campus of Monsanto headquarters in St Louis, Missouri. 
Photograph: Michael B Thomas/AFP/Getty Images 
“As this is a stunt staged and supported by the International Foundation of 
Organic Agriculture Movements 
<http://www.ifoam.bio/en/news/2016/09/13/registration-open-peoples-assembly-monsanto-tribunal-14-16-october-2016-hague>
 – an umbrella organisation of organic agriculture organisations, and their 
associates such asNavdanya <http://www.navdanya.org/> and others who are 
fundamentally opposed to modern agriculture – we will not participate.”

The Monsanto statement added: “We help farmers mitigate and adapt to climate 
change. Our products and services help farmers to use data science to grow food 
in a more sustainable and carbon-neutral way. We have made commitments and 
taken actions to enhance honey-bee health; create a healthier ecosystem for 
monarch butterflies; and help rural communities preserve their forest-farm 
ecosystem, prevent illegal deforestation and protect local species.


“We believe in the coexistence of all types of farming practices, and in 
farmers’ individual freedom to choose the production method that makes most 
sense for their goals – be that growing crops using conventional methods, or 
with genetically-modified seeds and other modern techniques, or by following 
organic practices”.

Organisers insisted the tribunal was not a kangaroo court or a stunt and said 
it was by no means certain the case against the corporation would be proved.

“Other similar tribunals have found both for and against corporations,” said 
Damien Short, director of the Human Rights Consortium at London University. 
“This is a test of international law. It has moral force and the tribunal’s 
decision will be evidence-based. Peoples’ tribunals are testing the law.”

Lucy Rees, speaking on behalf of End Ecocide on Earth 
<https://www.endecocide.org/>, added: “Under existing [international] law, it 
is impossible to bring criminal charges against a company like Monsanto or its 
management, for possible crimes against human health and the integrity of the 
environment.”

The Indian author Vandana Shiva <http://vandanashiva.com/>, a tribunal 
organiser who has clashed with Monsanto many times, said the company is seen as 
one of the most dangerous on the planet.

“It has earned this reputation through a history of producing products toxic 
to humans and the environment. Life, society and democracy are under threat. We 
refuse to allow this future to unfold.”

The tribunal, expected to cost €500,000 (£445,000), has so far raised €364,000 
through crowdfunding. It is supported by more than 500 groups and individuals, 
includingLa Via Campesina 
<https://viacampesina.org/en/index.php/organisation-mainmenu-44/what-is-la-via-campesina-mainmenu-45>
 and Friends of the Earth Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmonsanto-staged-stunt-gm-seed-firm-faces-moral-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F017d64d85e36bedb4ab748ab3afa1582d95e7cb6%2F0_221_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GM%20seed%20firm%20Monsanto%20dismisses%20'moral%20trial'%20as%20a%20staged%20stunt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmonsanto-staged-stunt-gm-seed-firm-faces-moral-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GM%20seed%20firm%20Monsanto%20dismisses%20%27moral%20trial%27%20as%20a%20staged%20stunt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fmonsanto-staged-stunt-gm-seed-firm-faces-moral-trial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F017d64d85e36bedb4ab748ab3afa1582d95e7cb6%2F0_221_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Activists in San Salvador march to commemorate World Food Day in October 2014. 
The sign in the middle reads: ‘Monsanto out’. Photograph: Stringer/El 
Salvador/Reuters 
Belgian law professor De Schutter 
<http://www.srfood.org/en/olivier-de-schutter>, who will give evidence, said: 
“The tribunal will provide a forum for the victims of Monsanto. Secondly, it 
shall help develop international law. Thirdly, we are now in a stage in which 
very important choices should be made as to how agricultural production should 
develop. Shall we move to larger monocultures that rely on fossil energy, 
pesticides and genetically modified food, or shall we move towards diversified 
farming systems that respect the ecosystems and can be highly productive as 
they work with nature rather than against nature?”


Other critics, including British fashion designer Vivienne Westwood, former 
German minister of agricultureRenate Künast 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renate_K%C3%BCnast>, Canadian farmer Percy 
Schmeiser <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percy_Schmeiser> and French researcher 
Gilles-Éric Séralini 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gilles-%C3%89ric_S%C3%A9ralini>, will give 
evidence at a parallel “people’s assembly” of international social groups.

“We will also be talking about their lobbying tactics, the political 
strategies, how they influence the political decisions, and how that links them 
to the other agrochemical giants: Bayer, BASF, DowDuPont, Syngenta,” said Nina 
Holland, Corporate Europe Observatory <https://corporateeurope.org/> director 
and a speaker in the peoples’ assembly.

In a possible conciliatory move, Monsanto – which has always denied human 
rights abuses and claimed to be a force for environmental good – invited its 
critics to pose questions.

“We know we can always do more,” said the firm. “We understand that people 
have different points of view on these topics, and it’s important that they are 
able to express and share them. For our part, we remain committed to our human 
rights policy and practices, transparency, dialogue and collaboration, and 
welcome anyone who wants to learn more about Monsanto to ask us a question at
discover.monsanto.com <http://discover.monsanto.com/>.”
 