
The Reverend Kate Bottley, possibly the most famous vicar in Britain thanks to 
her regular appearances onGogglebox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gogglebox>, seems to have a god-given 
gift for the 1983 arcade game Track & Field. She has just thrashed the 
Guardian’s games editor Keith Stuart at the classic button-bashing sports sim.

She takes the 100m sprint with ease, before breaking a record in the javelin. 
“That’s it, I’m retiring undefeated,” she declares to the small crowd that’s 
gathered around her at the GameCity festival taking place at Nottingham’s 
National Video Arcade (NVA).

She walks away from the machine. Stuart looks dejected, his fingers still 
poised over the buttons.
Keith Stuart (@keefstuart) 
Well, @revkatebottley <https://twitter.com/revkatebottley> absolutely thrashed 
me at Track & Field. I was totally hustled.https://t.co/6M5gJvFddb 
<https://t.co/6M5gJvFddb>
 <https://twitter.com/keefstuart/status/791633381134110720> October 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/keefstuart/status/791633381134110720> 
The National Videogame Arcade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/16/national-videogame-arcade-nottingham-gaming-institution>
 may seem like a strange place to find a member of the clergy, but Bottley 
feels right at home. She and her family are regular visitors to the NVA. Her 
young son loves its array of classic arcade games and interactive 
installations, but it’s not just about him: she’s been playing video games for 
35 years, beginning with the old business sim Lemonade Stand onthe ZX81 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZX81>. She’s good at them, even though she says 
she feels like an impostor here.


But then, Bottley is used to this feeling. As a priest, her gender alone is 
enough to mark her out as progressive. “I’m a 41-year-old, white, straight, 
able-bodied woman, and yet I’m cutting edge for the Church of England,” she 
says. “Now how disappointing is that?”

Of course, the most significant way that Bottley stands out from her 
colleagues is that millions of people from across the country know who she is. 
Slouching on the sofa with her husband, usually cup of tea in handand slippers 
on, she’s a popular cast member on Channel 4’s Bafta-winning Gogglebox, a 
reality show where viewers watch other people watch television.

Bottley says there were no auditions before her appearance: the production 
company came to her. In 2012, she posted a video to YouTube showing footage of 
a wedding she was officiating. After the bride and groom kiss, Bottley breaks 
out into a dance accompanied by C+C Music Factory’s hit Everybody Dance Now – 
the married couple quickly join in – as does the rest of the congregation. The 
video has now been viewed more than 7m times. It was this video that impressed 
the casting Gogglebox casting team.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcMrvcORsDLI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcMrvcORsDLI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcMrvcORsDLI&media=>
“Fancy doing a flash mob,” she says. “That’s very 1990s. But the Church of 
England is always a healthy 30 years behind everybody else, so I got away with 
it. When it went viral on YouTube, I remember ringing the press officer at the 
diocese and saying, ‘I’ve done something, and it’s gone viral,’ and I kid you 
not, they said, ‘What does ‘viral’ mean?’”

The three-minute video is the perfect encapsulation of her relentlessly 
outgoing, energetic personality. “I’ve never been a quiet, meek and mild kind 
of gal,” she says. “For me, obviously because I have a faith, it’s like God’s 
gone, ‘Oh, you’re an attention-seeker. OK. We can use that.’”

Television <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> has used it too, 
not just on Gogglebox, but also BBC Radio 2’s Pause for Thought and, of course, 
Songs of Praise. But it’s her demeanour on Gogglebox that people like; she 
seems relaxed and affable but then also engaged, passionate and animated when a 
political topic comes up on one of the shows they’re asked to watch.

Is she constantly aware that she’s being filmed though? Does she feel relaxed 
enough to say anything she wants? “No!” she exclaims. “I’m a vicar for a 
living. I couldn’t say what I really think about David Cameron. Yeah, we’re 
always aware that the cameras are on and there’s a whole crew in the house when 
we’re filming – you don’t forget.”

But it’s video games she’s here for today and it’s unsurprising that she 
understands the culture that has grown up around them. After all, Gogglebox has 
direct parallels with the “let’s play” videos beloved of the gaming community, 
where YouTubers such asPewDiePie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/22/pewdiepie-youtube-felix-kjellberg-this-book-loves-you>
 and Ali A are shown playing and chatting about the titles they love. For 
Bottley’s kids, like most others of their generation, YouTube and its 
celebrities are just part of their lives.

For her son Arthur especially, these online communities are about more than 
just entertainment. “I have a son on the autistic spectrum who is passionate 
about gaming and really struggles with socialisation,” she says. “Online gaming 
really helps him, and he’s got a little community that he plays with. These are 
his friends. These are his community. These are the people that he learns how 
to socialise with.”

For a person on the autistic spectrum, it can be difficult to socialise and 
connect with other people. But video games can be a catalyst for those tricky 
human connections, whether online or in person.

“If we put Arthur in a room full of people he’ll find it quite difficult to 
make friends,” Bottley says. “But when there’s something else to talk about, 
and there’s something that’s connecting people right in front of him, then that 
really really helps.”

Places such as the NVA, where games are the centre of attention, are 
particularly great for him. “We can let Arthur go here, and he can talk to 
anyone. And they won’t make him feel stupid, and they won’t make him feel 
silly, and they will listen to him. They will listen to what he’s got to say. 
He’s quite used to being the weirdest kid in the class. He’s not the weirdest 
kid here.”

Even outside of the benefits for people on the autistic spectrum, Bottley 
believes that video games have the power to provide connection not just with 
each other but with ourselves and even with the universe as a whole. 
Unsurprisingly, she links that power to spirituality.

This summer at the annual arts, faith and justice festival Greenbelt, Bottley 
and her family attended an event about gaming and faith run by writer and 
speakerAndy Robertson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/andy-robertson>. In 
the past, Robertson has introduced congregations to games such as 
thatgamecompany’s Flower and Journey. As the name suggests,Journey is a 
particularly spiritual game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2012/mar/15/journey-game-or-interactive-art>
, the story of a pilgrimage, but Bottley sees that spirituality in the medium 
as a whole.

“I think what human beings want, regardless of whether we express an actual 
named faith or whether we profess to be atheist or whatever, is connection,” 
she says. “So that’s connection with ourselves, connection with others, 
connection with the universe as a whole.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgogglebox-vicar-kate-bottley-on-faith-family-lifelong-love-of-gaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe414d9ed59642cd08332ff7d8ce5adad05eecbe3%2F100_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gogglebox's%20vicar%20on%20faith%2C%20family%20and%20a%20lifelong%20love%20of%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgogglebox-vicar-kate-bottley-on-faith-family-lifelong-love-of-gaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gogglebox%27s%20vicar%20on%20faith%2C%20family%20and%20a%20lifelong%20love%20of%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fgogglebox-vicar-kate-bottley-on-faith-family-lifelong-love-of-gaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe414d9ed59642cd08332ff7d8ce5adad05eecbe3%2F100_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Journey is a game about spirituality and the search for meaning – Bottley sees 
the parallels with religion Photograph: Thatgamecompany 
“What gaming provides for us is a platform to provide that connection with 
ourselves. It’s not just about wasting an hour. It’s actually about developing 
ourselves, and our relationships with others, and our relationships with the 
universe as a whole. I definitely see gaming as a way of exploring our own 
psyche.”

To those who worry that video games are a waste of time, or that the content 
is inappropriate for children, Bottley has some advice: “I think the danger 
comes when people just sit their children in their bedroom, close the door and 
leave them to it.

“Get involved, ask your kids what they’re playing. Ask them about where 
they’re going in their game, all that sort of stuff. From a faith perspective, 
you know, I think some people of faith would like their children to live in 
some sort of religious bubble their entire lives. I think it’s called a 
convent, isn’t it? I want my kids to be in the world and of the world.”

That desire to be in the world and of the world, rather than holed away with 
other people of the same religious background, is why Bottley can be found 
dancing in flash mobs, watching television on the television, and playing Track 
& Field at the NVA.

“I preach a gospel of normality,” Bottley says. “So when people say to me, 
‘Why do you do Gogglebox? Why do you do all this stuff?’, I say, ‘Because most 
people who have a faith are just normal people.’ I’m just a normal person.”

But of course, that normality must now include an element of fame. And for a 
lot of women, especially women active on Twitter, that means abuse. Bottley 
talks passionately about the connective value of games and digital media, but 
she has also encountered the dark side of all that. She treats it with the wit 
and stoicism her Gogglebox appearances have become renowned for. “I get some 
horrible, horrible things on social media: bless and block is my usual 
strategy,” she says.

“But just occasionally, just occasionally, I compose the tweet I would like to 
reply with. So the other day someone put, ‘Your husband obviously hates you. 
I’ve got no idea why he stays with a bitch like you,’ and I typed, ‘I’m really 
good in bed’. Obviously I didn’t send it.”

 * A Boy Made of Blocks by Keith Stuart review – moving odysseys in Minecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/10/a-boy-made-of-blocks-by-keith-stuart-review-minecraft>
 