
I’m having some friends over on Tuesday night to stay up and watch the US 
election. What should the dress code be?

Hayley, by email

How about a hazmat suit? A nice, stylish all-in-one orange number that 
outlines the figure but also protects you from all the toxic bile that will 
spew forth whatever Tuesday night’s result? Got you an outfit that can do both. 
At the very least, I would urge you to opt for fabrics coated in plastic, so 
that the various liquids that you may have on your person over the course of 
the night – tears of terror, vodka, your vomit – won’t stain. Tomorrow may well 
be traumatic enough without having to do laundry.

So here we are, folks, on the eve of watching the US make the difficult choice 
betweena woman <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> who used 
the wrong email server anda man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> who has answered the question 
of what American fascism would look like. Tricky choice, fellow Americans! 
Better flip a coin.

Oh, don’t worry. I’m not going to bang on about who anyone should vote for 
because, frankly, if anyone out there has still not made up their mind after 
everything that has happened in the past year and a half, then I doubt anything 
you read in asoi-disant style column will push you over the edge. I mean, if 
your candidate has12 women accusing him of sexual assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/27/gloria-allred-lawyer-donald-trump-sexual-assault>
 and he still has your loyalty then I’m guessing my jokes about him resembling 
an Oompa Loompa won’t make much difference. Say what you like about Trump 
supporters but you can’t question their focus, and that focus is on not letting 
a damn woman become president.

How should Hillary Clinton dress? However she goddamn pleases
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/how-should-hillary-clinton-dress-however-she-goddamn-pleases>
As for the undecided voters, I will temporarily hand over the stage to my 
fellow American in London, the peerlessDavid Sedaris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-sedaris>, who recently described 
this demographic as being like passengers on an aeroplane who are told that the 
meal options are chicken and “the platter of shit covered in broken glass”.

“To be undecided in this election,” Sedaris writes, “is to pause for a moment 
and then ask how the chicken is cooked.”

But before this election passes into the dark night of the soul, there is 
something else I’d really like to get off my chest. Ready Britain? Seatbelts on.

There is a certain demographic – surprisingly large! – who, for the past few 
months, has been fond of saying things like this to me: “Look, I’m a reasonable 
liberal person. I’m a good guy! So obviously I hate Trump – OBVIOUSLY. But I 
also hate Clinton – OBVIOUSLY. They’re as bad as each other. I guess you should 
vote for Clinton though, Christ, you’ll have to walk through bleach afterwards. 
Damn you, corporate America!”

OK, so first of all, thank you so much for telling me how to vote. How on 
earth would I have known if it weren’t for you? Oh, Trump is BAD, is he? 
Clinton talks to Goldman Sachs, does she? Thank you so much for Britsplaining 
the election to me, I really hadn’t noticed! We ex-colonials have been too busy 
knocking back Supersize Big Gulps of blue soda to read a newspaper.

Second, I get that a lot of people don’t like Clinton. I think you’ve 
mentioned it once or twice. But can we all please give the goddamn false 
equivalency a rest, please? Because you know where that gets you? It gets you 
into the same camp as Susan Sarandon who, only just last week,was on Newsnight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4LoGej6BqMc> explaining why Trump and Clinton 
are as bad as each other, and that’s why she’s voting for Jill Stein, the Green 
party candidate who thinks Clinton is as dangerous as the man who claims 
climate change is a hoax. Isn’t it sweet how Sarandon’s belief that voting for 
third-party candidates gives her the moral upper hand has in no way been dimmed 
by her experience of voting for Ralph Nader in 2000? She won’t vote for 
Clinton, Sarandon explained to Evan Davis, because “I don’t vote with my 
vagina, you know. This is bigger than that.” Sometimes, even for me, the joke 
is just too obvious.

So given that we settled the important matter of what to wear tonight in the 
first sentence, I’d like to switch tack and look at a different issue, which is 
how to deal with any Americans who might be in your life tomorrow. Because they 
will be in a fragile place, wilted inside their hazmat suits and screaming at 
the television: “No no, wait! I didn’t hear how North Carolina voted! Someone 
give me the final results from North Carolina!”

By and large, it’s great to be American in Britain. Hell, we speak the 
language, and that’s a huge boon, given that, for most of us, our knowledge of 
foreign languages is limited to, “Hasta la vista, baby.” OK, you have to endure 
the occasional humiliation of seeing your nation represented byHuey Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/17/huey-morgan-30-minutes-with-fun-lovin-criminals>
 onQuestion Time 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b081wrzp/question-time-03112016>, or 
Sarandon on Newsnight, but, generally, life is sweet. Yet it is hard to be away 
from home during an important election, which is why Americans, whatever the 
outcome, will need your kindness tomorrow. They’ll be exhausted and emotionally 
spent. They may also need reminders of happier times in their homeland. So 
furnish them with food they ate as children – Kraft Macaroni and Cheese, Aunt 
Jemima’s Pancakes, Hershey’s Chocolate Milk, Fruit Roll-Ups. You can probably 
order them all by drone on Amazon these days.

And above all, don’t hector Americans about the result. Trust me, they know. 
Don’t hector, just hug. Buckle up, guys. We got a long night ahead of us.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
 