
This year’s Golden Globe nomination list might be notable for being the one 
that brought Mel Gibson out from under his pall of shame and back to the 
Hollywood top table – a place which many had thought would be for ever denied 
him. His antisemitic remarks and subsequent disgrace have now evidently been 
forgiven, if not forgotten, and he has now best film (drama) and best director 
nominations for his grandstanding second world war pacifist movieHacksaw Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hacksaw-ridge> – and a best actor nod for 
Andrew Garfield. This fact creates an atypically serious focus for the Globes 
nomination list, which traditionally – and very refreshingly – gives a fair 
shake to the lighter end of the movie spectrum, creating an awards space for 
musicals and comedies, though perhaps ghettoising them away from the perceived 
quality fare.

2017 Golden Globes: full list of nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/2017-golden-globes-full-list-of-nominations>
Picking quarrels with snubs and omissions has maybe become too much of a 
critical bloodsport in recent years. Though I can’t get too exercised about the 
lack of Globe nominations for Clint Eastwood’s Sully (a bafflingly dull and 
creaky picture), it is quite extraordinary that Martin Scorsese’s powerful and 
valuable movieSilence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence> has been 
utterly overlooked. I thought this movie had its flaws, but it was the work of 
a deeply serious and substantial film-maker, perhaps the most important working 
in the US today. The idea of it losing out to, say, Lion, must have ruined 
Scorsese’s breakfast today. I also object to the nada conferred upon Jim 
Jarmusch’s lovely, gentle film Paterson, Whit Stillman’s Love & Friendship and 
Andrea Arnold’s American Honey; Globe voters, moreover, have zero interest in 
Ken Loach’s I, Daniel Blake. As so often, Cannes success is no sure guide to 
the glittering American prizes, although Paul Verhoeven’s provocative 
rape-revenge movie Elle gets a foreign-language nod and its lead, Isabelle 
Huppert, is in the best actress (drama) category.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-nominations-peter-bradshaw-hacksaw-ridge-la-la-land-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7e94ca21ed33e996f262f467da0c2fd8ccd2bb0%2F0_236_5640_3384%2F5640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Globe%20nominations%3A%20Mel%20Gibson%C2%A0resurrected%C2%A0as%20Scorsese%20snubbed%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-nominations-peter-bradshaw-hacksaw-ridge-la-la-land-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Globe%20nominations%3A%20Mel%20Gibson%C2%A0resurrected%C2%A0as%20Scorsese%20snubbed%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-nominations-peter-bradshaw-hacksaw-ridge-la-la-land-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7e94ca21ed33e996f262f467da0c2fd8ccd2bb0%2F0_236_5640_3384%2F5640.jpg>
 Urgency … Moonlight. Photograph: David Bornfriend/AP 
Elsewhere, this is shaping up to be the year of La La Land, which has seven 
nominations, or Barry Jenkins’s critically adored Moonlight, about stages in 
the life of a gay African-American man, which has six. La La Land’s nods 
include best film (comedy/musical), best actor, best actress (again in the 
comedy/musical) and best director – which, through a procedural quirk, is not 
in fact divided into drama and comedy/musical in the same way.La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> is a glorious paean to Hollywood, 
rather like The Artist, and features a lovely relationship between sardonic 
jazz musician Ryan Gosling and wannabe star Emma Stone; the movie is 
beguilingly, seductively romantic and sad. Moonlight’s entries include the 
categories of best film (drama), and its more serious identity might give it 
the edge in the Academy awards. It is powerful and may speak to a more 
contemporary-minded constituency in the Globes that thinks that in the era of 
#blacklivesmatter – quite apart from its own merits – Moonlight is a film with 
more urgency and relevance.

Kenneth Lonergan’s Manchester by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/manchester-by-the-sea>, taking five 
nominations, is a wonderful film from a director whose persistence has earned 
him respect, through a kind of visionary self-belief that allowed him to bring 
his earlier masterpiece Margaret to the screen, whose success made this 
possible. It has an intensely, almost overpoweringly focused leading 
performance from Casey Affleck – a best actor (drama) nominee – as an angry, 
lonely man who finds that his dead brother has made him guardian of his nephew. 
Lonergan shows an extraordinary command of tone and style, mixing comedy with 
drama of the weight of Miller or O’Neill.

Elsewhere, Tom Ford’s sensationally good psychological suspense thriller 
Nocturnal Animals <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nocturnal-animals> is 
rewarded, with best director and best screenplay nominations – but 
disappointingly nothing for Michael Shannon in the best supporting actor 
category. Rather obtusely, the Globes have nominated Aaron Taylor-Johnson’s 
performance as the sinister, feral criminal who sets the nightmare in motion. 
It’s a perfectly decent performance, but not in Shannon’s league (playing the 
Texan cop), and really Laura Linney deserved something for her wonderful 
portrayal of the sorrowing Texan mamma. Amy Adams could and should have got 
something as well, though she is nominated for her appearance in the sci-fi 
drama Arrival.

David Mackenzie’s thriller Hell or High Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hell-or-high-water> has proved to be 
extremely popular, with a best film (drama) nomination and best supporting 
actor nod for Jeff Bridges. This is another reason I would have liked to see 
Michael Shannon get a nomination for Nocturnal Animals: he and Bridges could 
have had a Texas lawman-off.

Garth Davis’s Lion <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lion> is a tremendously 
effective, big-hearted picture, based on the true story of the former street 
kid who used Google Earth to locate the Indian village of his birth. It has a 
best film (drama) nod, but – rather confusingly – a best supporting actor 
mention for Dev Patel, who by any measure is surely the lead in this film? 
Could it be that its exec producer Harvey Weinstein, a past master of wrangling 
awards voting, has shrewdly calculated how to maximise his chances for an award?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-nominations-peter-bradshaw-hacksaw-ridge-la-la-land-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd225b222e2d534774abe78fb6941f2876d9ef47%2F0_64_2791_1676%2F2791.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Globe%20nominations%3A%20Mel%20Gibson%C2%A0resurrected%C2%A0as%20Scorsese%20snubbed%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-nominations-peter-bradshaw-hacksaw-ridge-la-la-land-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Globe%20nominations%3A%20Mel%20Gibson%C2%A0resurrected%C2%A0as%20Scorsese%20snubbed%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-nominations-peter-bradshaw-hacksaw-ridge-la-la-land-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd225b222e2d534774abe78fb6941f2876d9ef47%2F0_64_2791_1676%2F2791.jpg>
 Very considered … Ruth Negga, with Joel Edgerton, in Loving. Photograph: Ben 
Rothstein/AP 
As far as the other acting nominations go, it’s good to see a nomination for 
Ruth Negga, giving a very considered, underplayed performance in the true-life 
drama Loving, about which I was a little agnostic generally; she is, however, 
great. Natalie Portman has given what some think is the performance of her 
career as the post-assassination Jackie Kennedy inJackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
; she might well walk away with a Globe. However, I am entirely dismayed by the 
nomination for Viggo Mortensen in Captain Fantastic, an entirely phoney and 
posturing family dramedy, which shows Mortensen himself at his most mannered.

It is great that Deadpool – about which many critics were rather sniffy – has 
picked up Globe nominations in the comedy/musical category, for best picture 
and for Ryan Reynolds’s performance. Could this be a counter to anti-superhero 
prejudice? Otherwise, Stephen Frears’s entertainingFlorence Foster Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/florence-foster-jenkins-review-meryl-streep-hugh-grant-stephen-frears>
 has tickled Globes voters into a best comedy/musical mention and nominations 
for Meryl Streep, Hugh Grant and for Simon Helberg. I myself wouldn’t 
necessarily bet against Grant pinching the best actor prize from other 
contenders, including Colin Farrell for The Lobster, and Jonah Hill who has 
sneaked in with his turn in the very uninteresting arms-dealing comedy War Dogs.

So the frontrunners are La La Land and Moonlight. But if there’s one feelgood 
moment I want to take away from the 2017 Globes list, it is the nomination for 
Sing Street in the musical/comedy category: a wonderful and genuinely 
heartwarming movie about a kid in Dublin forming a band. It would be great to 
see John Carney’s film get a Globe.
 