
This year’s Globes are offering a widely anticipated race between yin and 
yang. The creamily sensuous Carol, Todd Haynes’s 1950s-set story of a love 
affair between an older and younger woman, played byCate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> and Rooney Mara, is in the 
race for best picture (drama) and Blanchett and Rooney both have acting nods. 
That’s alongside a very male film, Alejandro González Iñárittu’s The Revenant, 
with Leonardo DiCaprio’s 1820s mountain man obsessively tracking down the two 
men who left him for dead after he was mauled by a bear — and DiCaprio has a 
nomination.

Golden Globes nominations 2016: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/10/golden-globes-nominations-2016-full-list-of-film-tv>
Peering ahead to the Academy awards, I am seeing Cate Blanchett, already a 
double-Oscar winner, pictured next to Oscar neophyteLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>, both holding up their 
statuettes.

Elsewhere, in the Globes’ best picture (drama) list, there is the quasi-Fritzl 
drama Room, and also the rather worthy and for my money rather overvalued
Spotlight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spotlight>, the story of 
investigative journalists tackling the issue of paedophilia in the Catholic 
church.

Rather surprisingly, the best picture (drama) list has no room for Steven 
Spielberg’s superlative Bridge of Spies but has included the hectically 
hyperactive and wildly silly Mad Max: Fury Road. Mad Max’s director George 
Miller even gets a nod in the Director heading — and in this category tooSteven 
Spielberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> gets zilch. I’m 
all for some contrarianism and the Globes are renowned for rewarding the 
sunnier and popular movies that traditionally get crowded in awards seasons, 
but Bridge of Spies looks like the big snub, with nothing for Tom Hanks, 
although Mark Rylance gets a best supporting actor nod.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcate-blanchett-rooney-mara-carol-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F24%2F1448381381948%2FKP_600907_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cate%20Blanchett%20on%20Carol%3A%20'The%20first%20time%20love%20between%20two%20women%20didn't%20end%20badly'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcate-blanchett-rooney-mara-carol-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cate%20Blanchett%20on%20Carol%3A%20%27The%20first%20time%20love%20between%20two%20women%20didn%27t%20end%20badly%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fcate-blanchett-rooney-mara-carol-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F24%2F1448381381948%2FKP_600907_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Cate Blanchett on Carol: ‘The first time love between two women didn’t end 
badly’ 
Considering that Steve Jobs was considered to have tanked most royally at the 
box office, it is reassuring that this very good film has featured so 
prominently in this year’s Globes list, with acting nominations forMichael 
Fassbender <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender> and also Kate 
Winslet for her witty supporting turn as Jobs’s marketing manager. Aaron Sorkin 
gets a screenwriting nomination for Jobs, alongside Quentin Tarantino for his 
western The Hateful Eight.

In best picture (musical or comedy) category, Ridley Scott’s amiable sci-fi 
adventure The Martian gets a listing (although I thought it more serious) along 
with the financial crisis dramedy The Big Short (which has a total of four 
nominations) and also David O Russell’s deadpan-subdued Joy — about the 
invention of a bestselling miracle mop. I found Joy disappointing and tonally 
mismanaged, compared to his stylish American Hustle, althoughJennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> is certainly a commanding 
presence and is duly rewarded with her nomination.

In this categeory there is also Amy Schumer’s comedy Trainwreck about the 
hard-drinking singleton finding love; Schumer also gets a nomination in best 
actress (musical or comedy). The Globes are going to be a huge night for 
Schumer, all but unknown in the movies until so recently. For what it’s worth, 
I personally would also have included in this categorySisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sisters>, the unpretentious comedy 
starring Tina Fey and Amy Poehler, ahead of Spy, Melissa McCarthy’s espionage 
romp.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-hugh-glass-the-revenant-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20stars%20as%20Hugh%20Glass%20in%20The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-hugh-glass-the-revenant-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20stars%20as%20Hugh%20Glass%20in%20The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-hugh-glass-the-revenant-video&media=>
 Leonardo DiCaprio stars as Hugh Glass in The Revenant 
As far as acting goes, the Globes are a triumph for Alicia Vikander, who gets 
a double with best actress (drama) forThe Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-danish-girl> and best supporting actress 
for her turn as the mysterious AI robot in Ex Machina — it’s a stylish 
performance for which she might well win. Maggie Smith is up for best actress 
(musical or comedy) for The Lady In The Van: a big name made even bigger in the 
US due to Harry Potter and Downton. She is up against Lawrence, Schumer, Lily 
Tomlin for Grandma and Melissa McCarthy for Spy. It could be Maggie Smith’s 
year.

As far as serious acting goes, the Globe (as well as the Oscar and everything 
else) surely has to go toSaoirse Ronan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/saoirse-ronan> for her wonderful lead 
performance in Brooklyn: a superb example of screen acting. It’ll be a 
disappointment if it doesn’t go to Ronan.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Ftrainwreck-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439469803038%2FKP_386538_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trainwreck%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Ftrainwreck-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trainwreck%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Ftrainwreck-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439469803038%2FKP_386538_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Trainwreck - video review 
One of the most striking things about this year’s Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes> nomination list is that two of 
the year’s most successful films are duking it out in the best animation 
category: Inside Out, the dizzying drama of a girl’s inner mental world versus 
Anomalisa, Charlie Kaufman’s extraordinary stop-motion study of a psychological 
breakdown. The other contenders are The Good Dinosaur, Shaun the Sheep Movie 
and Snoopy and Charlie Brown: The Peanuts Movie — all perfectly plausible 
candidates in their way, but surely outclassed by those two frontrunners. 
Anomalisa actually has a very powerful claim to be the year’s best film, full 
stop.

So this year the Globes’ big successes look like coming from Carol, The 
Revenant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant>, Brooklyn, The 
Martian, Spotlight and The Big Short, and I predict a headline win for 
DiCaprio/Blanchett.
 