
What are we to make of the news that social care providers have seemingly 
taken the “national living wage” in their stride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/30/fears-over-minimum-wage-increase-in-social-care-industry>
? Despite the dire warnings that it would be unaffordable, they appear not only 
to have absorbed it, but to have gone way beyond its requirements.

According to the respected Resolution Foundation 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/> thinktank, which has analysed pay 
figures for more than 80,000 workers courtesy of thenational minimum dataset 
for social care 
<http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/NMDS-SC-intelligence/NMDS-SC-and-intelligence.aspx>
, introduction of the new minimum wage of £7.20 an hour for adults aged 25 or 
over has had “a large, positive impact on pay in social care … with no evidence 
of hours being cut to foot the bill”.


Not only have more than half the 1.6 million social care workers in England 
benefited directly from the new minimum, but a remarkable 83% of those under 25 
are also being paid £7.20, and the overall pay bill for the sector has risen 
6.9% at a stroke – more than twice the increase that was needed simply to 
comply with the wage law.


At first sight, the findings are baffling. Care companies, and charities 
providing services, continue to complain that theycannot make a viable margin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/aug/30/company-handing-homecare-contracts-back-to-councils>
 on the prices being paid for contracts by many local councils. Yet they have 
voluntarily incurred significant extra pay costs.


What difference will the national living wage have on social care workers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/apr/01/what-difference-will-the-national-living-wage-have-on-social-care-workers>
As the Resolution Foundation says: “How providers have managed to behave in 
this way in the face of pressures on budgets is an important question for 
further research.”


There are some probable answers. First, the social care workforce 
<http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/NMDS-SC-intelligence/NMDS-SC/Workforce-data-and-publications/State-of-the-adult-social-care-sector.aspx>
 is relatively mature: just 11% are under 25, making it not too costly and 
certainly less trouble administratively to pay the £7.20 to all. By comparison, 
says the foundation, more than one in three workers in some other low-pay 
sectors, such as hospitality, is under 25.


Second, many social care employers will have felt they needed to maintain pay 
differentials in their workforces. Giving an average 9.2% rise to workers who 
were previously paid less than £7.20, without also giving a chunky increase to 
those on grades above them, would have reduced the incentive for staff to 
progress and take on further responsibilities.


Third, and most important, many – but not all – care providers received an 
increase in contract prices in April to help them meet the costs of the new 
minumum wage, often the first such uplift for several years.


According to the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/home/>, 82% of English councils raised prices, 46% by 
more than 3%. One in three councils increased prices for homecare contracts by 
more than 5%. This came after almost all councils added the government’s 
optional 2% social care precept to council tax bills.


Why my company is handing homecare contracts back to councils
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/aug/30/company-handing-homecare-contracts-back-to-councils>
The picture, then, is encouraging. While social care remains a distressingly 
low-paid job, it is today almost 7% better paid than it was on 31 March. That 
can only be good for recruitment and retention of workers.

Whether the sector can sustain this upward trajectory is another matter: as 
the Resolution Foundation warns, paying the £7.20 and meeting further promised 
increases in the national minimum to about £9 an hour by 2020 will add a total 
£2.3bn to wage costs in social care.

More than ever, the sector needs to get its act together to campaign 
effectively for a sustainable, long-term funding settlement. A key plank of 
such a campaign must be transparency and honesty by care providers about costs 
– and profits.

What has happened with the “national living wage” will leave some people 
feeling that providers were crying wolf about the consequences. If that 
suspicion is allowed to fester, the public will not rally to social care’s flag.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 