
Let’s start off by saying that I’m a Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls> fan. I’ve watched every 
episode the night it aired and look forward to its return every season. But I’m 
not at all sad that HBO announced Lena Dunham’s chaotic tale of the lives for 
four young women living in Brooklyn is coming to an end after its sixth season. 
The fifth season kicks off on the network on 21 February and the final season 
will air at an undisclosed time next year.

Girls season four – when Lena Dunham's show came of age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/24/girls-season-four-when-lena-dunhams-show-came-of-age>
“I conceived of Girls when I was 23 and now I’m nearly 30 – the show has quite 
perfectly spanned my 20s, the period of time that it’s about – and so it feels 
like the right time to wrap our story up,” Dunham said in a statement released 
by the network. “We look forward to creating a sixth season that will honor our 
amazing cast, crew, and fans. And in the Girls universe, nothing ever ends too 
neatly.”

The thing about Girls is that it has never been neat, even at the beginning. 
Watching Girls is sort of like going out with a friend who is a sloppy drunk. 
You don’t know if you’re going to get the witty, wonderful banter and great 
company that you’re use to or some wild, inebriated flailing that is just going 
to give you a headache and make you wish you were alone in your bed listening 
to early Joni Mitchell albums.

Girls, while often excellent, has always been wildly erratic and has only 
gotten more so as the seasons progress. When it started as a collaboration 
between Dunham and executive producers Jenni Konner and Judd Apatow, the show 
hewed a little bit more closely to a traditional television comedy, with a 
structured way through each hour.

Starting with the second season, the show became more experimental, trying 
“bottle episodes”, such asOne Man’s Trash <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2588924/>
 where Dunham’s Hannah spends a day at a doctor’s house having sex and 
discussing life. It was one of the show’s best and most hotly debated 
half-hours. Also genius was season three’sBeach House 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3000706/>, which saw the girls’ friendships 
unravel. But along with this freedom came wild inconsistencies. Just look at 
season two’s descent into Hannah’s OCD or the fourth season’s diversions both 
to Iowa for a few episodes and then a fixation on her father’s coming out. Some 
might say that the shifts in characters’ directions, changes in careers, and 
trips to rehab are what we all go through in our 20s, and that’s not wrong, but 
it’s that the quality of the show is about as reliable as sleeping on a 
porcupine’s waterbed.

Still, in the last season, the episode where Hannah and Adam break up (spoiler 
alert!) was one of the best episodes of television last year. That’s the thing 
with experimentation: sometimes you find the cure for polio, and sometimes you 
blow up the meth lab. Girls only ever does one of these two things and there is 
no middle ground. When looking at television’s great comedies, all have their 
better and worse episodes, but all have a consistency that makes them 
legendary, something that Girls hasn’t been able to achieve.

That’s why I’m happy that all concerned have decided to put an end to it. 
Dunham, who has clearly become a voice of her generation, as she quipped in the 
pilot, has been working tirelessly on other projects while Girls has been 
ongoing. She’s released a best-selling book of essays, set up a podcast and 
recently launched theheadline-grabbing newsletter Lenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/15/lena-dunham-to-launch-lenny-email-newsletter-for-young-women>
, whereJennifer Lawrence published her essay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/jennifer-lawrence-hollywood-gender-pay-gap>
 about equal pay for women in Hollywood, andalso bagged an interview with 
Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/24/lena-dunham-interview-hillary-clinton-feminist>
.

From Bushwick to Hollywood: what the Girls movie needs to get right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/22/girls-movie-lessons-on-what-to-get-right-tv-movie-adaptations>
Dunham clearly has lots to say and wants to find many different avenues to 
express herself, which is why a television series, at least not one like Girls,
may not be the best venue for her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/14/lena-dunham-1960s-feminism-comedy-pilot-for-hbo>
. Having the freedom to explore other outlets for her singular vision will make 
for better artistry. I don’t think that Dunham is as much a Jerry Seinfeld as 
she is a Woody Allen, New York’s other love-it-or-hate-it neurotic, 
inconsistent visionary. Freeing her from the shackles of 10 episodes a year 
with the same characters will only be better for Dunham and her art, letting 
her make things such as Tiny Furniture, a singular accomplishment that can 
stand on its own and whose quality won’t be diminished by some of the crappy 
episodes. Girls may be dead, but it’s for the best.
 