
“Once there was a Mexican girl whose name was Frida,” begins one of the 100 
fairytale reinventions included in Good Night Stories for Rebel Girls. A new 
children’s book that sets out to confront gender stereotypes, it has quickly 
raised more than $600,000 (£409,000) onKickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter>.

Created by Elena Favilli and Francesca Cavallo, co-founders of children’s 
media company Timbuktu Labs, the book tells the stories of 100 great women, 
from Kahlo to Elizabeth I to Serena Williams, illustrated by female artists 
from around the world. Favilli and Cavallolaunched their Kickstarter a month ago
 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/timbuktu/good-night-stories-for-rebel-girls-100-tales-to-dr>
, with the goal of making $40,000, and printing their first 1,000 copies. With 
hours to go before closing to further pledges, their fundraising total stands 
at $624,905.

“It’s insane. We were expecting the project to be successful but not at this 
level,” said Favilli. “It’s beyond any possible dream.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fgood-night-stories-for-rebel-girls-is-dream-kickstarter-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75132d47fdf4e2e6ec3fe4f594a98f3af786a2b3%2F560_671_3692_2215%2F3692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20Night%20Stories%20for%20Rebel%20Girls%20is%20'dream'%20Kickstarter%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fgood-night-stories-for-rebel-girls-is-dream-kickstarter-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20Night%20Stories%20for%20Rebel%20Girls%20is%20%27dream%27%20Kickstarter%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fgood-night-stories-for-rebel-girls-is-dream-kickstarter-success%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75132d47fdf4e2e6ec3fe4f594a98f3af786a2b3%2F560_671_3692_2215%2F3692.jpg>
 ‘Venus and Serena would train every day...’ Photograph: Timbuktu Labs 
The pair have now added a series of “stretch goals 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/help/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&term=what+are+stretch+goals%3F>
” to their Kickstarter, including a week of workshops in Rwanda about female 
leadership in January 2017. They estimate that they will be printing more than 
10,000 copies of the book and are also planning an edition for general 
distribution, once the fundraiser ends on Wednesday.

“We chose to write the stories in the style of a fairytale – lots of them 
start ‘once upon a time’,” said Favilli. “We are really thinking of the book as 
a modern fairytale that children will read at bedtime before they go to sleep.”

On their Kickstarter page, Favilli and Cavallo explain that part of the 
inspiration for the book was their own journey as entrepreneurs, which “made us 
understand how important it is for girls to grow up surrounded by female role 
models”, because “it helps them to be more confident and set bigger goals”.

They also realised “that 95% of the books and TV shows we grew up with lacked 
girls in prominent positions”. Pointing to a study of 6,000 children’s books 
published between 1900 and 2000,which found that just 7.5% had female 
protagonists <https://www.fsu.edu/news/2011/05/06/gender.bias/>, they add that 
not much has changed since.

Picture books that draw the line against pink stereotypes of girls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/jul/30/picture-books-that-draw-the-line-against-pink-stereotypes-of-girls>
“We know children’s books are still packed with gender stereotypes,” said 
Favilli. “And we’re both in our early 30s, we’re female entrepreneurs, and we 
know first-hand how hard it is to succeed, to be considered, to be given a 
chance.”

The idea for the book, she said, “didn’t happen overnight, it was more of a 
process. We started to send pieces of content out with our newsletter, short 
stories about extraordinary women, and at some point we realised that the 
response we were getting just from sending the newsletter was so great, so 
intense. This doesn’t happen often with you send a newsletter; usually people 
don’t open it. So it became clear this was a book we had to make.”
 