
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> and the Cuban 
government have signed a deal allowing the internet giant to provide faster 
access to its data by installing servers on the island that will store much of 
the company’s most popular content.

Storing Google data in Cuba eliminates the long distances that signals must 
travel from the island through Venezuela to the nearest Google server. More 
than a half century after cutting virtually all economic ties withCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>, the US has no direct data link to the 
island.

The deal announced on Monday removes one of the many obstacles to a normal 
internet in Cuba, which suffers from some of the world’s most limited and 
expensive access. Home connections remain illegal for most Cubans and the 
government charges the equivalent of a month’s average salary for 10 hours of 
access topublic Wi-Fi spots 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=8&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjlpoHHp-_QAhVPGsAKHXL5BYcQFghEMAc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcuba-to-offer-wi-fi-at-35-public-spaces-for-the-first-time&usg=AFQjCNHs-NZErq7nZBLUEDPhoPZTWIdhzQ&sig2=gdiE4eN65txnfqPgHEQBVg>
 with speeds frequently too slow to download files or watch streaming video.

Cuba's 'offline internet': no access, no power, no problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/23/cuba-offline-internet-weekly-packet-external-hard-drives>
The deal does not affect Cuba’s antiquated communications infrastructure or 
broaden public access to the internet, but it could make Google websites like 
YouTube or Gmail up to 10 times faster for users inside Cuba. Content hosted by 
other companies will not be affected.

Neither Google chairman Eric Schmidt nor Cuban officials spoke to the press 
after the signing ceremony in Havana.

Cuban officials appear to be accelerating their approvals of deals with US 
companies in an attempt to build momentum behind US-Cuba normalization before 
Donald Trump takes office next month. The Google pact was announced less than a 
week after Cuba gave three US cruise companies permission to begin sailing to 
the island next year. Officials familiar with the negotiations say other deals, 
including one with General Electric, are in the works.

The US and Cuba have struck a series of bilateral deals on issues ranging from 
environmental protection to direct mail since the declaration of detente on 17 
December 2014, but business ties have failed to keep pace. The Cuban government 
has blamed the US trade embargo on Cuba. Many US businesses say Cuba has been 
moving on most proposals so slowly that some suspect the government has been 
deliberately limiting the development of economic ties.

The Google program could provide ammunition for US advocates of closer ties 
with Cuba. Both pro-detente forces and those arguing for a hard line on 
President Raúl Castro’s single-party government have been pushing for Cubans to 
have better access to information.

If the Google deal proves to truly improve internet access for a significant 
number of Cubans, it ties information access to US-Cuban detente in a way that 
could prove politically difficult to undo for anti-Castro officials in the 
incoming Trump administration.
 