
Ministers have promised to overhaul the despised work capability assessment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/sick-pay-and-work-assessments-to-be-reviewed-jeremy-hunt-reveals>
 (WCA) used to diagnose whether someone is fit for work, as part of a range of 
new proposals aimed at helping ill and disabled people find employment.

A green paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/work-health-and-disability-improving-lives/work-health-and-disability-green-paper-improving-lives>
 published by the work and pensions secretary, Damian Green, also confirms that 
the government aspires to help at least 1 million disabled people into work, 
though it sets no timescale for achieving this ambition.

Sitting at home on sickness benefits is bad for health, says Green
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/sitting-at-home-on-sickness-benefits-is-bad-for-health-damian-green>
It promises to halve the current employment gap between disabled and 
non-disabled people, described as the difference between the fewer than five 
out of 10 disabled people who have a job compared with eight in 10 non-disabled 
people.

“This is one of the most significant inequalities in the UK today and the 
government cannot stand aside when it sees the injustice and unfairness,” the 
green paper says.

The paper sets out wider plans to confront what it calls “prejudices and 
misunderstandings” that get in the way of employment for those with physical 
and mental health difficulties.

Among the planned measures is a review of the system of statutory sick pay and 
GP “fit notes”. This will encourage people to make phased returns to work as 
they recover, as well as early treatment to prevent them falling out of 
employment in the first place.


Ministers will consult on reform of the WCA tests to deliver more “targeted 
and personalised” support and end the division of universal credit and 
employment and support allowance claimants into groups deemed to be able or 
unable to work.

Volunteer law project wins 95% of 'fit for work' test appeal cases
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2015/sep/02/volunteer-law-project-wins-95-of-fit-for-work-test-appeal-cases>
The WCA was introduced in 2008 by the Labour government, and adopted and 
accelerated two years later by the coalition. Under Green’s predecessor, Iain 
Duncan Smith, it attractednotoriety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/atos-contract-end-relief-campaigners>
 for itsharshness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/24/benefits-shakeup-aims-to-force-more-disabled-people-into-jobs>
 and there were high numbers of successful appeals against fit-for-work 
decisions.

Green said: “We must be bold in our ambition to help disabled people and those 
with health conditions. This green paper marks the start of our action to 
confront the attitudes, prejudices and misunderstandings that, after many 
years, have become ingrained within the welfare state, within the minds of 
employers and across wider society.”

However, Stephen Evans, chief executive of the thinktank Learning and Work 
Institute 
<http://www.learningandwork.org.uk/our-thinking/news/disability-and-health-reform-plans-are-welcome-we-need-do-lot-more-and-do-it>
, said it would at current rates take more than 200 years to halve the 
disability employment gap.

“Our analysis has found that fewer than one in 10 disabled people receive any 
employment support at all, with funding for disability employment programmes 
due to be halved in this parliament.

“And on current plans, Jobcentre Plus will provide about 10 minutes of support 
a month to just one in five of those on ill-health benefits. We need to do more 
and do it better so that the scale of action matches the scale of our ambition.”

The shadow work and pensions secretary, Debbie Abrahams, said: “For Damian 
Green <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/damian-green> to claim that this 
Tory government is confronting the negative attitudes and prejudices that it 
has spent six years encouraging is ridiculous.


“It is an insult to the hundreds of thousands of disabled people who have been 
on the receiving end of their callous social security regime.”

Dan Scorer, head of policy at charity Mencap, said: “The government’s long 
awaited green paper sets out an important 10-year vision for changing attitudes 
and working with employers to transforming disabled people’s access to 
employment. However, disappointingly, it does not set any milestones in terms 
of meeting the government’s important commitment to halve the disability 
employment gap.”

Mark Atkinson, chief executive at disability charity Scope, welcomed the green 
paper but said it must lead to concrete action. “Disabled people are twice as 
likely as the general public to be unemployed. For this consultation to succeed 
it must lead to real changes in policy, legislation and employer attitudes.”


The Labour chairman of the Commons work and pensions committee, Frank Field, 
said: “People with disabilities have been among those least well-served by 
jobcentres and welfare-to-work programmes in recent years. All too often, 
having a health condition or disability means dropping out of work and 
struggling to return.


“The committee welcomes the government’s ambition to support people into work 
faster and more sustainably. Equally important is the review of the work 
capability assessment, which for too long has been a source of anxiety and fear 
for disabled people.


“Getting this right is key not just to ensuring that disabled people get the 
support they need, but also to building confidence that the department has 
their best interests at heart.”
 