
One of the fashion industry’s most revered creative directors, Grace 
Coddington, has stepped down from her position at US Vogue after 28 years.

The 74-year-old will not be leaving the magazine altogether – instead taking 
up a more fluid position of creative director at large – but many have 
interpreted the move as a watershed moment for fashion publishing, marking a 
shift away from the lush, baroque photo shoots Coddington is famous for and 
towards a more commercially minded digital future.

Q&A: Grace Coddington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/26/grace-coddington-interview>
Coddington, from Anglesey in Wales, entered the fashion world as a model, 
winning a Vogue contest in her late teens. She was immediately embraced by some 
of the biggest names of the swinging sixtes, including Norman Parkinson, David 
Bailey and Vidal Sassoon. The latter chose Coddington to popularise hisfive 
point haircut 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/beauty/2012/11/26/grace-coddington-on-her-iconic-vidal-sassoon-haircut>
, the style credited with liberating women from setting lotion and rollers.

She remained a significant presence in front of the camera even after losing 
her left eyelid in a car accident and having a series of reconstructive 
operations and skin grafts.

Since taking up the role of creative director at Vogue in the 1980s, 
Coddington has overseen some of the most iconic fashion photography of the past 
three decades, working with models such as Naomi Campbell and Christy 
Turlington and photographers including Bruce Weber, Peter Lindbergh and Mario 
Testino.

Typically dressed in androgynous black suits or, at a push, silky blue pyjamas 
on theMet Ball red carpet 
<http://jezebel.com/grace-coddington-and-her-pajamas-are-the-met-galas-true-1702332186>
, Coddington is an understated industry treasure, her halo of ginger hair so 
recognisable that it recently became the star of its own Cousin It-style
portrait by Tim Walker 
<http://41.media.tumblr.com/04b561250fbd475436ce0c48c24aff21/tumblr_n1iyxdcWID1r9e2vfo1_1280.jpg>
.

She is loved for taking an old-fashioned approach to fashion, creating iconic 
images that further the premise that fashion is more art form than cold, hard 
commerce.

She became something of a celebrity in the wider world in 2009 with the 
release of the behind-the-scenes Vogue documentary The September Issue. The 
film presented Coddington, with her tendency to prioritise artistry and romance 
over pedestrian concerns of budgets and logistics, as the foil to US Vogue’s 
strict and business savvy editor, Anna Wintour. The pair’s clashes over clothes 
and pagination became highlights of the documentary.

By 2013, Coddington was deemed to have sufficient mass market appeal to appear 
alongside Tracey Emin and Katie Piper in a Marks & Spencer Leading Ladies
advertising campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/aug/19/marks-spencer-new-ad-annie-leibowitz>
.

The move will allow Coddington to work on other projects for the first time 
since the 80s, including a fragrance collaboration with Japanese label Comme 
des Garçons.

“I’m not running away from Vogue, because it has opened so many doors” she 
said. “But it will be nice to collaborate, and nice to go out [and] give talks 
to people. It’s just another approach. I’m certainly not going into retirement. 
I don’t want to sit around.”



 