
Er, where?

Only 95km or about 90 minutes from Verona airport, Folgaria is a mid-sized 
resort in the Trentino region of northern Italy that has a reputation for being 
in a snow pocket. It also has impeccable ski history credentials, as the first 
ski lift in Italy was built here, in the 1930s, and a full ski resort created 
shortly after the war.

Since then the pistes, accessed by chairlifts, have grown to cover 104km. 
About two-thirds of that is local to Folgaria itself; the other 30km is above 
the neighbouring villages of Lavarone and Luserna, a short bus ride away. Three 
new quad chairlifts for the 2013-14 season have connected Folgaria to the 
previously mothballed small centre of Fiorentini, over the regional border in 
Veneto. The lifts have enabled new runs – a 1.9km red and two blues (2.4km and 
1km long) – to be created. The combined ski area is promoted asAlpe Cimbra 
<http://alpecimbra.it/en/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F269cc859330d55f43e3bbe2d3ad10b7b0ec01393%2F0_131_2473_1484%2F2473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Folgaria%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Folgaria%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F269cc859330d55f43e3bbe2d3ad10b7b0ec01393%2F0_131_2473_1484%2F2473.jpg>
 Chairlifts serve 104km of pistes at Folgaria. Photograph: Alamy 
Why try it?

When it comes to our ski resort choices each winter, we tend to be swayed by 
the big-name resorts with the impressive stats – hundreds of kilometres of 
pistes, dozens of fast comfy lifts and a vibrant après ski scene. So, despite 
being easy to reach and offering the type of authentic, unspoilt mountain 
village experience that many people say they want, with lower prices, quieter 
slopes and uncrowded bars and restaurants, in reality most skiers bypass 
Folgaria for the more famous Madonna di Campiglio and Passo Tonale, a couple of 
hours away. “Folgaria is a gem,” says Stuart McLeod of Zenith Holidays, which 
operates low-cost packages to the resort. “It is a short transfer from Verona 
with an excellent variety of slopes. It’s ideal for a mixed-ability group and 
perfect for beginners.”

The lowdown

On the slopes, the terrain is “classic Trentino”, with 37 flattering 
easy-to-intermediate red and blue runs carving down through the trees, plus a 
handful of short, testing blacks. Lift pass prices (and most other in-resort 
costs) are around half what you might pay in a big resort in the French Alps.

Anything else?

Located in the “great highlands of Trentino”, Folgaria is proud of its history 
and culture. You’re unlikely to hear English spoken here and in some bars it 
won’t even be Italian, but Cimbro, the ancient southern Bavarian dialect 
brought to these mountains by medieval settlers. It’s also reflected in the 
food culture: I tucked in to polenta with mountain mushrooms and the region’s 
famous Vezzena cheese atRifugio Stella d’Italia <http:>, one of several 
family-run mountain huts. Pure local mountain honey is a key element of many of 
the desserts, including a stickily delicious strudel (there’s ahoney museum 
<http:> down in the valley, ).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F756a212c97ca9b4c91c724eda1f11941598b905a%2F0_53_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Folgaria%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Folgaria%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F756a212c97ca9b4c91c724eda1f11941598b905a%2F0_53_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Another view of Rifugio Stella d’Italia. 
And the après?

A handful of bars just the right side of lively, but offering nothing too 
raucous.John Caffè <http://johncaffe.it/> has been here as long as the skiing 
but has moved with the times and has a stylish lounge area with comfy leather 
seating and framed historic ski pictures on the walls. Apart from the 
obligatory après-ski beer, it is also good for a perfect espresso served with 
local pastries.

And apart from skiing?

Beyond the bars, restaurants and a few small hotel spas, the community is also 
seeking to diversify into dog-sledding and the latest craze “fat biking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/14/italy-dolomites-fat-biking-winter-sports>
” (mountain bikes with oversized but under-inflated tyres to grip on the snow). 
There’s also special effort made for families, with a new Kinderheim nursery 
and a great little terrain park.

Where do I eat?

Ticking off more of the Italian staples in downtown Folgaria, I found the 
chocolate and pistachio ice-cream sublime atLa Baita del Gelato 
<http://www.artigeniale.it/la-baita-del-gelato>, and the formaggi misti pizza, 
made with local cheese (€6.50) authentic and wonderful atPizzeria Cheizel 
<http://pizzeriacheizel.it/>.

Where do I stay?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d8faa7432c64dea1f7ae2d614811de75d18ee2%2F0_15_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Folgaria%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Folgaria%2C%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fgreat-little-ski-resorts-folgaria-italy-lavarone-fiorentini-beginner-intermediate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2d8faa7432c64dea1f7ae2d614811de75d18ee2%2F0_15_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Hotel Luna Bianca 
The modern three-star Luna Bianca hotel <http://lunabiancahotel.it/> is one of 
the most popular in Folgaria, with spacious, clean rooms, good facilities 
including a sauna, and a reputation for good service. The ski bus stops outside 
the front door. Half-board doubles from €360 for three nights in mid- December.

The nitty gritty

104km of runs with 22 lifts (one gondola, nine chair lifts, 12 surface lifts) 
that offers 800 metres of vertical descent.

Good for Families, beginners and Intermediates.

Costs Lift pass Up to Christmas, as low as €163 for an adult six-day pass. 
Peak price is €209 over Christmas and new year. Children under 8 ski free all 
season.Beer €4.50

• Green runs  0
• Blue runs  20
• Red runs 17
• Black runs 3

Limitations Quiet après ski scene mid-week.
 