
Authorities in Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> believe that 
the Greek ambassador who went missing on 26 December has been killed and have 
named his Brazilian wife, a police officer and another man as suspects in the 
case. Local police have said that the officer, who was romantically involved 
with the diplomat’s wife, has confessed to the killing at her direction.


The third man, believed to be the officer’s cousin, is believed to have acted 
as lookout and helped move the ambassador’s body. All three are being held in 
jail as the investigation continues, the investigators told a news conference 
in Rio.


Police have detained the suspects for 30 days on a judicial order and will 
recommend charges against all three for homicide, said Adilson Palacio, a 
spokesman for the Rio homicide division. He said that the indications were that 
a body found in a burnt-out car was that of Kyriakos Amiridis, 59, who was 
reported missing on 28 December by his wife, Françoise Oliveira.

She told police that Amiridis had left the condominium where the couple were 
staying in Nova Iguaçu, a town 25 miles inland from Rio de Janeiro, two nights 
earlier, without saying where he was going. The couple had been together 15 
years, and have a 10-year-old daughter, according to another officer working on 
the case, who was not authorised to give his name publicly..

Palacio said that bloodstains believed to be from the ambassador were found on 
a sofa inside the home of his wife. “Her family had a residence in the city. 
They are from Nova Iguaçu,” Palacio said. The investigation of a foreign 
diplomat was made a priority, he said, and investigators “haven’t slept for two 
days”. Officers revealed at a press conference that the detained officer worked 
at a station in the central Rio favela of Fallet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fbrazil-police-question-greek-ambassadors-wife-over-suspected-killing-kyriakos-amiridis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6387cd7f62d433cd87a06bc6a44aea04e801ad3e%2F0_145_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greek%20envoy's%20wife%20and%20two%20men%20detained%20in%20Rio%20de%20Janeiro%20over%20his%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fbrazil-police-question-greek-ambassadors-wife-over-suspected-killing-kyriakos-amiridis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greek%20envoy%27s%20wife%20and%20two%20men%20detained%20in%20Rio%20de%20Janeiro%20over%20his%20death&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fbrazil-police-question-greek-ambassadors-wife-over-suspected-killing-kyriakos-amiridis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6387cd7f62d433cd87a06bc6a44aea04e801ad3e%2F0_145_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 The burnt-out vehicle in which the body, believed to be that of the Greek 
ambassador, was found. Photograph: Victor de Sa/EPA 
Amiridis began his career in 1985 at the Greek foreign ministry and was Greek 
consul in Rio from 2001-04. He became Greece’s ambassador to Libya in 2012 and 
returned to Brazil as an ambassador earlier this year.

Hildegard Angel, 67, a Rio-based journalist, said Amiridis had been a good 
friend and a popular figure at dinners and parties while he lived in the city. 
“He was a very interesting man,” she said. “A man of the world. Agreeable, 
sociable, informed. You wanted to go to Greece, talking to him.”

But Angel said nobody had known he was married when he lived in Rio. “In 
refined society in Rio de Janeiro, he was invited to everything. He always 
circulated alone. He was a bachelor, always invited to dinners,” she said.

Angel said she first discovered that he was married after media reports of a 
robbery at his house in 2003 were referred to a wife. She added that she first 
met Oliveira in February, when the couple were invited to the Carnival Ball, an 
annual high society event held at the upscale Copacabana Palace, which this 
year had an ancient Greek theme.
 