
The Greens have called on Labor to abandon its support for a tax cut for 
people earning $80,000 and over, arguing it amounts to “trickle-down economics”.

Greens Treasury spokesman, Peter Whish-Wilson, has written to Labor’s shadow 
treasurer,Chris Bowen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, calling 
for reconsideration of the tax cuts in shadow cabinet and caucus. The call has 
been rebuffed, with Bowen insisting Labor will continue to support the cut.

The Turnbull government plans to increase the middle income tax bracket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/bracket-creep-changes-in-budget-to-save-500000-from-second-top-marginal-tax-rate>
 from $80,000 to $87,000 at a cost of $4bn over four years.

Cutting welfare to fund tax cuts for top earners 'unconscionable', Coalition 
told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/28/cutting-welfare-to-fund-tax-cuts-for-top-earners-unconscionable-coalition-told>
The tax cut is designed to prevent more than 500,000 people moving into the 
second-highest marginal tax bracket in the next year and does so through a tax 
cut to 2.5m taxpayers who earn more than $80,000 a year.

Whish-Wilson argued the tax cuts were a “poorly targeted response to the 
challenges of bracket creep” in a letter dated 3 October.

“This bill would deliver an additional $315 to only the top 20% of income 
earners,” he said.

“This includes some of the wealthiest people in the country, and goes well 
beyond the group of income earners most affected by bracket creep.”

Whish-Wilson welcomed Bowen’s recent speech The Case for the Middle Class in 
which the shadow treasurer railed against “trickle-down economics and the 
scourge of growing income inequality”.

But he said Labor’s support for the tax cuts “cuts against the intention” of 
the speech and stood in contradiction to its principles.

Whish-Wilson said the $4bn tax cut would wipe out two-thirds of the savings 
achieved bythe omnibus savings bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/labor-says-coalition-has-lied-and-included-additional-cuts-in-omnibus-savings-bill>
 with Labor support. That billcut family tax benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/labor-under-fire-over-6bn-budget-savings-deal-with-coalition>
 for 383,000 middle income households, cut back-payment of carers’ allowances, 
increased Centrelink debts and “shifted more lifetime debts onto students”, he 
said.

“Viewed together, these two pieces of legislation will simply exacerbate the 
problems identified in your speech.”


Superannuation backflip on $500,000 cap wins over Coalition conservatives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/superannuation-backflip-on-500000-cap-wins-over-coalition-conservatives>
Whish-Wilson proposed that if Labor supports the tax cuts it should “at least 
insist on another policy we both share, making the top marginal tax rate 
permanent at 47%”.

“This would neutralise the budget impact of the tax cut and ensure the measure 
is better targeted to the purported audience of workers approaching $80,000,” 
he said.

A spokesman for Bowen told Guardian Australia that Labor would continue to 
support the tax cuts.

He rejected the idea the cuts were poorly targeted or in contradiction with 
Labor’s criticism of trickle-down economics, noting “those earning around 
$80,000 to $87,000 a year are middle class”.

“Senator [Whish-Wilson] hasn’t given us the courtesy of receiving the letter 
before releasing it to the media,” he said.

According to research by The Australia Institute that counted people who don’t 
file tax returns, including those on the pension,just 14% of Australians 
currently earn $80,000 or more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/may/07/beware-tax-cuts-for-middle-australia-above-average-earners-benefit-most>
.

It found in 2013-14 only about 17% of women had a taxable income of more than 
$80,000 compared with 33% of men because men are more likely to work full-time.
 