
When the share price of Lululemon rose 20% in the last three months, it seemed 
like a surprising turnaround for the yoga apparel retailer. Last year it 
endured the sudden resignation of its former CEO, following aglobal recall of 
leggings in 2013 which turned out to be see-through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/mar/19/lululemon-sales-threatened-yoga-pants>
, and a founder who outraged customers by stating on national television that “
some women’s bodies just don’t work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/09/too-fat-for-lululemon-yoga-pants>
” for his brand.

But the change in fortune for Lululemon, a Canadian company known for selling 
£138 leggings and which now expects sales of up to $695m in the fourth quarter 
of the year, is indicative of a wider trend – sometimes labelled athleisure – 
in which expensive workout clothing has become a wardrobe staple, as likely to 
be worn all weekend as it is to an actual yoga class.

“When I first came back to London from Australia about three years ago, I 
would walk around in my leggings and people would give me odd looks,” says 
Madeleine Shaw, author of healthy lifestyle bookGet the Glow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/get-the-glow.html>, “but these days it’s so 
much more acceptable to feel confident going bare faced in yoga pants in 
public”.

Chelsie Crowder, 25, from London, said: “I probably spend more on yoga clothes 
than on daily wear, but it’s not to look trendy. To me it’s an investment, 
because it makes me feel confident, fit and healthy. As I do yoga or Pilates on 
the weekend, I also wear my leggings to get my nails done, go for a coffee with 
friends, have a business meeting, or do a food shop.” Crowder gets her yoga 
wear from Lululemon, but also Sweaty Betty and Stella McCartney.

The athleisure trend is part of pervading culture of wellness and 
self-improvement, one in which designers have replaced high heels withtrainers 
on catwalks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/mar/03/on-the-front-foot-charting-the-rise-of-trainers-in-fashion>
, and gossip websites are inundated with pictures of A-listers including 
Kendall Jenner, Gigi Hadid and Rosie Huntington-Whiteley going about their 
daily business in leggings and hoodies.

Bonnie Rakhit, founder of luxury travel and fashion blog the Style Traveller 
<http://thestyletraveller.com/>, said: “One of the biggest factors in this 
trend is, of course, the recent national preoccupation with being healthy. The 
buzz phrase for which is ‘It’s hip to be healthy’.”

You can keep your overpriced, overhyped Lululemon yoga pants | Jessica Wakeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/09/too-fat-for-lululemon-yoga-pants>
Companies such as Sweaty Betty, Athleta and Alo Yoga also continue to blossom 
as the athleisure trend grows. “Sports brands focusing on women such as Sweaty 
Betty and Lululemon have helped redefine the female sports market by selling 
fashionable and feminine gym and yoga clothes that are comfortable,” Amanda 
Lintott from Mintel said. “The rise in availability of attractive-looking 
sportswear for women has also meant that women are using these items both for 
sports and as fashionable leisurewear, which feeds into a trend for more 
multipurpose styles of clothing in everyday life.”

According to a recent Mintel survey, millennials are more willing to spend 
money on experiences that enhance their lives rather than on material goods. 
Therefore, as Lindsay Rowe of creative agency PBJSwrote 
<http://www.pbjs.com/blog/how-millennials-are-redefining-luxury/>, “for 
[millennials] to justify a purchase, luxury items or experiences must have a 
functional, performance-oriented reason for its higher cost.”

Marks and Spencer, Gap and H&M have all introduced their own sports lines. 
“The athleisure trend towards sporty style is not only influencing what we wear 
at, and to the gym, but is also having an impact on our everyday wardrobes,” 
Soozie Jenkinson, head of design at M&S, said. “Leggings and yoga pants are 
becoming an attractive alternative to the skinny jean, which has been our ‘go 
to’, multitasking wardrobe staple for a decade, not only because of their 
sporty style credentials but also because they are just so comfortable.”



Rakhit said: “With women becoming increasingly busy, striving to cram work, 
play and keeping fit into our every day routines, the sartorial rules have had 
to adapt to become more relevant to our hectic lives. In cities across the UK, 
we’re enrolling in early morning yoga sessions, lunch time gym classes or post 
work-work outs, what we wear needs to fit in with all the roles and activities 
our lives take on. So we have to take into account not only performance, 
comfort and versatility but also style.”
 