
January

It’s been a mad, sad year. The death of pop icon David Bowie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/14/celebrating-david-bowie-2017-concerts>
on 10 January set the tone, and there was an impromptu wake in Brixton, where 
he was born.

Radio-controlled drone cameras are enabling photographers to capture scenes 
that would previously have been impossible or cripplingly expensive to obtain.

February

The Mobile Photography <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> 
Awards are now in their fifth year, and this spectacular shot of Spring Break 
in Sydney got an honourable mention this year.

Guardian Travel launched a series of alternative city guides to South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/series/alternative-south-africa>, using 
local talent and readers’ Instagram shots

Elsewhere in Africa, we loved the stark beauty and simplicity of this shot 
taken at Lalibela airport in Ethiopia.

March

Cuba figured heavily on Instagram this year, following the thaw in relations 
with the US, andPresident Barack Obama’s state visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/22/obama-cuba-visit-tourism-industry-havana>
 – the first American president to visit Cuba in nearly a century, and the 
first since a revolution led by Fidel Castro toppled a US-backed regime in 1959.

In slightly colder climes, the Iditarod sled dog race was underway in Alaska.

But, in Burgundy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/26/burgundy-cycling-wine-tour-france>
, it already felt like spring was on its way in the vineyards.

April

You know when it’s spring in Japan because everyone comes out to celebrate the 
country’s iconicsakura (cherry blossoms).

May

Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/17/burmese-days-george-orwell-burma-myanmar>
 was a popular destination on Instagram this year, and this shot shows workers 
taking a lunch break in the fields, their faces protected from the sun with
thanaka, a yellowish-white cosmetic paste made from ground bark.

June

The colours of a Tuscan summer.

July

This year was all about bridges – mostly scary glass-bottomed walkways in China
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2016/aug/03/chinas-300m-high-cliff-walk-for-fearless-tourists-in-pictures>
. But we really liked this shot of Germany’s longest suspension bridge -the 
Geierlay rope bridge 
<http://www.germany.travel/en/news/spectacular-views-geierlay-rope-bridge-now-open-190466.html>
, in the Hunsrück mountains, Rhineland-Palatinate – which opened last year and 
drew less press attention.

Making hay in Transylvania, which appears to have been bypassed by the endless 
march of technology.

There’s only one place in the world this could be … summer on the Italian 
riviera.

August

Vintage Germany … even though the photographer Jannik Obenhoff is a mere 16 
years old, and based in Munich.

The Olympics kicked off in Rio de Janeiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/30/rio-de-janeiro-olympic-games-holiday-guide>
.

September

A dining car on the Trans-Siberian – the 9,288km railway from Moscow to 
Vladivostok celebrated the centenary of its completion this year. We also ran a
photo essay that documented the journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/ng-interactive/2016/dec/27/trans-siberian-railway-moscow-vladivostok-in-pictures>
.

Outdoor swimming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/04/in-love-with-winter-swimming-outdoors-kendal-mountain-festival-films>
 continues to grow in popularity and this shot sums up its appeal.

October

Meanwhile, in the Netherlands, they prefer to skate on the frozen water of the 
canals.

November

In Mexico, the traditional Dia De Los Muertos festivities kicked off, and our 
intrepid reporterKevin Rushby <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevinrushby> 
was there to capture the scenes.

December

We rounded the year off in traditional style, with a visit to Sápmi, Swedish 
Lapland, and an insight into the life of a reindeer herder, Anna-Maria 
Fjellström, who documents her family’s modern nomadic lifestyle on Instagram.
 