
Guardian News & Media (GNM) is pleased to announce the appointment of Imogen 
Fox to the role of executive editor, Guardian Labs.

Imogen joins the Guardian Labs team from newsroom where she was head of 
fashion. Since joining the Guardian’s fashion desk in 2004 Imogen has been a 
powerful editorial force and helped drive the Guardian’s global reputation for 
intelligent fashion reporting, features and visuals. Since taking on the role 
as head of fashion in 2013 she spearheaded the launch of the award-winning 
bi-annual supplement The Fashion, as well as developing the Guardian’s 
cross-platform editorial fashion strategy.

In this newly created role of executive editor, Guardian Labs, Imogen will 
have responsibility for developing and leading the team responsible for 
producing creatively brilliant commercial content whilst adhering to the 
Guardian’s core values and editorial standards. Imogen will jointly report to 
Hamish Nicklin, chief revenue officer, GNM and Caspar Llewellyn Smith, head of 
Guardian digital platforms.

Hamish Nicklin, chief revenue officer of GNM, said: “I’m thrilled to have 
attracted a journalist of Imogen’s calibre into this exciting commercial role. 
In this newly created position Imogen will use her deep understanding of the 
Guardian’s journalistic values to work directly with clients to deliver 
outstanding commercial results.”


Imogen Fox said: “It’s an exciting time to be joining Guardian Labs - there’s 
a huge creative opportunity to work with brands and deliver outstanding 
commercial content that resonates with our diverse and engaged audience. I’ve 
got tons of ideas for sharp, beautiful and original collaborations and can’t 
wait to get started.”













 