
Gucci <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> designer Alessandro Michele 
makes clothes you lay eyes on for the first time and instantly feel you have 
always wanted. He starts trends that have a mass appeal quite disproportionate 
to their off-the-wall aesthetic. You may have never heard of Michele, but if 
your eye has been caught by a pleated skirt or a pussybow blouse in the past 
few months, I must tell you that you are in fact under his power.

Westminster Abbey gets a Gucci makeover – stylewatch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/03/westminster-abbey-gets-a-gucci-makeover-stylewatch>
These are talents which come in pretty handy in the luxury industry. Last 
week, Gucci posted a full-year net profit rise of 32%, confirming what a 
cursory glance around any fashion industry gathering – taking in the numerous 
fringed metallic Gucci loafers being worn, and the serene smiles on the faces 
of executives of the brand’s owner, Kering – has been suggesting for months, 
that the rebooted Gucci is not just a critical hit, but a commercial one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b9e102f748e233c6f6b228572d5ac28c35ca33f%2F312_0_2476_4438%2F2476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gucci's%20glamorously%20nerdish%20aesthetic%20returns%20%E2%80%93%20with%20a%20twist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gucci%27s%20glamorously%20nerdish%20aesthetic%20returns%20%E2%80%93%20with%20a%20twist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b9e102f748e233c6f6b228572d5ac28c35ca33f%2F312_0_2476_4438%2F2476.jpg>
 A model sports retro shades with embellished Mary Janes. Photograph: 
WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
The buzz around Gucci has been present for a year, since Michele took over. 
The significance of this, Michele’s third womenswear show for the label, was 
that it showed Gucci’s to be a revival with staying power. Michele’s 
glamorously nerdish aesthetic was an instant hit when it appeared on the 
catwalks early in 2015, and still felt fresh when reprised at September’s 
fashion week. But Wednesday’sMilan fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week> show was the first to 
prove that Michele’s Gucci is about more than one look.

The venue was the same disused train depot that served as the setting for last 
season’s show, yet transformed. In September, the space beneath pillars 
overgrown with vines had been laid with colourful carpet, and furnished with 
ornate chairs, so that the mood evoked an eccentric, aristocratic garden party.

Gucci's Alessandro Michele to receive major fashion award
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/16/guccis-alessandro-michele-british-fashion-awards-karl-lagerfeld>
For this show, the same space was boxed in matt black with sleek cube seating. 
The start of proceedings were announced with a crackle of static interference 
and flashing lights which morphed into footage of a waterfall flowing upwards, 
and an avalanche un-happening. Show notes on lurid yellow card made no mention 
of clothes at all, but rather explained the show as a celebration of 
“rhizomatic thought”: disorderly thought, that is, with neither centre nor 
orientation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8abee4279292d5adc7254b7fd26638eb0ba9a717%2F315_0_2819_4717%2F2819.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gucci's%20glamorously%20nerdish%20aesthetic%20returns%20%E2%80%93%20with%20a%20twist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gucci%27s%20glamorously%20nerdish%20aesthetic%20returns%20%E2%80%93%20with%20a%20twist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8abee4279292d5adc7254b7fd26638eb0ba9a717%2F315_0_2819_4717%2F2819.jpg>
 Pussybow blouses and rainbow colours. Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
The show began with a white leather trench coat with ruched and puffed 
sleeves, worn with red tights, towering Mary Jane shoes, and a perky little 
hat. The mood was more assertive, and more assuredly womanly, than the 
“androgynous adolescent prodigy comes down from the library for cocktails” 
aesthetic which denotes Gucci today. Throughout the show, the now-familiar 
new-Gucci memes - the barrette-clipped hair, the spectacles, the rainbow shades 
and the loafers and grand-wizard-meets-librarian long skirts - were ideas which 
took Gucci somewhere new, with Anne Boleyn dress shapes, towering heels, 1940s 
netted hats, fur coats with 1980s-style spray-paint graffiti.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4827df4cc85b508db56b870de19cac620243ea44%2F183_0_2829_4643%2F2829.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gucci's%20glamorously%20nerdish%20aesthetic%20returns%20%E2%80%93%20with%20a%20twist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gucci%27s%20glamorously%20nerdish%20aesthetic%20returns%20%E2%80%93%20with%20a%20twist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fguccis-glamorously-nerdish-aesthetic-returns-with-a-twist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4827df4cc85b508db56b870de19cac620243ea44%2F183_0_2829_4643%2F2829.jpg>
 Grand wizard-meets-librarian. Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
On the morning of the show, Michele posted an image on his Instagram account 
of a glossy black snake on a blood red background. “I love ambiguity, and the 
snake is the most ambiguous animal,” he said backstage after the show. “It 
represents fear, but it is also so beautiful. When you look at a snake, your 
heart is pulsing.” Tigers and panthers also featured in the collection along 
with symbols of beauty and power of a different type: the Gucci logos and 
monograms and signature stripes.

Miuccia Prada has had Milan to herself for years. It will be interesting to 
see how she responds to this Gucci land grab, with her show tomorrow. On the 
first day of Milan fashion week, Gucci have laid down the gauntlet.
 