
I read that the new Gucci <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> geek 
look is all that matters in fashion now. Can you explain?

PS Welcome back!

Harriet Winters, by email

Hello! Apologies for my absence but I’ve been on an intense retreat in the 
Himalayas for the past six months. Eight hours of yoga and five hours of 
SoulCycle every day; no sugar, salt, dairy, gluten or carbs; three daily 
colonics. It was all about spirituality, you know. Oh really, do you think I’ve 
lost some weight? Well, that was just incidental, because the real focus was my 
inner growth, of course. The cost? About £15,775 a week, but the whole 
experience was so real – I honestly don’t know why everyone doesn’t do it.

So I have come back glowing in a way only #eatingclean can make you (and 
possibly malnutrition – does anyone know if eating nothing but avocado is bad 
for you?) and am ready to tackle the big questions in the all new Ask Hadley 
column, which will focus on fashion … and etiquette! I am theNancy Mitford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nancy-mitford> of the modern age. Or maybe 
Nancy Dell’Olio.

Anyway, Gucci! I have had time to ponder this issue and whether I think it is 
a good or bad thing. And I have decided – I say, my thumb quivering in the 
neutral position like a Roman emperor of fashion – it is a good thing! Thumbs 
up!Gucci geek chic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/23/alessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week>
, you shall not be thrown to the lions!

To give a quick recap for those who are not quite as fashionable as me, Gucci, 
the label that onceadvertised itself by shaving its logo into a model’s pubic 
hair <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/feb/26/advertising>, is now 
pretending none of that happened and it is the go-to place for whatVogue 
described last month <https://issuu.com/vanmaster666/docs/vogue_uk_-_march_2016>
 as the “library loiterer look”. This sounds like something George Michael 
might have been arrested for back in the day but actually refers to a pile-up 
of patterns, pussy-bow blouses, loafers and bright colours. Never mind library 
loitering, it looks like a cross betweenSolange Knowles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/solange-knowles>’s wardrobe from one of my 
favourite music videos,Losing You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hy9W_mrY_Vk&feature=youtu.be> (educate 
yourselves!), andKristen Wiig <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-wiig>’s 
pleated-skirt suits in the newGhostbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/03/watch-the-new-ghostbusters-trailer-with-an-all-female-cast-video>
.

Look, any trend that encourages women to wear comfortable shoes is OK with me, 
whether it’sMarc Jacobs <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marc-jacobs>’ 
quirky cuties in the early 2000s with their round-toed flats or Gucci’s 
librarian loafers today. My colleague Jess Cartner-Morley rightly described 
this look as part of the current trend for clothes that have “a cheerful 
disregard for the male gaze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/01/man-repeller-look-milan-fashion-week>
”. Personally, I thought this was just dressing like a regular person as 
opposed to dressing likeElizabeth Hurley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/elizabeth-hurley>. But hey, I’m fine 
with the idea that dressing like a regular woman is, if not exactly a feminist 
statement, than as close as fashion gets to one. Carry on, Gucci.

Everyone does internet research before going on a date, but at what point does 
it tip into creepy stalking?

Nadiya Imran, by email

Once upon a time, if you got set up on a date by a friend, you would ask, at 
most, a few questions: what’s their name? What do they do? Are they a 
psychopath? Do they have a hairy back? And then, questions answered to your 
liking, armed with this and only this information, off you would go to meet 
this potential swain. Now, I wouldn’t even think of meeting up with someone 
without having memorised their Instagram feed, their sister’s Facebook and 
their best friend’s Twitter account.

“Oh really? You have a brother?” I say on the first date, all the while 
vividly picturing the said brother’s wedding photos I have been studying for 
the past week from his Facebook page. Date me, know that I will have been deep 
cover in your life.

It’s a truism that most romcoms are actually terrifying stalker movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/rom-coms-women-stalker-myth-study>
, with the protagonist spying on and manipulating the emotions of their desired 
quarry.Sleepless in Seattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sleepless-in-seattle>, for starters, is 
completely terrifying, with a deranged (and engaged) Meg Ryan stalking poor 
widowed Tom Hanks, studying details of his late wife’s funeral, hiring a 
private investigator to photograph him on dates, even turning up at his 
flipping house. Now, however, this looks like small fry compared with the 
amount of spying on one another we do.

There’s no stopping this train now – we do it because we can. But with great 
power comes great responsibility, and the responsibility is on all of us to 
know when to stop. So to keep things simple, here are some rules to stop you 
from tipping over from “harmlessly curious” to “deranged obsessive stalker”: 
don’t go back further than page two on a person’s Google search; look at their 
Facebook and Instagram photos once – then step away; don’t look at the social 
media accounts of any of their friends, family or, most of all, exes; don’t 
follow them on Twitter until you are actually in a relationship. Put your phone 
down, people.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
 