
A gunman killed at least 13 people watching a football match in a bar in South 
Sudan’s capital,Juba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/19/south-sudan-violence-fear-looting-juba>
, at the weekend, police have said.

The death toll had risen to 13 after some who were injured in the shooting 
during the game between Chelsea and Liverpool on Saturday night died of their 
wounds, a police spokesman, Kwacijwok Dominic Amondoc, said. Ten others were 
being treated in hospital.

Among the injured was Wani Patrick, who was recovering from a bullet wound to 
his hand. “When I was shot I fell and some youths fell on top of me. I was 
unable to stand until he finished shooting all his bullets,” he said. “Many 
people were shot and many people died.”

The gunman, who appeared drunk, according to reports, grew angry after being 
refused free entry to the bar where patrons had paid about ¢50 to watch the 
Premier League match on television.

Is it too dangerous for aid workers to be in South Sudan?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/01/is-it-too-dangerous-for-aid-workers-to-be-in-south-sudan>
The man stormed off, said Amondoc, adding: “When he came back he was carrying 
a gun and just started shooting randomly.”

The attack happened at about 9pm local time in Gure, a suburb in south-west 
Juba.

The whereabouts of the gunman were unclear and investigations were under way, 
said Paul Akol Kordit, a government spokesman. “It’s very unfortunate and we 
condemn this in the very strongest terms possible,” he added.

Kordit pledged that the government “will do what we can to protect our people 
and bring to book those who are killing innocent [people]”.

Insecurity in Juba has worsened since a civil war erupted nearly three years 
ago. Widespread fighting has led to an increase in criminality and armed 
violence.

In July, the capital became a battleground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/south-sudan-is-the-renewed-violence-the-restart-of-civil-war>
 as forces loyal to the president,Salva Kiir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/08/salva-kiirs-address-to-south-sudan-greeted-with-heavy-gunfire>
, clashed with those of his former deputy turned rebel leader, Riek Machar, 
forcing Machar to flee.

Successive rounds of internationally backed ceasefire talks and agreements 
have failed to bring peace to the world’s newest country, whichwon independence 
from Sudan in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/10/south-sudan-celebrates-independence>
.
 