
Scuffles broke out on Regent Street in London as impatient shoppers jostled to 
get into H&M for the launch of acollection by the designer label Balmain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/18/hm-announces-latest-collaboration-with-balmain>
.

A police car was parked on the pavement and officers tried to calm the crowd 
on Thursday morning. Some had started queuing outside the high street brand’s 
flagship store at 10pm on Wednesday in the hope of a bargain.

H&M’s annual collaborations, which sell a limited run of designer pieces at 
high street prices, have become well-known for attracting fervent shoppers, but 
the Balmain launch was the Regent Street store’s busiest yet.

Balmain x H&M collaboration: the first look
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/oct/15/balmain-x-hm-collaboration-the-first-look>
Students in designer hoodies jostled with twentysomethings in pristine 
trainers in two queues that snaked around the block. Many had camped out and it 
became increasingly fractious as they waited, with bickering and scuffles 
breaking out on the street.

Once a respectable, slightly stuffy French fashion house, Balmain has been 
converted into a trendy Instagram brand by its creative director,Olivier 
Rousteing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/20/kardashian-couture-balmain-buzz-olivier-rousteing-fashion-social-media-star>
, 29.

“I want the beaded jacket,” said Cherrie Stevens, who started queuing at 5am. 
“I’ve never been to an H&M designer launch before, I never do things like this, 
but this is a once in a lifetime thing – it’s so much cheaper than the catwalk. 
And I like the creative director, he’s a young fresh guy.”

“Rousteing’s work is really detailed,” said Hannah Situ. “I’ve become aware of 
the brand in the last year, with the Kardashians and models like Gigi Hadid 
wearing it. Everyone wants to be the Kardashians, even people who say they 
don’t like them.”

“Speak for yourself,” countered Irini Mando. “Olivier Rousteing’s Instagram is 
really good. I don’t like Balmain because of the Kardashians, but they are 
omnipresent – that’s pop culture.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhm-balmain-designer-fashion-launch-scuffles-regent-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd97c835142bee7204401dae2ad499987b36441fd%2F0_164_4797_2878%2F4797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=H%26M's%20Balmain%20launch%20prompts%20scuffles%20on%20Regent%20Street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhm-balmain-designer-fashion-launch-scuffles-regent-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=H%26M%27s%20Balmain%20launch%20prompts%20scuffles%20on%20Regent%20Street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhm-balmain-designer-fashion-launch-scuffles-regent-street%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd97c835142bee7204401dae2ad499987b36441fd%2F0_164_4797_2878%2F4797.jpg>
 A shopper emerges from the H&M event. Photograph: Ray Tang/Rex Shutterstock 
The social media effect might explain the unprecedented crowds, but the prices 
were a big draw too. As a brand beloved of the international party set, Balmain 
is notoriously expensive; anembellished velvet dress costs £6,290 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/products/Balmain-Embellished-velvet-dress-1019397>
, for example. The H&M equivalent was expensive for the high street but a 
fraction of the catwalk price – a pearly jacket dress for £300, or an 
embellished shift for £190, with lower priced items such as branded T-shirts 
going for around £25. On eBay, just hours after the launch, T-shirts and 
dresses were already being sold for three times their original price.

Two minutes up the road, some enterprising shoppers were reselling their loot 
on the street. Wads of cash changed hands; the £300 beaded jacket was sold for 
£750.

Anaisa Pinto was taking no chances, attempting to buy from the collection on 
the H&M website via her phone while she queued. “I’m not walking away from the 
queue until I get an email confirming that what I’m buying online has gone 
through,” she said.

A young woman was shopping for her forthcoming 18th birthday. “I really want 
to get a beaded dress for my 18th and then put it out all over Instagram,” she 
said. “Although of course then I’ll never be able to wear it again. Not once 
it’s been on social media.”
 