
Until your partner has seen you in the sort of padded cycling shorts that make 
you look like you’re wearing an industrial-strength nappy over the unshorn legs 
ofMr Tumnus <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/dec/04/cslewis.film>, I’m 
afraid you’re still just dating. It’s not a relationship until you stop shaving 
your armpits. You’re not somebody’s partner until you’ve shared a poorly 
ventilated bathroom.

All this I have learned only recently, as I undertook a sweaty, hairy, padded, 
hilly and at times freezing bike ride acrossIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> with my boyfriend. It was here, 
under the sun and occasional hail that I finally let it all hang out. Bobbing 
down beside a hedge at a canal’s edge to go for an al-fresco pee somewhere 
outside Mullingar, I felt the last of my single lady mystique gently stream 
down across my left foot as I stared resolutely into the eyes of a watching 
sheep. As I squeezed a blackhead the approximate size of a broad bean, until 
that moment trapped under the rubberised hem of my cycling shorts, I felt a 
release not just of sebum but also of romantic expectation. While standing 
behind a tent in my cotton M&S briefs, wet wiping away two days of accumulated 
grime, I started to hum the Commodores: she’s mighty mighty, just lettin’ it 
all hang out.

So it was with a gay trill of laughter that I read that a hotel in New Zealand 
had recentlybanned Lycra cycling shorts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/15/lycra-ban-new-zealand-hotel-bumps-and-bulges-breakfast>
 from its public areas as it finds the “bumps and bulges” inappropriate and 
“unsightly”. I mean, it’s hard to argue. Standing at the counter of a small 
cafe, opposite the Catholic shrine at Knock, ordering a baked potato, I could 
feel the eyes of at least one tutting, middle-aged devotee boring into my 
backside like the unquenchable fire ofGehenna 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gehenna>. By the sweat of my face, I will eat 
bread till I return to the ground 
<https://www.kingjamesbibleonline.org/Genesis-3-19/>, I should have said. 
Because from it I was taken; for I am dust, and to dust I shall return. 
Instead, I merely smiled, picked up the giant stainless steel pot of tea and 
waddled my Maris Piper of arse-padding back to my chair. But we are dust.

Or, at least, the same frail, fungal, sweating, hirsute, spitting, pissing, 
carbon beasts as men are. And what is love if not the freedom to be appreciated 
for precisely what you are, without pretending to be something you’re not?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fhairy-armpits-spots-burps-wee-hotel-new-zealand-banned-lycra-shorts-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940cfcff530d76bc4b0f0003ba7b1b7bf7df9d10%2F0_0_3727_2236%2F3727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hairy%20armpits%2C%20spots%2C%20burps%2C%20wee%20%E2%80%93%20these%20are%20the%20signs%20of%20true%20love%20%7C%20Nell%20Frizzell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fhairy-armpits-spots-burps-wee-hotel-new-zealand-banned-lycra-shorts-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hairy%20armpits%2C%20spots%2C%20burps%2C%20wee%20%E2%80%93%20these%20are%20the%20signs%20of%20true%20love%20%7C%20Nell%20Frizzell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fhairy-armpits-spots-burps-wee-hotel-new-zealand-banned-lycra-shorts-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940cfcff530d76bc4b0f0003ba7b1b7bf7df9d10%2F0_0_3727_2236%2F3727.jpg>
 ‘Until your partner has seen you in the sort of padded cycling shorts that 
make you look like you’re wearing an industrial-strength nappy over the unshorn 
legs of Mr Tumnus, I’m afraid you’re still just dating.’ Photograph: Phil 
Bray/Walt Disney Company 
The politics of letting it all hang out has hovered over single women’s 
WhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> groups and dinner 
parties for years. From Victorian changing screens to modern tubes of Immac, 
the objects of our existence tell of a lifelong battle to hide, shave, bleach, 
tuck away, remove, ignore or disguise our mammalian reality. The spots, the 
wayward eyebrows sprouting unaccountably from your chin, the sweat between your 
legs, the burps, the wrinkles even, for some the muscles – all are to be hidden 
from the one you love, in order for them to love you. If the truth of your body 
is unpalatable, then feed them a lie instead.

Except, of course, you cannot have true intimacy without veracity. Sometimes, 
you have to show your hand to win the game. You have to admit to the liquid, 
bulging, stained and straining truth of your own body to keep the emotional 
energy for empathy, compassion and care. If you’re too busy worrying about the 
failings of your own leathery bag of bones you don’t leave room to appreciate 
the glory of someone else’s.

The disturbing truth about how we treat our pubic hair | Mona Chalabi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/23/the-disturbing-truth-about-how-we-treat-out-pubic-hair>
Of course, it’s not just the matter of airing your body in all its glory. 
There’s also the big question of when, in a relationship, you let your 
emotional guard down too. When you stop being on “date behaviour” and discuss
depression <https://www.theguardian.com/society/depression>, fertility, 
previous emotional abuse,anxiety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/sep/15/anxiety-epidemic-gripping-britain>
, your parents,politics <https://www.theguardian.com/politics>, phobias and 
principles.

This one can be even trickier. But, just like an ingrown hair or slack 
stomach, trying to keep your psychological quirks or past experiences hidden 
for too long will almost certainly cause them to roar up like an inferno when 
you, and your partner, least expect it. Even in the best case scenario, you are 
denying the person you love full access to your inner landscape. Which will, 
all too often, leave them lost, bewildered, unable to reach you.

As we wheeled along the final few miles, beside the dark and heaving river 
Liffey, I realised that not only was I a 10-day stranger to the razor, I also 
hadn’t brushed my hair, put on any make up or worn anything other than padded 
shorts, leggings and a silver cycling jacket that made me look likeTyres from 
Spaced <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1sF6Lnxl8ZA> with a gusset full of 
foam, for over a week. I was a state. And yet, it is these very experiences, as 
well as the dinners, the dresses and the well-groomed sunsets, that knit two 
strangers together into love. I might have a sock that smelled of pee, I might 
have burned my nose into something resembling a beetroot and I might be, at 
that very moment, standing on my pedals to finally let a little blood back into 
my bottom, but I was there. Entirely in the moment. Entirely as I am. A 
terrible beauty was born, that week, between the Atlantic and the Irish Sea. 
Only, this time, it speaks of love, not war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fhairy-armpits-spots-burps-wee-hotel-new-zealand-banned-lycra-shorts-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcacceb053b898663f5d943c9ee76fdc2b68ceb6e%2F0_279_4966_2980%2F4966.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hairy%20armpits%2C%20spots%2C%20burps%2C%20wee%20%E2%80%93%20these%20are%20the%20signs%20of%20true%20love%20%7C%20Nell%20Frizzell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fhairy-armpits-spots-burps-wee-hotel-new-zealand-banned-lycra-shorts-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hairy%20armpits%2C%20spots%2C%20burps%2C%20wee%20%E2%80%93%20these%20are%20the%20signs%20of%20true%20love%20%7C%20Nell%20Frizzell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fhairy-armpits-spots-burps-wee-hotel-new-zealand-banned-lycra-shorts-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcacceb053b898663f5d943c9ee76fdc2b68ceb6e%2F0_279_4966_2980%2F4966.jpg>
 ‘The objects of our existence tell of a lifelong battle to hide, shave, 
bleach, tuck away, remove, ignore or disguise our mammalian reality.’ 
Photograph: Getty Images  