
The enduring impact of closing factories and shutting coalmines in the 1980s 
has been revealed in new research showing that the drain on the exchequer from 
former industrial areas is responsible for up to half the government’s £55bn 
budget deficit.

The legacy of leaving old industrial Britain to rot is becoming clear | Larry 
Elliott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/06/the-legacy-of-leaving-old-industrial-britain-to-rot-is-becoming-clear>
In the first comprehensive analysis of the cost to the state of the 
de-industrialisation that began three decades ago, Sheffield Hallam University 
said the annual bill was at least £20bn and was perhaps as high as £30bn.

The report found that the cumulative legacy of the hollowing-out of 
manufacturing and the year-long miners’ strike of 1984-85 was a far heavier 
concentration of people claiming incapacity benefits than in the richer parts 
of Britain and a more widespread use of tax credits to top up the wages of 
those in low-paid jobs.

The report’s co-author, Prof Steve Fothergill, said: “The long-term effect of 
job destruction in older industrial Britain has been to park vast numbers out 
of the labour market on incapacity benefits, these days employment and support 
allowance (ESA). The cost to the Treasury is immense, especially if all the 
top-up benefits are included.

“Added to this, low wages in these weaker local economies have jacked up 
spending on in-work benefits such as tax credits and reduced income tax 
revenue. None of these impacts have diminished over the years, despite the 
recent upturn and efforts to cut claimant numbers.
incapacity 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/incapacity-zip/giv-1406G0rq42Z5gPoE/>
 “We estimate that the ongoing cost to the exchequer, in extra benefit 
spending and lost tax revenue, is at least £20bn a year, and possibly nearer 
£30bn. To put this another way, approaching half the current budget deficit is 
the result of job destruction in Britain’s older industrial areas.”

The report – Jobs, Welfare and Austerity  
<http://www4.shu.ac.uk/research/cresr/sites/shu.ac.uk/files/cresr30th-jobs-welfare-austerity.pdf>
– said there was a continuous thread linking what happened to British industry 
in the 1980s to the welfare cuts being borne by communities in the north, 
Scotland and Wales today.

The loss of manufacturing jobs fuelled spending on welfare benefits which in 
turn had added to the financial problems of successive governments and led to 
pressure for cuts.

“The welfare reforms implemented since 2010, and strengthened since the 2015 
general election, hit the poorest places hardest,” the report said. “In effect, 
communities in older industrial Britain are being meted out punishment in the 
form of welfare cuts for the destruction wrought to their industrial base.”

The report comes as Theresa May’s government is coming under increasing 
pressure to delay cuts in disability benefits 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/02/tory-backbenchers-poised-for-stand-off-with-theresa-may-over-del/>
announced by the former chancellor, George Osborne, as part of his now 
abandoned plan to put the public finances back into the black by the end of the 
parliament.

May has raised expectations of action to help Britain’s manufacturing 
heartlands by stressing the need for the country to have an industrial strategy 
and by emphasising the difficulties faced by working-class families in the 
speech made in Downing Street on the day she became prime minister.

Last week Michael Fallon guaranteed 20 years of work for the BAE Systems 
shipyard on the Clyde whenhe announced that work on a new generation of 
warships would begin next summer. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/clyde-warship-contract-green-light-michael-fallon>

But the Sheffield Hallam study found that Scotland, along with Wales and large 
areas of the north of England, still bore the scars of the period in the early 
1980s when high interest rates and a strong pound led to the loss of 2 million 
jobs and a fifth of the UK’s manufacturing capacity.

Subsequent recessions in the early 1980s and the late 2000s have meant that 
the number of people working in industry has fallen from a peak of 8.9 million 
to 2.9 million over the past 50 years – a far bigger decline than in other 
advanced economies.

The report found that the increase from 750,000 to 2.5 million in the number 
of people on disability-related benefits reflected hidden unemployment and that 
18 of the 20 districts with the highest incapacity rates were in older 
industrial Britain. In Blaenau Gwent and Neath Port Talbot in South Wales, and 
in Glasgow, the incapacity claimant rate was 11.9%.
job losses 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/job_losses-zip/giv-1406RjzOXiorOqPV/>
In areas where the local economy was strong, there were much lower incapacity 
claimant rates. Only one London borough, Islington, featured in the top 100, 
with only four other districts in the south-east featuring, all of them seaside 
towns.

Fothergill and his co-author, Christina Beatty, said the UK spent £34bn a year 
on working-age incapacity benefits once housing benefits and tax credits were 
added to ESA. Of this, they said £10bn-£14bn was the cost of job destruction in 
older industrial Britain.

They added that higher claimant count unemployment in the old industrial areas 
was costing the exchequer a further £1bn-£1.5bn a year.

The study estimated that the government was also subsidising the poorly paid 
jobs that had replaced those lost in manufacturing in the older industrial 
areas to the tune of £10bn a year. Spending on tax credits exceeded £850 per 
head a year, double the level in southern Britain.

As a result, the poorer parts of Britain were vulnerable to the freezing of 
non-pensioner benefits, including tax credits, which Osborne announced for the 
duration of the current parliament. The study estimated that the average 
working age adult in the older industrial regions would lose £750 a year by 
2020-21, whereas the average loss in Cambridge would be £340.

It added: “The Treasury has misdiagnosed high welfare spending as the result 
of inadequate work incentives and has too often blamed individuals for their 
own predicament, whereas in fact a large part of the bill is rooted in job 
destruction extending back decades.”
 