
More than half of adult women of reproductive age in Brazil have actively 
tried to avoid pregnancy because of theZika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus> epidemic, according to a survey 
carried out there.

Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> has confirmed far more 
malformations of the brain in babies born to mothers who were infected with 
Zika than any other country.

So far, there have been 1,845 confirmed cases of what is now being called 
congenital Zika syndrome; a further 7,246 cases are suspected but the link to 
the virus has not yet been firmly established.

The survey carried out in June, led by academics in Brazil, shows that 56% of 
women who responded have tried to avoid becoming pregnant as a result. The 
numbers are no different among those who describe themselves as having 
religious beliefs – 58% of Catholics and 55% of Evangelicals in the survey said 
they were avoiding pregnancy.

In a letter to the Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Healthcare 
<http://jfprhc.bmj.com/content/early/2016/11/30/jfprhc-2015-101678>, Dr Debora 
Diniz from the University of Brasilia and colleagues say there is an urgent 
need for Brazil to reconsider its policies on family planning and abortion, to 
help women who want to avoid the risk of having a baby with brain malformation.

“As indicated by the high proportion of women who avoided pregnancy because of 
Zika, the Brazilian government must place reproductive health concerns at the 
centre of its response, including reviewing its continued criminalisation of 
abortion,” they write.

The government should ensure better access to contraceptive methods and 
information, they say, arguing for a wider range of methods to be made 
available. Long-lasting reversible contraception such as intrauterine devices 
are scarce, they say, and hormonal implants are unavailable through the public 
services.

Women’s groups are attempting to challenge Brazil’s abortion restrictions 
through the courts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/19/zika-emergency-pushes-women-to-challenge-brazil-abortion-law>
, arguing that those infected by the Zika virus should be permitted a 
termination.

The team conducted a face-to-face survey of more than 2,000 women, who are 
literate and between the ages of 18 and 38, which corresponds to 83% of the 
female population.

They found that 27% had not tried to avoid pregnancy and 16% were not planning 
to become pregnant anyway, regardless of the Zika epidemic.

The response reflects the geographical impact of the epidemic, with a higher 
proportion of women from the hard-hit north-eastern region (66%) trying to 
avoid pregnancy than in the south (46%).

“Black (64%) and brown (56%) women were more likely to report avoiding 
pregnancy than white women (51%), which also likely reflects the 
disproportionate impact of the epidemic among the most vulnerable racial 
groups,” they write.

An estimated 174,000 Brazilians are said by the ministry of health to have 
been infected with the Zika virus, although the last updated figure was in 
early July.
 