
The challenges that confronted Dilma Rousseff in cleaning up Brazilian 
political life cannot be underestimated (From presidential palace to her 
mother’s flat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/24/dilma-rousseff-brazil-impeachment-president>
, 24 December). In 2012, I was contracted by Unesco to advise the government on 
implementing the access to information decree the president had signed. Among 
the first disclosure demands made by the press were for details of salaries and 
perks received by ministers, judges and public officials.

This prompted legal action by trade unions (which had negotiated lucrative 
deals for their members) to try to prevent disclosure, and fierce resistance 
within the coalition government. When the matter was taken to Rousseff she 
instructed that full disclosure should be made, starting with her own pay 
package.

Subsequently, the published details revealed that a third of ministers and 
almost 4,000 federal employees breached the pay ceiling set by the 
constitution, and were earning more than the president. Bloated rewards 
included up to an additional six months’ salary per year, accounted for as 
cost-of-living allowances or in lieu of educational leave. Even some 
congressional parking and lift attendants were earning up to 10 times more than 
the average salary of a teacher or police officer. Those embarrassed were 
unlikely to forgive her for breaching the code of silence on these 
arrangements, far less support her in tackling other areas of political 
back-scratching.
Professor Kevin Dunion
Anstruther, Fife

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 