
Under the blistering heat of the southern African sun, the dignitaries did not 
linger. The ceremony was short. The road running 60km around the scruffy 
outskirts of the Angolan capital Luanda was declared open and a plaque unveiled 
revealing its new name: “The Commander-in-Chief of the Cuban Revolution Fidel 
de Castro Motorway.”

That a major piece of new infrastructure anywhere in Africa might be named 
afterCastro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro>, who supported 
both freedom struggles and dictators on the continent, is little surprise. That 
a road in Angola commemorates the dictator still less so. It was the Cuban 
leader’s military intervention that preserved the new nation’s independence – 
and enabled its president,José Eduardo dos Santos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/30/angola-jose-eduardo-dos-santos>, 
to hold on to power through decades of war and upheaval.

Nana Akufo-Addo wins poll to become Ghana's president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/nana-akufo-addo-wins-poll-to-become-ghanas-president>
Dos Santos, who became president in 1979 and is Africa’s 
second-longest-serving leader, is still in charge in Luanda, a capital that has 
the dubious honour of beingthe most expensive city in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/26/what-where-is-the-worlds-most-expensive-city>
, and simultaneously one of those with the highest proportion of inhabitants 
living in poverty.

But Dos Santos may not be in charge for much longer. Shortly before the 
inauguration of the Castro expressway, there had been extraordinary news: the 
veteran ruler would not seek a new term as president in elections in 2017. The 
announcement, made in a closed-door meeting of the ruling party’s central 
committee, has made front page news in Angolan newspapers all week.

“It is difficult to overstate the significance of this announcement. It is 
almost impossible to imagine what [Angola] looks like without [Dos Santos] at 
the helm,” wrote Simon Allison, an analyst and journalist, for the Institute 
for Security Studies, inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>.

For those who watch the ups and downs of democracy in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, recent weeks have been eventful. 
Ten days ago Yahya Jammeh, authoritarian ruler of the Gambia, accepted 
electoral defeat. His decision stunned onlookers, who had expected Jammeh, who 
seized power in a coup 22 years ago, to reject the result. Then, on Friday 
evening, he did just that, and soldiers deployed onto the streets of Banjul, 
the capital.

In South Africa, one of the most robust democracies on the continent, President
Jacob Zuma <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma> narrowly missed being 
ousted as leader of the ruling African National Congress.

Last week in Ghana, considered a beacon of democracy in Africa, closely 
contested electionsended in a tense standoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/nana-akufo-addo-wins-poll-to-become-ghanas-president>
 and eventual defeat for President John Mahama.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambian%20president%20rejects%20election%20result%20in%20television%20address%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambian%20president%20rejects%20election%20result%20in%20television%20address%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video&media=>
Gambian president rejects election result in television address to the nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
Nor is the frenetic tempo of politics likely to slow soon. Somalia is electing 
a new president in what everyone admits are deeply flawed polls, while the 
second-term mandate of Joseph Kabila, who has run the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo since the assassination of his father in 2001, expires in just over a 
week. Kabila, 45, doesn’t look likelyto relinquish power without a struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/joseph-kabila-democratic-republic-of-the-congo-elections-transfer-power>
, and is trying to push back elections to 2018 at the earliest. Widespread 
protests are expected – and violence.Next year will see a new crop of polls, 
with demonstrations, riots, crackdowns, celebrations and upsets. Amid the 
tumult on a vast, varied continent, is any broader pattern discernible?

African political experts say democracy in Africa after colonial rule 
struggled until the end of the cold war. The two decades that followed the end 
of the proxy conflicts between the west and the Soviet Union saw rapid 
progress, though the continent still lagged behind the rest of the world. Over 
recent years, however, this process of “democratisation” has slowed.

According to one recent research paper, in 2015 only 12% of people in Africa 
lived in full or flawed democracies, with the rest equally split between 
authoritarian or “hybrid” regimes. Another analysis put the total closer to 
40%, but still well below global averages. The peaceful transfer of power in
Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> last year gave the figures 
a boost.

“It’s peaks and troughs. There’s not a continual momentum of improvement. 
There are some democratic reversals, but we are in a situation where there are 
more elections more regularly,” said Alex Vines, of London’s Chatham House 
thinktank.

What is clear is that the rule of the “strong man” is far from over. From 
Robert Mugabe, who has ruled Zimbabwe since 1980, toOmar al-Bashir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/omar-al-bashir>, who seized power in Sudan 
in 1989, autocratic leaders facing charges of human rights abuses still hold 
sway in many places. The election of Donald Trump, who has praised at least one 
African “strong leader”, has been welcomed by some who hope the new US 
administration will be less interested in promoting human rights or democracy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwestern-saharan-refugee-women-use-film-in-liberation-struggle-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Western%20Sahara%3A%20the%20last%20colony%20in%20Africa%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwestern-saharan-refugee-women-use-film-in-liberation-struggle-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Western%20Sahara%3A%20the%20last%20colony%20in%20Africa%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwestern-saharan-refugee-women-use-film-in-liberation-struggle-video&media=>
Western Sahara: the last colony in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/nov/24/western-saharan-refugee-women-use-film-in-liberation-struggle-video>
The wealth of some leaders, and their families, is extraordinary. No one may 
be crowning themselves on golden thrones, asJean-Bédel Bokassa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/aug/29/1>, “emperor” of the Central 
African Republic, did in 1977, but last week Dutch authorities impounded a 
76-metre luxury yacht allegedlyowned by Teodorin Obiang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/28/dictator-son-superyacht-teodorin-obiang>
, vice-president and son of the president of Equatorial Guinea, who has been in 
power since 1979 and is Africa’s longest-serving leader.

One trend that worries many has been growing repression. Yet this might not be 
as depressing as it looks at first glance, says Nic Cheeseman, an expert in 
African politics at Oxford University. Cheeseman said that autocratic leaders 
were facing a new and dynamic opposition, and intensifying efforts to cling to 
power.

“There will be more repression in the short term and it will look worse. But I 
am positive about democracy in Africa in the long run … Social and economic 
change will drive democratisation over 30 years. But there is a barrier of pain 
we will have to go through to get there,” he said.

Autocrats are also updating their responses to new challenges. Social media 
and other new technologies mean they need more subtle strategies than simply 
unleashing loyal thugs. Few leaders now rule without some semblance of 
democratic process. In recent years several have sought to change constitutions 
– rather than abrogate them entirely – to stay in power.

Another strategy is simply to disguise enduring influence. Dos Santos has 
effectively handpicked his successor, the defence minister and vice-president 
of the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation ofAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> (MPLA) party, and appointed his son 
as head of the nations’s sovereign wealth fund. His daughter, reported to be 
Africa’s richest woman, worth $3bn, runs the resource-rich state’s national oil 
company and has stakes in many of its biggest industries.

“#DoSantos (after 38 years in power) goes, the ruling #MPLA (after 42 years) 
stays. What change do we foresee in #Angola?” Rafael Marques, an award-winning 
local journalist and writer, tweeted shortly after the news of the Angolan 
leader’s decision not to run next year was made public. “Angolans will move 
from one dictator to the next,” Marques told AFP news agency. “Change is not 
coming tomorrow.”

The Gambia's new rulers vow to prosecute outgoing president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/the-gambias-new-rulers-vow-to-prosecute-outgoing-president>
Some have questioned whether Africa actually needs democracies at all, arguing 
that strong government and growth should be prioritised over elections or 
institutions. They point to states such as Ethiopia and Paul Kagame’s Rwanda, 
which have brought millions out of poverty in recent years but have been 
repeatedly accused of human rights abuses.

But if the short-term achievements of centralised authoritarian states can 
sometimes impress, with some sustaining very high levels of growth for short 
periods, democracies are better at delivering sustainable economic progress 
over the long term, Cheeseman said. “We have to accept that [Ethiopia and 
Rwanda] have achieved impressive things … but on average authoritarian states 
underperform. Democratic states grow more, and the longer you are democratic 
the more you grow.”

For many, there are other considerations than economics. “Democracy also means 
preserving good African traditional culture, prioritising national interests, 
[the] participation of women in politics, creating legitimate government 
fighting corruption and nepotism ... We are very hopeful about the future of 
democratic process in Africa,” said Ali Warsame, an entrepreneur, academic, 
former minister and aspirant Somali presidential candidate.
African graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/africa-zip/giv-3902qUozp5N7IBob>
THE OLD GUARD

YAHYA JAMMEH

THE GAMBIA

To general surprise, Jammeh, in power since 1994, initially accepted his 
defeat in elections on 1 December, possibly because he lacked support among the 
country’s security establishment for further repression. But he has now 
rejected the result – he may have been spooked by the prospect of prosecution – 
and called for fresh elections.

TEODORO OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

The US has accused 74-year-old Obiang – Africa’s longest-serving ruler – of 
overseeing unlawful killings, kidnappings and torture. Life expectancy in
Equatorial Guinea <http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/2008/af/118999.htm> 
remains among the lowest in the world despite massive oil resources. He was
welcomed at the White House 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mojo/2014/08/african-autocrats-leaders-summit-human-rights>
 in 2014 during a summit of African leaders.

JOSE EDUARDO DOS SANTOS

ANGOLA

Now 74, the former Marxist guerrilla leader has been in power for 38 years. 
Vast reserves of oil and diamonds have ensured prosperity for a narrow elite, 
though much of the population lives in abject poverty. Dissidents have faced 
arrest by a politicised judiciary, according toAmnesty 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/africa/angola/report-angola/>. Recently, 
falls in commodity prices have caused economic problems, though not to those 
who have already made vast fortunes.

OMAR AL-BASHIR

SUDAN

Bashir, 72, took power 27 years ago when he led a military coup. A skilled 
political operator, he has reached out to a variety of world powers for 
assistance during his decades in power and has shifted ideologies with little 
apparent difficulty. His country is now in desperate economic trouble, however, 
after the oil-rich south seceded in 2011, and Bashir iswanted for war crimes  
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/darfur/albashir>by the international criminal court.

YOWERI MUSEVENI

UGANDA

Museveni, 72, was once admired for his economic policies and effective 
strategy against HIV/Aids. He has fewer friends overseas these days. In power 
since 1986, the former rebel leader has presided over robust economic growth 
but has faced mountingaccusations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/young-people-uganda-elections-time-for-president-yoweri-museveni-to-move-on>
 at home and abroad of cracking down on dissent and failing to tackle rampant 
corruption in the east African nation of 37 million people. Growth has now 
slowed to around 5%.

ROBERT MUGABE

ZIMBABWE

Mugabe, 92, continues to defy his age, political opponents and much of the 
international community. A former guerrilla leader, he came to power in the 
former British colony in 1980 as prime minister. Since then he has used a 
combination of brutal repression and political manoeuvring to remain in charge. 
But physical infirmity and a collapsing economy mean his grip is weakening.

• This article was corrected on 12 December 2016 to correct the reference to 
Omar Al-Bashir’s time in power from 37 to 27 years.

 