
Near my corner of Hackney, on bus routes I often use, stands a cluster of five 
new buildings <http://www.hackney.gov.uk/pc-pembury-circus> that might be a bit 
of a model for London’s housing future. Pembury Circus is amixed use development
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mixed-use_development> containing 268 flats, a 
community hall, a nursery and some shops, including a branch of the Co-op. 
Nearly half of the flats - 119 of them - are designated “affordable” of some 
kind, which is an unusually high proportion.

There is no provision for car parking on the site, other than a few bays for 
disabled people and a car club. It is a high density development, though the 
block that forms the highest part is not, at 12 storeys, particularly tall. It 
is heated from alow carbon energy 
<http://www.lowcarbon.com/portfolio/portfolio-overview/chp/> centre and it is 
“permeable” - which basically means you can walk or cycle all the way through 
it to connect with the surrounding area - and it is striking to look at, with 
different blocks built in different styles in an effort to fit in with 
neighbouring older buildings. Pembury Circus hasattracted plaudits 
<http://www.peabody.org.uk/news-views/2016/sep/vote-for-pembury-circus!> from a 
clutch of housing and design organisations and recently won theBest Mixed Use 
Development Award 
<http://www.ardmoregroup.co.uk/news/pembury-circus-scoops-top-award-leaf-awards/>
 from the prestigiousLeading European Architects Forum 
<http://www.arena-international.com/leafawards> (LEAF). 

It’s not easy to be high-density, car-free, good-looking and provide a large 
amount of affordability all at the same time, but Pembury Circus has managed 
it. Is it everything newLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> housing 
ought to be? If so, what’s its trick?

The backstory begins at the end of the 1990s when the large, adjacent Pembury 
estate was transferred from Hackney Council to thePeabody housing association 
<http://www.peabody.org.uk/our-neighbourhoods/whats-on-at-pembury> as part of 
the Labour government’sstock transfer programme 
<http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/written_answers/1999/mar/11/housing-stock-transfers>
, aimed at upgrading social housing. Part of the deal was that one section of 
the estate, comprising 42 of its nearly 1,300 dwellings, road and car parking 
space and a little open land, would be redeveloped.

This is where Pembury Circus now stands. The 42 estate flats were demolished 
in 2004 and the site was landscaped for the time being. Eventually, in 2011, 
Peabody and commercial developer Bellway came forward with plans. There weretwo 
of them 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/PAWS/media_id_174879/pembury_circus_dalston_report.pdf>
: one proposed garage parking for 80 cars, the other proposed none. Hackney’s 
planning committee preferredthe latter 
<http://www.mlm.uk.com/projects_pemburycircusredevelopment.php>. Some 95% of 
housing developments in Hackney are now car-free. Pembury Circus is believed to 
be the largest of that type in Europe.

Work began in 2013. The deal included the council being able to widen a 
pavement on a street that goes past the site and the developers paying for 
forthcoming improvements to the five-way junction that part of the development 
faces on to. By early 2014 Pembury Circus wasrecognised as a destination 
<http://davehill.typepad.com/claptonian/2014/02/even-the-buses-are-saying-pembury-circus.html>
 in on-board bus announcements and by 2015 it was complete. Every unit has now 
beenlet or sold <http://www.peabody.org.uk/homes-in-development/hackney>.

The project is a local outcome of a national housing policy begun in the last 
century that continues to split opinion: for some, stock transfers are always 
to beopposed 
<http://www.defendcouncilhousing.org.uk/dch/dch_infopage.cfm?KWord=transfer> as 
aform of privatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/dec/10/housing-voluntary-transfer>, 
though other assessments, such asone for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation in 2009 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/sites/default/files/jrf/migrated/files/britain-housing-urbanSUMMARY.pdf>
, have found them to be mostly beneficial for residents. The 42 Pembury estate 
homes knocked down, all of which had been for social rent, were considered 
sub-standard by the council and their environs had an unhappy reputation as a 
crime spot. The open space that replaced them became valued by local people, 
some of whom were unhappy to see it go.

Now, the 268 homes of Pembury Circus fill the same piece of land. Of the 119 
“affordable” ones 
<http://www.peabody.org.uk/homes-in-development/hackney/pembury-circus>, 21 are 
for traditional social rent, 58 for the higher “affordable rent” variety, 
ranging from 55% to 75% of local market levels, and 40 are for shared 
ownership. Relevant context: nearly45% of Hackney households rent from a social 
landlord <http://hackney.gov.uk/Assets/Documents/Hackney-Profile.pdf>, be that 
the council or a housing association, and “affordable rent” tenants, can be 
eligible for help from housing benefit.

Some of the rented homes were reserved for older estate residents and others 
who wanted to move to somewhere smaller. The different tenures are in different 
sections of the development - a set up you oftenfind in the capital 
<http://www.bowrivervillage.co.uk/> these days, given the need for sales of one 
housing type to help subside others - but, thanks in part to the building 
materials used, Pembury Circus looks more “tenure blind” than “poor doors”.

Different people will take different views about it for a range of different 
reasons, some of them historical. But judged on its own, contemporary terms 
within the exacting framework of, in particular, Inner London housing 
financing, Pembury Circus meets several desirable criteria: a high level and 
wide spread of “affordable” tenure types; good environmental standards; pretty 
to look at; efficient and creative use of available space. There could be more 
of this kind of development on its way across London. London could certainly do 
a lot worse.
 