
The millennium development goals sought to improve the lives of people living 
in the global south by reducing poverty and hunger, as well as improving access 
to health, education and water and sanitation.

Six of the eight goals mention women and girls as priority targets. Goal three 
seeks to promote gender equality and empower women.


As the deadline for achieving the MDGs looms, how successful have the goals 
been in empowering women?

UN Women predicts that, at the current pace of change, it will take about 50 
years to achieve parity in parliaments, and more than 80 years beforewomen are 
on an equal footing with men in terms of economic participation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/10/world-leaders-pledge-womens-rights-equality-csw-2030>
.

According to the executive director of UN Women, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the 
MDGs presented a much narrower focus than theBeijing platform for action 
<http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/>, which was signed at the 
fourth world conference on women, five years before the Millennium Declaration 
was agreed. Quite a lot of the content of the Beijing document was left out of 
the MDGs.

Millennium development goal three: Promote gender equality and empower women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/aug/05/millennium-development-goal-gender-equality>
“The MDGs five years later [than Beijing] had a much smaller agenda. In a way, 
goal three focused on leadership and education. Certainly one regret is that 
[the goal] didn’t include violence against women or have an emphasis on human 
rights. In some cases, governments put a lot of energy into implementing the 
MDGs so much that Beijing, which was more comprehensive, began to fall between 
the cracks,” she said.

Olivia Mensah, a community leader from the Brong-Ahafo region of central 
Ghana, who was in New York last week for the Commission on the Status ofWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, was more positive about 
progress. She said the MDGs had resulted in more girls going to school in her 
country.

“Firstly, few were going to school, but now more are going. The government is 
providing it for free, so schooling has become much easier.” She said there 
were also fewer instances of early marriage and domestic violence.

Farmers have received equipment, like fertilisers and rubber boots, “and women 
with small-scale businesses have been provided with loans to enhance their 
businesses”.

She added that more women are now entering into politics, on local and 
national platforms, but “we’re striving to get more, we want 50-50”.

Lydia Alpizar, executive director of the Association for Women’s Rights in 
Development, has mixed feelings about the MDGs. “The processes that led to this 
framework were undemocratic, and showed a limited understanding of what is 
required for gender equality, social justice and sustainability more broadly. 
The comprehensive and forward-looking UN agreements of the 1990s were reduced 
and limited to the eight goals. The design of this framework left little impact 
due to this limited vision for what was needed, a lack of political will and 
the reduced allocation of necessary financial resources,” she said.

But it has not been all negative. Alpizar noted some progress on access to 
primary education and political participation, and having a standalone goal on 
gender equality meant it became “an important priority that opened some 
opportunities”.




What do you think? We want to hear from you. Have the MDGs served a purpose or 
did they miss a trick? Should they have factored in the 12 action points from 
the Beijing conference? Share your thoughts in the comment thread below or 
tweet us at@GdnDevelopment <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment>

 