
When Michelle Tatu got her first period, she was afraid she was dying. 
Terrified, she stuffed bits of cloth and cotton inside herself to try to stem 
the bleeding.

Too frightened to tell her parents what was happening, she kept quiet. She 
spent her school day terrified blood would leak out, exposing her to ridicule 
from her classmates.

“At first I was so scared, I didn’t know what it was, I thought I had hurt 
myself,” exaplains Tatu over the din of a women’s rights march in Kibera, her 
home and one of Kenya’s largest slums. The march has been organised by 
non-profit The Cup, which provides menstrual cups to girls like Tatu.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ff75f18bba561a3b8c72940a7ea157062056d61%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ff75f18bba561a3b8c72940a7ea157062056d61%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 As the world marked Human rights day on 10 December 2016, residents of Kibera 
came together to use this day to raise awareness towards a particular issue - 
the rights of young women Photograph: Emma Nzioka 
Today, little trace is left of that fear. Tatu is now 17 and uses a menstrual 
cup that she can wash regularly and use for up to ten years. “[Menstruation] 
happens to all girls, why would I be embarrassed?”

But Tatu’s initial experience is common across Kenya, and the rest of the 
continent. As many as one in 10 girls in sub-SaharanAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> are missing school during 
menstruation.

Just a decade ago, there was little discussion of the challenges girls in 
sub-Saharan Africa faced with their periods. In recent years, a groundswell of 
attention by non-profits, development organisations and governments means there 
is a growing consensus: girls should have access to the products they need 
without shame or secrecy.

11 ways to stop periods from disrupting girls' education
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/19/11-ways-to-stop-periods-from-disrupting-girls-education>
“The time when a girl’s world is supposed to open up instead becomes a time 
when her opportunities are beginning to contract,” says Alison Nakamura Netter, 
chief communications and development officer forZanaAfrica 
<http://www.zanaafrica.org/>, which provides sanitary products and reproductive 
rights education in Kenya.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56d8098b2236e162c37e38e1a7e1ae485efc3320%2F0_232_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56d8098b2236e162c37e38e1a7e1ae485efc3320%2F0_232_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Marchers gave out flyers with information on how young women can get access to 
help and counselling if they become a victim of violence Photograph: Emma Nzioka
Helping girls is difficult when a dearth of research means there’s still so 
much we don’t know about how periods affect their educational and social 
outcomes. Luckily, emerging research is beginning to change that.

In Kenya, 65% of women and girls 
<http://menstrualhygieneday.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/FSG-Menstrual-Health-Landscape_Kenya.pdf>
 (pdf) are unable to afford sanitary pads. “When people earn less than two 
bucks a day, is a family going to [get] bread, milk and food, or a girl’s 
sanitary pads?” says Angela Lagat, chief brand marketing officer at ZanaAfrica.

The situation is so dire that in a 2015 study  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/28/we-dont-know-enough-about-menstruation-and-girls-are-paying-a-price>
of 3000 Kenyan women, Dr Penelope Phillips-Howard found 1 in 10 15-year-old 
girls were having sex to get money to pay for sanitary ware.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F749b2faf86237a2d51703e3317267f343d133765%2F0_38_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F749b2faf86237a2d51703e3317267f343d133765%2F0_38_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 17 year old Celine Awino was part of the march, organised by The Cup, a 
Swedish organisation Photograph: Emma Nzioka 
Before Tatu started using a cup last year, she used rags and mattress stuffing 
when she couldn’t afford pads, causing infections and painful sores more than 
once.

Caro Muhonja, a 21-year-old Kibera resident walking by the march with her two 
daughters, says she often has to use cotton and scraps of fabric because 
sanitary products are too expensive. “They burn, they sting, they irritate my 
skin, and they leak and soil my clothes,” she says of the ad hoc alternatives.

The Kenyan government is considered a global leader on access to sanitary 
products. It repealed added tax on pads and tampons in 2004 to lower the price 
– a tax that still exists in the US – and since 2011, with the help of 
ZanaAfrica, the government has allocated money todistribute free pads to school 
girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/jul/29/kenya-schoolgirls-sanitary-pads-funding>
.

We need to talk about periods: why is menstruation still holding girls back?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/28/we-need-to-talk-about-periods-why-is-menstruation-still-holding-girls-back>
But this programme hasn’t always been implemented well. Sometimes pads are 
stolen and or supplies run out. Also, it’s unclear whether the programme has 
improved school attendance inKenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa31107114ed7ce7bbfee9f7bc72f3ba6aaa94480%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa31107114ed7ce7bbfee9f7bc72f3ba6aaa94480%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A number of women are unable to afford sanitary pads so are forced to use 
pieces of cloth or cotton wool which results in skin irritations Photograph: 
Emma Nzioka 
“The need for products is unmet,” says Eunice Muthengi, lead researcher of a 
study on the effects of sanitary pad distribution and reproductive rights 
education on girls. “But we really don’t have enough evidence to show the 
impact of a lack of sanitary pads on absences or school performance.”

One problem may be that products alone aren’t enough. “While products and 
materials are essential, you can’t manage your period if you don’t understand 
what is happening to your body and don’t have basic information about 
reproductive health,” says Marni Sommer, an associate professor at Columbia 
University who studies adolescent health in sub-Saharan Africa.

During Muthengi’s preliminary research she found one girl who knew more about 
Ebola, of which there’s never been a case in Kenya, than she did about 
menstruation. Other girls in the same study thought women could only become 
pregnant by having sex during menstruation.

“Girls don’t talk about these issues, so I’m not sure if any other women face 
them,” says Muhonja about her own struggles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23dea0ebbe4d6ab9a68496378d6722207d801145%2F0_125_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23dea0ebbe4d6ab9a68496378d6722207d801145%2F0_125_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Women and men from different parts of Kibera gathered at the DC camp in Kibera 
early morning and peacefully marched through the streets Photograph: Emma Nzioka
Access to sanitary products is of limited help if schools don’t have the 
supporting infrastructure, such as separate bathrooms for girls with doors and 
locks for privacy. In rural areas of Kenya,only 32% of schools 
<http://menstrualhygieneday.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/FSG-Menstrual-Health-Landscape_Kenya.pdf>
 (pdf) have a private place for girls to change their sanitary products. Many 
teachers are also uncomfortable talking about or teaching menstruation.

Only half of Kenyan girls 
<http://menstrualhygieneday.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/FSG-Menstrual-Health-Landscape_Kenya.pdf>
 (pdf) say they openly discuss menstruation at home presenting a missed 
opportunity for future education.

“Here’s this wonderful moment upon which a girl’s life changes that, although 
taboo, parents are probably more comfortable talking about than sex,” says 
Sommer. “Those conversations can open the door to communication so that they 
could eventually talk about more sensitive issues.”

The Kenyan government, with the support of Unicef, is developing national 
guidelines for menstrual hygiene in schools, including proper hand washing 
facilities and places to dispose of sanitary products, says Agnes Makanyi, 
water sanitation and hygiene specialist at Unicef in Kenya.

Not just a girls' problem: the economic impact of menstrual shame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/oct/30/costly-periods-economic-impact-of-menstrual-shame>
But perhaps most important is the emerging research. Muthengi’s study, in 
partnership with ZanaAfrica and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, is the 
first of its kind in sub-Saharan Africa. ZanaAfrica will distribute a variety 
of sanitary products and will pilotNia teen magazine 
<http://www.zanaafrica.org/health-education/> , to teach girls about 
menstruation and reproductive health. The final study will provide insights 
into the individual and combined effects of sanitary pad distribution and 
reproductive health education on girls’ education and health.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc953c950ccaffa32c4fdbcaaa2624e3009a6d65f%2F0_110_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Having%20a%20period%20is%20unaffordable%20in%20Kenya%2C%20yet%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20talk%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhaving-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc953c950ccaffa32c4fdbcaaa2624e3009a6d65f%2F0_110_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A young woman on the march wears a Girl Power t-shirt Photograph: Emma Nzioka 
“Funds are limited so we want to make sure we’re investing funds in what 
works, so that we’re getting the biggest bang for our buck,” says Muthengi.

The study will hopefully mean that all girls can laugh as much as Tatu did at 
the idea that a period is ever something to be embarrassed of. Or, as Netter 
says, “breaking the period taboo and making menstruation something that should 
be celebrated and not shamed”.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 