
How should we all dress in this post-Brexit world?

Michael, by email

Apologies, dear readers. As much as I would like to continue normal service, I 
fear things have just gone too strange. For almost a decade, you have been 
Asking Hadley, and Hadley has answered. But look! Things have taken such a 
strange turn that not only am I referring to myself in the third person (number 
one on the list of signs for incipient insanity), but I feel as if I don’t have 
any answers at all. It’s hard to believe you understand anything any more, now 
that this country feels like a rejected script forBlack Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/black-mirror>. Am I dreaming? Did I 
drink some dodgy tea atGlastonbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury>? (Obviously, but possibly not 
relevant here.) Jesus, remember when the news in this country was just about 
the weather? Can someone please send over some Valium, stat, because this 
comedown is a goddamn killer.

So what to wear for Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>
? Layers, first and foremost, so outfits can be changed to suit shifting 
conditions at a second’s notice; thick-soled shoes to protect your feet from 
the bones of the dead politicians littering the ground, all knived in both the 
back and front; a hazmat suit to protect oneself from the openly toxic national 
atmosphere. And, finally, a seatbelt. Buckle up, people – this is going to be a 
bumpy ride.

I’m going to a very glamorous wedding this summer. What should I wear?

Sarah, by email
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fhazmat-suits-on-brexit-toxic-national-atmosphere-sarah-vine-teach-wedding-attire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24f872621e72dc8780b713958f9eb5e61d10dee2%2F0_197_2826_4225%2F2826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hazmat%20suits%20on!%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20dress%20for%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fhazmat-suits-on-brexit-toxic-national-atmosphere-sarah-vine-teach-wedding-attire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hazmat%20suits%20on%21%20It%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20dress%20for%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fhazmat-suits-on-brexit-toxic-national-atmosphere-sarah-vine-teach-wedding-attire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24f872621e72dc8780b713958f9eb5e61d10dee2%2F0_197_2826_4225%2F2826.jpg>
 Panto season … Sarah Vine and Michael Gove on their way to Rupert Murdoch and 
Jerry Hall’s wedding in London. Photograph: Alamy 
What indeed, Sarah, what indeed. Weddings are difficult enough, but a 
“glamorous” one, you say? Well, this might tax even my world-renowned 
expertise. Also, given that, asMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> said so recently that 
“Britain has had enough of experts” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/jun/08/experts-eu-referendum-michael-gove>
, perhaps I am not the one for this anyway. So let us turn instead to a 
self-professed amateur, one with a bit of practice on the subject of attending 
“glamorous weddings”. I speak of none other than our future overlord, Sarah 
Vine.

Perhaps you think of Vine as a political wife. Or maybe you consider her the 
person affixed to the giant hand upon which sits the little puppet that is 
known as Michael Gove. “Be STRONG, Michael!Be your BEST 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/michael-goves-wife-doubts-boris-johnson-email-sarah-vine-dacre-murdoch>
! You can DO this!” she shouts at him like a cut-price Lady Macbeth, were the 
Macbeths a couple from Croydon intoHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards> cosplay.

Is Michael Gove an idiot? His wife seems to think so | Zoe Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/29/michael-gove-sarah-vine-leaked-email>
But I think of Vine first and foremost as a columnist, one whose writings in 
the Daily Mail are the only reason I wake up on Wednesdays, now that Channel 4 
no longer shows reruns of Ally McBeal. I’ve learned a lot from Vine over the 
years, from one Polly Filler to another. I’ve learned, for example, that 
getting caught kitting out your kitchen on expenses – to the point where you 
have topay back £7,000 of taxpayers’ money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/18/looters-rioters-mps> 
after spending it on such crucial items as “elephant lamps” – should be no bar 
to mocking other people’s dining areas. In Vine’s case, it was Ed Miliband’s 
kitchen that wasdeemed wanting 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2990810/Why-kitchen-tells-need-know-mirthless-Milibands-s-suggest-Ed-Justine-not-fact-aliens.html>
 in her column – proof, in fact, that he and his wife are “aliens”. And no 
wonder Vine found it so bewildering: it didn’t seem to have a single £750 
“Loire table”, just one of the many items that the Goves tried to put on the 
public’s credit card. I mean, what kind of human doesn’t try to chivvy the 
public purse strings, for at least a £238.50 birdcage coffee table?

More pertinent to our question today are Vine’s thoughts on “glamorous wedding 
wear.” As it happens, Vine and Gove were invited toRupert Murdoch and Jerry 
Hall’s wedding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/05/rupert-murdoch-and-jerry-hall-hold-second-wedding-ceremony-in-church>
 earlier this year. “I was thrilled, of course (not to mention a little 
surprised),” Sarahwrote 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3479445/So-DOES-middle-aged-mum-wear-wedding-year-SARAH-VINE-chose-outfit-Jerry-Hall-s-wedding-Rupert-Murdoch.html>
, with exquisitely casual parenthetical afterthought **side eyes to camera**. 
But what does one wear to the marriage of a southern belle to Beelzebub? Truly, 
’tis quite the fashion quandary. Sadly, Vine declined todress up as Jennifer 
Lopez <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/magazine/article3864512.ece>, as she did 
in 2013. Instead, after rejecting several £1,800 hats some designer offered to 
loan her (Vine apparently likes paying for hats about as much as she and her 
husband enjoy spending on their kitchen), she opted for a self-described 
“panto” look, with gold coat and culottes, which, honestly, is no better or 
worse than what most people wear to weddings. “I felt happy and comfortable,” 
Vine writes, and good for her. “And by the time Marsha Hunt took to the podium 
to give a black power salute, I couldn’t have cared less what I was wearing.” 
Um, you what now? A black power salute? At Rupert Murdoch’s wedding? Now, I 
don’t think we can learn much about dressing for weddings from Vine’s column. 
But one thing it definitely does teach us is that the dream of 60s revolution 
is dead, co-opted instead by middle-aged rich white people for their own 
individual entertainment. Suddenly, I’m beginning to understand why absolutely 
everything has fallen apart and everyone’s so freaking furious. Suddenly Brexit 
makes total sense. Thanks, Sarah!

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
 