
HBO’s new Westworld series has spawned countless gigabytes of online 
discussion and speculation as its intricate plot has unfolded. The design of 
the robots, and of the intelligence that guides them, has attracted less 
comment. That’s a shame; when you dive into the construction of the park there 
are some very odd choices that are worth pulling apart.

(Warning: spoilers ahead.) 

Westworld plays out over multiple timelines, but its ‘present’ appears to be 
set some time in the mid-to-late 21st century. The park is around 35 years old 
by then. That places its construction in our near future, which means that the 
earliest ‘host’ robots – more mechanical in design than later versions – were 
built using technology not too distant from what we have available today.

The golden age of desktop processors getting exponentially faster each year 
ended more than a decade ago. That’s inconvenient if you’re trying to build an 
artificial intelligence, so people have combined two new strategies. Firstly, 
massive server farms have been constructed to house and process ‘big data’ and 
provide raw processing power as an online service. Second, much of the heavy 
number crunching has been delegated to specialized graphics chips, which turned 
out to be better at it than general-purpose processors.

Meanwhile, consumers have switched to mobile devices or laptops. These have to 
rely on limited batteries, and battery technology hasn’t moved quite as fast as 
we’d like, so chip manufacturers have focused on energy efficiency rather than 
raw performance. Of course another way to use less energy is to do less work on 
the mobile device and more in the cloud. Mobile devices become a low-powered 
interface through which we access data and processing power housed elsewhere.

Intelligent assistants like Apple’s Siri, or Amazon’s Echo seem like a 
physical presence in our lives, but their ‘brains’ are elsewhere. We talk to 
them through cheap, disposable devices that act as little more than relays. 
They pass whispered instructions across the Internet to a humming black box – 
one of thousands in warehouses around the world – and wait for a response to 
read out. It makes a lot of sense, so why aren’t Westworld’s hosts built the 
same way?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fheads-in-the-cloud-are-westworlds-robots-poorly-designed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F496a0b3d4ec15cdf0d9d9ae3ace46e7d0e84d881%2F29_130_2751_1652%2F2751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Heads%20in%20the%20Cloud%3A%20Are%20Westworld%E2%80%99s%20Robots%20Poorly%20Designed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fheads-in-the-cloud-are-westworlds-robots-poorly-designed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Heads%20in%20the%20Cloud%3A%20Are%20Westworld%E2%80%99s%20Robots%20Poorly%20Designed%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fheads-in-the-cloud-are-westworlds-robots-poorly-designed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F496a0b3d4ec15cdf0d9d9ae3ace46e7d0e84d881%2F29_130_2751_1652%2F2751.jpg>
 A server farm at CERN. This is what the hosts’ ‘brains’ would probably look 
like if we tried to build them now. (AP Photo/KEYSTONE/Martial Trezzini) 
Photograph: Martial Trezzini/ASSOCIATED PRESS 
Imagine you’re designing the first host. There are some pretty clear 
requirements to work with. We know the hosts are going to take damage. They’re 
active for long periods with no obvious way to recharge. They have to be safe. 
If they go off script they need to be containable. They need regular quality 
checks. They absolutely cannot be allowed to leave the park; something Delos 
takes so seriously that the hosts supposedly have location-aware explosives in 
their spines.

Physically placing a ‘brain’ inside the hosts makes very little sense. It 
dramatically increases their power usage. Physical damage could permanently 
wipe characters, as we saw with Clementine’s drill-up-the-nose ‘lobotomy’. It 
hampers remote control. Handlers have to be physically present for any kind of 
diagnosis. Hosts have to be trained manually, on location, as we saw in 
flashbacks to their ‘beta’ phase.

Then there’s Maeve’s story line – her quest to leave the park and “infiltrate 
the mainland” (an instruction visible in her programming in one scene). If her 
intelligence were located in a server on the local network, then the whole 
concept of her ‘leaving’ would be a joke. Her body would deactivate the moment 
it went beyond the range of the last Wi-Fi router. That seems like a safer 
containment solution then planting explosives in a machine that people are 
going to shoot at.

It would make sense for reflex and automatic functions to be carried out 
locally – balance, locomotion and so on – but why do so much high-level 
processing on the hosts, rather than on network-attached servers? We know that 
this is software after all, not some kind of black box made of mystery goo. If 
you can edit their personalities with a futuristic iPad you ought to be able to 
run them on a server.

The only technical reason I can think of is bandwidth. At a minimum, hosts 
have binocular vision, stereo hearing, and a sense of touch. They also have 
some form of proprioception – a sense of the relatively positioning of their 
body parts. Hundreds of hosts in the same area, transmitting all that data, 
could cripple a Wi-Fi network; but then if Delos can build sentient machines 
they can probably knock up a better router.

Then we get into what I like to call the ‘bullshit philosophy’ arguments. The 
key phrase here is ‘embodied cognition’, the reasonable idea that human-like 
intelligence requires an intimate link with body, sensorimotor skills and 
environment – it needs a human experience, in other words.

That makes sense, but it’s irrelevant here because that link isn’t dependent 
on physical location. If your brain lived in a jar in a Luton warehouse, 
talking to your body via an ultra-fast connection and a router in your skull, 
it would be make no practical difference to your experience. At least not until 
you found out about it. Then you’d probably freak out a bit.

I can think of two other possibilities. The cynical one is ‘because the plot 
needs it’, but let’s leave that aside. A more interesting one is this: the 
hosts don’t meet the requirements because they were never meant to. Their 
creator always intended for them to gain sentience and self-determination. You 
can’t be independent without your own brain, so this concern would override all 
the other requirements.

Who knows. Jonathan Nolan has said that the show will explore more about the 
hosts capabilities, their nuts and bolts and the practicalities of operating 
them, in season two. It’ll be interesting to see if their design choices make 
sense. After all, we might want to make a park for real one day.
 