
Name: The Church of England.

Age: 482 years (approx).

Appearance: Elderly, dwindling.

Poor old Church of England. It must be hard being the least cool people on the 
planet. Don’t you believe it! That C of E gang, they’re cool all right. They’ve 
got aYouTube channel <https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCLecK8GovYoaYzIgyOElKZg>.

How many subscribers? 1,348.

I see. And they’re into fashion!

No, don’t, please … Oh yes! To mark London Fashion Week, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week> the C of E has made a 
film <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d9vE3mfVCrE> about Christians and God in 
the fashion industry.

They don’t have to do this. It’s already done. They’ve interviewed a vicar and 
two people who work in fashion.

Any of them famous models or designers? Not exactly. Simon Ward 
<http://www.britishfashioncouncil.co.uk/BFC-Contact-profile/Simon-Ward> used to 
work in Selfridges menswear department and has been a fashion industry 
administrator for the past 35 years.

Is he the enfant terrible of fashion industry administration? I don’t think so.

What does he say? “A lot of people would ask the question: ‘What does God make 
of this industry?’”

Is he sure? Maybe 1,348 people would. What’s Ward’s answer? “God is really 
interested.”

Is this a wind-up? Nope. “If we look at the beginning of the Bible, God 
created. He’s a god of creativity.”

Isn’t he the God of everything? And so also the God of un-creativity? Ah but: 
“What did He do first? He created the seasons. So I think the fact that fashion 
changes a lot reflects God’s heart.”

What? That’s not even true! He started with “the heavens and the earth” 
<https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Genesis+1>. Then it’s “light”. 
Then “day” and “night”… Stop quibbling. The other person interviewed is 
Chrissie Abbott <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d9vE3mfVCrE>.

And what does she do? Apart from organising a prayer group, that’s troublingly 
vague. “Working for international fashion/luxury brands, winning the loyalty of 
VIPs worldwide,” apparently. Anyway, she says: “Lots of people look at us and 
think: ‘How can God be in the fashion industry?’”

Again, I’m not sure that a lot of people either look at her or think that. But 
you can see what she’s driving at, right? Besides being cool, fashion is 
associated with sweatshops, anorexia, ego mania and conspicuous consumption. So 
maybe the industry does need better ethics.

Maybe. What does the video say God would think of the many gay people who work 
in fashion? Oh, um. It doesn’t say.

Do say: “We put the I CAN into Anglicanism!”

Don’t say: “Church of England, don’t ever change.”
 