
Helen Marten, considered one of the most exciting British artists of her 
generation, has won the inauguralHepworth prize for sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/20/hepworth-sculpture-prize-review-medalla-barlow-marten-claydon>
.

The award, presented at a ceremony in Wakefield on Thursday, comes in what is 
proving to be quite a year for the 31-year-old artist. Her show atthe 
Serpentine in London 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/helen-marten-drunk-brown-house>
 has attracted much critical praise and she is one of four artists in the 
running for this year’s Turner prize, to be announced next month.


It took judges about two hours to decide on the Hepworth winner. “Frankly I 
would have enjoyed having a lot longer because the debates and arguments were 
fascinating,” said Simon Wallis, director of the Hepworth Wakefield gallery and 
chair of the judging panel. He said there was something “fresh, exciting and 
new” about Marten’s work; she was an artist who was “one of the strongest and 
most singular voices working in British art today”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6d4ec81c0865ad08859d9c9b36412cae9681959%2F0_1016_3328_1997%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Hepworth%20prize%20for%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Hepworth%20prize%20for%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6d4ec81c0865ad08859d9c9b36412cae9681959%2F0_1016_3328_1997%2F3328.jpg>
 Sculptor Helen Marten pictured at the Carl Kostyál gallery, London. 
Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
He added: “We are seeing something that really does expand the boundaries of 
this protean art form that is sculpture.”

The artist, who was born in Macclesfield, was given her £30,000 prize by 
Christopher Bailey, chief executive of the fashion house Burberry. She was 
named winner from a shortlist that included Phyllida Barlow, David Medalla and 
Steven Claydon.

Accepting the prize, Marten said she thought art prizes were, to some extent, 
flawed and she would be sharing it with the other shortlisted artists. “Here’s 
to a furthering of communality and a platform for everyone,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f3a91ba878e2d07817c3a266c502038512f674c%2F159_246_1158_1447%2F1158.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Hepworth%20prize%20for%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Hepworth%20prize%20for%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f3a91ba878e2d07817c3a266c502038512f674c%2F159_246_1158_1447%2F1158.jpg>
 Artwork by Marten for her show Drunk Brown House, at the Serpentine gallery, 
London. Photograph: Annik Wetter/© Helen Marten/Courtesy of Sadie Coles HQ 
Marten is known for using a dizzying amount of materials in odd and unexpected 
ways. Her work is slippery and hard to follow but infectious. In her work on 
display at Wakefield she has used steel, wood, a toy snake, tennis ball, cast 
bronze, wicker, leather, shell, fired clay, dried vegetables, cigarettes, milk 
cartons and cherry stones. And that is barely the half of it.

Wallis said Marten’s work always became more than the sum of its parts and you 
could sense her enjoyment of materiality. “There is a lot of complexity. The 
sheer amount of material that she orchestrates is always amazing to me. It is a 
filigree. There are so many little moments of incident in the work and I like 
these curious unresolved narratives. It does place demands on the viewer. But 
all ambitious art does.”

Wallis said Marten’s work demanded that people spent time with it. “It has an 
immediate appeal but there is a mystery too ... not all is revealed and the 
greatest art always does have a kernel of mystery.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F461b0c0f477afe778f4e151a02e4148c0808e1df%2F134_137_1366_1708%2F1366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Hepworth%20prize%20for%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%20wins%20Hepworth%20prize%20for%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fhelen-marten-wins-hepworth-prize-for-sculpture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F461b0c0f477afe778f4e151a02e4148c0808e1df%2F134_137_1366_1708%2F1366.jpg>
 Knockoff Venus, 2015, by Marten (cropped). Photograph: Annik Wetter/© Helen 
Marten/Courtesy of Sadie Coles HQ 
The Wakefield gallery says it believes sculpture is the art form of the moment 
and hopes the prize, created to mark the gallery’s fifth birthday, will go some 
way to “demistifying” it. It aims to reward a sculptor, at any stage of their 
career and of any age, who has made asignificant contribution to the 
development of contemporary sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/06/hepworth-prize-barbara-wakefield->
.

Each of the shortlisted artists was asked to exhibit their work, some of it 
new, some of it not, but the prize – named afterBarbara Hepworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/barbara-hepworth>, one of Britain’s 
greatest sculptors who was born and brought up in Wakefield – was then judged 
on the artists’ wider work.

Bailey said he was proud to have been part of the ceremony. “I am so excited 
for not onlyHelen Marten <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/helen-marten>
 on winning the first ever Hepworth prize for sculpture, but also for the rest 
of the incredibly talented nominees. Their work on display at the Hepworth 
Wakefield is a shining example of their creativity and outstanding contribution 
to the development of contemporary sculpture in the UK.”

Judges for the prize, which will be given every two years, were Carolyn 
Christov-Bakargiev, director of the Turin museum; David Chipperfield, the 
architect; Sheikha Hoor al-Qasimi, president of the SharjahArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Foundation; Patrizia Sandretto 
Re Rebaudengo, a collector and patron; and the critic Alastair Sooke.

The exhibition of the work of the four artists will continue until 19 February.
 