
“Please let me know if there’s anything you can do for this woman,” says the 
voice in the Whatsapp recording. “She’s about to give birth any day, she’s 
living in a tent, and the conditions are awful.”

Driving through northern Greece on a recent December night, a pair of 
volunteers from the grassroots aid groupHelp Refugees 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/> have just received this SOS from another aid 
worker. It is 7.32pm, and a young Afghan refugee is about to go into labour at 
one of Greece’s worst refugee camps. It is a few dozen tents on a remote and 
windswept hillside – but the government and the UN refugee agency can’t move 
her anywhere better. Can Help Refugees?

Please help us help child refugees survive the winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
As the temperature drops to 3C, the group’s network whirs into action. A call 
goes out toFiloxenia <http://filoxenia-intl.org/>, a housing project funded by 
Help Refugees, to see if it can take in the pregnant woman. Behind the wheel in 
the car, Crystallynn Steed Brown says if the worst comes to the worst, she will 
put up the family at her flat in Thessaloniki. But can they get to the woman in 
time?

It is a typical night for Help Refugees, one of three beneficiaries of the 
Guardian’s Christmas charity appeal 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
. The group is one of the unsung heroes of the European refugee crisis, a young 
grassroots collective that has tried to create a more dynamic form of aid in 
Calais and Greece, where even seasoned aid workers admit their traditional 
models have failed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhelp-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F522387effa7a83926df327868d99f30389e223e9%2F161_1465_3240_4051%2F3240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help%20Refugees%3A%20'We%20will%20never%20abandon%20them'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhelp-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%20Refugees%3A%20%27We%20will%20never%20abandon%20them%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhelp-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F522387effa7a83926df327868d99f30389e223e9%2F161_1465_3240_4051%2F3240.jpg>
 Yamamah Matlaq with her newborn cousin in the Oreokastro refugee camp near 
Thessaloniki. Photograph: Alice Aedy 
“Some of the bigger NGOs are starting to realise how they can utilise us 
because of our flexibility,” says Brown, as she drives through the night. “The 
bigger the organisation, the more they get caught up in the bureaucracy – and 
so they often reach out to us to see if there’s anything we can do.”

Help Refugees was founded in the late summer of 2015, after a group of friends 
decided to send a van of donations to Calais; it soon became one of the main 
suppliers of aid to northern France. With Calais now disbanded, the charity’s 
main focus has shifted to Greece, where about 50,000 refugees – 40% of them 
children – have been stranded insqualid and degrading camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/prisoners-of-europe-the-everyday-humiliation-of-refugees-stuck-in-greece-migration>
 since a shift in European migration policy in March.

The EU, major NGOs and the Greek government have collectively failed to 
provide adequate conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/prisoners-of-europe-the-everyday-humiliation-of-refugees-stuck-in-greece-migration>
. Help Refugees is attempting to fill in the gaps, funding more than 20 
grassroots groups that are working to alleviate the situation.

Through its partners, Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> provides food, infant care, safe 
spaces, building materials, building work and water infrastructure in dozens of 
camps; it funds rescue boats at sea; and organises housing for particularly 
vulnerable refugees.

And it’s this that sends Brown hurtling in her Peugeot hatchback through 
Thessaloniki. By now, another aid worker has managed to bring the pregnant 
Afghan to a local hospital, and her son, Ali, has become the world’s youngest 
refugee. But if Help Refugees can’t intervene in time, there is a danger that 
both mother and child will be out in the snow again within a few days.

Brown arrives after visiting hours are over, and is initially denied entry. 
But after grasping the desperate nature of the situation, the nurses relent, 
and Brown calmly explains to the mother what Help Refugees can do for her. “We 
will find you a place,” she says through a translator, also called Ali. “And if 
we can’t find you a place, you’ll sleep in my house.”

Brown leaves the hospital relieved to have made contact. But back in the car, 
her mood is more subdued. “I try not to be too emotional in this work,” says 
Brown, a former ambulance worker from Idaho. “But it’s pretty messed up when 
you stop and think that I just held a brand new baby in my arms. And if we 
didn’t step in and do something about it, that baby is supposed to move back 
into a tent in two days in freezing conditions.”

From war in Syria to a Turkish sweatshop for child refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/war-to-sweatshop-for-child-refugees>
A visit to Oreokastro, a camp on the other side of Thessaloniki, hints at how 
dismal that would be. After passing the spot where Brown treated a refugee who 
tried to kill himself this summer, and another where a car recently ran over a 
Syrian child and his mother, we meet a Syrian father cradling his 10-day-old 
daughter. In the depths of winter, the newborn has been sent to live in a tent 
at this former cigarette factory. There is no electricity, and therefore no 
heating. A warmer tent has been erected for young mothers, but refugees say it 
has never been opened.

All of which leaves the young father fearing for his daughter. “Children are 
dying from the cold,” says Abdulhalim al-Matlaq, a builder who fled the advance 
of Isis in Deir ez-Zor, eastern Syria. “There’s no heating. No money. It’s just 
garbage.”

Matlaq and his extended family escaped Deir ez-Zor together last winter, and 
all 42 shared the same inflatable boat to Greece in February. They now occupy 
one long row of tents at Oreokastro, wondering if they will ever get to leave. 
They hoped to reach Germany, but the humanitarian corridor that once funnelled 
hundreds of thousands of Syrians through the Balkansclosed in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/balkans-refugee-route-closed-say-european-leaders>
. And in the months since, they have not been granted asylum elsewhere in 
Europe, due tothe failure of the EU relocation scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/refugees-eu-resettles-tiny-number-pledged-target-four-months>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fkids-refugees-questions-whats-it-like-to-have-no-home-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%2C%20refugees%2C%20questions%3A%20'What%20is%20it%20like%20to%20have%20no%20home%3F'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fkids-refugees-questions-whats-it-like-to-have-no-home-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%2C%20refugees%2C%20questions%3A%20%27What%20is%20it%20like%20to%20have%20no%20home%3F%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fkids-refugees-questions-whats-it-like-to-have-no-home-video&media=>
Kids, refugees, questions: ‘What is it like to have no home?’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/dec/09/kids-refugees-questions-whats-it-like-to-have-no-home-video>
This limbo has been particularly traumatic for their children, who are among 
hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees with no access to school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/war-to-sweatshop-for-child-refugees>
 across Europe and the Middle East. Yamamah, Matlaq’s cheery 11-year-old niece, 
says the camp is too dangerous for her siblings to visit the toilet alone at 
night. To pass the time, they watch YouTube videos on her father’s phone until 
they get tired.

“We’re wasting our lives,” says Yamamah. Her father, minibus driver 
Abdulrazzaq, agrees: “It’s not even limbo, it’s five times worse than limbo. 
We’ve been here for 10 months, and it’s all a mystery. We don’t know if we’re 
going to another country, if our kids are going to get to study again, or have 
a future.”

His brother Abdulhalim has more basic concerns for his own child; he fears the 
camp is simply too cold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhelp-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7051e937370de372dc5d667c7792daaa65addf5f%2F0_113_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help%20Refugees%3A%20'We%20will%20never%20abandon%20them'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhelp-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%20Refugees%3A%20%27We%20will%20never%20abandon%20them%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhelp-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7051e937370de372dc5d667c7792daaa65addf5f%2F0_113_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Batul, four, Yamamah, 11, and Rimas Matlaq, three, watch videos on their 
father’s phone in the Oreokastro camp. Photograph: Alice Aedy 
It is this kind of challenge that Help Refugees is trying to alleviate where 
it can. A few miles away, in another gloomy former warehouse, the group 
provides crucial funding toNurture Project International (NPI) 
<http://nurtureprojectinternational.org/>, a small charity that gives pre- and 
post-natal support to Kurdish mothers at the Kalochori camp.


When we arrive, one nurse is teaching a Kurdish mother to wash her baby. A 
second nurse helps a 17-year-old refugee send breast milk to her premature 
daughter, who is still in hospital.

“I never thought I’d have my first child in a place like this – it’s too cold 
here for a baby,” says Sonya, the young mother. “If NPI weren’t here, I’d be in 
a really bad situation.”

The nurse, or international board certified lactation consultant, beams with 
affection. But in private, the tragedy of the situation looms larger. The 
conditions simply do not conform to western standards, says Fiona Lang-Sharpe. 
“You let go of many of the things that you know or you’ve learned, because you 
can’t go and buy things that you have at home,” she says, turning slightly 
emotional at the thought. “We will not leave them and we will not abandon them.”

'Prisoners of Europe': the everyday humiliation of refugees stuck in Greece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/prisoners-of-europe-the-everyday-humiliation-of-refugees-stuck-in-greece-migration>
Ultimately, Help Refugees doesn’t just want to make the camps better, it wants 
refugees to leave the camps entirely. A glimpse of this vision can be found at 
a block of flats in another remote suburb of Thessaloniki. Most of the 
buildings here were never inhabited, having been built when the financial 
crisis first hitGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> in 2008. But 
one of them has just been occupied by Filoxenia to provide refugees with a warm 
flat to live in.

Run by Samantha and Theo Nelson, former car dealers from Totnes, Devon, the 
building houses eight families in their own flats, and will soon welcome two 
more. After being cooped up in camps for months, the 54 residents can finally 
live in a greater degree of dignity.

“There’s quiet here, there’s privacy, and this is your house,” says Bozan Ibo, 
a Syrian Kurd whose family was the first to move into Filoxenia six weeks ago. 
“You have your own key. It’s a normal life like it was in Syria.” His wife, 
Mezgin, smiles in agreement. They have a fruit bowl on the kitchen table, and a 
washing machine – two luxuries they haven’t experienced for months.

“When I came here, I don’t know how to describe how I felt,” says Mezgin. 
“When I think about it I almost cry!”

Mezgin thanks the Nelsons, who in turn thank Help Refugees for making the 
project happen.

“Help Refugees helps with everything really,” says Samantha Nelson. “There’s 
their financial support, and also their support in general. They really 
understand what we’re trying to do.”

• Click here to donate to our appeal 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=editorial>
 