 The Belgian cyclist Henri "Rik" Van Steenbergen, who has died aged 78, won 
1,647 races, including the world road race championship three times (1949, 
1956, 1957) - a feat equalled but never bettered - and eight of cycling's 
single-day Classics. He was the sport's most prolific winner in volume, if not 
in quality, for he saw the great races primarily as a means of enhancing his 
appearance fee for lesser events, particularly indoor track meetings, which 
accounted for over 1,300 of his wins. "A fabulous cyclist with the soul of a 
mercenary," said one contemporary.
The tall, muscular Van Steenbergen turned up at the better events only when he 
felt his appearance fee was falling. One such occasion produced one of the 
finest single-day Classic victories ever, his epic duel with the Italian, 
Fausto Coppi, the greatest cyclist of the 1950s, over the cobbled roads of the 
"hell of the north" in the Paris-Roubaix of 1952. Coppi tried time and again to 
shake off "Rik I", who won the finish sprint.

Van Steenbergen's reign in the post-war years was the start of a 
quarter-century when Belgium ruled professional cycling, culminating in the 
Eddy Merckx era. Born in Arendonk, he began racing during the second world war, 
when his car was requisitioned by the Belgian army, and would take advantage of 
racing trips to Switzerland to smuggle back watches to sell on the black market.

During the post-war years, Flemish cycling produced a generation of legendary 
hardmen, and Van Steenbergen was "the typical cold Fleming, not saying much, 
with a cloud of boredom on his forehard," said Raphael Geminiani, a fellow 
cyclist. "He wandered the world with his bars and his saddle, ready to race 
anywhere against anyone."

These were the days when professional cyclists were in perpetual motion 
between one racing contract and another, and this at a time with few motorways 
and limited air travel. In one 48-hour spell in 1957, Van Steenbergen raced in 
the Belgian Congo, Copenhagen, Paris and Liege, winning all four events. It was 
calculated that he travelled 2m kilometres during his career, and only a 
quarter of these were on his bike.

Van Steenbergen stripped his sport to the basics. A pair of socks would last a 
whole season. When they completely wore out, he wore none. His jerseys were 
frayed from constant washing. "At any race he would want to know the start 
time, the address of a restaurant, the gear to use, and how soon he would be 
paid. For the rest, jokes and civilities, no time was wasted," wrote the French 
journalist Jean Bobet. The volume of racing and travelling meant that Rik saw 
doping as a necessary evil. "The stars had to look fresh in every race, and 
they couldn't do it without stimulants," he said. There were also allegations 
about his first world title, which he probably bought.

At the age of 33, Rik I was piqued into one last great win in spring 1958 
after he heard a Belgian radio station refer to the country's new star Rik Van 
Looy - inevitably known as "Rik II" - as "the best in the world." He trained 
1,000 kilometres in a single week, prompting his regular training partner to 
lock himself in his bedroom and claim he had a cold, and duly won the hilly 
Fleche Wallonne event through the Ardennes to prove that he was not to be 
written off.

Ironically, for a man who had spent his life chasing one contract after 
another around the world, he gambled away his winnings, lost more money in a 
divorce, came close to prison for smuggling a suspect package over the Dutch 
border, and ended his life in relative poverty.

Â· Henri (Rik) Van Steenbergen, cyclist, born September 9 1924; died May 15 2003
 