
The winner of the inaugural Hepworth prize for sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/20/hepworth-sculpture-prize-review-medalla-barlow-marten-claydon>
 has pledged to share the £30,000 award with her fellow nominees.

Helen Marten, who is also nominated for December’s Turner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/12/turner-prize-shortlist-anthea-hamilton-michael-dean-helen-marten-josephine-pryde>
, picked up the biennial award on Thursday at the Hepworth Wakefield gallery, 
where she told guests about her plan to split it with thePhyllida Barlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/28/phyllida-barlow-artist-success-2017-venice-biennale>
,Steven Claydon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/feb/23/artist-of-week-steven-claydon>
 and David Medalla.

She then told BBC Radio 4’s Front Row 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b08296jx>: “To a certain extent I believe, as 
I said on stage, in the light of the world’s ever lengthening political shadow, 
that the art world has a responsibility, if not to suggest a provisional means 
forward, then at least show an egalitarian platform of democracy. I believe the 
hierarchical position of art prizes today is, to a certain extent, flawed.

 “I’m flattered to be there anyway and I would be very happy if they accept to 
share the prize amongst the four of us.”

While dividing the prize money means Marten would get £7,500, she said 
receiving a significantly smaller sum was not something she was concerned about 
– despite the high costs of creating art shows. “I’m lucky enough to be here 
and to be given a visible and audible platform to be doing what I’m doing,” she 
said, “and the fact that I’m supported by an enormously generous infrastructure 
of other artists, critics, curators, galleries, is enough for me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhepworth-sculpture-prize-winner-helen-marten-share-30000-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe09148362549bae88c37a211726084dcad161e2d%2F0_193_2716_1630%2F2716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hepworth%20sculpture%20prize%20winner%20vows%20to%20share%20%C2%A330%2C000%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhepworth-sculpture-prize-winner-helen-marten-share-30000-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hepworth%20sculpture%20prize%20winner%20vows%20to%20share%20%C2%A330%2C000%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhepworth-sculpture-prize-winner-helen-marten-share-30000-award%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe09148362549bae88c37a211726084dcad161e2d%2F0_193_2716_1630%2F2716.jpg>
 Helen Marten with her artwork at the Hepworth Wakefield gallery. Photograph: 
Anthony Devlin/PA 
The organisers of the Hepworth prize said it was “entirely up to Marten” how 
she used the prize money. “We support her decision to split it between the 
artists and think it a gracious and generous suggestion,” they added.

The art critic Alastair Sooke, who was one of the judges of the prize, said 
Marten won because the judges felt that “inHelen Marten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/helen-marten>, we have one of the 
most exciting talents that’s emerged in recent years within British art … what 
I love about Helen’s work is it has a tremendous coherence, she manages to 
assimilate all these different unusual objects, so many of them, almost 
reflecting our up and down digital world.”

Marten, 31, who is originally from Macclesfield in Cheshire, studied at the 
Ruskin School of FineArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, 
University of London and at Central Saint Martins in London.

The award comes in what is proving to be a successful year for the artist, who 
won critical praise for her show atthe Serpentine in London 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/helen-marten-drunk-brown-house>
. Other recent exhibitions include 2014’s Parrot Problems at the Fridericianum 
in Kassel, Germany, and Plank Salad at the Chisenhale gallery in London in 2012.

Turner prize 2016; Helen Marten/Marc Camille Chaimowicz – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/02/turner-prize-2016-tate-review-helen-marten-camille-chaimowicz-serpentine>
Her sculptures feature a large amount of materials used in odd and unexpected 
ways. Pieces on display at the Hepworth include steel, wood, a toy snake, 
tennis ball, cast bronze, wicker, leather, shell, fired clay, dried vegetables, 
cigarettes, milk cartons and cherry stones.

It took the judges about two hours to pick a winner. Simon Wallis, the 
gallery’s director and chair of the judging panel, said: “Frankly I would have 
enjoyed having a lot longer because the debates and arguments were 
fascinating.” He said there was something “fresh, exciting and new” about 
Marten’s work; she was an artist who was “one of the strongest and most 
singular voices working in British art today”.

He added: “We are seeing something that really does expand the boundaries of 
this protean art form that is sculpture.”

 The Hepworth prize was set up to recognise a UK-based artist of any age and 
at any stage in their career who has made a significant contribution to the 
development of contemporary sculpture. It was created to celebrate the 
gallery’s fifth anniversary and is named after Barbara Hepworth, who was born 
and brought up in Wakefield, West Yorkshire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhepworth-sculpture-prize-winner-helen-marten-share-30000-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd21fd14c9c856bad505f9575001a789009df0715%2F0_132_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hepworth%20sculpture%20prize%20winner%20vows%20to%20share%20%C2%A330%2C000%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhepworth-sculpture-prize-winner-helen-marten-share-30000-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hepworth%20sculpture%20prize%20winner%20vows%20to%20share%20%C2%A330%2C000%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhepworth-sculpture-prize-winner-helen-marten-share-30000-award%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd21fd14c9c856bad505f9575001a789009df0715%2F0_132_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Bluebutter Idles, 2014, by Helen Marten. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for 
the Guardian 
Marten’s prize was presented by Christopher Bailey, the chief creative and 
chief executive officer of fashion brand Burberry, who said he was proud to 
have been part of the ceremony. “I am so excited for not only Helen Marten on 
winning the first ever Hepworth prize for sculpture, but also for the rest of 
the incredibly talented nominees. Their work on display at theHepworth Wakefield
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hepworth-wakefield> is a shining 
example of their creativity and outstanding contribution to the development of 
contemporary sculpture in the UK.”

 In sharing her prize, Marten follows in the footsteps of the American artist 
Theaster Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/03/theaster-gates-artist-chicago-dorchester-projects>
, who last year pledged to share the £40,000 Artes Mundi prize with his nine 
fellow nominees.

Earlier this week, the human rights lawyer Philippe Sands, who won the Baillie 
Gifford prize for nonfiction,said he would donate his £30,000 prize money to a 
refugee charity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/philippe-sands-wins-2016-baillie-gifford-prize-for-nonfiction-east-west-street>
. “Individuals make a difference at difficult times, and even in the face of 
adversity it is possible to make a mark … [these ideas] are under threat by the 
government in this country, they will be under threat from the next government 
in the United States and the book is a salutary reminder we must take 
absolutely nothing for granted,” Sands said in his acceptance speech.
 