
If style apologists have learned anything in 2015 it is that if it didn’t 
happen on Instagram, then it didn’t happen at all. Consequently, if you fail to 
translate yourChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
preparations through a Lark filter, then you may as well turn off the fairy 
lights and recycle your wrapping paper right now. You will have failed. Welcome 
to your style guide to the season, with any unphotogenic joy ruthlessly cropped 
out.
 Gift-wrapping au naturel 
How to pose in photos during Christmas party season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/08/how-to-pose-in-photos-during-christmas-party-season>
Insta-prep: it’s literally everything

The whole point of Instagram is that preparation – and the documentation of 
preparation – is everything. Literally everything. Actually enjoying the doing 
of something has become irrelevant. If it doesn’t look good in a grid shape, 
don’t do it. This Christmas, the look is unequivocally handmade and crafty, but 
in aKinfolk <http://www.kinfolk.com/>-inspired, disciplined and wholesome way. 
#Botchedjob will not do. Lol is for losers. Start with the colour scheme. Red, 
gold and green is too clashing (unless your Christmas is black and white 
Insta-ed in which case: go ahead, fine). Instead, the dream colourway is 
real-fir green, undyed white and pine-cone brown. Bit of restrained gold. The 
odd pop of red is permissible, but that’s where it ends. Strings of popcorn are 
winning the war over tinsel this year. (Yes, people are actually popping corn 
then threading it on to actual fishing wire in a bid for superiority over those 
who have bought tinsel from Tesco). Colourful paperchains have lost out to 
posts of real fir-tree garlands draped over doorways and atop mantlepieces, 
complete with roaring fire and gilt mirrors. Come the 24th, you will need to 
add a handful of subtly mismatched stockings, Von Trapp-style, above the 
fireplace.
 Craft work courtesy of Kinfolk. 
The gingerbread house is the new door wreath

Last year, you will recall that Instagram went crazy for a chunky, natural but 
highly mannered door wreath. You should still do that, but know that the likes 
this year are coming from ahomemade gingerbread house 
<https://www.instagram.com/clevergretel_kalenderhaus/>. Look up Kourtney 
Kardashian’s feed for how not to do it 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/-9Y_s1k1lK/?taken-by=kourtneykardash>. It should 
be less Hollywood double-fronted stucco mansion, more Maine-meets-Bavarian 
cabin. Physical Christmas cards aren’t a thing this year. The way to do it is 
to post a picture of one homemade card created by your children using potato 
prints or similar. Maximum social media cut-through, without using a single 
stamp. Presents, sorry gifts, should be wrapped in plain paper with some 
natural whimsy attached – seasonal foliage for the purists, pom-poms for the 
more fashiony wrapper. Forget twine at your peril. The rise of the 
#adventcalendar is the important December trend to know about. It should be 
homemade and innovative, eg 24 toile bags containing home-baked angel biscuits 
or a series of festive images along the lines ofBusy Phillip’s elves tableau 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/-1gk_5QPt5/?taken-by=busyphilipps>. It’s a fine 
line between charm and irritation, but if you’ve read this far you’ll know how 
addictive the hate-scroll can be.
 The likes are coming from a gingerbread house. 
The Christmas tree post: arty, conceptual and restrained

The tree you Instagram in public should be arty and conceptual. In London, 
Damien Hirst’s pill-bottle baubles outside the Connaught Hotel 
<http://www.damienhirst.com/news/2015/connaught-christmas-tree> or Disney’s 
cuddly teddy tree at St Pancras station <http://stpancras.com/news> are IG 
bankers. The tree you post from your house should incorporate all the crafty 
and homespun elements outlined above. Of course, if you really want to bleed 
the instantaneity out of the whole shebang and garner extra IG mileage, post 
pictures of your children wearing matching pyjamas decorating the tree, editing 
out their naive proportional mistakes and using the noir filter.

Your social life: six parts candlelit joy, one part composed debauchery

The runup to Christmas offers a unique Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> opportunity: the ability to 
showcase a cosy home existence while also demonstrating the ceaseless merriment 
of your still-banging social life.

For the optimum balance, pictures of nights out should be peppered throughout 
the month with discipline. Remember, the kind of fun that works on Instagram is 
subtle and controlled – hair remains in place, drinking is moderate, there are 
absolutely no photographs of the bus home or the end-of-night kebab. Your life 
is fabulous, yes, but absolutely not “U OK Hun?” reckless – think six parts 
candlelit joy to one part subtle and intriguing suggestion of entirely composed 
debauchery.

#toiletselfie is the new #squadgoals

Festive activities are a must – but ice skating is over. It’s hard enough to 
get a decent selfie with your feet firmly on the ground, let alone whizzing 
around under floodlights. Instead, carol singing offers a wholesome take on 
#squadgoals and the possibility for video footage. Additional humblebrag points 
if you are a terrible singer, but post the evidence anyway. What’s actually 
important, let’s face it, is how you look, and the face shape created by 
singing the opening bars of Oh Come All Ye Faithful is as effective asa fish 
gape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/07/happy-birthday-instagram-the-five-selfie-faces-kim-kardashian>
 for creating cheekbones.

The work Christmas party is crucial. For many social media pros, this is the 
only time that actually having a job will be alluded to all year. The key 
takeaway for your followers should be just how much you love your colleagues. 
Last year’s Insta-hit – an #aboutlastnight morning-after photograph featuring 
attractive, squiffy-looking revellers, their limbs scattered around the frame 
in the manner of the front-row crowd at aSaint Laurent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/saint-laurent> show – has been usurped by 
the more “real” boisterous #toiletselfie. As in, we just bumped into each 
other. In a loo! Ha ha ha! You couldn’t make it up.
 The sprout tree is this year’s most Instagrammable vegetable. 
The dinner party: sloe gin, name tags and napkins

Clearly, there is no point hosting a party yourself unless it is a social 
media sensation. In its earnest guide to ensuring yours delivers on this front, 
US Vogue recommends orchestrating a moment of surprise: “Maybe a second-line 
band escorts your guests from cocktails to dinner, or a troupe of kids from the 
local dance studio arrives to get everyone moving on the dance floor,”it urges 
<http://www.vogue.com/13375433/instagram-worthy-holiday-party-rules-bronson-van-wyck/>
. It really is that easy.

If your bash is a dinner party, remember that the table decorations provide 
mileage. Candles are essential – the 2015 ideal is more monastery than 
ground-floor department store: long, tapered and skinny. Each place should be 
marked with a hessian napkin, overlaid with a sprig of deep purple berries: 
festive but less predictable than holly. Name tags are always huge on 
Instagram, giving guests an opportunity to post yet another photograph about 
themselves. The drink to favour is sloe gin – clarify that you have been 
casually fermenting it at home for months – while food should include a sprout 
tree (this year’s most Instagrammable vegetable) and uncut gourds inexplicably 
scattered all over the table.
 Winter warmers on Instagram. 
The look: wholesome, faux casual, post-naff

What to wear? In a fashion occurrence that feels about as expected as 
Leicester being top of the league, Christmas jumpers are acceptable again, 
three or four years after they reached peak naff. You can thank the perennially 
chic Sofia Coppola whorecently wore one on the red carpet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/03/sofia-coppola-about-christmas-jumpers-stylewatch>
, styled down with jeans and artfully messy hair. Indeed, faux-casual is the 
way to go all season: Christmas Day means pyjamas, but absolutely not the ones 
you wear in bed (the alpha choice is a silky top by Olivia von Halle or Three 
Graces London – very new-era Gucci). Your look for the wholesome Boxing Day 
walk is crucial, too – think of it as the epilogue to your festive Instagram 
narrative. TrySorrel snow boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/20/snow-business-how-weather-proof-boots-went-high-fashion>
, a Uniqlo padded jacket and beanie with hair poking out to soften and halo the 
face. Accessorise with a dog and some children – your own or borrowed – which 
are as essential to this final outing as 4G.
 