
Christmas is a time of tradition for many families, but the word “tradition” 
can sometimes feel synonymous with routine and repetition, like a month spent 
listening to the chorus of Paul McCartney’s Wonderful Christmastime. This is 
true of movies, too. There are holiday standards old and new, from It’s a 
Wonderful Life to Home Alone to Love Actually, andharder-edged alternatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/12/christmas-film-special-2016-peter-bradshaw>
 for when the kids are in bed, such as Die Hard orBad Santa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/bad-santa-2-review-same-old-dirty-tricks>
. But returning to the same standards year after year leaves a lot of gems 
sitting in the snow, especially for more adventurous viewers who might be on 
the lookout for lesser-known Christmas fare, not all of the feel-good variety. 
For them, here are 10 titles ranging from extreme horror to Hollywood flops to 
high art to blink-or-you’ll-miss-it indie fare from the US and abroad.

It’s a Wonderful Life: my most overrated Christmas film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/dec/22/most-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life>
Black Christmas
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhXzhNZhPIbI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhXzhNZhPIbI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhXzhNZhPIbI&media=>
Forget the 2006 remake, one of the most shameful attempts to revive a past 
horror classic. Bob Clark’s original is the pinnacle of Canadian horror, a 
proto-slasher movie about a serial murderer making his way through a sorority 
house on Christmas Eve. BlackChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> originated the 
first-person killer-cam that was popularized by Halloween four years later, but 
it’s equally memorable for its sophistication and psychological depth. Among 
its many virtues is an early Margot Kidder performance as a hard-drinking queen 
bee who tries the vanquish the threat with boozy sarcasm.

The Silent Partner
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS5ipcHbgOk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS5ipcHbgOk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzS5ipcHbgOk&media=>
Bad Santa was not the first movie to conceive of a malevolent mall Santa 
pulling off a lucrative heist – and it’s not the nastiest, either. That 
distinction belongs to a psychopathic Christopher Plummer in The Silent 
Partner, a Canadian thriller that starts with Plummer casing a bank branch in a 
Santa costume and continues with instances of blackmail, decapitation, and 
Norman Bates-style cross-dressing. It’s all in service of a gripping 
cat-and-mouse game between Plummer and Elliott Gould as a mild-mannered teller 
who anticipates the robbery and tucks away $50,000 for himself.

The Ref 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtyqFgpmoiFo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtyqFgpmoiFo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtyqFgpmoiFo&media=>
Touchstone Pictures released Ted Demme’s enthusiastically vulgar black comedy 
in the spring to keep from spiking the eggnog, but the Christmas-in-Connecticut 
setting wraps a shiny red bow on the acrimony. A throwback of sorts to classic 
screwball comedies and home invasion thrillers like The Desperate Hours, The 
Ref casts Denis Leary as a thief who holes up with a couple (Kevin Spacey and 
Judy Davis) in the middle of a bitter marital dispute. As their bickering turns 
the crook into a counselor, the film turns into a verbal pie fight with Leary – 
very much on brand as the exasperated crank – catching it from both sides.

The Ice Harvest 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dul5U0ow-_TY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dul5U0ow-_TY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dul5U0ow-_TY&media=>
“Only morons are nice on Christmas,” scowls Billy Bob Thornton in this 
noir-tinged hybrid of a heist thriller and a black comedy, which plays like a 
seasonal twist on the heartland morality of Fargo. Thornton and John Cusack 
play a crooked businessman and a lawyer, respectively, who team up to steal $2m 
from their mob boss (Oliver Platt) on Christmas Eve, but cannot get out of 
Wichita due to the ice-covered roads. Director Harold Ramis (Groundhog Day), 
along with ace screenwriters Richard Russo and Robert Benton, treat the holiday 
with a certain dark irreverence, but they also see the greed and mayhem as a 
needless violation of the Christmas spirit.

Kiss Kiss Bang Bang 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__PnD1HWXSo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__PnD1HWXSo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__PnD1HWXSo&media=>
Christmas in LA is an auteur stamp for Shane Black, who has been setting films 
during the holiday season since his breakthrough script for Lethal Weapon. Jack 
Frost never nips the sunny-and-75 sameness of Black’s Hollywood and the 
backdrop suits the scuzzy ironies that pepper his work, especially Kiss Kiss 
Bang Bang, his directorial debut. Robert Downey Jr plays a petty thief who gets 
whisked into a fake acting career and an unlikely method partnership with a 
private investigator (Val Kilmer), but none of it would have happened if he 
hadn’t tried to rob a toy store on Christmas first. Or encountered a childhood 
crush (Michelle Monaghan) in a devastating Santa suit.

Inside 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5FKVN4JxvlE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5FKVN4JxvlE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5FKVN4JxvlE&media=>
This extreme French horror movie about a predatory stranger (Béatrice Dalle) 
trying to snatch a soon-to-be-born child from its expectant mother (Alysson 
Paradis) could have been set at any time of year. But writer and co-director 
Alexandre Bustillo and co-director Julien Maury stage the action on Christmas 
Eve for practical and thematic reasons: there are fewer cops and neighbors 
around to help the victim, for one, but there are also the added stakes of a 
lonely, widowed woman clinging to the only family she has left. For her and her 
baby to see this and many Christmas mornings to come, they have to survive the 
night.

A Christmas Tale
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1yPhab421Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1yPhab421Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1yPhab421Q&media=>
It’s Christmastime and a mother (Catherine Deneuve) needs a bone marrow 
transplant. The heartwarming ending writes itself, like the third-act treacle 
found in many holiday dramas, but Arnaud Desplechin’s A Christmas Tale is much 
bigger, messier, and pricklier than its premise suggests. Over 150 minutes, 
Desplechin gathers a sprawling family under one roof and watches as their 
rivalries and conflicts pop off in minor detonations, all while keeping an eye 
on a complex family dynamic. Yet, at bottom, A Christmas Tale is every bit as 
uplifting as its sentimental counterparts: Desplechin and his superb cast – 
including Mathieu Amalric, Anne Consigny, Melvil Poupaud, and Emmanuelle Devos 
– argue for the strength of contentious families. They fight because they care.

Rare Exports: A Christmas Tale 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPwT3wtUCv9Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPwT3wtUCv9Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPwT3wtUCv9Y&media=>
Santa has always been interested in finding out who’s naughty and nice, but in 
this thoroughly bizarre fantasy-horror-action-comedy from Finland, only the 
naughty side draws his interest. When a team of researchers excavate a dark 
Christmas secret from deep within the Korvatunturi mountain range, it unleashes 
what could gently be referred to as Old Testament Santa. That leaves local 
residents to improvise a fight against this evil entity and the hordes of old, 
naked, wispy-bearded “elves” who serve as its faithful, head-lopping guardians.

Christmas, Again 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQDkwOp3X0g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQDkwOp3X0g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQDkwOp3X0g&media=>
Photographed in beautifully textured 16mm, this ultra-low-budget indie, from 
first-time director Charles Poekel, follows a Brooklyn Christmas tree salesman 
(Kentucker Audley) as he grinds out the night shift in a 24-7 corner operation. 
There’s drama in his world – the heartbreak of a relationship that ended after 
the previous season, a connection with a young woman he finds passed out on a 
park bench, the threat of losing money if he doesn’t sell enough trees – but 
Christmas, Again subtly underplays all of it, creating a lovely, perfectly 
proportioned slice of life.

Tangerine 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvqsJq5qK3jE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvqsJq5qK3jE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvqsJq5qK3jE&media=>
As befits Christmas in LA, there aren’t many overt signs of yuletide cheer on 
the Sunset Strip in Tangerine, which follows two transgender prostitutes 
(Kitana Kiki Rodriguez and Mya Taylor) across the city as one of them tracks 
down her unfaithful boyfriend/pimp. But Sean Baker’s electrifying low-budget 
feature, shot entirely on iPhones, turns Christmas into a poignant marker of 
their disconnection from family and society at large. Some drama involving a 
frequent client reveals the lie of a “straight” family during Christmas dinner, 
but mostly, Tangerine is about a holiday lived on the margins and the tenuous 
refuge of friendship.
 