
You wrote the other week about how sorry you feel for men when it comes to 
fashion. But what about women? In what areas do they have it worse?

Carl, by email

Yes, what about the women? Enough of this pity party for you men, who only get 
to enjoy themselves with watches and trainers (sadface emoji), let’s get back 
to the ladies. Now, the obvious answer to the question about where women lose 
when it comes to fashion is high heels. High heels are – as I have frequently 
stated in this column – clearly the invention of the misogynistic devil. And to 
all of you high-heeled keyboard warriors poised to explain to me that heels 
give you HEIGHT and this makes you feel STRONG and SEXY and YEAH THIRD-WAVE 
FEMINISM, I say this to you: you’re wrong. There is nothing strong and sexy 
about shoes that hobble you.

I realise that, contrary to what the angry people on Twitter would have you 
believe, most things in this world are subjective and arguments generally have 
some elements of rectitude on both sides. But I’m afraid that, when it comes to 
high-heel defenders, I’m right, you’re wrong and that’s all there is to say. 
Oh, you want more? OK, how about this:American poet Mary Karr wrote, in last 
week’s issue of the New Yorker, 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/05/16/down-with-high-heels> about how 
high heels should “fade from consciousness along with foot-binding and 
rib-removal.” That’s right, a poet in the New Yorker: you can’t get more 
highbrow than that. Case, as they used to say on LA Law, closed.

But given that I don’t really wear high heels, I don’t find them too much of a 
drag on my life. No, the worst thing about being a woman in my personal 
experience, if we’re talking about fashion and beauty issues, is hair.

I honestly believe I could have come up with a solution to peace in the Middle 
East in the amount of time I’ve spent thinking about my goddamn hair: growing 
it, thickening it, straightening it, curling it, removing it, waxing it, 
highlighting it, lasering it, threading it, shaving it. Name a verb and I’ve 
almost certainly done it to some hair somewhere on my body.

I sometimes fantasise about doing crop rotation on my body – wouldn’t that 
make so much sense? Forget about extensions and blow-dries, I could just glue 
all the hair I shave, wax and thread off the rest of me on to my scalp. Sadly, 
going around with pubic hair stuck on your head does not seem to be the look 
this season, so my grand plan will have to wait.

The worst thing about this is, of course, I do it to myself. This is my 
choice: I don’t have to kowtow to these stupid beauty standards, just as I 
don’t pay attention to high heels: I know, OK? I know. And yet, for some 
reason, this is my feminism Waterloo. Oh, sometimes it’s hard to be a woman, 
and that time is when you realise that every other Saturday for the rest of 
your life will be spent schlepping from one hair appointment to the next.

***

Is the British press evil?

Michael, by email

All of it? No. Some of it? Honestly, I think the time has passed since the 
British press could afford to be full-on evil. Being evil costs money, you 
know. Why do you think villains in movies are always billionaires?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhigh-heels-hairdos-womens-fashion-tyrannies-sheridan-smith-british-press%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365a7b8ed4f2f424410765d281752156db063d00%2F0_159_4388_2633%2F4388.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20heels%20and%20hairdos%3A%20women%E2%80%99s%20worst%20fashion%20tyrannies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhigh-heels-hairdos-womens-fashion-tyrannies-sheridan-smith-british-press%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High%20heels%20and%20hairdos%3A%20women%E2%80%99s%20worst%20fashion%20tyrannies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhigh-heels-hairdos-womens-fashion-tyrannies-sheridan-smith-british-press%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365a7b8ed4f2f424410765d281752156db063d00%2F0_159_4388_2633%2F4388.jpg>
 Sheridan Smith in Funny Girl. Photograph: Marc Brenner 
But let us look at the strange case of Sheridan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sheridan-smith>. Smith is a hugely 
talented actress – one of the best this country has – and iscurrently starring 
in Funny Girl in the West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/03/funny-girl-review-sheridan-smith-menier-chocolate-factory>
, a role all but made for her. She is also the current chosen target of certain 
British newspapers, which have been circling her for weeks, vultures eagerly 
feasting on her flesh before she even lay down for a rest. There was a classic 
juxtaposition on one news website last week, on which, atop a story about how 
Smith felt the press was bullying her, was another story with the cackling 
headline: “Watch out Sheridan! As troubled star misses West End show for THIRD 
time, her understudy gets rave reviews.” And so it continued on Thursday, when 
Smith officially announced a break from the show: “Sheridan who? Funny Girl 
fans flock to meet ‘exceptional’ understudy.” Given how many other stories 
there are about the brilliance of understudies in the papers every day, how 
could Smith possibly think the papers are after her?

Look, I have no idea what is wrong with Smith, and it’s unlikely this weird 
media campaign against her is the entire reason she has taken time out. But, 
good Lord, it hasn’t helped, has it? She is obviously having some problems, and 
the glee with which her departure from the show has been received by the press 
is palpable. Is this evil? It’s certainly grim. Seems as if the British press 
can still afford to be that.
 