
Tourists don’t have the best reputation when it comes to cycling around 
Amsterdam. The stereotype is a 10-rider convoy, probably stoned, stopping in 
the middle of a busy junction to check their city map en route to the Sex 
Museum. In a city populated with lifelong cyclists, it’s common to hear 
grumbling about visitors wobbling absent-mindedly on already congested cycle 
lanes.

Capital transfer: a cycling trip from London to Amsterdam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/24/cycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke>
However, one cycle hire company is hoping to promote a more positive exchange 
between locals and visitors, with a new scheme that encourages Amsterdammers to 
let tourists hitch a ride on the back of theirfiets. 

Described as “couchsurfing on a bike”, the YellowBackie 
<http://www.yellowbackie.org/> project invites tourists to hail down a local 
cyclist with a shout of “backie!” whenever they spot a bicycle with a bright 
yellow rack. The racks are provided free to anyone who signs up as a volunteer.

“We wouldn’t claim that there is ‘a lot’ of hostility between tourists and 
locals on the cycle lanes,” says Martin Luyckx, communications manager of 
Yellow Bike, the long-running rental company that set up the scheme. “But there 
have been some people in the media raising concerns about the growing number of 
tourists in Amsterdam. In general, we do think that most people are friendly 
towards tourists, we just help remind them of that fact.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Famsterdam-cyclists-yellow-backie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442412822867%2F16279d84-1b90-404e-ba06-a99cb9e7ac37-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hitchhiking%20Amsterdam-style%3A%20hail%20a%20lift%20with%20a%20local%20cyclist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Famsterdam-cyclists-yellow-backie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hitchhiking%20Amsterdam-style%3A%20hail%20a%20lift%20with%20a%20local%20cyclist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Famsterdam-cyclists-yellow-backie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442412822867%2F16279d84-1b90-404e-ba06-a99cb9e7ac37-1020x612.jpeg>
 For a free ride, tourists can hail ‘Backie!’ when they spot a yellow bike rack 
The hope is that the scheme, like Couchsurfing - in which hosts offer 
travellers free accommodation - will be adopted by locals who want to meet 
visitors and perhaps show them around their favourite spots.

Top 10 free things to do in Amsterdam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/20/top-10-free-things-to-do-amsterdam>
“It’s really common in the Netherlands to give someone a backie for short 
distances,” says Luyckx. “Everyone does it, no matter the age or city. As 
Couchsurfing proves, there are a lot of people who like to make friends while 
showing their love or pride for their city ... and the people you meet on your 
luggage rack can show you around when you visit their hometown. So it’s a 
win-win for both involved.”

Since launching in August, 107 people have signed up as“Backie Drivers” in 
Haarlem and Utrecht, as well as Amsterdam. The team hope this number will hit 
250 by the end of the year.

Among the early adopters is 22-year-old student Jeroen Snoodijk, who signed up 
to the scheme to help show tourists that there’s a lot more to Amsterdam than 
the red light district.

“So far I’ve picked up just one tourist and two locals who knew about it from 
social media,” he says. “We had nice conversations about the concept and about 
how we view the state of tourism in Amsterdam. One of them even joined me and 
my friends at a party later that evening, so my experiences have been good so 
far.”
 