
Cinema historians, former cast and crew and Alfred Hitchcock’s official 
biographer have rushed to the defence of the director after claims that he
sexually harassed and bullied actress Tippi Hedren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/31/tippi-hedren-alfred-hitchcock-sexually-assaulted-me>
 during the filming ofThe Birds in the 1960s.

In her new book, Tippi: A Memoir, published on 17 November, Hedren alleges 
that the director made sexual approaches to her and regarded her as his 
personal property. In one passage she also describes her genuine horror during 
the filming of the attic scene inThe Birds when she was attacked by real birds. 
“It was ugly, brutal and relentless,” she writes, adding that Cary Grant, 
visiting the set that week, had told her how brave she was.

John Russell Taylor, author of Hitch: The Life and Times of Alfred Hitchcock, 
said: “In a way I don’t blame Hedren, who I got to know in the late 1970s when 
I was researching my book. She is, I would guess, elaborating memories she 
feels bitter about but, as Hitchcock’s friend, I resent the way her story has 
changed over the years.”

Hedren, the director’s archetypal cool screen blonde, also starred in another 
Hitchcock thriller,Marnie. She was a New York fashion model when he spotted her 
in October 1961 in a diet drink commercial. Taylor said that in previous 
interviews for his book, republished in paperback in January, Hedren said the 
director had taught her all she knew about films, even allowing her into script 
meetings forThe Birds.

Taylor and a fellow Hitchcock expert, Tony Lee Moral, author of Hitchcock and 
the Making of Marnie and The Making of Hitchcock’s The Birds, both argue that 
Hedren’s claims are not supported by others who worked on the films, or by the 
shooting schedules and other documents in Hitchcock’s archive at theMargaret 
Herrick Library <https://www.oscars.org/library> in Los Angeles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoBnhC8Eer8M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoBnhC8Eer8M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoBnhC8Eer8M&media=>
 The Birds trailer 
Hedren, mother of 1980s film star Melanie Griffith and grandmother to Dakota 
Johnson, the star of last year’sFifty Shades of Grey, claims that during 
location filming ofThe Birds, Hitchcock gave her a ride to her motel in his 
limousine and tried to kiss her while others watched.

She repelled his advances, she writes, and alleges he took his revenge the 
next day when they filmed the famous telephone booth scene in which birds break 
in to attack the star. The glass booth’s supposedly shatterproof panes 
splintered, cutting her cheek, and Hedren suggests the sequence was part 
punishment for her rejection of him.

The allegation about Hitchcock’s attempted kiss came to light in 2008 in 
Donald Spoto’s book,Spellbound by Beauty, which inspired the 2012 television 
filmThe Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/11/hitchcock-the-girl-truth-master-suspense>
, starring Sienna Miller as Hedren and Toby Jones as Hitchcock.

The film provoked protests from those who worked with Hitchcock when it was 
broadcast and theseobjections have intensified <https://savehitchcock.com/> in 
response to Hedren’s new memoir. The reputation of Britain’s greatest film 
director, fear Taylor and Lee Moral, is being tarnished by allegations that do 
not stand up. After speaking to surviving members of the film crew onThe Birds, 
Lee Moral believes the record should be set straight. “Shooting documents show 
there was months of studio filming between the time when she was staying in 
that motel and the phone booth filming,” he told theObserver. “It also happened 
a few days after Hedren was offered the part ofMarnie, which makes even less 
sense.”

Taylor adds that onlookers, such as assistant director Jim Brown and 
Hitchcock’s assistant, Peggy Robertson, have never mentioned the limo incident 
when offering other criticisms of the director. He also questions why Hitchcock 
would have risked disfiguring his new star during an expensive shoot.

Gerry Gero, assistant to Ray Berwick the bird trainer, has backed this view, 
while Hedren’s hairdresser, Virginia Darcy, is on record agreeing that the crew 
“were all looking out for her”.

Only two chapters in the new memoir are about Hitchcock, who died in 1980, as 
most of the book chronicles Hedren’s passion for filming with lions and other 
big cats and the creation of her wildlife reserve near the Mohave desert.

The biggest row between director and his star, all parties agree, was over 
Hedren’s plan to attend an awards event in New York held byPhotoplay Magazine 
in February 1964, during the filming ofMarnie, an intense pyschological 
thriller about abuse co-starring Sean Connery. Hedren’s memoir maintains she 
requested a long weekend away, but Lee Moral claims the records in the Los 
Angeles library show the awards evening was held in the middle of a week of 
scheduled filming.

A memo from Universal publicity manager David Golding sent in January advised 
Hitchcock that it was impractical for Hedren to fly to New York. Connery was 
scheduled to begin filming as Bond inGoldfinger in March and there was no room 
for postponements. Hitchcock also did not want Hedren to break the taut 
atmosphere on theMarnie set.

Louise Latham, who played Marnie’s mother, told Lee Moral she had sympathy for 
Hitchcock. “I find some of the allegations hard to believe. She’s a lovely 
woman, but I don’t think Tippi should have said those things about Hitch … I 
wasn’t aware of her being hassled on the set. For Hitchcock to go down as this 
monstrous thing, to the degree that [Tippi] was vulnerable is not accurate.”

Taylor told the Observer he once asked Hitchcock about the row and was told 
that Hedren had said something no one was permitted to say: “Well, she, ahem, 
referred to my weight.” Robertson later told him Hedren had shouted: “You fat 
pig. Who are you to tell me what I can and can’t do!”
 