
Cleaners in HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> offices in 
Merseyside have suspended industrial action after the subcontractor that 
employs them agreed to reinstate hours it had cut from their shifts to counter 
pay rises introduced with the government’s new ”national living wage” (NLW).

The dispute was triggered when ISS, the company that employs the cleaners in a 
complex subcontracting chain,told staff in April that it could not afford the 
mandatory rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/28/hmrc-cleaners-striking-over-pay-national-living-wage>
.

It informed them it intended to claw back the 50p-an-hour increase in pay 
introduced by then chancellor George Osborne by cutting each worker’s hours so 
that their overall wages stayed the same. The cut in hours had a 
disproportionate effect on female cleaners because it pushed them below the 
30-hour-a-week threshold that entitles them to working tax credits, the 
government’s cash top-up to low wages. Some cleaners were left £40-50 a week 
worse off as a result and were advised by help centres that they would be 
better off not working and claiming full benefits.

HMRC cleaners striking over pay: 'They've treated us appallingly'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/28/hmrc-cleaners-striking-over-pay-national-living-wage>
Following an initial strike in July, members of the Public and Commercial 
Services union had planned a further walkout from Monday across six HMRC sites. 
However, ISS has now agreed to reinstate the hours and halt proposals to reduce 
hours in other HMRC sites to allow for talks on long-term pay and conditions. 
The move follows aGuardian report exposing the cleaners’ plight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/28/hmrc-cleaners-striking-over-pay-national-living-wage>
.

HMRC is responsible both for enforcement of the NLW and for paying working tax 
credits. Local MP Maria Eagle described the action of the companies as “beyond 
parody” and has written to the prime minister, Theresa May, asking why the 
government cannot make sure people who clean its own offices benefit from its 
own policy to raise pay for those on low wages.

The PCS general secretary, Mark Serwotka, said: “We welcome the restoration of 
cleaners’ hours, although this would never have been achieved without our 
members taking action.

“We hope the company is genuinely committed to meaningful talks on this and 
other issues. And we hope HMRC and other government departments have got the 
message that we will not allow them to simply pass the buck when low-paid staff 
are being treated unfairly in their workplaces.”

ISS is a transnational corporation and one of the largest employers in the 
world, with its headquarters in Denmark. It specialises in facilities 
management and doubled its profits last year to £250m.


The origins of the arrangement for HMRC buildings date back to 2001 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/2263208.stm>, when the department sold off 
its estate of more than 600 buildings to Mapeley, a Bermuda-based offshore 
company, as part of a private finance initiative. The deal wascondemned later 
by MPs 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmpubacc/312/31208.htm>
 as bad value and as undermining HMRC’s position as a tax collector.

HMRC leases back buildings from a subsidiary of Mapeley; a further subsidiary, 
Salisbury FM 
<http://www.fm-world.co.uk/news/business-news/mapeley-launches-stand-alone-fm-business/>
, is contracted by Mapeley to manage the day-to-day running of the offices. 
Salisbury, in turn, subcontracts the cleaning to ISS.

ISS said it was “pleased that the threatened industrial action has been 
suspended, pending the outcome of the proposals put forward by the company, who 
remain committed to continuing dialogue with the trades union and a 
satisfactory outcome for all”.

After the two-day strike in July, ISS said: “We have a duty of care towards 
our staff, as well as a contractual responsibility to the client. As such, we 
look forward to resuming discussions with our people, and to do so with their 
PCS trade union representatives and the other key parties involved.”

An HMRC spokesperson said: “HMRC is absolutely committed to every worker 
receiving at least the national living wage and we come down hard on employers, 
including our own suppliers, who don’t share that commitment. All those who 
work for our third party suppliers can be assured of our vigilance and 
determination to secure for all workers their legal entitlement to a living 
wage.”
 