
Never mind the old ways of rolling up clothes to maximise space, splurging on 
travel size toiletries, then flipping out and throwing the contents of your 
case all over the gate when it doesn’t meet the hand luggage requirements. 
Holidaying is now all about what goes in your digital suitcase.

According to a survey commissioned by audiobook retailer Audible, travellers 
spend more time doing their “digital packing” for a week-long break – four 
hours and 16 minutes to be precise – than they do packing their physical case, 
on which they spend a comparatively measly two hours and 30 minutes. A third of 
under-35s pack their digi-case – which contains music, audiobooks, ebooks, 
films and TV shows – before they think about the actual stuff they will take on 
holiday.

Now that holidays are about switching on rather than off, here are five key 
digital packing rules:

The best books for summer 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/09/writers-best-books-summer-2016> 
1 When choosing ebooks, size matters. This is not the time for the latest 
collection ofGeoff Dyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/03/geoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview>
 essays. The point of taking your e-reader on holiday is to stock up on 
doorstoppers that would otherwise be used to swat mosquitoes. Go for the 
classics,the Man Booker longlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/27/man-booker-prize-2016-longlist-jm-coetzee>
, or something wildly impractical likeKarl Ove Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/26/karl-ove-knausgaard-the-shame-of-writing-about-myself>
’s My Struggle series – the kind of books that would never make it into your 
physical suitcase.

2 The average UK consumer downloads 13 songs before a holiday. Make sure all 
playlists are destination-appropriate. No one wants to be listening to 
Hopelessness byAnohni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/anohni-hopelessness-review-antony-and-johnsons>
 on a Greek island – this is a holiday, not a post-Brexit bootcamp. A certain 
amount of cheesiness will only enhance your digi-case: listening toChristine 
and the Queens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/03/christine-and-the-queens-chaleur-humaine>
 in France is not obvious; it’s classic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fholiday-downloads-what-to-put-in-your-digital-suitcase%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aa4827923f0ae31c616107de7c1715c2444688d%2F0_338_5138_3082%2F5138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20downloads%3A%20what%20to%20put%20in%20your%20digital%20suitcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fholiday-downloads-what-to-put-in-your-digital-suitcase%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20downloads%3A%20what%20to%20put%20in%20your%20digital%20suitcase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fholiday-downloads-what-to-put-in-your-digital-suitcase%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aa4827923f0ae31c616107de7c1715c2444688d%2F0_338_5138_3082%2F5138.jpg>
 Virtual doorstoppers, location-appropriate playlists, reality-banishing 
podcasts … how to fill your holiday e-suitcase. Photograph: David 
Cleveland/Getty Images/Cultura RF 
3 The top three audiobooks this summer are Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> and the Philosopher’s Stone by 
JK Rowling,The Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/29/paula-hawkins-woman-behind-the-girl-on-the-train-interview>
 by Paula Hawkins, and A Short History Of Nearly Everything byBill Bryson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/billbryson>. But how about going leftfield 
anddownloading some podcasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/listen-to-this>? Not newsy ones – 
we’re assuming your reason for going on holiday is to escape the awfulness of 
our times – but funny ones, such as John Oliver and Andy Zaltzman’s satirical 
monthly missiveThe Bugle <http://thebuglepodcast.com/>. For the more 
traditional digital packers among you, there’s always Desert Island Discs.

4 Some relaxing time out requires the right holiday apps. XE Currency 
<http://www.xe.com/currencyconverter/> converts every world currency, which – 
in our current climate – might depress as much as assist you.Google Translate 
<https://translate.google.co.uk/> is essential for the British traveller 
feeling like a pitiful monoglot in Europe this summer. And if you’re looking 
for a digital companion to document every moment of your holiday – and frankly, 
what digital packer isn’t? – check outEsplorio <https://home.esplor.io/>, which 
records your GPS position, orders your photos and creates “a digital travel 
journal”. If you’re bored of this by day two, just playPokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/08/man-shot-dead-pokemon-go-san-francisco>
. And then the most important rule of all …

5 DON’T FORGET YOUR TRAVEL ADAPTOR!
 