
The essential itinerary for Costa Rica was defined long ago: Manuel Antonio 
for the beach, Monteverde for cloud forest, Tortuguero for turtles, and Arenal 
volcano for outdoor adventure. Add in the area of sandy beachfront in 
Guanacaste that has also been set aside for large hotels and you have all the 
elements of most package tours to the country.

But the true beauty of Costa Rica lies in its smaller, emptier spaces. And 
though there is plenty of adventure on offer (when they say you can zipline 
from one end of the country to the other, they’re only half joking), it’s the 
V-formation of pelicans flying over your hammock, lightning over a silver sea, 
pink orchids against turquoise houses, a passing cowboy with silver stirrups, 
the white sand and deep blue sea that stay in the memory – along with the state 
of the roads.
Costa Rica travel map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/travel_costa_rica_web/giv-32650NjDM2QqNgMtN/>
Costa Rica has a mountainous spine, so crossing from Pacific to Caribbean 
coast takes forever. Resign yourself to loops in all directions out of the 
capital San José, which sits in the Central Valley, and remember that internal 
flights will save time and stress. What looks like a quick journey on a map 
will not be: the 65-mile drive from Arenal to Monteverde, say, can take six 
hours.

All prices are for the current high season (December-April) and include tax of 
13%. In the low season, from May-November (less crowds, rainy mornings), there 
are substantial discounts if occupancy is low

San José
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd7e3aad861e37e67a1591c97a1012d06088649%2F0_25_640_385%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd7e3aad861e37e67a1591c97a1012d06088649%2F0_25_640_385%2F640.jpg>
 The foyer of the Teatro Nacional. Photograph: Alamy 
You’d be forgiven for thinking that the old capital has been left to rot while 
a replacement, made of condos and strip malls, is built around it. The 
gridlocked downtown blocks aren’t pretty, with their cracked pavements, 
stinking drains, seedy bars, pickpockets, rusting tin roofs and ocarina 
sellers. But old San José has its sights, fromMuseo de Jade (Plaza de la 
Democracía) andMuseo del Oro (beneath Plaza de la Cultura), both with 
unrivalled but unsung pre-Colombian treasures, to the warren of theMercado 
Central, and the pay-to-view grandeur of the Teatro Nacional 
<https://www.teatronacional.go.cr/>.

Start at the city’s western edge with a visit to Museo de Arte Costarricense 
<http://www.musarco.go.cr/> in the old air traffic control building of what 
used to be the airport, then head down Paseo Colon.

Where to stay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15834f665c17299bc3c6f050f3640a3bd916191d%2F0_9_1200_791%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15834f665c17299bc3c6f050f3640a3bd916191d%2F0_9_1200_791%2F1200.jpg>
 Hotel Grano de Oro 
For San José’s airports and exits for Pacific highways, hotels in the western 
suburbs are best. For a quick stopover, white, clean, super-valueHotel Luisiana 
<http://hotelluisiana.com/> in Santa Ana (doubles from $62 room-only) is a good 
option, but for a treat tryXandari <http://xandari.com/> (doubles from $299), 
just 20 minutes from the international airport. This colourful gem, with 
thatched spa and pools in tranquil tropical gardens on the northern flanks of 
the Central Valley, offers spectacular views of the city. In San José itself, 
the boutiqueHotel Grano de Oro <http://www.hotelgranodeoro.com/> (doubles from 
$186) is a luxurious, charming oasis filled with art and plants just off Paseo 
Colon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc456fcc942568a4480f9717c7ad14e61fd8f1d98%2F0_319_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc456fcc942568a4480f9717c7ad14e61fd8f1d98%2F0_319_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Alma de Amón 
Wealthy coffee barons built their homes in Barrio Amón, five blocks north of 
the Teatro Nacional. Hipster entrepreneurs have turned several of them into 
bars and restaurants. Try hole-in-the-wallCafé Miel 
<https://www.facebook.com/cafemielcostarica/info?tab=overview> (Avenida 9, 
Calle 11 & 13) for great cake and coffee; atmospheric and artyAlma de Amón 
<https://www.facebook.com/AlmadeAmon> (Calle 5, Avenida 9 & 11) for cocktails, 
empanadas and ceviche; and coolly scruffy Stiefel Pub 
<https://www.facebook.com/StiefelPub> (near the INS building on Avenida 7) for 
lively crowds and craft beer. Near the top of Paseo Colon, stylishAquí Es 
(Avenida 2 & Calle 38) has live jazz and big steaks.

Tiquicia <http://www.tiquiciacr.com/> (+506 2289 5839), above San Antonio de 
Escazú, offers city views and folk dancing. It’s cheesy and sentimental, but 
this is where Ticos go for a night ofchicharrones (pork rinds), a casado of 
rice, steak and plantain, and loads of Nicaraguan Flor de Caña rum with Coke, 
limes and a bucket of ice.

Corcovado rainforest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F143939603cdaee20f7d9d238a7b4221e6ae8267d%2F0_101_5120_2519%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F143939603cdaee20f7d9d238a7b4221e6ae8267d%2F0_101_5120_2519%2F5120.jpg>
 The Osa peninsula, Corcovado national park. Photograph: Getty Images/Mint 
Images RM 
A quarter of Costa Rica is protected parks and reserve, but the crown jewel is 
Corcovado national park 
<http://costa-rica-guide.com/nature/national-parks/corcovado/>, 164 square 
miles of rainforest in the Osa peninsula, fringed by empty Pacific beach. 
Remote and largely impenetrable, it’s home to five species of cat (jaguar, 
puma, ocelot, margay and jaguarundi) plus tapir, sloth, monkeys, boas (there 
are lots of snakes: wear boots) and almost 400 bird species. Here’s your best 
chance of spotting Costa Rican wildlife – and the waters are rich with dolphins 
and, seasonally, pods of whales.

Access is with guides only, and reservations need to be made well in advance. 
Hikes range from easy day trips, mainly aroundSan Pedrillo, to multi-day treks 
with overnights at Sirena, a magical, ultra-basic ranger station. (It’s also 
accessible by boat and small plane.) Most lodges on the peninsula include 
Corcovado hikes as part of a package; for something more full-on, contactOsa 
Aventura <http://www.osaaventura.com/> (+506 2735 5670). It has a one-day hike 
for $85pp, including park fees, guide, lunch and transport, and a three-day 
adventure tour for $395pp including two nights at Sirena. For a list of 
approved guidesemail the park office  <mailto:pncorcovado@gmail.com>in Puerto 
Jiménez.

Up in the mountains, you find children in sou’westers herding friesians, then 
cloud forests where everything’s dripping, and doused in golden light. 
Reminiscent of Somerset in October it may be, but squelching down misty trails 
to the plink of tree frogs and the warbles of bellbirds is an unearthly 
experience. Also lurking among the foliage are 420 species of orchid, and 
scarlet poison dart frogs in purple stockings. Wherever you visit, expect 
rainbows, the strong aroma of a cedar cabin, and a damp, chilly night.

Where to stay

On the Osa peninsula’s southern tip, along a rutted track south of Puerto 
Jiménez, pricey Bosque del Cabo <http://www.bosquedelcabo.com/index.html> 
(doubles from $390 full-board), makes a luxurious base for exploring the 
national park and its own 700-acre private reserve. White-nosed coatis scamper 
across the lawns, toucans call, private trails lead to rock pools, and 
convivial dinners are served at long candlelit tables in the thatchedrancho. 
Accommodation is in cabinas with doors that fold back to let in ocean breezes 
and dawn chorus.

Budget options for independent travellers abound in Puerto Jiménez, round the 
Osa’s southern tip, a short flight or nine-hour road trip from San José. It’s a 
scruffy backwater but full of characters and a springboard to adventure on the 
shores of the Golfo Dulce.Cabinas Jiménez <http://www.cabinasjimenez.com/> 
(doubles from $55 room-only) is a good-value favourite. There are free bikes 
and kayaks to borrow, and the well-connected owner runs dolphin tours.Il 
Giardino Italiano <http://www.ilgiardinoitalianrestaurant.com/> (+506 2735 
5129) is the standout option for dinner.

Cloud forests
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cc52f8d37328914f0d1170453a165bdc183707b%2F0_0_4368_2882%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cc52f8d37328914f0d1170453a165bdc183707b%2F0_0_4368_2882%2F4368.jpg>
 Visitors spot some interesting wildlife from a sky walk in the Monteverde 
Cloud Forest. Photograph: Alamy 
Monteverde is the classic cloud forest choice, and the most child-friendly, 
with sky tram, sky walk and, for over-eights, canopy zip lines. If you are 
travelling south,San Gerardo de Dota, 46 miles from the capital and 2,200 
metres above sea level, makes a top stopover. The (heated) wooden cabins at
Trogon Lodge <http://www.trogonlodge.com/> (doubles from $133 B&B) lie inside 
the country’s newest national park, Los Quetzales, a vast birdwatchers’ 
paradise, home to flame-throated warblers, emerald toucanets, green violetear 
hummingbirds and motmots, turquoise cotingas as well as trogons and quetzals.

Worth noting that Central America’s foremost ornithologist, the late Alexander 
Skutch, chose to live just down the road.

Nearby (at KM80 on the Panamerican Highway), Miriam’s Quetzals 
<http://miriamquetzals.com/> (doubles from $60 B&B) provides old-school Costa 
Rican hospitality: simple, pretty mountain-top cabins in gardens thick with 
birds and moss, andcomida tipica (plenty of fabulous rice and beans, eggs, 
plantain, juices) in the no-frills restaurant-with-views. It’s worth noting 
that Central America’s foremost ornithologist, the late Alexander Skutch, chose 
to live just down the road.

Costa Ballena beaches
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73776df654bdddc5668c720b0231676e453f1578%2F0_0_640_385%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73776df654bdddc5668c720b0231676e453f1578%2F0_0_640_385%2F640.jpg>
 Playa Dominical, Marino Ballena national park. Photograph: Alamy 
Costa Rica has two coasts and more than 300 beaches, some the domain of 
turtles. But there are two areas that have everything, from surfer bars to 
top-end retreats, party beaches to silent jungle. The first is the junglyCosta 
Ballena on the Central Pacific, extending 18 miles down Highway 34 from the 
grey-sand surfer town of Dominical to mini gastroville Ojochal.


Hotels offering yoga and salads and infinity pools with sunset vistas peek out 
from the dense foliage of the mountain slopes. Many have an indoor-outdoor Bali 
thing going on, and top-whack prices to go with it. No worries:La Cusinga 
<http://www.lacusingalodge.com/> (doubles from $172 B&B), a more affordable, 
child-friendly option by the famous whale-tail shaped beach of Uvita offers the 
same jungle setting, and a great deal of eco-action from riding to whale tours 
(all extra), plus yoga studio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41d4b18dffa36529c70c3105ee3d538a0b8bbe19%2F0_84_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41d4b18dffa36529c70c3105ee3d538a0b8bbe19%2F0_84_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 La Cusinga 
There’s budget accommodation around Dominical. You don’t have to be a gap-year 
surfer to loveCool Vibes <http://www.hosteldominical.com/> (dorm beds from 
$12), an open-plan beachfront space with bunks and hammocks, wooden floors, 
ocean view and boards to rent – but if you’re not, you may come across as weird.

Offering both affordability and peace, the six Coconut Grove Oceanfront 
Cottages <http://www.coconutgrovecr.com/> (sleep two, $85 room-only, extra 
person $10) are fully equipped, set in lovely gardens (with dipping pool) a 
mile down the beach from Dominical.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F413f0688dc13ec7f356f5027768f5d5f8327b0dc%2F0_67_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F413f0688dc13ec7f356f5027768f5d5f8327b0dc%2F0_67_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 El Pescado Loco 
Dominical’s the place for lively bars, and cheap, healthy food in sandy 
flipflops settings. Try smoothies for breakfast on the beach atSurf Shak 
<http://www.dominical.biz/restaurants/surf-shak>, spicy shrimp tacos at El 
Pescado Loco <https://www.facebook.com/Elpescadoloco>, healthy fish and 
vegetarian dishes (plus dancing on Wednesdays and live music on Saturdays) at
Maracatu <http://maracatucostarica.com/>, and hotel Roca Verde 
<http://rocaverde.net/> for the Saturday party. Miraculously, in what feels 
like the middle of nowhere, Ojochal has chic jungle dining options. BothCitrus 
<https://www.facebook.com/ojochal.citrus> (+506 2786 5175) and the thatch-roofed
Exotica (+506 2786-5050) do good things with fish, ginger, coconut and exotic 
fruits.

Southern Caribbean beaches
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8ce5d3e5490e64cbdca9838adb2f5726c80ab38%2F0_0_1621_1174%2F1621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8ce5d3e5490e64cbdca9838adb2f5726c80ab38%2F0_0_1621_1174%2F1621.jpg>
 The Tree House 
The second beach area is the more laid-back eight-mile stretch of Caribbean 
coast between lively Puerto Viejo and sleepy Manzanillo. All the palm-fringed 
white-sand beaches, turquoise sea, parrots, jungle cabins, nightlife, surf 
camps, gingerbread beach cottages, and pancake breakfast joints a person could 
possibly need are here. This coast, settled by West Indian fishermen in the 
19th century, is English-speaking, and that vibe still dominates, despite a 
steady influx of more excitable jungle lovers. The obvious thing to do is read 
in a hammock, perhaps rent a cheap bike and visit a beach cafe. But boat trips, 
snorkelling, and mountain hikes can be arranged through theAsociación 
Talamanquena de Ecoturismo y Conservación <http://www.ateccr.org/#!inicio/zc12z>
 office. Surf camps run courses for beginners (the mighty Salsa Brava break 
tosses even experts off their boards), and a visit to either theJaguar Rescue 
Centre <http://www.jaguarrescue.com/> at Punta Cocles though jaguars aren’t 
always on view, or theSloth Sanctuary <http://www.slothsanctuary.com/>, a short 
drive north in Cahuita, is almost obligatory.


There are plenty of small hotels, cafes, bars and pulperías (groceries) along 
the sandy road to Manzanillo, but it’s Puerto Viejo that is the hub for 
late-night drinking and dancing. To be at the heart of it, bag a hammock at
Rocking J’s <http://www.rockingjs.com/> (hammock $7, tents $8, dorms $11, 
cabinas from $26,), the colourful surfing backpacker hot spot on the beach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F413b4b6f2af4c4f3da9d58837ecee9ae8dcef69f%2F0_0_2880_1920%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F413b4b6f2af4c4f3da9d58837ecee9ae8dcef69f%2F0_0_2880_1920%2F2880.jpg>
 Costa de Papito 
Providing easy access yet also peace, transplanted New Yorker Eddie Ryan’s 
popular wooden garden bungalows and restaurant atCosta de Papito 
<http://lacostadepapito.com/> (doubles from $59 B&B) are an easy stroll away at 
Playa Cocles. Points further south, easily reached on a bike during the day, 
feel more removed at night. Beach cottage rentals allow for a degree of 
self-sufficiency, and are the way to go. Most are rustic or eccentrically 
luxurious – the four atThe Tree House (from $200 to $390 for the fabulous Beach 
Suite), the wondrous creations of Edsart Besier at Playa Chiquita, are both.

Where to eat
For open air, sea view, jungle sounds and fresh fish, you’re spoilt for 
choice. In Puerto Viejo,Koki Beach <https://www.facebook.com/KOKIBEACH> is a 
rancho-style lounge bar with furniture coolly fashioned from reclaimed wood, in 
a top location by the sea, and prettily lit. Alternate withStashu’s con Fusion 
<https://www.facebook.com/Stashus-Con-Fusion-175927065802353/>, serving beach 
fare in piquant sauces just a coconut’s throw away. Or for rice and beans, 
snapper and lobster, cycle toMaxi’s 
<http://manzanillo-caribe.com/maxi/maxi.html> in Manzanillo, a wooden building 
where reggae plays downstairs, and good food is served above.

Arenal, the essential volcano
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F781ba6f0e37003315276a755ce6724c2454d031c%2F0_0_5639_3759%2F5639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F781ba6f0e37003315276a755ce6724c2454d031c%2F0_0_5639_3759%2F5639.jpg>
 Arenal at sunrise. Photograph: Getty Images/AWL Images RM 
Volcán Poás is easier to visit (it’s virtually a drive-in) and Volcán Rincón 
de la Vieja is wilder, butArenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/27/top-10-active-volcanoes> is 
unmissable. Only one thing beats the thrill of seeing Arenal erupt, and that’s 
seeing it erupt while you’re sitting in a hot spring. The hot spring industry 
sprang up as a way of entertaining frustrated visitors who arrived to find the 
perfect cone shrouded in cloud.

Rivers, heated by geothermic activity, were dammed and tidied, and now hot 
springs circle the base of the volcano beyond the lava field (at least, that’s 
the theory). They range from big, cheap and fun, likeBaldi 
<https://www.baldihotsprings.cr/> (day pass $34), to Rousseau lushness with 
lava flow views and accommodation, such asTabacón Hot Springs 
<http://www.tabacon.com/> (night pass with dinner $70). In general, the further 
from La Fortuna (see below), the higher the price and the better the view. 
Visit at night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cd0839186cdd1d1355763846f45aac033568f6f%2F0_0_5206_3464%2F5206.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holiday%20guide%20to%20Costa%20Rica%3A%20beaches%20and%20adventures%2C%20plus%20hotels%20and%20restaurants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcosta-rica-holiday-guide-beaches-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cd0839186cdd1d1355763846f45aac033568f6f%2F0_0_5206_3464%2F5206.jpg>
 La Fortuna, Arenal hanging bridges. Photograph: Getty Images 
Adventure tours in the surrounding conservation area range from riding to 
zip-lines and canyoning. A good option is the three-day whitewater rafting 
classic on the Pacuare river (class III-IV) withRios Tropicales 
<http://www.riostropicales.com/> ($370pp), which includes a stay at its 
excellent eco-lodge at the mouth of the gorge. Rios picks up from Arenal, 
Puerto Viejo and San José.

Where to stay

 Smithsonian room atthe Arenal Observatory Lodge 
La Fortuna is a boom town, almost entirely dedicated to feeding, accommodating 
and entertaining budget tourists. If you’re OK with whoops from the pool every 
time the volcano at the end of the road erupts, hostels are a good bet, 
offering tour information and services, bars and fairy lights, hammock lounging 
space, and a sliding scale of options from low-cost, zero-privacy dorms to 
private rooms. TryArenal Hostel Resort <http://arenalhostelresort.com/> (dorms 
$16pp, doubles from $58). The lava, however, flows down the other side of the 
volcano, and the very best views are from the Smithsonian rooms at theArenal 
Observatory Lodge <http://arenalobservatorylodge.com/index.php> (doubles from 
$175 B&B, cheaper rooms from $100). It may lack cutting-edge style, but who 
cares? You’ve got front-row seats – or, actually, beds – for one of the best 
natural firework shows on Earth.

• Sorrel Downer blogs at sorreldowner.co.uk <http://sorreldowner.co.uk/>; 
Twitter@somewheresville <https://twitter.com/somewheresville>
 