
Now here’s a pitch for a movie. An aspiring US politician announces that, if 
elected, he will build a mighty wall to prevent Latin Americans from entering 
his country. To everyone’s surprise, this guy gets elected and very soon finds 
out, as he tries recruiting inLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>, that the only people he can 
get to do such poorly paid and onerous work are… Latin Americans. Sort of a 
dark comedy? Maybe a big Latino star as one of the building workers? Nice 
mariachi soundtrack?

Or maybe not. Because there already seems to be a large and forbidding wall, 
albeit an invisible one, that prevents Latinos, who now make up approximately 
half of the LA population, from featuring in films about the city.

'Learn English': LA landlords allegedly harassed Latinos to get richer tenants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/latino-evictions-california-housing-discrimination>
There have been three high-profile productions this year in which Los Angeles 
has played a starring role:Hail, Caesar! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/06/hail-caesar-observer-film-review>,
Café Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/cafe-society-woody-allen-review-hollywood-jesse-eisenberg-kirsten-stewart>
 andLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
, the last of which has high hopes as we enter the awards season. Yet none of 
the three casts much light on the millions of Latinos who live, work and play 
in the capital of film. How so?

There have been films in which Latinos have played a leading role but few have 
had the sort of box office returns that attract the big studios. Most recently, 
in 2014, Diego Luna, who came to international fame along with his co-star, 
Gael García Bernal, inY Tu Mamá También 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/apr/12/1> in 2002, directed an eponymous 
biopic of the celebrated farm-workers’ union organiser, Cesar Chavez – in many 
ways the Latino equivalent of Gandhi or Mandela, who have both had reverential 
film treatments. It had a very cool reception.

Writing in Variety at the time of its release, Peter Debruge described it thus 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/markets-festivals/berlin-film-review-cesar-chavez-1201098532/>
: “Recognising that Chavez’s victory in earning equal rights for migrant 
workers remains scandalously under-taught in classrooms, director Diego Luna 
responds with a biopic that feels more polite than political, counting on the 
worthiness of his subject and the participation of a well-meaning ensemble to 
galvanise mostly Latino audiences.”

Luna could be congratulated for at least getting the film made as – tellingly 
– the idea had been floating around Hollywood for decades. But it is 
significant that he is Mexican rather than an Angeleno, and his presence as 
director was a reflection of the fact that most of the leading Latino film 
names such as Bernal, Salma Hayek, Antonio Banderas and Javier Bardem come not 
from LA but from Latin America or Spain. Three currently high-profile, 
Oscar-nominated directors – Alejandro González Iñárritu, Guillermo del Toro and 
Alfonso Cuarón – are all Mexican-born, so things have certainly changed in some 
respects; 20 years ago, a now esteemed Mexican cinematographer was told on 
entering an LA agency that they did not need a gardener, thank you.

This year the main Oscars controversy focused on the lack of black faces, yet 
in 2014, Chris Rock – the black comedian, actor andthis year’s Academy Awards 
host <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kqhVNZgZGqQ> – wrote in the Hollywood 
Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/top-five-filmmaker-chris-rock-753223>: 
“Forget whether Hollywood is black enough. A better question is: is Hollywood 
Mexican enough? You’re in LA, you’ve got totry not to hire Mexicans.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkqhVNZgZGqQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkqhVNZgZGqQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkqhVNZgZGqQ&media=>
 Chris Rock’s opening monologue at the 2016 Oscars. 
This theme was taken up last February by Los Angeles Times writer Hector 
Becerra 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/movies/la-et-mn-latinos-in-hollywood-20160227-story.html>
 in an article headlined “A film brownout – Latinos largely left out of even 
cliched supporting roles”. The parts that seem to be available for a Latino 
actor are most often that of a maid, a gardener or a gang member.

Becerra told the Observer: “Latinos in America occupy this spot where their 
American-ness seems to be in silent dispute – and sometimes not so silent. 
Because immigration has never ended, though it has abated compared to previous 
levels, there’s this lingering perception that we’re sort of foreign. It’s also 
an issue with Asian-Americans, I’m sure. I suspect that bleeds into popular 
entertainment. There’s generally just a lack of nuance with portrayals of 
Latinos in American films – if they’re portrayed at all.” He did note that the 
last two Star Wars movies featured characters played by Latinos, including 
Diego Luna inRogue One, but added: “In general, I think Hollywood doesn’t 
really know what to do with Latinos beyond roles that emphasise their 
ethnicity.”

In Cannes last year, Salma Hayek spoke entertainingly about the way Latinos 
were still perceived in the industry. Sherecounted an incident 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/cannes-2015-salma-hayek-sexism-796121> 
in which a studio executive told her she could have been the biggest star in 
America, but her Mexican accent might remind people of their maids. She added 
that she had also been tipped to star in a sci-fi film but the director had run 
into that brick wall of preconceptions: “They said to him, ‘a Mexican in 
space?’”

The delicate issue of Latinos and the US film industry goes back nearly a 
century. In the 1930s, Spanish language versions of big Hollywood movies were 
shot at night on the same sets as the English-language ones. Lupita Tovar, who 
died last month aged 106, starred in 1931 in aSpanish-language Dracula 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/arts/lupita-tovar-star-of-spanish-language-dracula-dies-at-106.html?_r=0>
, acting by night on the same set as Bela Lugosi did by day.

[LA Latinos] are an invisible army working for some of the richest lawyers and 
agents in the world
Paul Laverty, screenwriter 
There have been some great and highly regarded Latino films over the last 
three decades.El Norte, directed by Gregory Nava in 1983, told the story of 
illegal immigrants whose plight was summed up by Rosa, played by Zaide Silvia 
Gutiérrez, in a way that still has an echo: “Here in the north, we aren’t 
accepted. When will we find a home?” It was nominated for a best screenplay 
Oscar.La Bamba (1987) was the admired biopic of Ritchie Valens, the musician 
who died with Buddy Holly in the 1959 plane crash.Born in East LA (1987) 
featured the comedian, Cheech Marin, better known to many old hippies as half 
of theCheech and Chong <http://www.cheechandchong.com/> standup duo. Stand and 
Deliver, starring Edward James Olmos in 1988, also packed a powerful punch. Mi 
vida loca (1993), directed by Allison Anders and promoted with the tag-line 
“mothers, warriors, sisters, survivors”, featured a largely unknown cast and a 
very young Salma Hayek. Ten years ago, Wash Westmorland and the late Richard 
Glatzer directedQuinceañera, a charming tale about the 15th birthday party of a 
girl played by Emily Rios that won critical acclaim but was made on the tiniest 
of budgets. In 2011,A Better Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/31/a-better-life-review> told the 
story of a Mexican immigrant gardener trying to make a better life in LA for 
his sceptical teenage son. With their Latino themes ignored by the mainstream, 
many of these films have have been promoted instead by theSundance 
<http://www.sundance.org/festivals/sundance-film-festival> and Telluride 
<http://www.telluridefilmfestival.org/> film festivals.

Sometimes the stories have been told by foreign directors: Britain’s Ken Loach 
madeBread and Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2001/apr/29/features.review7> in 2000, 
from a story by Paul Laverty, about a strike by Latino janitors in LA. The idea 
came to Laverty when he was on his way home from a Beverly Hills party and 
noticed that all of his fellow bus passengers were from central America. “It 
was this very odd image,” said Laverty. “These people were working at some of 
the richest real estate in Los Angeles and having to wait for hours to get a 
bus home at night. They were an invisible army working for some of the richest 
lawyers and agents in the world.” Laverty recalled how surprised the extras, 
mainly LA cleaners, were when they saw the film for the first time. “It was 
amazing watching their faces. One of them said to us, ‘I never expected to see 
ourselves on screen.’”

There is a parallel universe of successful Spanish-language films shown in 
Latino neighbourhoods that operate beyond the radar of the big studios and in 
which soap stars play the main roles. And there have also been many fine films 
about crossing the border – most recently Cary Fukunaga’sSin Nombre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/16/sin-nombre-review> (2009) – but 
Los Angeles on film remains a much whiter place than its reality.

“That’s LA – they worship everything and they value nothing,” says Sebastian, 
the jazz musician played by Ryan Gosling inLa La Land. This is unfair on LA, a 
much more interesting and elusive city than the “Tinseltown” putdown gives it 
credit for, but with that wall about to raise tensions across the borderline 
states and beyond, now would seem to be the time for Hollywood to grant much 
greater value to the invisible army in its midst.

LOS ANGELES IN FILM

Chinatown, 1974

Jack Nicholson is private eye J.J. Gittes, hired to trailing LA’s chief water 
engineer Hollis Mulray at the height of the water wars on the 1930s.

Boyz n the Hood, 1991

Released in the year of the Rodney King riots, John Singleton’s searing debut 
– starring Cuba Gooding Jr, Laurence Fishburne and Ice Cube – follows three 
young men as they grappling with race and relationships in the city’s Crenshaw 
ghetto.

Crash, 2004

The sprawling, Oscar-winning drama tells linked stories of LA residents over 
36 hours, laying bare racial and social divides.

Café Society, 2016

Woody Allen’s art deco-inspired, jazz-soundtracked homage to 1930s Hollywood 
stars Jesse Eisenberg as nebbish Boby Dorfman, the son of a Bronx jeweller who 
tries his luck in Hollywood. Bobby is smitten with his uncle’s secretary, 
Vonnie (Kirsten Stewart), who keeps him at arm’s length until, dumped by her 
boyfriend, she turns to him for comfort.
 