
When I first told the council I was homeless I was 16. It was cold, dark and I 
was alone. I didn’t have any belongings, but I had been staying at friends’ 
houses so I was clean and hadn’t been sleeping rough. I was forced to declare 
myself homeless when a brick was thrown through a friend’s window by a family 
member, and their safety was compromised. I waited to see the housing officer 
in my busy London borough, but when he arrived I was quickly dismissed on the 
grounds that I didn’t “look homeless”. What did I need to do to look homeless 
enough? I asked him. Did I need to be attacked? Raped? He looked at me, in his 
own helpless way, and shrugged.

That was 10 years ago. Today, Bob Blackman’s homelessness reduction bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/homelessnessreduction.html> will 
have its second reading in parliament. The main features of the bill are to 
remove the “priority need” category, and the requirement of being physically 
homeless before you are housed. Councils will have a duty to help those at risk 
of homelessness 56 days in advance, and to provide them with support for a 
further 56 days to secure accommodation. The governmenthas announced its support
 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-to-support-new-legislation-to-reduce-homelessness>
 for it.

Our immoral housing policy is set up to punish the poor | Matt Wilde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/26/immoral-housing-policy-punish-poor-councils-poverty-people-losing-homes>
And something certainly needs to be done. Homelessness has doubled 
<http://www.crisis.org.uk/pages/homeless-def-numbers.html> since 2010 and seems 
be on course to rise further. And the proposals in the bill sound like good 
ideas in principle. The priority need list puts those who fit a certain 
criterion (those with children, mental health problems or other vulnerabilities 
and those under the age of 18) in a position to be housed quicker. However,in 
practice 
<http://www.crisis.org.uk/data/files/publications/MysteryShopping_Report_FINAL_web.pdf>
, this often turns into an easy excuse to turn people away without letting them 
speak to an officer, which they are entitled to, amid high housing pressures.

The other requirement to be axed, being physically homeless, cuts short the 
prospect of a preventative system. So those who see the possibility of having 
nowhere to live looming are told to come back when they are actually homeless 
and the situation might be harder to remedy. On a very basic level, the process 
requires homeless people to demonstrate they are homeless while obscuring this 
fact by asking them a set of unrelated questions. As a woman in BBC2’s
documentary on the housing crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/19/council-house-wait-50-years-barking-and-dagenham-councillor-documentary-london-no-place-to-call-home>
 in Barking and Dagenham put it: “[It] is crazy. Homeless is homeless.” 
Removing these criteria will make all homeless people a priority.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fno-place-to-call-home-clip-from-homelessness-documentary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Place%20to%20Call%20Home%3A%20clip%20from%20homelessness%20documentary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fno-place-to-call-home-clip-from-homelessness-documentary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Place%20to%20Call%20Home%3A%20clip%20from%20homelessness%20documentary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fno-place-to-call-home-clip-from-homelessness-documentary-video&media=>
No Place to Call Home: clip from homelessness documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/oct/18/no-place-to-call-home-clip-from-homelessness-documentary-video>
Elements of the bill have been taken from the Welsh model 
<http://gov.wales/topics/housing-and-regeneration/legislation/housing-act/?lang=en>
 which was introduced in 2014 with great success. It is said to haveled the 
culture change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/26/welsh-law-early-support-prevents-homelessness-crisis>
 away from box-ticking to actually helping people in flexible and creative 
ways. There are, however, concerns about the ability to implement the policy in 
areas like London where there are huge housing pressures. The problem there is 
that there isn’t the place to put people.

I worked hard to get into Cambridge. But I needed benefits too | Poppy Noor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/19/cambridge-benefits-cut-welfare-under-25s-education>
I went through the system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/19/cambridge-benefits-cut-welfare-under-25s-education>
 at a much more forgiving time, and fit both criteria: physically homeless 
because I was on the street with nowhere to go, and a priority need as a young 
woman fleeing domestic violence. Still it took three months for the council to 
accept I was entitled to housing. I spent three years in “temporary 
accommodation” – never intended as a long-term solution by its very definition. 
EventuallyI went to university 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/16/university-immigrant-effect-education>
 and I was taken off the housing list. That means that now, 10 years later, I 
have been pushed into private renting and still battle homelessness one pay 
cheque at a time. The issue was then, as it is now, not that housing officers 
didn’t want to help: they just had nowhere to put me.

The officials in Barking and Dagenham’s documentary spell out the problem very 
clearly. Policies like the right-to-buy scheme have depleted council housing 
stock, while successive governments have not been committed to replenishing it. 
This is combined with soaring rents and house prices that people can no longer 
afford; insecure wages and a tattered welfare system that means people turn up 
to the council with nowhere to go. This is not the story of unwilling 
bureaucrats, but of the concept of housing as a commodity rather than a right. 
Mandating staff to house people when they have nowhere to put them cannot 
change this issue. Priority or no priority, the question remains: where will 
the people go?
 