
It may seem inevitable that Homeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/homeland> would eventually find its 
way to New York City but the show, which returns for its sixth season on 15 
January on Showtime, initially relocated its narrative there for more practical 
reasons than the city’s deep history with terror threats. Each year showrunner 
Alex Gansa and the producers meet with a group of national security experts in 
Washington DC to get a sense of what’s happening in the world and where it’s 
taking place. This year, although that week of meetings was very useful, the 
story didn’t arise from those sessions. It turned out that the show’s star, 
Claire Danes, wanted to spend more time at home.

Rip it up and start again: can shows like The Affair survive constant 
reinvention?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/the-affair-homeland-american-horror-story-tv-reinvention>
“It’s taken us to Pakistan in the past, as well as Berlin,” executive producer 
Chip Johannessen says. “It did not take us to New York. That came about in a 
very different way, which was that we’d all been on the road for a while. 
Claire had been on the road for a while and she was ready to get home, which 
for her was New York. So that’s how we ended up there. We had to reverse 
engineer the show to a location for the first time.”

The writers struggled with how they could make New York the right backdrop for 
the show, which has previously been centered in DC, Pakistan and Berlin. The 
CIA, which Danes’ protagonist Carrie Mathison is no longer part of, is less of 
a focal point. Instead, the team felt that the current state of affairs in 
America could provide the right thematic notes.

“There was this interesting idea that things are very disrupted here at home 
and some of that is due to things that are going on elsewhere in the world, 
like the terrorist threat, and some of it is about things like a new 
president-elect,” Johannessen says. “We found this time interesting and 
topical. Someone has been elected president, they haven’t yet taken office and 
we’ve put them at odds with the national security establishment. Which, as it 
turns out, was a kind of lucky guess.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6EBmdbsWTNE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6EBmdbsWTNE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6EBmdbsWTNE&media=>
Season six opens six months on from last season’s events in Berlin. Carrie is 
now living and working at a law firm in Brooklyn, where much of the episodes 
take place. Gansa and crew weren’t that interested in showcasing New York 
monuments like the Empire State building or in shooting along Fifth Avenue 
(although the premiere does include shots in Times Square). A lot of the action 
is set in the outer boroughs, with the city skyline in the background, 
purposefully representing the potentially unreachable American Dream. The 
initial few episodes set up a narrative that includes an incoming female 
president-elect who disagrees with the CIA’s practices, and a tense dynamic 
between the Muslim community and the national security forces in New York.

'Homeland is racist': artists sneak subversive graffiti on to TV show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/15/homeland-is-racist-artists-subversive-graffiti-tv-show>
“This is not about setting terrorism in New York,” says executive producer and 
director Lesli Linka Glatter, who is at the helm of four episodes this season. 
“One of the things Alex Gansa really didn’t want to do was make this about an 
attack on New York because it’s so horrifying to even think of. Carrie, again 
this season, is not in the CIA, which gives us the opportunity to really look 
at the intelligence community. We’re looking at the reactions since 9/11 and 
the fact that we now have a $120bn-a-year counter-terrorism budget. There’s a 
lot at stake to keeping us scared. Not that there are not threats that are very 
real and true. We don’t want terrorism in our country, obviously, but there has 
to be a rational way to look at this and you can’t accuse a group of people for 
things they have never done and are never going to do.”

Johannessen echoes the importance of not making a New York-set season of 
Homeland about a terror attack on the city. Past seasons have focused a lot on 
terror attacks, many of which have mirrored those in the real world. But this 
season needed to find new ways to explore themes of national security.

“New York has a special meaning to us,” Johannessen says. “One thing we didn’t 
want to do is create a big terrorist incident in New York. It felt like a bad 
thing karmically and we just didn’t want to do it. I think that was a good 
thing for us, honestly, because it really meant we had to go, ‘What stuff 
that’s not like that could we do to make a season here?’ At some point there 
are these thriller tropes that do involve some guns, so we didn’t totally 
abandon that. But we definitely didn’t want to build it around a big 9/11-type 
incident this season.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fhomeland-season-six-new-york-city-claire-danes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa49d5b7096fd8c2dcb9b81c1bf37d9f9f7e56c34%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Homeland%20hits%20New%20York%20City%3A%20'Things%20are%20very%20disrupted%20here%20at%20home'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fhomeland-season-six-new-york-city-claire-danes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Homeland%20hits%20New%20York%20City%3A%20%27Things%20are%20very%20disrupted%20here%20at%20home%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fhomeland-season-six-new-york-city-claire-danes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa49d5b7096fd8c2dcb9b81c1bf37d9f9f7e56c34%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Claire Danes as Carrie Mathison and Patrick Sabongui as Reda Kazem in 
Homeland, season six. Photograph: JoJo Whilden/Showtime 
The significance of 9/11 does, however, linger throughout the episodes. 
Bombing attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/new-york-bombing-no-international-terrorism-link-governor-cuomo>
 occurred in New York in September, shortly after the new season was announced, 
and there is a constant sense of what the city has been through.

“It’s overwhelming and you feel a lot of responsibility to look at that in a 
real way,” Glatter notes. “One has to have a lot of responsibility. We’re 
telling a story. Yes, it’s based on research and we’re looking at different 
issues, but it is still in a story.” She adds: “NYC was ground zero of 9/11 and 
all of our reactions and horror and fear of terrorism comes from that, so 
basing [Homeland] here and talking about these issues and looking at some of 
the overreactions to 9/11 and doing it here seems to bring everything full 
circle.”

Much of this year is, in fact, about exploring all sides of national security. 
What are the pros and cons to the ongoing sense of fear regarding terrorism and 
the Muslim community? In the early seasons of Homeland, Carrie was gung-ho 
about the CIA and her role there. She viewed the agency’s work as essential, 
but as the show has progressed her perspective has shifted. Now she works 
almost in opposition to the government. In season six, Carrie’s focus is on 
defending a young Muslim man who has been (presumably) wrongfully accused of 
terrorist intent. She’s fighting to defend an entire community against a very 
real sense of prejudgment. The season continues her on this journey away from 
the CIA, which works particularly well in the New York setting.

Watch this! The must-see TV shows of 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/07/must-see-tv-shows-of-2017-girls-twin-peaks-game-of-thrones>
“We had a sense that what we wanted to do this season was take her to the 
outermost marker of that trajectory away from the CIA,” Johannessen says. “Her 
business this year is very much counter to the CIA. In the CIA she thought she 
could make the world better and she wasn’t able to do that there. Now she’s 
actually turned against it, and I think that’s the dynamic of this year.”

Moving the show’s location every season, which is currently renewed through to 
season eight, has allowed for these big shifts in storytelling. It lets the 
producers and writer take on new themes each year and to build on previous 
narratives without repeating them, which feels important in today’s television 
landscape.

“Every place we set Homeland very much becomes a character in the 
storytelling,” Glatter says. “New York is the quintessential American city. It 
all mixes here. We reinvent the show every year. We’re never going back to the 
world and the same city. It’s almost like doing a pilot all the time. You’re 
not always going back to the same hospital set, so the world is constantly 
changing.”
 