
I had thought I had heard the last of “Beau Nash 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beau_Nash>,” the correspondent who reproved me 
some weeks ago for suggesting that white spats and white gloves were worn by 
the right sort of men just now. In myarticle of May 26 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/14/Obs19120526.jpeg> I told this 
correspondent how he could satisfy himself that he was wrong and that I was 
right, but I see from the postmark of his letter (which he does not sign with 
his name) that he lives a long way from London. Therefore, I do not see why he 
should pose as an authority on men’s fashions, which are invariably “set” in 
London. But “Beau Nash” raises another point which may be of interest to other 
readers of these articles, and so I quote a part of his long letter.

“These white spats and white and yellow gloves are an innovation, I take it,” 
he writes, “from the Continent, and as distinctly un-English as the green 
Tyrolese hat with the bow at the back which set my blood boiling. No, sir, let 
Englishmen dress as Englishmen, and not be led by foreigners and play actors. 
The old English breed always led the foreigners in fashion of dress, and should 
do so still; but when I see the atrocities I have mentioned above I lament the 
decadence of the British race, and pray that it may be but a temporary 
aberration which is at present permeating this country in every manner and 
form, and that matters may eventually readjust themselves, and English 
gentlemen again assert their superiority not only in dress but in ‘arms’ and in 
‘men.’”

So now you know what kind of man “Beau Nash” is. He concludes his letter with 
a story of a solicitor who wore a satin bow at the ball. “Beau Nash” was a 
steward at the ball, and but for his kindly intervention the offending 
solicitor would have been thrown out. I take it that the moral of this true 
story is that you must not be a solicitor, and that if you are you must not 
wear a satin bow at a ball, but as I have never advocated the wearing of satin 
bows at balls I do not know why “Beau Nash” should trouble to write three pages 
about the young solicitor and his bow.


But, replying to “Beau Nash” regarding those Tyrolese hats which make his 
blood boil, I will give him the name of one man who was usually regarded in 
England and on the Continent as the leader of fashion, a man who, when he 
travelled on the Continent, was followed at a respectful distance by 
Continental tailors, anxious to know what London fashions were. I refer, of 
course, toKing Edward <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_VII>. 

It was King Edward who first introduced that green hat into this country; and, 
by the way, it is aHomburg hat <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homburg_(hat)> – 
not a Tyrolese. Hats of this kind were made originally for Continental 
sportsmen, and King Edward set the fashion among sportsmen in this country. He 
frequently wore one when he was shooting. If “Beau Nash” wants any proof he can 
turn to “King Edward VII as a Sportsman 
<https://archive.org/details/kingedwardviiass00wats>,” by Alfred E. T. Watson, 
in which are several photographs of His late Majesty wearing this hat. King 
Edward also liked this hat when he was motoring; I know, because I frequently 
saw him wearing one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmen-beau-nash-hot-summer-days-archive-1912%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c010dec9919697d8de73b57f3379d64a695bcc4%2F0_345_1313_1362%2F1313.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hot%20summer%20fashions%20for%20men%20%E2%80%93%20fashion%20archive%2C%2016%20June%201912&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmen-beau-nash-hot-summer-days-archive-1912%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hot%20summer%20fashions%20for%20men%20%E2%80%93%20fashion%20archive%2C%2016%20June%201912&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmen-beau-nash-hot-summer-days-archive-1912%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c010dec9919697d8de73b57f3379d64a695bcc4%2F0_345_1313_1362%2F1313.jpg>
 English actor Claude Rains wearing spats, 1912. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Some of the smartest men in town seem to have prophesied to themselves that 
June was to be very hot, and to have ordered their clothes accordingly. Hence 
the number of men I have seen lately wearing black lounge coats and waistcoats 
and dark striped trousers and silk hats. Apparently these men said to 
themselves that a lounge coat was cooler and more comfortable than a black 
morning coat, and so they set a little fashion among themselves.

The black lounge coats are mostly braided and are made to be worn unbuttoned; 
that is to say, the lapels are made to roll right down to the edge of the coat. 
The waistcoats to these coats are made with rather a small opening – quite a 
foolish idea really for a summer waistcoat – and yet these waistcoats look to 
be very smart when worn with the coats I have described. These coats, by the 
way, are usually bound with black ribbon about half an inch wide, and the 
material of the coats is a very soft stuff, so as to make a good contrast with 
the ribbon at the edge. The coat is also a trifle longer than the ordinary 
lounge coat, so that it is really “more of a coat” than an ordinary lounge coat.

This black lounge coat is a very smart coat, indeed, and looks very well with 
a silk hat. A coat built somewhat on these lines has long been a favourite with 
some City men who have wanted a coat without tails when they have been sitting 
in their offices.


This is an edited extract, click here to read article in full 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/14/Obs19120612.jpeg>
 