
When there’s a smile on everyone’s face you know the holiday is working. Does 
having the whole family – from the smallest to the tallest – all having fun 
together in one place sound like an unattainable dream? Think again.

Gathering the family together used to be as simple as Sunday dinner, but today 
everyone leads busy lives and coordinating multiple family members can be near 
impossible.

However, suggest a holiday where no one has to cook or clean, there are pools 
aplenty, babysitters on call and as much ‘we’ or ‘me’ time as everyone wants, 
and suddenly everyone’s available. When the whole family goes cruising 
together, that’s what happens.

Cruise ships are perfect family holidays because they’re designed so everyone 
can have fun. There are activities for both young and young at heart, and 
places where you can get away from everyone and everything. Ships have taken 
entertainment, facilities and comfort to a whole new level.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c5243229f92d08d37d07f225eb72c751bc41d48%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20get%20away%20from%20it%20all%3A%20with%20the%20family%2C%20without%20the%20fuss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20get%20away%20from%20it%20all%3A%20with%20the%20family%2C%20without%20the%20fuss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c5243229f92d08d37d07f225eb72c751bc41d48%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
 Illustration: Eirian Chapman 
Fun on the ocean waves

The first ingredient to a great multi-generation holiday is keeping the 
children happy. You won’t have any problems convincing them to try out the 
kid’s club activities when they’re told about pirate parades, dance evenings 
and hands-on science-based activities, all organised into age groups. Some kids 
have so much fun they want to spend all their time there.

How to get away from it all: with the family, without the fuss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/royal-caribbean-live-life-big/2016/feb/15/how-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss>
While the lure of the kid’s club activities will have your children begging to 
go, there are also plenty of options for the whole family. See what’s offered 
on board: perhaps you’ll begin by teaching little ones to drive a dodgem car 
and share plenty of safe bumps and lots of laughs. Or later in the day why not 
visit the roller skating rink, another new skill or old favourite that all the 
family can enjoy.

With countless activities included in the cost, even teenagers might find it 
hard to hide their enthusiasm: open-mic nights, sports competitions, 
basketball, teen dinners and parties, plus a teen-only lounge and disco.

Or you could head outdoors. There’s a choice of options on every vessel, such 
as mini golf and the challenge of a 12-metre rock climbing wall. Pull on your 
swimmers, grab a board and try out the surf simulator, all without leaving the 
ship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f93be4fe218db00819022918782a440583fd7d3%2F0_0_6081_3649%2F6081.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20get%20away%20from%20it%20all%3A%20with%20the%20family%2C%20without%20the%20fuss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20get%20away%20from%20it%20all%3A%20with%20the%20family%2C%20without%20the%20fuss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f93be4fe218db00819022918782a440583fd7d3%2F0_0_6081_3649%2F6081.jpg>
 North Star on the Quantum of the Seas cruiseliner. Photograph: Michel 
Verdure/Supplied 
The thrill level is high, but the Ovation of the Seas’ North Star is suitable 
for any age group. Take the grandchildren on a ride to remember as the 
jewel-shaped capsule rises gently into the air on a 360-degree sightseeing 
journey 91 metres high.

It doesn’t always have to be about adventure, there’s plenty of family 
enjoyment to be had just watching a movie on the large outdoor poolside screen, 
or a catching a show in the theatre together.

For a touch of relaxation and luxury, head to the spa for mother / grandmother 
/ granddaughter treatments while the men and boys face it off on the basketball 
court.

They have dinner time sorted too. With My Family Time Dining®, kids are served 
quickly and then head off with staff to their activities, leaving parents and 
grandparents to enjoy the peace and quiet.

Parent’s retreat, every day of the week

Need to get away from it all for a while? Sometimes there’s only so much 
togetherness one can take and this is the perfect moment to head off for quiet 
time in the adult-only areas. You’ll find all the peace you need in the 
solarium retreat, or you could bliss out with a couple’s massage in the 
Vitality Spa.

Cruising can be a real flashback for parents with young children. Remember the 
days before kids arrived, when you’d go out for a drink with your partner 
without a care in the world? Well, it’s nearly the same on the ship if your 
little ones are happily playing in Aquanauts or a toddlers’ nursery. You can 
relax knowing they’ll contact you by pager if you’re needed. In the meantime, 
unwind with a cocktail, Japanese at Izumi or maybe even dinner at Jamie’s 
Italian. Settle in and see a Broadway-style show. There’s no need to rush 
either: the kid’s clubs have long hours so you can dance the night away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a2a44f551c96890a250e80cbc197ce75e59259%2F0_2391_3456_2075%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20get%20away%20from%20it%20all%3A%20with%20the%20family%2C%20without%20the%20fuss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20get%20away%20from%20it%20all%3A%20with%20the%20family%2C%20without%20the%20fuss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-live-life-big%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhow-to-get-away-from-it-all-with-the-family-without-the-fuss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a2a44f551c96890a250e80cbc197ce75e59259%2F0_2391_3456_2075%2F3456.jpg>
 Take a break from sitting at the kid’s table and dine at Jamie’s Italian, one 
of the many dining options on board. Photograph: David Loftus/Supplied 
Family time can continue when the ship docks, with shore excursions designed 
for a wide range of abilities and interests. How about dog-sledding in Alaska, 
feeding dolphins in the Bahamas, swimming with turtles in the Caribbean or 
riding a gondola up the world’s largest spherical building in Stockholm?

It’s the sort of holiday where lasting memories are made.
 