
Over the past few decades, the humble handpump has become the go-to option for 
rural water supply in developing countries. They’re used to extract groundwater 
which is mostly clean, easy and cheap to access, and available year-round. 
Handpumps are usually a better option than open wells – which are highly 
vulnerable to contamination – and piped schemes or motorised pumps, which 
require the skills, finances, and management that’s often lacking in remote, 
rural areas.

However, though around 60,000 handpumps 
<http://www.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/Carter-2010-User.pdf> (pdf) are 
installed across sub-Saharan Africa every year, typically 30 to 40% of those in 
the region do not work at any one time, according toestimates made by 
<http://www.rural-water-supply.net/en/resources/details/203> the Rural Water 
Supply Network.

More often than not, broken handpumps are abandoned and fall into disuse. The 
World Bank has estimated that over the last 20 years this represents a loss of 
investmentof more than $1.2bn 
<https://upgro.files.wordpress.com/2014/03/hidden_crisis_final_report_v7.pdf> 
(pdf).

The ATMs bringing cheap, safe water to Nairobi's slums
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/16/atms-cheap-safe-water-nairobis-slums>
Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> points can fail for a 
number of reasons. First, most handpumps are manufactured in India where 
quality controls are not always enforced and poor-grade recycled metal is used, 
meaning parts break more easily.

Second, and most commonly, handpumps stop working because the borehole it 
extracts groundwater through was drilled in the wrong place or in the wrong way.

Not enough data about the land or geology contributes to this problem. “When 
you drill a borehole in the UK, there are incredibly detailed maps and borehole 
logs [registered with theBritish Geological Survey <http://www.bgs.ac.uk/> 
(BGS)] to help you decide where to drill,” says Sean Furey, a water and 
sanitation specialist atSkat Consulting <http://www.skat.ch/>. “Even in 
countries where a similar organisation exists, that sort of data isn’t 
available because NGOs, the private sector or even governments who commission 
boreholes aren’t aware that they need to submit their drilling logs.”

Lastly, a shortage of skilled drillers and site supervisors exacerbates the 
problem of poorly drilled or sited boreholes. “If you don’t have a supervisor 
on site all the time, checking that the driller’s doing the right job, that’s 
when things can go wrong,” says Furey. “The driller might not be paying 
attention, or maybe the rig was set up in the wrong way so instead of going 
straight down, the drill goes off at an angle.”


Globally, 663 million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/01/global-access-clean-water-sanitation-mapped>
 still lack access to an improved water source – one that protects from 
external contamination – according to data released by the WHO/Unicef Joint 
Monitoring Programme last year. Eight in 10 of those people live in rural areas 
and almost half – 319 million people – live in sub-Saharan Africa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fhow-do-you-solve-a-problem-like-a-broken-water-pump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa665b36e5d9e909f3126fa4f2839d16d943ddd3%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20you%20solve%20a%20problem%20like%20a%20broken%20water%20pump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fhow-do-you-solve-a-problem-like-a-broken-water-pump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20you%20solve%20a%20problem%20like%20a%20broken%20water%20pump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fhow-do-you-solve-a-problem-like-a-broken-water-pump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa665b36e5d9e909f3126fa4f2839d16d943ddd3%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
To date, evidence of water point failure has been purely anecdotal. This is 
where theHidden Crisis project <http://upgro.org/consortium/hidden-crisis2/> – 
part of theUPGro <http://upgro.org/> (Unlocking the Potential of Groundwater 
for the Poor) research programme – comes in. “The quality of data we have as a 
sector is very bad,” says Vincent Casey, a senior water and sanitation adviser 
atWaterAid <http://www.wateraid.org/uk>. “We can see that there are issues with 
handpump failure but we can’t see much about the service levels: will they be 
fixed, how long was the downtime, how many times did the handpump break in a 
year?”

Over the next few years, researchers from WaterAid, Overseas Development 
Institute <http://www.odi.org/>, BGS and other organisations will analyse 600 
handpumps across Uganda, Malawi and Ethiopia, to get “statistically significant 
data” about the main causes of handpump and borehole failure. The Hidden Crisis 
project will then propose policy recommendations to address them.

There are numerous solutions to this “hidden crisis” already in the pipeline.

Invented by researchers at the University of Oxford’s Smith School of 
Enterprise and the Environment <http://www.smithschool.ox.ac.uk/>, the 
waterpoint data transmitter fits on to the handle of a waterpump, and using a 
small low-cost accelerometer – similar to one in a smartphone that switches the 
screen from portrait to landscape – monitors the arching movement of the 
handle. It uses this data to estimate water usage and sends the information via 
SMS to a web-based dashboard.

In areas of Kenya where this smart water pump is currently being used, social 
enterprisesFundiFix 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LQcqifPuNU8&feature=youtu.be> – monitors the 
dashboard. The manager identifies which pumps are being used and where a water 
point might be broken, then sends a mechanic to fix it. “The mechanic will call 
the community ahead and ask questions, so they’re usually able to identify the 
problem and go to the pump with the correct spare parts to fix it there and 
then,” says Patrick Thomson, a lead researcher at the Smith’s schools water 
programme.
A map showing the three locations in Kenya where the waterpoint data 
transmitter has been retrofitted on to handpumps. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/mar/2016-03-16T16:39:35.html>  A map 
showing the three locations in Kenya where the waterpoint data transmitter has 
been retrofitted on to handpumps. 
The device has been retrofitted onto 300 handpumps across three sites in Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> – in Kwale, Kitui and Kakamega – and 
through various trials the response time to fix a broken pump has been reduced 
from a month to two days.

We hope to be able to reduce downtimes to zero, which could have huge benefits 
in terms of public health
Patrick Thomson 
The team is now working with Unicef to expand the scheme within Kenya and to 
other countries – Bangladesh and Zimbabwe – as well as looking into ways to 
identify pump breakdowns before they occur. By monitoring the noise the 
handpump makes, managers can tell whether a part of the equipment is 
deteriorating and needs to be replaced before the pump stops producing water. 
“We hope to be able to reduce downtimes to zero, which could have huge benefits 
in terms of public health and the burden of collecting water,” says Thomson.

Experts are also keen to highlight the need for qualified engineers and 
supervisors. While some NGOs, like WaterAid, ensure boreholes are drilled 
correctly in the first place, there’s not much you can do to right a poorly 
drilled borehole, says Casey. “We’re working with the RWSN to promote the 
importance of higher standards of drilling, siting of boreholes, and 
supervision of their construction to governments, other NGOs, and to other 
people operating in the rural water supply sector,” he says.

Last year WaterAid, Unicef and the RWSN released a series of animated films 
<https://vimeo.com/channels/drilling> that can be downloaded and shown around 
academic institutions to highlight the importance of professional water well 
drilling.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2Fchannels%2Fdrilling%2F128478995&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2Fchannels%2Fdrilling%2F128478995>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2Fchannels%2Fdrilling%2F128478995&media=>
 ‘A borehole that lasts a lifetime’ is one is a series of videos produced by 
WaterAid, Unicef and the Rural Water Supply Network to promote the 
professionalisation of drilling. 
“The quality of implementation is what we’re trying to champion because so 
many of us are just fed up of seeing poor quality water points,” says Furey.

Most important, perhaps, are the efforts to ensure that the long-term 
sustainability of water points is placed at the forefront of water point 
installations across the sector.

Beer and business: the unexpected benefits of water access in Cameroon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/07/beer-and-business-the-unexpected-benefits-of-water-access-in-cameroon>
“The method whereby agencies go in and just put boreholes in without the 
necessary support structures has to end,” says Casey. A coalition of NGOs – 
including WaterAid, IRC and Water for People – are working towards the Agenda 
for Change, a plan to transform how rural water supplies are provided. “It’s 
about working with national systems, supporting where changes or adjustments to 
those systems need to be made, and really pushing to get these sustainable 
water supply services in place,” says Casey. “There’s a momentum gathering and 
we’d like more NGOs to come onboard with the principles.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 