
There are no puzzles, no enemies. You’re alone on a remote Hebridean island 
with little evidence of life beyond the cawing gulls, and the odd glimpse of a 
shadowy figure on the horizon. There is one path to follow, which guides you 
over the dunes and into caves lit by phosphorescent flora. The story unravels, 
not through the completion of tasks, but through a pondering, poetic narration, 
and scattered letters.

Are you playing a game?

That question has haunted Dear Esther, an interactive exploration of love and 
grief, since its arrival as a modification to the sci-fi shooter Half-Life in 
2008. Developed by a small team of researchers at the University of Portsmouth 
and later released as a standalone game, it treated the player as a tourist 
rather than a resident. Your agency in this beautifully drawn world is 
restricted to movement. The story washes over you like a tide rolling pebbles 
along the beach.

This week, publisher Curve Digital is releasing Dear Esther: Landmark Edition 
onPlayStation 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> and Xbox 
One – an enhanced and updated version of the 2012 PC release. It remains a 
stark and spellbinding experience, which renders its lonely island in 
scintillating detail. The story of an unnamed narrator trudging through the 
grass and sand, reading out letters meant for his dead wife, Esther, remains 
elusive and haunting, the exact time and place of the action obfuscated behind 
historical yarns and recollections, as though the island is exerting its own 
autobiography onto the telling. Snippets of the story are provided in a 
randomised order, so that each playthrough reveals different angles and images. 
The interactivity is mostly interpretive – the player has to work out exactly 
how Esther died, and who is responsible, and where really is the narrator now? 
But even that description is misleading, because there is no compulsion toward 
interpretation. You can just walk and listen to the beautiful music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fhow-walking-sim-first-person-shooter-dear-esther%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb36fa3e50d9012c586d8306eb0ea1336c8f91fd4%2F94_0_2811_1688%2F2811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20walking%20sims%20became%20as%20important%20as%20the%20first-person%20shooter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fhow-walking-sim-first-person-shooter-dear-esther%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20walking%20sims%20became%20as%20important%20as%20the%20first-person%20shooter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fhow-walking-sim-first-person-shooter-dear-esther%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb36fa3e50d9012c586d8306eb0ea1336c8f91fd4%2F94_0_2811_1688%2F2811.jpg>
 Firewatch looks like a survival sim, but what you’re really grappling with is 
solutitude Photograph: Campo Santo 
Now, of course, we recognise Dear Esther as one of the originators in a new 
sub-genre of games, often termed walking sims. Subsequent titles such as Gone 
Home, Firewatch and the Stanley Parable have taken the premise of a minimalist 
interactive experience, and pushed it in new directions, though the fundaments 
are often the same: no puzzles, no enemies, just story, sound and movement. 
Newcomers likeThe Grave <http://www.grave-game.com/> and Niten 
<http://nitengame.com/> promise to take things further.

All of these titles could be easy to dismiss as experimental diversions, a 
cluster of outliers far from the rest of the industry. But that’s not really 
how it’s turned out. Dear Esther, and titles like it, have introduced all sorts 
of interesting questions to the game development community. They have made 
designers think differently about elements like pace, environmental 
storytelling and meaning.

Richard Lemarchand, lead designer on the first three Uncharted titles, has 
talked about how The Graveyard, a 2009 game by Belgian studio Tale of Tales 
influenced the famed “Peaceful Village” scene in the second instalment of 
Naughty Dog’s blockbusting series. Nathan wanders through a Nepalese town, 
indulging in amusing but ultimately pointless interactions with the locals, 
kicking footballs, patting bulls, chatting – just as in The Graveyard, the 
character simply walks along a cemetery path, taking in the sights and sounds. 
We have seen the influence of walking sims in modern horror titles such as Soma 
and Vanishing of Ethan Carter – both emphasising environment and atmosphere 
over interaction.
 The Graveyard, a simple game that inspired the Uncharted series Photograph: 
Tale of Tales 
Stripped of traditional ludic elements, walking sims give the player room to 
really investigate the feel of every location, to think about the characters, 
to relate to them on a human level rather than as agents of action. 
Portland-based developer The Fullbright Company was inundated with messages 
from players who saw their own lives and struggles reflected in Gone Home, a 
domestic drama about first love and family breakdown. Firewatch, a game about 
loneliness and isolation, set in the Wyoming wilderness, got a lot of players 
thinking aboutthe emotional distance in their own lives 
<http://www.dualshockers.com/2016/02/29/firewatch-how-a-game-about-loneliness-brought-me-closer-to-other-people/>
.

First-person shooters like Doom and Unreal revolutionised our understanding of 
space, structure and embodiment in games. They put players into the body of a 
killing machine and set them lose. First-person walking sims have taken the 
environmental lessons, the same ideas of architectural structure as a form of 
storytelling, and diverted the focus from action to introversion. They leave 
the player alone in a world with their own thoughts.

Playing Dear Esther now it seems crazy that its release was almost 
provocative. It angered people – people who tossed around definitions of what a 
game should be; definitions that would always lead to more questions, more 
exceptions, more problems. We have seen a similar reaction to No Man’s Sky, its 
soulful, minimalist approach to space exploration at odds with the expectations 
and ambiguous hype. Weird games still have the power to shock and create fury, 
which is probably a good thing.

People are always asking questions about the boundaries of art – what 
qualifies and what doesn’t. This debate has been transposed onto games. What 
Dear Esther, and all walking sims tell us, is that there are different kinds of 
challenge and agency in this medium. Depth is not purely systemic. Dear Esther, 
like its spiritual successor Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture, simulates walking 
through a kind of installation. You have to work with it; you fill in the gaps.

It was a determination to reduce the elements of a first-person shooter to the 
absolute fundamentals that led to the development of Dear Esther. Since then, 
the genre has become an important force in its own right. Mainstream game 
developers play indie games; their teams have similar ideas and wonder about 
similar questions. It is possible to see the influence of experimental games in 
the Bioshock series, in the work and philosophy of Ubisoft, even in the Call of 
Duty series, where the surreal, hallucinogenic memory sequences that have come 
to typify the Black Ops titles, with the same focus on environmental and audio 
effect over player input.

The walking sims have given permission for games to slow down, place the 
emphasis on player interpretation, and tell interesting stories through scenery 
and props and artefacts without resorting to graffiti. Perhaps we won’t 
appreciate their full impact until virtual reality goes mainstream; with an 
input technology that utterly gives itself to the idea of immersion and 
second-by-second experience, those quiet moments of reflection, those detailed 
landscapes, those almost theatrical techniques and stories will make complete 
sense. Perhaps more than any other genre, the walking sim is preparing us for a 
future of synthetic worlds.

 