
In a city famous for its nightlife, I’ve been waking up early to look for 
birds of prey. On a Sunday morning, while the techno clubs are still running, I 
am out on my bike with my binoculars. I pass people coming home from parties or 
from working the nightshift; getting out of taxis, off the U-Bahn. I cycle past 
snatches of music and voices from house parties.

It has been cold overnight and, at Tempelhofer Feld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/05/how-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers>
, the grass is coated in frost. The rising sun glints in the windows of the 
vast old airport terminal building, and the sky is the same pink as the 
markings on the runway. Everything else is monochrome. Cold is in my nostrils 
and I can hear trains, traffic and crows. A birdwatcher friend told me that 
dusk and dawn are the best times to see hawks: “Try to break up your own 
outline by standing against a tree,” he advised.

I’ve been in the park for just a few minutes when a large, heavy bird of prey 
comes screeching out of the trees, upsetting the hooded crows and changing the 
atmosphere. It perches on a post while I fumble with my new binoculars, bought 
from Mauer Park fleamarket, trying to get a closer look; then it flies back 
into the trees and disappears. I am a novice birdwatcher so am not sure what 
species it is, but when I get home I compare the call to a recording online. 
Yes, as I’d hoped, it was a goshawk.

At the beginning of the winter I moved to Berlin from Scotland, looking for 
new experiences and inspiration. I heard that, amazingly, around 100 pairs of 
goshawks (der Habicht in German) breed and live in the city of Berlin. I am 
particularly interested because I’d recently read the wonderfulH is for Hawk by 
Helen Macdonald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/23/h-is-for-hawk-helen-macdonald-review>
, an account of the author’s lifelong passion for birds of prey and training a 
goshawk.

A birdwatcher friend told me that dusk and dawn are the best times to see 
goshawks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431445767850%2F218f71d9-3bca-426c-9270-602133c90d21-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Berlin's%20urban%20goshawks%20helped%20me%20learn%20to%20love%20the%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Berlin%27s%20urban%20goshawks%20helped%20me%20learn%20to%20love%20the%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431445767850%2F218f71d9-3bca-426c-9270-602133c90d21-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tempelhof airport closed in 2008; it is now left open to the public, and to 
wildlife. Photograph: Amy Liptrot 
The northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) is, in most places, notoriously 
elusive, only glimpsed in woodland. In Britain, goshawks were extinct by the 
late 19th century, persecuted by humans who saw them as vermin. They were 
re-introduced from the 1970s and, mixing with escaped falconers’ birds, there 
are now around 450 pairs in the UK.

Macdonald describes goshawks as a “dark grail” for birdwatchers, and how, in 
Britain, “you might spend a week in a forest full of gosses and not see one, 
just traces of their presence”. So I am excited that here in Berlin it is not 
so hard to spot them, even for a beginner like me. If you have an idea of what 
to look or listen for, you can see them from an open-air cafe or even a 
swimming pool. In the last 30 years, they have thrived in Berlin where there is 
an abundance of prey (they hunt and eat mainly pigeons but also birds such as 
crows and magpies, and mammals including rats and squirrels) and they are not 
usually persecuted by humans.

Goshawks are arboreal, they live in trees, and Berlin is one of Europe’s most 
wooded cities, with tree-lined streets (an average 80 per kilometre), and parks 
and cemeteries where the trees have regrown after the second world war. 
Although goshawks are found in a few other cities, Berlin has the highest 
density of goshawk territories anywhere in the world – urban or rural.

Tempelhofer Feld is a huge park in the middle of the city on the site of the 
old airport. The park is a wide expanse ringed by trees, train tracks, 
apartment blocks and the terminal building. The Feld was asite of early 
aviation experiments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/mar/05/tempelhof-airport-berlin-history-nazis-candy-drops-in-pictures>
: in 1909, 150,000 Berliners turned out to watch a Zeppelin flight in front of 
Emperor Wilhelm II. In the 1920s the first airport was built in the area, then 
razed after being bombed in the war. The current building was constructed under 
Hitler’s regime, designed as part of theGermania project 
<http://content.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,1725102,00.html> to create a 
new world capital. When constructed it was the largest building the world, with 
400 air-raid and gas-attack shelters underground.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431445942141%2F45e85c1a-b2b7-4bf0-ae94-82be5b74b789-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Berlin's%20urban%20goshawks%20helped%20me%20learn%20to%20love%20the%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Berlin%27s%20urban%20goshawks%20helped%20me%20learn%20to%20love%20the%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431445942141%2F45e85c1a-b2b7-4bf0-ae94-82be5b74b789-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Goshawks are arboreal, and Berlin is one of Europe’s most wooded cities. 
Photograph:Norbert Kenntner  <http://habicht-berlin.de/allgemeines/> 
After the war, Tempelhof was the site of the American airlift 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/berlin-airlift-begins> in 1948 and 
’49, when West Berlin was supplied by plane. A radar tower, built by the 
Americans in the 1980s for communications and to listen in on the GDR, still 
stands and is now used by the German army. After the end of the Cold War and 
German reunification, Tempelhof was used as the city’s main civil airport until 
2008; there were subsequent plans to develop the site, but a referendum decided 
there would be no construction in the park for 10 years. It is now left open to 
the public, and to wildlife. The planes left and the birds returned. Fast wings 
still descend over the runway.

Enthused and encouraged by a couple of hawk sightings, I contact Berlin 
ornithologist Dr Norbert Kenntner <http://habicht-berlin.de/allgemeines/>, who 
is part of a project to observe the city’s goshawks and ring their chicks. One 
sunny Sunday, Norbert kindly takes me around goshawk territories, mainly 
cemeteries in Neukölln and Kreuzberg. He plays surf guitar in his car between 
sites and talks knowledgeably and enthusiastically.

Goshawks tend to spend much of their time perched, he explains, rather than 
soaring like buzzards, so they can be difficult to find. He describes how the 
hawk uses its long, strong legs and talons to kill its prey; it can kill a 
pigeon in mid-air. He shows me how to find their plucking posts – piles of 
pigeon feathers on the ground – and tells me about “flagging” when, around 
mating season, males show their white under-tail feathers.

We spot big, dark goshawk nests high in the trees, and look to see if they 
contain any new build (green leaves that show they’ve been worked on this 
year). At the top of a church steeple in Kreuzberg, we see the very male 
goshawk that is pictured on theWikipedia entry for the bird 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northern_goshawk>. Nearby, in the cemetery, his 
mate is perched on their nest. I look through binoculars at her and then watch 
her fly, as pigeons disperse, getting a good view of her pale flecked 
underside. As Macdonald describes, “goshawks in flight are a complicated grey.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431446079086%2F3fac4535-f76a-4396-89e9-0bbd6b1354c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Berlin's%20urban%20goshawks%20helped%20me%20learn%20to%20love%20the%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Berlin%27s%20urban%20goshawks%20helped%20me%20learn%20to%20love%20the%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fberlin-goshawks-urban-wildlife-tempelhof-airport-birdwatching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431446079086%2F3fac4535-f76a-4396-89e9-0bbd6b1354c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Visitors relax and enjoy barbecues beside the former runway of Tempelhof 
airport. Photograph: Carsten Koall/Getty Images 
As I walk around my new city, on my way to job interviews or first dates, I 
find myself thinking about the city like a hawk: looking up at treetops, window 
ledges and chimneys. Goshawks live in trees but use buildings as hunting 
perches. I’m looking up at the crosses on top of churches and the crescent 
moons on mosques, at satellite dishes and cranes.

Armed with knowledge from Norbert, I keep searching, setting my alarm and 
taking a long-cut across Tempelhofer on my way to work, or going at dusk to a 
square near my flat in Kreuzberg where he told me there was a nesting site. I 
see goshawks maybe half of the times I go to Tempelhof and kestrels every time, 
often accompanied by a motorcade of crows. Urban birds have learned to be 
unbothered by the dog walkers, runners and skateboarders.

One lunchtime, crossing a busy square, I unexpectedly hear the yittering call 
of the goshawk directly above. I look up and see a goshawk and crow in chase, 
then together in combat for a noisy moment before disappearing behind the 
red-roofed buildings. It’s an exciting and violent spectacle; no one else 
browsing the market stalls or sitting outside cafes notices, but I am buzzing. 
I am pleased I can identify the call among the other high pitches of Kreuzberg: 
sirens, babies crying, screeching brakes. I’ve become tuned into another 
frequency vibrating alongside our urban lives. Knowing about the raptors gives 
another dimension to this city.

How Berliners refused to give Tempelhof airport over to developers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/05/how-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers>
Urban birds provide chances for observation impossible in rural areas. 
Ornithologists are still learning about the species and seeing new behaviour in 
cities. Goshawks have been in Berlin since the mid-70s and the population 
boomed in the last 15 years, but is now levelling out. The city’s territories 
are almost full, and urban birds are vulnerable to disease and death by flying 
into windows.

Goshawks are protected but they face illegal persecution by humans 
(gamekeepers, pigeon fanciers, collectors) in rural areas, and young hawks 
leaving Berlin could be in danger. For this reason, they have been named “bird 
of the year 
<https://www.deutschland.de/en/topic/culture/town-country/nature-of-the-year-2015>
” by the German conservation organisation NABU, to encourage reporting of their 
persecution.

The hawks become a mascot of my first months in a new city, something to 
pursue when my priorities are unclear. I like knowing that the city is not 
completely human, and become interested in other wild creatures in Berlin too: 
red squirrels, foxes and even feral raccoons, descended from animals that 
escaped from farms bombed in the second world war. Nature is not something 
separate and distant: wild beasts live among us, unreliant, adaptive, among 
train tracks, cemeteries, industrial estates, domestic dogs and cats, and 
fireworks. The city is not as tame or discovered as we might think.

The dangers of eco-gentrification: what’s the best way to make a city greener? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/06/dangers-ecogentrification-best-way-make-city-greener>
 