
There are almost no limits to how human centred design can be applied. While 
many of us are familiar with high-profile organisations where the focus is 
firmly on customer experience – from Apple to Amazon – there are countless 
other innovations around the globe where this creative approach to problem 
solving is being applied in unconventional ways.

Speaking at a TED talk about human centred design, David Kelley, founder of 
global design company IDEO and a pioneer of human centred design, pointed to a 
couple of interesting examples: a ‘smart’ dressing room with interactive mirror 
at Prada’s New York store, where customers could access information on garments 
in the form of design sketches, catwalk video clips, and colour and fabric 
swatches at the touch of a button, and Spyfish, a submarine television vehicle 
that can provide users with an underwater diving experience that doesn’t 
require them getting wet.

From high-tech retail and adventure to innovative healthcare solutions, IDEO 
has also used human centred design to create patient-centred experiences for 
Planned Parenthood in the US. In a shifting healthcare landscape, Planned 
Parenthood teamed up with IDEO to evolve and rethink and design a number of 
initiatives: a comprehensive patient and employee experience, including waiting 
and recovery areas, a digital patient-provider counselling tool, easy-to-use 
online forms, and a unifying vision for Planned Parenthood staff.

Closer to home, human centred design is also being embraced by the banking 
industry to improve people’s everyday needs. Leandro Pinter, delivery lead and 
agile practice lead at ING DIRECT Australia, says that human centred design is 
changing the way ING does business.

“Human centred design brings purpose and customer value back to the heart of 
the organisation – empathy is the key.
Leandro Pinter, ING DIRECT Australia  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-human-centred-design-is-improving-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6494dcc26b9dcd81093c2e4d48c91aa76b76a71%2F0_55_1271_763%2F1271.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20human%20centred%20design%20is%20improving%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-human-centred-design-is-improving-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20human%20centred%20design%20is%20improving%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-human-centred-design-is-improving-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6494dcc26b9dcd81093c2e4d48c91aa76b76a71%2F0_55_1271_763%2F1271.jpg>
 Leandro Pinter, ING Direct Photograph: Supplied by ING Direct 
“Human centred design brings purpose and customer value back to the heart of 
the organisation – empathy is the key,” Pinter says. “Our people are motivated 
by purpose – what I am doing can actually impact someone’s life.

“The aim is for everyone at ING to think about human centred design and 
innovation in everything that they do – keeping the customer at the centre. We 
try to take the approach that everyone in the organisation is an innovator, not 
just a select few.

“It’s about bringing teams together and closer to the customer, and bringing 
customers into the business at the ‘thinking’ stage of product development. 
It’s about bringing customers to us, and also observing them in their homes and 
environment.

“The world is changing and we need to change how we deliver – digital-based 
organisations like ING DIRECT are leading the way. The future is about solving 
real social problems to create and deliver value.”

Clearly, innovation driven by human centred design can improve the customer 
experience in all manner of ways, however its impact is perhaps being felt most 
strongly in the humanitarian sector.

UNICEF has had a number of success stories to date. One of these was working 
with local government officials in the Nicaraguan village of Orinoco and 
applying human centred design principles to prototype a strategy aimed at 
improving birth registration rates of children.

UNICEF’s research found that many of the parents in the village regarded birth 
registration as a difficult and bureaucratic process – often involving costly 
travel – with little direct benefit. As a result, many children lack birth 
registration, which is vital to accessing basic rights.

After 15 months of planning and feedback clinics, including a co-creation 
workshop, a number of solutions were found, including an SMS-based system to 
improve the real-time information gathering of communal health workers who 
support pregnant women.

Why human centred design matters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/ing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world/2016/nov/14/why-human-centred-design-matters>
IDEO is also working in the humanitarian sector, with its non-profit arm, 
IDEO.org, which was established to apply human centred design to help tackle 
poverty-related challenges around the world. It has been successful in a number 
of innovative initiatives that have made a real impact and improvement to 
people’s lives, including:

 * Clean Team <http://cleanteamtoilets.com/>, a sanitation system that 
delivers and maintains toilets to thousands of people in Ghana who don’t have 
in-home toilets. 
 * Vroom <http://www.joinvroom.org/>, a human centred take on early childhood 
development aimed at engaging low-income parents through tools and messages on 
the importance of positive engagement with their children in the first five 
years of life. After years of refinement and design work, the pilot program was 
launched in Washington, US, in 2014. 
 * Asili <http://asili.net/>, a sustainable community-owned health, 
agricultural and water business in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which 
provides health care and agricultural services (including seeds) as well as 
clean drinking water. 
 And it’s not just larger organisations that have found human centred design 
to be a creative and effective practice. As a class project, a group of 
graduate students at Stanford University was challenged to design a low-cost 
infant incubator for neonatal hypothermia, one of the leading causes of infant 
death in developing nations.

After visiting health centres in Nepal, including interviewing doctors, nurses 
and parents, the group tested dozens of designs, culminating in the Embrace 
Warmer – a reusable, portable and cost-effective design that doesn’t require 
constant electricity, and which is now being used in a number of developing 
countries.

The scope for innovating using the human centred design framework has no 
boundaries. With more unique solutions and products being developed every day 
and being applied across the globe, it is clearly the means to successful 
design in the future. Only time will tell how much further it will take us.
 