
It’s almost six months since Sadiq Khan became London mayor and opinion polls 
suggest that Londoners arepleased with him 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/mayor/sadiq-khan-given-poll-boost-after-first-two-months-in-office-a3292706.html>
 so far. He’s had a high public profile, addressing the capital’ssecurity 
concerns 
<http://www.cityam.com/252475/london-security-six-things-sadiq-khan-considering-tackle>
, making friends withHillary Clinton 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/sadiq-khan-backs-hillary-clinton/> and even 
beinglauded by the Evening Standard 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/comment/comment/sarah-sands-sadiq-khan-has-shown-he-s-the-mayor-our-city-needs-now-a3337981.html>
. Khan has allied with London business groups and others to lobby national 
government for infrastructure investment and stronger devolved powers. Brexit, 
which he and most London voters opposed, has addededge and urgency 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/mayor-sends-welcome-message-to-the-world>
 to this campaign. He’s also made starts ontackling London’s harmful air quality
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/londoners-overwhelmingly-back-sadiq-khans-air-pollution-crackdown>
, sizing upbarriers to social inclusion 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/sadiq-khans-social-integration-chief-matthew-ryder-wants-londoners-to-live-side-by-side-a3340791.html>
 andrecalibrating Transport for London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/sep/23/sadiq-khans-new-tfl-boards-first-meeting-hopping-inclusive-and-refreshed>
 to meet some of his bolder policy goals.

But his biggest challenge is what is now routinely called the London housing 
crisis. This is the issue Londoners are most concerned about. Accordingly, Khan 
dubbed themayoral election 
<http://davehill.typepad.com/double_q_books/2016/08/one.html> a housing policy 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/sep/30/sadiq-khan-london-mayoral-race-is-referendum-on-tory-housing-policy>
. A large part of his approach to this complex policy area will be trying to 
increase the delivery of homes that are affordable for people on low and middle 
incomes. Khan has so far not set a target for the absolute number of what he 
calls “genuinely affordable” homes to be built in his four-year term, but he 
has committed to a long term goal of 50% of all new London dwellings meeting 
that definition. How well is he doing so far? What progress is he making 
towards honouring other housing pledges inhis manifesto 
<http://www.sadiq.london/homes_for_londoners_manifesto>?

A lot of the work on housing has been hard graft behind the scenes. There is a 
widely shared view that Khan’s deputy for housing and residential development,
James Murray <https://www.london.gov.uk/people/mayoral/james-murray>, has 
applied himself to the vast task with an energy, an intelligence and a 
political will that was lacking in Boris Johnson’s time as mayor. He has been 
nurturing the broad consensus that unless London makes a better job of building 
the kinds of homes it and its people most need, everyone stands to lose - 
including the rest of the country. The goodwill of housing associations, 
boroughs of all political complexions, employers and commercial property 
developers has been sought. A dinner Murray had with newhousing minister Gavin 
Barwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jul/19/a-quick-guide-to-new-housing-and-planning-minister-gavin-barwell>
, who is alsominister for London 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/people/gavin-barwell> and MP for a marginal 
London constituency <http://www.gavinbarwell.com/>, appears to have gone 
swimmingly.

Khan has repeatedly stressed that altering the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> housing equation so that it generates 
better results won’t happen quickly or easily. Sooner or later, though, 
Londoners will want to start seeing solid results. What follows is a round-up 
of Khan’s housing policy progress so far and some pointers to important things 
to come.

A trade-off with property developers

Later this year, after the government’s autumn public spending statement on 23 
November 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/autumn-statement-2016-date-confirmed>, City 
Hall will issue its long-brewingsupplementary planning guidance 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/implementing-london-plan/supplementary-planning-guidance>
 (SPG) designed to encourage higher “affordable” housing yields from planning 
deals struck between boroughs and property developers across the city. Like it 
or not, London depends heavily on private sector companies to finance and 
deliver buildings it needs - including much of its affordable housing. Inviting 
them to take a hike might get you a round of applause but, the ways things are 
now, won’t help put roofs over people’s heads.

Khan’s SPG will effectively offer developers an incentive to ensure that the 
proportion of affordable homes agreed for larger schemes meets a minimum level, 
expected to be 35%. London mayors have considerable powers to intervene in 
planning arrangements being worked out at borough level. The SPG will show Khan 
willing to give a fair wind to plans enshrining the desired percentage, but 
take a long, hard look at those that don’t. The trade-off is that developers 
will benefit from the certainty this approach provides – they may have mastered 
thedark arts of viability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/oct/16/earls-court-questions-of-viability>
, but the attendant aggravation costs them time and money too. The SPG will 
also set out what types of home called “affordable” by national government meet 
Khan’s more stringent definition of being “genuinely” so.

Increasing “affordable” supply with public money

Khan has spent some of what’s left of the £1.25bn provided to Boris Johnson 
for 2015-2018 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/housing-and-land/increasing-housing-supply/mayor%E2%80%99s-housing-covenant-2015-18-programme>
 to increase the “affordable” housing component of housing planned for thefirst 
section of the vast Old Oak and Park Royal regeneration project 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/khan-intervenes-to-increase-affordable-housing-on-old-oak-site/7016350.article>
 in west London (whose overall stewardship under Johnson he’sdescribed 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/old-oak-common-regeneration-is-branded-a-mess-in-sadiq-khan-review-a3383996.html>
 as “a mess”). He will soon produce a successor toJohnson’s funding prospectus 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/the_mayors_housing_covenant_2015-18_programme_prospectus.pdf>
, outlining to housing associations and boroughs what it will take for them to 
secure grants from him. This will be published following the autumn statement. 
City Hall is lobbying for further funding for affordable homes.

Building “affordable” homes on public land

Prior to Khan’s election, Transport for London (TfL) had named a panel of 
developer partners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/feb/04/transport-for-london-names-partner-companies-for-land-development-drive>
 to work with on jointly profiting from building on over300 acres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/oct/20/transport-for-london-picks-first-300-acres-for-property-development-drive>
 on 75 sites in its large land portfolio. Its prime objective was to make as 
much money as it could for the city’s transport systems. Khan, though, wants an 
overall50% of homes built on these sites  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-35465056>to be “genuinely 
affordable”. His manifesto specified 
<http://www.sadiq.london/homes_for_londoners_manifesto> that these would be 
part-buy, part-rent shared ownership dwellings prioritised for first-time 
buyers who’ve been renting for five years, especially in Outer London. It is 
another key strand of his drive to increase affordable housing supply.

Since the election, Khan has put in place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/aug/23/london-housing-tfl-land-set-for-affordable-homes-as-sadiq-khan-picks-expert-team>
 arrangements for 200 out of 400 homes he wants built on TfL land at Kidbrooke 
station to meet his requirements and urged the transport body to prioritise 
some of its smaller sites elsewhere. Anannouncement 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/mayor-fast-tracks-more-land-for-affordable-homes>
 earlier this week concerned two of these. One is called Landmark Court near 
London Bridge station, which has been lined up for more than 100 homes, of 
which “at least 35%” will be affordable. The other is called Fenwick South, 
which is actually owned by Lambeth Council. The building of 55 social rented 
homes already planned for it as part of the agreement that will extend the 
Northern Line into Nine Elms will now begin early next year - sooner than 
expected. TfL will be responsible for delivering the homes, which will be owned 
and managed by Lambeth.

A best practice guide for estate regeneration 

Another way Khan could increase the supply of affordable homes would be by 
helping boroughs to add to the number on council-owned housing estates. Recent
research <http://www.centreforlondon.org/publication/estate-densification/> has 
emphasised that many of the biggest Inner London estates have already been 
rebuilt or replaced, but that the potential exists to “densify” others to the 
tune of an estimated 4,000 to 8,000 homes a year. The problem is that such 
“regenerations” have the potential to becontentious, contested and to go very 
wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/oct/10/london-housing-improving-the-theory-and-practice-of-densifying-estates>
 – not least for people living on them. One positive route through this 
difficult terrain is to find ways of “densifying” without extensive demolition 
and temporary rehousing, with current residents directly benefiting from the 
results. When he was Islington Council’s housing lead, James Murrayfirmly 
favoured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/aug/07/estate-regeneration-the-king-square-solution>
 the latter approach. A “best practice” document, setting out the mayor’s 
principles for getting estate regeneration right, is expected to be published 
by the end of this month.

Introducing the London Living Rent 

Khan’s plan to bring in a new private sector tenure with rents set at one 
third of average local household incomes – thereby fitting his definition of 
“genuinely affordable” - was a major element of his housing manifesto. In 
September, hesaid <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-37405991> London 
households typically earning between £35,000 and £45,000 a year - which would 
cover couples each earning substantially less than the average London incomes - 
would qualify forthese new homes 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-37405991> and be able to rent a 
two-bedroom flat for less than £1,000 per month, compared with the London 
average of £1,450. Subsequentpublished details 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/housing-and-land/renting/london-living-rent#acc-i-41302>
 indicate that the eligible household income range could be as wide as £25,000 
to £60,000, depending on the area of London.

The mayor’s intention is that this new form of tenure 
<http://londonist.com/2016/09/mayor-announces-london-living-rent-to-help-blunt-the-housing-crisis>
 would enable tenants to save for mortgage deposits andmove on to home ownership
 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/london-living-rent-confirmed-as-homeownership-product/7016863.article>
. It best described as “rent-indexing” rather than rent controlled according to
one housing expert 
<https://www.ft.com/content/f432c7aa-16bd-11e6-b197-a4af20d5575e>, though at 
City Hall they prefer to describe it as a form of rent regulation applied to a 
specific type of affordable home. Housing providers have said they would be 
able to supply London Living Rent properties, though some political debate has 
centred on how far they’d be affordable to renters earning the London Living 
Wage. The tenure period underLondon Living Rent terms 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/housing-and-land/renting/london-living-rent#acc-i-41303>
 will be “generally of up to five years”, says City Hall. Hackney Council, 
which is eager to help young, middle income residents remain in the borough as 
well as sustaining its social housing delivery, has pledged to be the first to 
see 500 London Living Rent homes built. It is thought that the very first 
London Living Rent homes could start to be built next year.

Understanding the impacts of foreign buyers

Much blame for London’s high housing costs is routinely aimed at foreign 
buyers investing in absurdly expensive “prime central” flats, but the true 
impacts of such finance and the use to which resulting properties are put are 
varied and unclear. Khan iscommissioning independent research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/01/london-housing-sadiq-khan-research-brief-recognises-need-for-overseas-investors>
 into the phenomenon, hoping to get a fuller picture so that housing policy can 
be developed accordingly. Significantly, the remit for this research recognises 
that, for good or ill, overseas buyers continue to play a big part in enabling 
development in London to happen. Khan wants the final report delivered next 
spring.

Lessening the ill-effects of the Housing and Planning Act

During the mayoral election campaign 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/zac-versus-sadiq.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, Khan’s Conservative rival Zac Goldsmith made much of an amendment to a piece 
of legislation that even fellow Tories thought very bad for London and which 
Goldsmith claimed would enable the forced sale of council homes toresult 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jan/11/what-will-zac-goldsmiths-2-for-1-housing-bill-amendment-achieve>
 in twice as many “affordable” homes being built in the capital as would be 
lost. But the true impact of the Act in London cannot be fully assessed until 
its accompanying regulations are published, interpreting the various elements 
that leave room for discretion. The EU referendum and its turbulent aftermath 
have meant progress on this task has been slow. The appointment of Gavin 
Barwell as housing minister (see above) and hissuggestion 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/09/13/government-edging-away-from-home-ownership-focus-says-housing-mi/>
 of a shift away from controversial “starter homes”, thought largely useless as 
an “affordable’ product in London, towards supporting a wider range of 
relatively low cost homes, including for rent, have raisedtentative hopes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/05/conservative-party-conference-hope-housing-crisis>
 that the worst aspects of the Act as they could affect the capital might be 
reduced.

Protecting the green belt

Housing supply analysis 
<http://www.ippr.org/major-programmes/london-housing-commission> published 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/professional_resources/policy_and_research/policy_library/policy_library_folder/report_when_brownfield_isnt_enough>
 during the election campaignunderlined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/mar/29/which-london-mayor-candidate-will-fix-the-capitals-housing-crisis>
 how difficult it will be to increase the number of homes built in London to 
the overall 50,000 a year it is generally held to need - a figure Khan has 
acknowledged but not committed to - without boroughs bringing forward some of 
their green belt land for building on. But the issue is politically explosive 
and Khan has gone to considerable lengths not to ignite it, bothduring the 
campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/apr/23/london-mayor-race-zac-goldsmith-is-being-slippery-about-the-green-belt>
 and since,making much 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/sadiq-khan-pledges-support-for-green-belt>
 of his rejection of Tory Bromley Council’s plans for a football stadium and 
flats to go on green belt land in Chislehurst.

A not-for-profit lettings agency

In his manifesto <http://www.sadiq.london/homes_for_londoners_manifesto>, Khan 
promised to set up “a London-wide, not-for-profit lettings agency for good 
landlords, building on the work that councils have started, and ending rip-off 
fees for renters”. Word is that work has begun on this at City Hall, but it is 
at an early stage.

Stopping “affordable rent” conversions

A policy introduced by the Tory-led coalition government encouraged housing 
associations and councils to convert social rented homes to new, more expensive 
“affordable rent” tenures when they became vacant and were re-let to new people 
on waiting lists (with the strain often taken by housing benefit, the bill for 
which the government is actually trying to reduce). This wascorrectly seen 
<http://blog.shelter.org.uk/2014/12/does-affordable-rent-really-mean-the-end-of-social-housing/>
 as a threat to social housing numbers at a time when more, not fewer, are 
needed. Khan, committed to protecting social housing in London as “a vital 
asset”, has moved to block these conversions. City Hall says that under Boris 
Johnson’s’s 2011-2015 affordable homes programme, a total of 19,000 were 
approved (see “notes to editors”here 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/mayor-launches-london-living-rent-for-new-homes>
) with 14,000 of those now completed. The rate of conversions has slowed 
recently, but Khansays 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/mayor-launches-london-living-rent-for-new-homes>
 he will work with housing associations through his affordable homes programme 
to put an end to them.

Homes for Londoners team

Khan promised to set up a “new and powerful team at the heart of City Hall” to 
pull together all the mayor’s housing powers and resources and “break the 
homebuilding logjam”. So far, a Homes of Londoners governance board has been 
formed, chaired by Khan - it will meet for the first time next month, after the 
autumn statement - a “skills and capacity audit” is underway and an in-house 
team of experts on development viability is being assembled with a view to 
making the provisions of the supplementary planning guidance stick (read more 
on thathere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/aug/23/london-housing-tfl-land-set-for-affordable-homes-as-sadiq-khan-picks-expert-team>
). Perhaps the “Homes for Londoners” title is best understood as a banner 
flying above various forms of co-ordinated action.

Preparing for a new London Plan and housing strategy

Mayoral housing policy has to be in line with those enshrined in the London 
Plan, the name given to the mayor’s statutory “spatial development strategy” 
for the capital. The current London Plan is Boris Johnson’s. That doesn’t mean 
Khan is totally hamstrung by it, but it does mean he needs to put it through a
full review 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/london-plan/london-plan-full-review>
 which will result in a new version in up to three years’ time. That review is 
underway with the launch of a consultation document calledA City for All 
Londoners 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/get-involved/have-your-say/all-consultations/city-all-londoners>
. In this, Khan sets out the challenges posed by the capital’s rapid growth and 
some of the ways he hopes to meet them, including in housing. Themes include 
some of those mentioned above and homelessness, including rough sleeping. The 
mayor will also be producing a specific housing strategy to replace Johnson’s. 
It will come out some time next year.

Summary

The essential difference between Khan’s approach to housing policy and that of 
his Tory predecessor is that the Labour mayor is, as you’d expect, taking a 
more interventionist approach to shaping and regulating the huge, unruly beast 
that is the London housing market. He appears to be demonstrating far greater 
drive for getting more homes across the “genuinely affordable” spectrum built. 
His mayoral team and City Hall officers are of a high calibre and have 
demonstrated the pragmatic, consensus-building approach that is fundamental to 
mayors getting things done.

London’s housing problems might be characterised as a combination of its 
booming successes over more than two decades and a consequence of successive 
national governments’ inadequate responses to the failure of the market to 
respond in the right way to its demands.Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> shortages and other problems 
aren’t new to London, and the current ones are beyond the power of any mayor to 
completely solve alone. But the hope is that Khan can provide strong, 
successful examples of how to make a start.
 