
You might not have heard of skate brand Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/27/how-skatewear-grew-up>, but 
you will almost certainly have seen their logo. A triangle with Palace written 
along each side, it’s spotted on the backs of hoodies worn by suburban 
teenagers, on shirts worn by Jay Z, on boys staring at the big screen in pubs, 
on the dancefloor of gay clubs and, in 2014, on England shirts produced by 
Umbro. It has even, thanks to her dad’s tailor, beenworn by North West 
<http://www.lamoda.co.uk/blog/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/north-west-palace-style-look-lamoda.jpg>
, the indisputable trendsetter of the toddler world. Ring a bell now? Thought 
so.
 Jay Z in Paris with Beyoncé, wearing a Palace shirt. Photograph: 
Beyonce/instagram 
Founder Lev Tanju planned it that way. When the ex-skater set up Palace in 
2009 on a wing and a prayer, one thing was non-negotiable: the logo had to be 
supersized. “That was a big thing for me,” he says. “I told the factory: ‘Can 
you make the logo as big as it will go on the back of the shirt, as far as the 
seam will allow …’ I’m quite a garish person, I think.”

Over the following seven years his hits have all been logo-heavy. They include 
a T-shirt with a Versace-like Medusa (worn by Rihanna) and a similar take on
Chanel <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel>’s double Cs. It’s cheeky, 
with the right references, and popular with a varied demographic from Dover 
Street Market shoppers to young teenagers. “Dads come in and buy shit, it makes 
me so happy,” Tanju says. “We have sons and dads coming in. I’m like ‘yes’ – 
because dad wants to be cool at work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65761c0b379c41908b7208d7753f79ce94d972d4%2F16_13_1901_2966%2F1901.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cult%20label%20Palace%20went%20from%20UK%20skate%20kids%20to%20hip-hop%20royalty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cult%20label%20Palace%20went%20from%20UK%20skate%20kids%20to%20hip-hop%20royalty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65761c0b379c41908b7208d7753f79ce94d972d4%2F16_13_1901_2966%2F1901.jpg>
 Rihanna in Palace’s Versace-like Medusa T-shirt in 2012. Photograph: Jun 
Sato/WireImage 
At the store in Soho, London, there are queues outside for each new drop of 
stock. When I visit on a weekday afternoon, there’s a steady stream of 
teenagers with their parents, US tourists and actual skaters. This regular 
supply of eager customers is down to a treat-’em-mean, keep-’em-keen policy: 
Palace only produces small runs of each design. Tanju says this is due to his 
short attention span, and a kind of Panini sticker “got-need” appeal. “There’s 
a constant flow of little things,” he says. “People come in to the shop, grab 
it and go, and then are like: ‘I didn’t get a particular T-shirt, why didn’t I 
get it?’ It’s quite fun.”

Tanju, a likable, grinning 33-year-old, has an infectious teenage energy that 
runs through his brand. On the day we meet, he is wearing Rupert Bear checked 
trousers, Palace sweatshirt and a cap. He is responsible for the product 
descriptions on the website, which have a cult following among Palace fans. 
Forget practical details on fabrics: abomber 
<http://shop.palaceskateboards.com/products/bomber-indigo> is “112% gully” 
(authentic and street, to anyone over 30). Asweatshirt 
<http://shop.palaceskateboards.com/collections/sweatshirts/products/cherub-hood-white>
 is explained with the words “I’m craving deep-fried fucking cheese”. “I sit in 
front the TV with a takeaway and type on my iPhone absolute nonsense in bullet 
points and people find it funny,” he says. The culinary references are down to 
his penchant for the Food Network.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2093c1b9312c1812a340b0130aa0bbac6e3544d8%2F0_0_2045_2922%2F2045.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cult%20label%20Palace%20went%20from%20UK%20skate%20kids%20to%20hip-hop%20royalty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cult%20label%20Palace%20went%20from%20UK%20skate%20kids%20to%20hip-hop%20royalty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2093c1b9312c1812a340b0130aa0bbac6e3544d8%2F0_0_2045_2922%2F2045.jpg>
 A tracksuit top for Palace SS16 . Photograph: Angelo Pennetta 
Part of Palace’s ability to keep its cool while growing as a business is down 
to that unbottleable thing: authenticity. Tanju lives and breathes skate 
culture, and talks fondly of spending 12-hour days skating at theSouthbank 
skate undercroft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/18/skaters-southbank-centre-undercroft-london-remains-open>
 as a teenager. He started makingvideos <https://vimeo.com/106385280> of his 
friends’ tricks, and Palace, the label, followed, initially as a way to sponsor 
skaters, and named in ironic tribute to the scuzzy flat Tanju lived in at the 
time. He partnered with friend Gareth Skewis and signed skaters Blondey, Chewy 
and Lucien, who still work with the company now. “We have a backbone,” says 
Tanju. “There’s a skate gang and a crew of people.”

Tanju grew up in south London, the son of a Turkish ex-pro footballer father 
and English mother who worked in the family restaurant. Together they ran 
Jack’s Place, a restaurant in Clapham where Jack Nicholson and Bros ate. “There 
would be two massive bouncers outside, and Bros were inside having a Sunday 
lunch, back when Bros were Bros,” he says. There is quite a lot of nostalgia 
for the 90s in Palace – from theT-shirt with a “Mitsubishi” pill on it 
<http://shop.palaceskateboards.com/collections/t-shirts/products/turbo-l-s-t-shirt-yellow>
 (the favoured brand of ecstasy in the decade), toreferences to films such as 
Terminator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/12/why-fashion-fell-in-love-with-the-90s-blockbuster>
 and laddy staples including signet rings. This, no doubt, appeals to the 
Palace customers who were around at the time and those who are discovering it 
now in a #retrolol way. “I guess it’s when I was young and I could do whatever 
I wanted,” says Tanju. “It’s a banging time to think about.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc3424452fc0ea9573a7a9b4b2b47194997f5aa1%2F23_18_2004_2897%2F2004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cult%20label%20Palace%20went%20from%20UK%20skate%20kids%20to%20hip-hop%20royalty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cult%20label%20Palace%20went%20from%20UK%20skate%20kids%20to%20hip-hop%20royalty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Fcult-label-palace-uk-skate-kids-hip-hop-royalty-brand-rihanna-jay-z-teens-dads-leve-tanju%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc3424452fc0ea9573a7a9b4b2b47194997f5aa1%2F23_18_2004_2897%2F2004.jpg>
 A tracksuit for Palace SS16. Photograph: Angelo Pennetta 
Ultimately, Palace’s success might be down to something really simple: Tanju 
is entrenched in the cool crowd but he is anything but a snob. He thinks it’s 
great when his mum texts him to say she saw someone in a Palace T-shirt in 
Liverpool, and he sheepishly admits to a past that involved “working in every 
skate shop in London” selling micro-scooters to children. He says he rarely 
“seeds” clothes to celebrities such as West, in the hope they’ll post a selfie 
on Instagram: “We make it and that’s it. If you want it, come to the shop. If 
someone really nice phones up [for a T-shirt], then of course. If Elton John 
rang up, I would be like, ‘Sure Elton John.’” Elton John in a Palace T-shirt? 
It’s only a matter of time.
 