
The workplace is not what it used to be. Workers once protected by unions and 
employee rights are increasingly signing up for jobs as independent contractors 
and finding themselves harnessed with skyrocketing levels of risk and 
ever-diminishing benefits.

At the same time, vulnerable workers, such as those involved in the 7-Eleven 
employment scandal, are being exploited by big businesses with a knack for 
putting profits before the rights of their people.

How can workers in this modern, changing landscape of employment organise to 
demand decent conditions and fair pay?

As Maurice Blackburn Lawyers’ head of employment law, Josh Bornstein, writes 
in The Guardian articleThe great Uber fairness fallacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/24/uber-fairness-independent-contractors-employees-rights>
: “People formerly known as ‘employees’ have lost that identity to schemes 
drafted by lawyers and top-tier accountants involving labour hire agencies, 
dependent and independent contracting, franchising, supply chains and 
digitalised labour.”

The 7-Eleven case

Employment law principal at Maurice Blackburn Lawyers, Giri Sivaraman, says 
the 7-Eleven case, in which it was revealed that the convenience chain store 
exploited and underpaid thousands of employees, is one of the worst employment 
law scandals in Australian history.

“The current wage theft is estimated to be in the scale of $50 million to $100 
million, and that’s just what will be claimed,” Sivaraman says. “People are 
scared, they have been physically threatened. Or their boss has been saying to 
them, ‘you tell anyone, and I will tell immigration that you worked more than 
the number of hours your visa allows and your visa will be cancelled’.”

Know your rights

A variety of factors meant that 7-Eleven employees were vulnerable to this 
type of exploitation, Sivaraman says, but one thing many of them had in common 
was that they were unaware of their rights.

“If you don’t know your rights, you are at risk of exploitation,” he says. 
“Information is very important, and collectivism is the only way to defeat this 
type of abuse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fhow-will-workers-be-protected-in-the-new-shared-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a19651a8fce697e485b7ae4b1144bcee99cecce%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20will%20workers%20be%20protected%20in%20the%20new%20shared%20economy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fhow-will-workers-be-protected-in-the-new-shared-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20will%20workers%20be%20protected%20in%20the%20new%20shared%20economy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fhow-will-workers-be-protected-in-the-new-shared-economy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a19651a8fce697e485b7ae4b1144bcee99cecce%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 7-Eleven case, in which it was revealed that the convenience chain store 
exploited and underpaid thousands of employees, is one of the worst employment 
law scandals in Australian history. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
A shared risk factor


The risk is shared by a growing number of workers in Australia and overseas, 
as corporations strive to increase their profits by using more and more 
independent contractors instead of good, old-fashioned employees.

Drivers for Uber and Lyft; delivery cyclists for Deliveroo and Foodora 
(currently the target of workers’ rights campaign developed by the Young 
Workers Centre and Maurice Blackburn Lawyers, The Rights for Riders campaign); 
cleaners for Whizz; and micro-taskers performing work through sites such as 
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk AMT or CrowdFlower, are realising that their dreams of 
doing flexible, liberating work are turning into a nightmare of unfair and 
often unsafe working conditions, poor pay, no security, and increased risk.

As former Deliveroo rider Alison Millward, 23, from Brunswick in Melbourne, 
says: “We weren’t insured, there were no penalty rates even though we worked 
nights and public holidays. We had no sick pay, there was no 
part-time/full-time/casual, and you could be working full-time one week, and 
then, on a whim, they might cut all your shifts.”

Maurice Blackburn, the SDA (Shop Assistants’ Union) and the Young Workers’ 
Centre are currently examining a test case to determine whether or not 
Deliveroo and Foodora workers are in fact employees and entitled to employee 
rights and conditions.

Scandal of our times

Kamal Farouque, a principal in employment and industrial law at Maurice 
Blackburn, says the critical issue for independent contractors is that they are 
at the mercy of the person engaging them.

“When you analyse the fundamental nature of the relationship, the person is 
not in business of their own account,” he says. And it’s not just workers 
contracting through platforms such as Uber and Deliveroo.

“These are endemic issues across the economic sector,” Farouque says. “Another 
is the farm industry, where there’s chronic underpayment, often using foreign 
workers. The farm engages a third-party labour hire company, which then engages 
the workers, ultimately insulating the ultimate hirer of the labour – the farm 
– from the responsibility of complying with labour law obligations.

“There needs to be a concerted effort to deal with this type of activity. It’s 
a scandal, quite frankly, going on under our noses.”

Where’s the sharing?

Professor Joseph Davis, an expert in information systems and services at the 
University of Sydney, says when people sign up to work as independent 
contractors, they forgo their right to bargain collectively.

“The service agreements imposed on these workers are not balanced; they are 
very asymmetric, and the employer controls the platform,” Davis says. “All the 
risks and most of the costs are borne by the workers. There’s not a whole lot 
of sharing going on.”

Davis cites Uber as an example. Passengers rate drivers, and if a few 
passengers complain about their driver, Uber has been known to shut them out of 
the website and any future work, he says.

“The driver has no recourse, there’s no negotiation,” Davis says. “And it’s 
very hard to take a company like that on legally. To begin with, they are a 
very big company with very deep pockets. Secondly, contracts are written in 
such a way that it’s not easy for anybody to take them on legally.”

Small victories

Seattle recently became the first US city to give on-demand drivers the right 
to bargain collectively regarding issues such as working conditions and pay, 
but victories such as this are thin on the ground. In September this year a US 
court determined that Uber drivers wouldn’t be able to pursue a class-action 
lawsuit, and would have to resolve claims individually instead.

What about unions?

Unions have long fought for fair wages and equal rights in the workplace 
throughout the history of modern employment, but how can they be applied to 
these new situations?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fhow-will-workers-be-protected-in-the-new-shared-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97209ce2bfff9b42dcedbfb1f932c74eeebd14ee%2F0_126_3353_4192%2F3353.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20will%20workers%20be%20protected%20in%20the%20new%20shared%20economy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fhow-will-workers-be-protected-in-the-new-shared-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20will%20workers%20be%20protected%20in%20the%20new%20shared%20economy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fhow-will-workers-be-protected-in-the-new-shared-economy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97209ce2bfff9b42dcedbfb1f932c74eeebd14ee%2F0_126_3353_4192%2F3353.jpg>
 30th Aug, 2016. A member or supporter of the IWGB trade union protests outside 
the headquarters of UberEats, Uber’s fast-food delivery service in London, UK. 
Photograph: Mark Kerrison/Alamy Stock Photo 
“The changing nature of work is challenging the traditional employment 
relationship,” says Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) secretary Dave 
Oliver. “Workers are facing less secure work, including increasing 
casualisation and sub-contracting. More and more people are underemployed.

“The growing number of people who are employed but looking for extra work out 
of necessity reveals the reality of the Australian labour market is less rosy 
than top-line figures might suggest.”

As Prof Davis says in his article Protecting the rights of the digital 
workforce in the ‘gig’ economy 
<https://theconversation.com/protecting-the-rights-of-the-digital-workforce-in-the-gig-economy-45838>
, “…the size of the reserve army of unemployed and marginally employed is 
forcing a race to the bottom on wage levels.”

Oliver says: “The Australian union movement is finding new ways to represent 
the working people to ensure that anywhere anytime flexible jobs aren’t, in 
reality, everywhere all-the-time underpaid work.”

Legislative change

Legislative change is necessary to protect these “new, precarious workers”, 
Oliver says. Josh Bornstein agrees: “Employment law has failed to keep up with 
the changing realities of modern work. Existing employment laws, like current 
tax laws, in many developed countries are no longer fit for purpose. Employment 
law needs to be replaced by work law.”

Prof Davis wonders if there is a need for more tech-savvy, social media-based 
approaches to the problem.

“To tackle the problem, we may need more of a technological approach including 
a web-based platform which enables gig workers to sign up, and also getting 
their employers to sign up on the other side of the platform, with or without a 
nudge from the regulatory agencies.

“This will bring workers and employers together to try and move towards 
something more equitable for the workers.

“It’s a bit of a wild idea.”
 