
Google’s search algorithm appears to be systematically promoting information 
that is either false or slanted with an extreme rightwing bias on subjects as 
varied as climate change and homosexuality.

Following a recent investigation by the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/05/google-alters-search-autocomplete-remove-are-jews-evil-suggestion>
, which found that Google’s search engine prominently suggests neo-Nazi 
websites and antisemitic writing, the Guardian has uncovered a dozen additional 
examples of biased search results.

Google’s search algorithm and its autocomplete function prioritize websites 
that, for example, declare that climate change is a hoax, being gay is a sin, 
and the Sandy Hook mass shooting never happened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7badc17eee53325ac225868a99ebd62041e9240%2F0_0_811_212%2F811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Google's%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Google%27s%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7badc17eee53325ac225868a99ebd62041e9240%2F0_0_811_212%2F811.jpg>
 Photograph: Google  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c97ac5b2f890944702b6de106849691d115c0dd%2F0_0_787_339%2F787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Google's%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Google%27s%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c97ac5b2f890944702b6de106849691d115c0dd%2F0_0_787_339%2F787.jpg>
 Photograph: Google 
The increased scrutiny on the algorithms of Google – which removed antisemitic 
and sexist autocomplete phrases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/05/google-alters-search-autocomplete-remove-are-jews-evil-suggestion>
 after the recent Observer investigation – comes at a time of tense debate 
surrounding therole of fake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
 in building support for conservative political leaders, particularly US 
president-elect Donald Trump.


Facebook has faced significant backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/29/facebook-fake-news-problem-experts-pitch-ideas-algorithms>
 for its role in enabling widespread dissemination of misinformation, and data 
scientists and communication experts have argued that rightwing groups have 
found creative ways tomanipulate social media trends and search algorithms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/05/google-must-review-its-search-rankings-because-of-rightwing-manipulation>
.

Google alters search autocomplete to remove 'are Jews evil' suggestion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/05/google-alters-search-autocomplete-remove-are-jews-evil-suggestion>
The Guardian’s latest findings further suggest that Google’s searches are 
contributing to the problem.

In the past, when a journalist or academic exposes one of these algorithmic 
hiccups, humans atGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> 
quietly make manual adjustments in a process that’s neither transparent nor 
accountable.

At the same time, politically motivated third parties including the “alt-right”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/01/gamergate-alt-right-hate-trump>
, a far-right movement in the US, use a variety of techniques to trick the 
algorithm and push propaganda and misinformation higher up Google’s search 
rankings.

These insidious manipulations – both by Google and by third parties trying to 
game the system – impact how users of the search engine perceive the world, 
even influencing the way they vote. This has led some researchers to study 
Google’s role in the presidential election in the same waythat they have 
scrutinized Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94e4295e7f464a9d5439d98b3c8b5b3fe046f2d6%2F0_0_795_178%2F795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Google's%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Google%27s%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94e4295e7f464a9d5439d98b3c8b5b3fe046f2d6%2F0_0_795_178%2F795.jpg>
 Photograph: Google  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a7109b099a69d7ba6ecc688c91ce0cc4a261655%2F0_0_803_358%2F803.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Google's%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Google%27s%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a7109b099a69d7ba6ecc688c91ce0cc4a261655%2F0_0_803_358%2F803.jpg>
 Photograph: Google 
Robert Epstein from the American Institute for Behavioral Research and 
Technology <http://aibrt.org/> has spent four years trying to reverse engineer 
Google’s search algorithms. He believes, based on systematic research, that 
Google has the power to rig elections through something he calls the search 
engine manipulation effect (SEME).


Epstein conducted five experiments in two countries to find that biased 
rankings in search results can shift the opinions of undecided voters 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/08/how-google-could-rig-the-2016-election-121548_Page2.html#.WFHJ6KIrJ-U>
. If Google tweaks its algorithm to show more positive search results for a 
candidate, the searcher may form a more positive opinion of that candidate.

In September 2016, Epstein released findings, published through Russian news 
agency Sputnik News, that indicated Google 
<https://sputniknews.com/us/201609121045214398-google-clinton-manipulation-election/>
 had suppressed negative autocomplete search results relating to Hillary 
Clinton.

“We know that if there’s a negative autocomplete suggestion in the list, it 
will draw somewhere between five and 15 times as many clicks as a neutral 
suggestion,” Epstein said. “If you omit negatives for one perspective, one 
hotel chain or one candidate, you have a heck of a lot of people who are going 
to see only positive things for whatever the perspective you are supporting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F037bc7df8c0b592582566c5c52484c6ebe047f02%2F0_0_751_160%2F751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Google's%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Google%27s%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F037bc7df8c0b592582566c5c52484c6ebe047f02%2F0_0_751_160%2F751.jpg>
 Photograph: Google  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91a2f02a863d7d5ee01163788261a9fd97d4faa5%2F0_0_794_211%2F794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Google's%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Google%27s%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91a2f02a863d7d5ee01163788261a9fd97d4faa5%2F0_0_794_211%2F794.jpg>
 Photograph: Google 
Even changing the order in which certain search terms appear in the 
autocompleted list can make a huge impact, with the first result drawing the 
most clicks, he said.

At the time, Google said the autocomplete algorithm 
<https://blog.google/products/search/google-search-autocomplete/> was designed 
to omit disparaging or offensive terms associated with individuals’ names but 
that it wasn’t an “exact science”.

Then there’s the secret recipe of factors that feed into the algorithm Google 
uses to determine a web page’s importance – embedded with the biases of the 
humans who programmed it. These factors include how many and which other 
websites link to a page, how much traffic it receives, and how often a page is 
updated. People who are very active politically are typically the most 
partisan, which means that extremist views peddled actively on blogs and fringe 
media sites get elevated in the search ranking.

“These platforms are structured in such a way that they are allowing and 
enabling – consciously or unconsciously – more extreme views to dominate,” said 
Martin Moore from Kings College London’s Centre for the Study of Media, 
Communication and Power.

Appearing on the first page of Google search results can give websites with 
questionable editorial principles undue authority and traffic.

“These two manipulations can work together to have an enormous impact on 
people without their knowledge that they are being manipulated, and our 
research shows that very clearly,” Epstein said. “Virtually no one is aware of 
bias in search suggestions or rankings.”

These manipulations can work together to have enormous impact on people 
without knowledge that they're being manipulated
Robert Epstein 
This is compounded by Google’s personalization of search results, which means 
different users see different results based on their interests. “This gives 
companies like Google even more power to influence people’s opinions, 
attitudes, beliefs and behaviors,” he said.

Epstein wants Google to be more transparent about how and when it manually 
manipulates the algorithm.

“They are constantly making these adjustments. It’s absurd for them to say 
everything is automated,” he said. Manual removals from autocomplete include
“are jews evil” and “are women evil” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/05/google-alters-search-autocomplete-remove-are-jews-evil-suggestion>
. Google has also altered its results so when someone searches for ways to kill 
themselvesthey are shown a suicide helpline 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/05/technology/05google.html?partner=rss&emc=rss>
.

Shortly after Epstein released his research indicating the suppression of 
negative autocomplete search results relating to Clinton, which he credits to 
close tiesbetween the Clinton campaign and Google 
<http://qz.com/823922/eric-schmidt-played-a-crucial-role-in-team-hillarys-election-tech/>
, the search engine appeared to pull back from such censorship, he said. This, 
he argued, allowed for a flood of pro-Trump, anti-Clinton content (including 
fake news), some of which was created in retaliation to bubble to the top.

“If I had to do it over again I would not have released those data. There is 
some indication that they had an impact that was detrimental to Hillary 
Clinton, which was never my intention.”

Rhea Drysdale, the CEO of digital marketing company Outspoken Media 
<http://outspokenmedia.com/>, did not see evidence 
<https://medium.com/@rhea/hillary-clintons-search-results-manipulated-by-sourcefed-not-google-3dd9a5c68ca1>
 of pro-Clinton editing by Google. However, she did note networks of partisan 
websites – disproportionately rightwing – using much better search engine 
optimization techniques to ensure their worldview ranked highly.

Meanwhile, tech-savvy rightwing groups organized online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/05/google-must-review-its-search-rankings-because-of-rightwing-manipulation>
 and developed creative ways to control and manipulate social media 
conversations through mass actions, said Shane Burley, a journalist and 
researcher who has studied the “alt-right”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65e35973621fe379228acdb78017c05cf31b9927%2F0_0_822_192%2F822.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Google's%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Google%27s%20search%20algorithm%20spreads%20false%20information%20with%20a%20rightwing%20bias&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-rightwing-bias-algorithm-political-propaganda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65e35973621fe379228acdb78017c05cf31b9927%2F0_0_822_192%2F822.jpg>
 Photograph: Google 
“What happens is they can essentially jam hashtags so densely using multiple 
accounts, they end up making it trending,” he said. “That’s a great way for 
them to dictate how something is going to be covered, what’s going to be 
discussed. That’s helped them reframe the discussion of immigration.”

Burley noted that “cuckservative” – meaning conservatives who have sold out – 
is a good example of a term that the “alt-right” has managed to popularize in 
an effective way. Similarly if you search for “feminism is ...” in Google, it 
autocompletes to “feminism is cancer”, a popular rallying cry for Trump 
supporters.

They can essentially jam hashtags so densely using multiple accounts, they end 
up making it trending​​
Shane Burley 
“It has this effect of making certain words kind of like magic words in search 
algorithms.”

The same groups – including members of the popular “alt-right” Reddit forum 
The_Donald – used techniques that are used by reputation management firms and 
marketers to push their companies up Google’s search results, to ensure
pro-Trump imagery and articles ranked highly 
<https://edgylabs.com/2016/12/09/google-search-engine-influenced-reddit/>.

“Extremists have been trying to play Google’s algorithm for years, with 
varying degrees of success,” said Brittan Heller, director of technology and 
society at the Anti-Defamation League. “The key has traditionally been 
connected to influencing the algorithm with a high volume of biased search 
terms.”

 The problem has become particularly challenging for Google in a post-truth 
era, where white supremacist websites may have the same indicator of 
“trustworthiness” in the eyes of Google as other websites high in the page rank.

“What does Google do when the lies aren’t the outliers any more?” Heller said.


“Previously there was the assumption that everything on the internet had a 
glimmer of truth about it. With the phenomenon of fake news and media hacking, 
that may be changing.”

A Google spokeswoman said in a statement: “We’ve received a lot of questions 
about autocomplete, and we want to help people understand how it works: 
Autocomplete predictions are algorithmically generated based on users’ search 
activity and interests. Users search for such a wide range of material on the 
web – 15% of searches we see every day are new. Because of this, terms that 
appear in Autocomplete may be unexpected or unpleasant. We do our best to 
prevent offensive terms, like porn and hate speech, from appearing, but we 
don’t always get it right. Autocomplete isn’t an exact science and we’re always 
working to improve our algorithms.”
 