
Angola

Drought is affecting 1.4 million people across seven of Angola’s 18 provinces 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/angola/angola-drought-office-resident-coordinator-situation-report-no1-13-april-2016>
. Food prices have rocketed and acute malnutrition rates have doubled, with 
more than 95,000 children affected. Food insecurity is expected to worsen from 
July to the end of the year.

Where drought is the new normal: El Niño worsens food shortages in Malawi and 
Zimbabwe – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/mar/30/drought-new-normal-el-nino-worsens-food-shortages-malawi-zimbabwe-africa-podcast>
Botswana

Three years of drought have hit the country’s livestock and arable farming 
sectors hard. At least 50,000 people are in danger of severe malnutrition.

Mozambique

A “red alert” has been announced for southern and central provinces 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/mozambique/mozambique-government-declares-red-alert-severe-drought>
. Some rain fell in April in southern Mozambique, but most of this year’s 
harvest has been lost.Nearly 500,000 people are being given food aid 
<http://clubofmozambique.com/news/food-aid-for-drought-victims-in-mozambique-available-this-month-govt/>
.


Malawi

Up to 8 million people, or half the country, will need food aid after a second 
year of drought and disastrous floods in 2015.More than 1m tonnes of food are 
needed 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/malawi/declaration-state-national-disaster-caused-prolonged-dry-spells-during-20152016-season>
. The situation is worst in the south and central regions.

Namibia

About 500,000 Namibians 
<http://www.namibian.com.na/index.php?id=141064&page=archive-read> are 
dependent on government food aid after crops failed for a third year running. 
Businesses in Windhoek, the capital, have been ordered by city authoritiesto 
cut water consumption by 30% 
<http://mgafrica.com/article/2016-05-12-drought-forces-coca-cola-to-halt-canned-drinks-in-namibia-as-businesses-ordered-to-cut-water-use-by-30>
.

South Africa

Seven provinces have declared a drought crisis 
<http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/382932/icode/>. Maize production is down 
40% 
<http://www.news24.com/Green/News/SA-maize-crop-down-a-third-food-shortage-looms-20150511>
. South Africa, which normally exports about 1m tonnes of food a year, will 
have to import about 3.5m tonnes of corn.

Swaziland

Food prices have escalated and the country’s staple food, maize, has been 
subject to a66% price hike since January 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwiIqP7BhenMAhVJCsAKHeaECnYQFggjMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Freliefweb.int%2Fsites%2Freliefweb.int%2Ffiles%2Fresources%2FWFP%2520Southern%2520Africa%2520Regional%2520El%2520Nino%2520Situation%2520Report%2520%25231%2C%252005%2520February%25202016.PDF&usg=AFQjCNFmPm6wWyrhVmjP4x92kpmBTQrdRw&sig2=n7P-Widc6v9QqG7ZXK5O1Q&bvm=bv.122448493,d.d24&cad=rja>
. The UN has provided $3m (£207m) for food and emergency relief for 95,000 
affected people.

Tanzania

Tanzania has an electricity crisis after it had to shut its hydropower plants 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34491984> because drought is causing 
low water levels in its dams. Food prices have soared. Local farmers and 
pastoralists have clashed over dwindling pasture and water supplies andKenyan 
and Ugandan farmers have invaded national parks 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-tanzania-landrights-wildlife-idUSKCN0Y828I> 
with their cattle.


Zambia

Zambia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zambia> has been rationing 
electricity because of a lack of water in dams, but the maize harvest has been 
the most successful in the region.

Drought and rising temperatures 'leaves 36m people across Africa facing hunger'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/drought-high-temperatures-el-nino-36m-people-africa-hunger>
Zimbabwe

A state of disaster has been declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/21/drought-southern-africa-heavy-toll-students-fainting-malawi-zimbabwe>
.Half the country’s rural population of 10 million people 
<http://af.reuters.com/article/zimbabweNews/idAFL5N1864FM> will need food 
assistance by Christmas. The government has appealed for$1.5bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/zimbabwe-seeks-15bn-in-drought-aid>
 but only $200m has been pledged.

South Sudan

Up to 5.3 million people face severe food shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/09/south-sudan-up-to-53-million-people-face-summer-food-crisis>
, especially in the non-conflict affected states of Northern Bahr el Ghazal and 
Eastern Equatoria. From January to March, 2.8 million people were classed as 
being in “crisis” or “emergency” food situations. The UN humanitarian plan for 
South Sudan has received only 27% of the $1.29bn needed.

Ethiopia

After one of its worst droughts in decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/drought-high-temperatures-el-nino-36m-people-africa-hunger>
, Ethiopia is now being lashed byheavy rains and flash floods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/el-nino-leaves-100-million-people-hungry-short-of-water-droughts-floods-worldwide>
. The government and international donors have pledged more than $700m in 
emergency aid but experts say the country still needs $600m more.
 