
I’ve never understood why blue represents cold. Doesn’t it make everyone think 
of clear skies and deep seas and happy summers? Well, that and Duncan James, 
obviously. But that’s a whole different matter.

The designers obviously agree with me (about the summer thing, not the Duncan 
thing) because blue was all over the summer collections. Though the catwalks 
carried every shade from cyan and sky to teal, it’s the shades that hover 
around cerulean and International Klein Blue that have really caught my eye.

These colours have been used on pristine white backgrounds to create glorious 
patterns – some a bit splodgy and Matisse-y, others more reminiscent of Delft 
porcelain. All of them lovely.

British designer Jonathan Saunders created layered clothes reminiscent of 
Matisse’s cutouts. TheLoewe <https://www.loewe.com/eu_en/> collection also 
featured layers – which fell like nursery-school collage from his models. Many 
of the prettiest clothes came in beautiful shades of blue. American labelAlice 
+ Olivia <http://www.aliceandolivia.com/> didn’t beat about the bush: they 
simply whacked one of Matisse’s Blue Nudes on a full skirted dress.

Even the collections that weren’t beholden to blue still featured lovely jolts 
of sapphire, cobalt and ultramarine. Clothes that made you think of that first 
glimpse of the sea as you travel to the coast for the holidays. Look at the 
shows byLanvin 
<http://store.lanvin.com/gb?gclid=CKa_2O_MmcYCFQTLtAodHBAAXg&tp=80307>, 
Valentino 
<http://www.valentino.com/gb/shop/women/pret-a-porter?gclid=CJ_uxvrMmcYCFc_ItAodrXUA1A&tp=16787>
andKenzo  <https://www.kenzo.com/en/women?gclid=COPQ0IPNmcYCFY7ItAodBaUB0w>if 
you want to see what I mean.

What’s great at this time of year is that you can buy more blue for less. The 
sales are on and I think the enduring appeal of blue means it’s a good 
investment. I mean, it’s not like stocking up on neon yellow.

This summer frock by Edit is one of those dresses you can pull out of the 
cupboard for many summers to come. It’s a nice brand, too. Edit is a Hong Kong 
shop which specialises in importing cool British labels, such as Antipodium and 
Etre Cecile. Now the Edit team has designed its own range this year and is 
exporting it for cool British people to wear. Nice trade.

The painty top by Eggs comes from Farfetch 
<http://www.farfetch.com/uk/?gclid=CK6a6fnNmcYCFUnItAodUR4AGw&bfdqbt=farfetch&campaign=Brand+UK&ff_medium=cpc&ff_source=Google+Adwords&ff_campaign=Brand+UK&ff_adgroup=Brand+Exact&ff_keyword=farfetch&ff_matchtype=Exact&ff_creativeid=46046792016&ff_device=c>
. I’m sure you know this online shop. It gives an internet presence to hundreds 
of independent boutiques. It’s a great place to find out about unknown labels 
(like Eggs – never heard of it. It’s based in Parma if you’re interested, and 
does lovely patterns and high-waisted skirts) and during the sale you can even 
afford them, too.

On the high street, go to Cos <http://www.cosstores.com/nl/> for bargains in 
duck egg and powder blue.Karen Millen  
<http://www.karenmillen.com/?lng=en&ctry=GB&>and Reiss have more stock in the 
ultramarine area of the spectrum.Mango 
<http://shop.mango.com/GB/women/clothing?&mkwid=sbg9SDc15_dc&pcrid=52591748157&pkw=mango&pmt=e&utm_term={product_id}&gclid=CPq-0aTPmcYCFXQatAodmwYADg>
 has a nice line in azure and navy.& Other Stories <http://www.stories.com/gb/> 
has some great blue prints. Look out online for the “porcelain” and the blue 
“scarf” prints in particular.

That should keep you happy for many summers to come. May they be long and 
sunny and very, very blue.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 