
There’s a painting in the National Portrait Gallery that has long been a 
source of fashion inspiration for me; it dates from about 1575, and is a 
peerless image of redheaded chic. Elizabeth I wears a gown of white and gold 
satin with dashing scarlet frogging across the breast, like a hussar, and she 
holds a particularly wonderful feather fan – whites and sulphurous yellows, 
dark iridescent greens, oranges and russet reds. That ghostly face is turned 
three-quarters of the way toward us; her expression reserved; her lips 
compressed. The line of that nose – “rising somewhat in the midst”, as Sir John 
Hayward described it – is clearly shown. My nose does the same. My hair is also 
red. Elizabeth I has been my pin-up girl since I was tiny. But it was only when 
I began researching my bookRed: A Natural History of the Redhead 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/328798/> that I came 
to appreciate how revolutionary Elizabeth’s image-making truly was.

Elizabeth’s red hair was no accident. For most of her life, Elizabeth wore 
wigs, so she might have chosen hair of any colour she liked, but she chose red; 
she was so committed to the shade that she is even supposed to have dyed the 
tails of her horses to match. (Who says redheads don’t have a sense of humour?)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-elizabeth-i-made-red-hair-fashionable-in-1558%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F7%2F1441641490012%2Fd4961264-6eda-4559-8116-ee67f243ca4a-2060x1639.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Elizabeth%20I%20made%20red%20hair%20fashionable%20%E2%80%93%20in%201558&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-elizabeth-i-made-red-hair-fashionable-in-1558%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Elizabeth%20I%20made%20red%20hair%20fashionable%20%E2%80%93%20in%201558&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-elizabeth-i-made-red-hair-fashionable-in-1558%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F7%2F1441641490012%2Fd4961264-6eda-4559-8116-ee67f243ca4a-2060x1639.jpeg>
 The kiss of Judas. Photograph: Alamy 
Nor was she following the crowd – far from it. The astonishing thing is that 
Elizabeth chose a hair colour that had typified the barbarian for centuries, 
since the time of the ancient Greeks and their encounters with the tribes 
living around the Black Sea. Its predisposition, as a recessive gene, of 
cropping up in the endogamous Orthodox Jewish community led to it becoming the 
hair colour chosen in much European art for the arch-traitor, Judas, too. No 
surprise, therefore, that it was also used to stigmatise Tudor England’s own 
barbarian and potentially traitorous “other” – the Irish and the Scots. So 
powerful a piece of conditioning was this that in Elizabethan literature you 
find red hair cited as positive proof that the clans of Ireland and Scotland 
(along with any other untrustworthy Johnny Foreigner you might care to 
include), were directly descended from the “barbarous Scythians”, a tribe 
living around the Black Sea 3,000 years ago, mentioned inKing Lear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/king-lear>. 

It seems strange for a monarch to link herself visually with the very subjects 
who had most to gain should she lose her throne. But there were personal 
reasons behind Elizabeth’s choice. Displaying the red hair inherited from her 
father gave the lie to all those rumours of illegitimacy that had plagued her 
girlhood. There were public and political reasons too.

Red hair has always been other. It stands apart. The white skin that so often 
goes with it also spoke in Elizabeth’s image-making of her separateness, her 
status as the Virgin Queen. Red and white were also the colours of St George, 
England’s patron saint. Those courtiers who dyed their hair or their beards 
red, to follow Elizabeth’s lead, were not merely declaring their loyalty to the 
queen; they and she were also, I believe, making a statement of standing apart, 
in Protestant England, from dark-haired and less pale-skinned Catholic Europe. 
Red and white were the Elizabethan brand, if you like, and that brand has been 
one of the most successful in history,as recognisable now as it would have been 
in Elizabeth’s own day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2015/feb/03/elizabeth-i-in-tv-and-film-from-bernhardt-to-blanchett>
.

This taking of a stereotype and turning it on its head, this classic piece of 
reverse discrimination, strikes me as startlingly modern, and mirrors the way
many redheads are dispatching prejudice today 
<http://thomasknights.com/red-hot/>. Gloriana was a superbly clever 
propagandist without question, but perhaps you have to be a redhead to 
appreciate what a perfect piece of sleight-of-hand her image-making truly was.

Jacky Collis Harvey’s book Red: A Natural History of the Redhead is published 
by Allen & Unwin at £16.99 and isavailable for £13.59 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/328798/> from the 
Guardian Bookshop.
 