
It’s never easy to ask someone to give back a gift. Last year, politicians 
asked Berliners to do exactly that with Tempelhof, the former airport turned 
much loved communal area.

Famous as the lifeline for West Berlin during the cold war, Tempelhof’s 
airfield had become the German capital’s biggest park. Since it was turned over 
to the public in May 2010, the site has been immensely popular with families, 
joggers, rollerbladers, kite-flyers, wind-karters, urban gardeners, yoga 
enthusiasts, hipsters and layabouts; smoke rises in summer from the abundance 
of barbecues. But there was always a niggling suspicion that the fun couldn’t 
last – that Tempelhof’s unique status as a hugely valuable piece of land 
essentially given over to the average picnicking Berliner was too good to be 
true.


“No other city would treat itself to such a crown jewel [of open space],” said 
Ingo Gräning of Tempelhof Projekt, the state company running the site, as he 
surveyed the runways and frostbitten green from the terminal roof. “There’s 300 
hectares there. Monaco is 200.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965441703%2Fa1d96fb7-2f7c-4178-858f-cfb0c128d233-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965441703%2Fa1d96fb7-2f7c-4178-858f-cfb0c128d233-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘No other city would allow itself such a crown jewel of public space’ ... 
Tempelhof park with the air traffic control tower in the background. 
Photograph: Ciarán Fahey 
The last three aeroplanes flew out of Tempelhof in November 2008, a month 
after the airport’s official closure. The buildings, however, have mostly 
remained in some form of use. The 72m radar tower is still used by the German 
army to monitor flight traffic. And the remarkable Nazi-era terminal, 300,000 
sq m including hangars that curve out 1.23km under a column-free roof – said to 
be the biggest protected building in the world – is mostly leased out. The 
biggest tenants? The Berlin police, who occupy some 46,000 sq m, around 15% of 
the total. (The Polizei have been tenants since 1951, when the US military, 
which took over the airport after the second world war, began renting out parts 
of the building.)


As well as the police, there is Berlin’s traffic control authority, the 
central lost property office, a kindergarten, a dancing school and one of the 
city’s oldest revue theatres – just some of more than 100 businesses and 
institutions that call the former airport home.


City planners wanted more, however. During local elections in 2011, plans were 
mooted for new commercial areas and offices, 4,700 homes and a large public 
library, the latter a pet project of former Berlin mayor Klaus Wowereit.

Planners promised they’d only build on 25% of the site, leaving 230 free 
hectares; politicians promised the new apartments would include affordable 
housing.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965507389%2F2794fb3b-d91a-4dcd-b83f-72371b65d416-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965507389%2F2794fb3b-d91a-4dcd-b83f-72371b65d416-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tempelhof’s classic design has made it a favourite for large events. 
Photograph: Ciarán Fahey 
Not everyone was buying it. “This government hasn’t built a single social 
apartment for 10 years – are they going to start right when park-side real 
estate opens up?” John Riceburg asked in Exberliner magazine. Meanwhile, the 
100% Tempelhofer Feld initiative, complaining of “empty promises, no 
guarantees,” gathered enough signatures to force the city into holding a 
referendum.


Last May, after months of bitter debate and despite a campaign backed by much 
of the media, 64.3% of voters chose to keep Tempelhof as it is. Politicians 
were left red-faced and investors empty-handed. “It’s a defeat and it’s a clear 
one,” said Wowereit. Some media outlets were less gracious. “The wonder is that 
Berlin still carries on,” wrote Ulf Poschardt, deputy editor of conservative 
newspaper Die Welt. “In the Prussian capital, hippie culture is state policy.”


'In the Prussian capital, hippie culture is state policy'
Die Welt deputy editor Ulf Poschardt 
The rhetoric may be overblown, but the remarkable fact is that Berlin will 
ultimately not further develop a hugely valuable piece of real estate, all 
because the people decided they didn’t trust big business not to mess up the 
park they loved. It’s a state of affairs that would be almost unimaginable in 
Frankfurt or Munich, let alone London or New York.


But the capital has always been special in this respect. “Berlin is a pioneer 
in re-using buildings that were left over after the division of the city,” 
Tempelhof Projekt chief Gerhard W Steindorf says, citing techno club Tresor as 
an example of a successful metamorphosis. “It’s a party city. And Tempelhof has 
a raw charm that people like. It’s not ready made, with everything at hand.”


Indeed, Tempelhof has already played host to major events, fairs, product 
launches, fashion shows and concerts. Seven hangars – the smallest capable of 
holding 2,000 people, the largest 3,800 – have hosted extravagant automobile 
industry unveilings, while the glitzy Bundespresseball (Federal Press Ball) 
took place in the 3,500 sq m main hall last year. Tempelhof will host a Formula 
E race in May, and Europe’s first Lollapalooza music festival in September.


“Now that the field’s future is safe we can continue to have more events like 
that,” said Steindorf, still excited by memories of Die Toten Hosen (The Dead 
Trousers) playing to 50,000 in 2013.


Also safe are the communal gardens. Lovingly tended by green-fingered 
apartment-dwellers grateful to break free of their four walls, the allotments 
are often adorned with old couches for gardeners to entertain visitors; others 
have no gardens but bring their couches anyway. Beer is usually involved.


The conservation law means the Tempelhof airfield will remain largely as it 
is. “The plan is to develop the park with direct community involvement, but 
there are restrictions on what can be done. New buildings are out of the 
question,” Steindorf says.


Unlike the airfield, the terminal building will be developed while respecting 
its protected status. Steindorf is excited by plans for studios and recording 
facilities, offices for start-ups and the general conversation process into a 
“campus for creatives”. He adds that no apartments will be built at Tempelhof 
“as long as the conservation law exists,” and though he respects the referendum 
result, he laments a missed opportunity to build cheaply on public land.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965197400%2Fd0a53ddd-9d78-48b5-8852-d02c3839f261-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965197400%2Fd0a53ddd-9d78-48b5-8852-d02c3839f261-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A Tempelhof partier Photograph: Ciarán Fahey 
“There are other areas available but they’re usually in private hands and not 
central. The whole Tempelhof site belongs to the city of Berlin. This was the 
chance for affordable housing,” he said. “Berlin needs housing. Another 250,000 
people are expected to move to the city by 2020.”


While that may be true, it is undeniable that distrust was a key factor in 
shooting down the city’s proposals, particularly regarding affordable housing. 
Steindorf argues that public representatives did work hard to keep costs down, 
and that a mix of affordable and, well, unaffordable was envisioned, similar to 
schemes in Munich and Hamburg, with cheaper housing on lower floors crowned by 
the more expensive variety above. “We don’t want people driving long distances 
to work. We’ve seen what happens in other large cities, the urban sprawl and 
problems. The inner city has to be given priority. We need to avoid traffic and 
people living outside the city in sleepy satellite towns,” Steindorf said. 
“Berlin did what it could but the chance wasn’t taken. It quickly spiralled 
into, ‘We don’t want it.’ It was an emotional decision. But I’m not sure if 
people wanted Tempelhof to stay exactly the way it is.”


The public has until 14 March to put forward ideas for the recreational 
development of Tempelhofer Feld, though their wildest dreams will be kept in 
check by the Tempelhof Conservation Act. This prohibits construction anywhere 
on the former airfield and ensures only limited development. For example, no 
trees can be planted within a large inner circle, not even to replace dead 
ones. Park benches face careful scrutiny. Permanent toilets cannot be 
constructed, nor changing rooms for sports facilities. Nesting birds were 
already protected, as were fenced-off areas for insects – 112 spider and 68 
beetle species have been identified at Tempelhof.


Despite its half-return to nature, Tempelhof could not be mistaken for 
anything other than an airport. Runway signs and markings have attained 
reverence among the revellers; an aeroplane once used for training by fire 
services provides a unique perch for resting birds including hawks; and 
information signs inform visitors about episodes from Tempelhof’s history.


That history is part of what makes Templehof so unique. The Prussian army was 
conducting manoeuvres here as far back as 1722, while Germany’s oldest active 
football club, Berliner FC Germania, was founded at Templehof in 1888. Count 
Ferdinand von Zeppelin flew one of his airships overhead on 29 August 1909; 
five days later, 150,000 people watched Orville Wright fly eight laps.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965349562%2F8bae1619-3db4-434a-863c-d7851f4941fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965349562%2F8bae1619-3db4-434a-863c-d7851f4941fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An old aeroplane at Tempelhof. Photograph: Ciarán Fahey 
The German airline Lufthansa grew out of Tempelhof in the 1920s, and by 1930 
Tempelhof was handling more passengers than any other airport inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. In May 1933, Hermann Göring 
took over the aviation industry: Lufthansa planes had swastikas on their tails 
until 1945. The Nazis created a concentration camp at Tempelhof, an early 
prototype closed in 1936 to make way for the new airport promoted by Hitler, 
though never completed. After Germany’s defeat, Tempelhof became famous for the 
Berlin airlift in 1948-49, when the western allies responded to a Soviet 
blockade of land routes into West Berlin by flying 2.3 million tonnes of 
freight into the divided city. When civilian flights resumed, Tempelhof became 
Germany’s busiest airport, an important departure point for East Germans 
fleeing the Soviet sector until the Berlin Wall sealed the border in 1961. In 
1975, civilian traffic was transferred to Tegel airport in West Berlin’s French 
sector, but the US military continued to use Tempelhof after German 
reunification until 1993, when it was handed over to the Berlin airport 
authority. The plan to build a new super airport, Berlin Brandenburg Airport 
(BER), made Tempelhof redundant.


By then, however, the airport had come to symbolise freedom on the frontline 
of the cold war. Tours of the terminal building are popular with visitors 
fascinated by the airport’s Nazi and cold war history; the park itself is named 
Tempelhofer Freiheit, or Tempelhof Freedom. For better or worse, the 
development plans were perceived as a threat to this spirit. Berliners had had 
their taste of freedom; in hindsight, it is no surprise that they refused to 
give it back.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965754322%2Fdcc91220-3326-4464-8846-26b0eb6635bf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Berliners%20refused%20to%20give%20Tempelhof%20airport%20over%20to%20developers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fhow-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424965754322%2Fdcc91220-3326-4464-8846-26b0eb6635bf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tempelhof at sunset. Photograph: Ciarán Fahey  