


On 8 July, fighting erupted in the capital of South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> between members of the 
presidential guard and forces loyal to then vice-president, Riek Machar. Over 
the following four days, humanitarians and residents of Juba were shelled, shot 
at, and in some cases, subjected to horrific acts of violence – including rape 
and gang rape, and a local journalist was killed.

News of the outbreak of fighting made it into the international media almost 
immediately, but details of the attacks against humanitarian staff only 
surfaced publicly four weeks later when AP published astory 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/237fa4c447d74698804be210512c3ed1/rampaging-south-sudan-troops-raped-foreigners-killed-local>
 describing the brutal killing, rapes, and violence that occurred in one Juba 
hotel.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fhow-should-sexual-violence-be-reported-ngos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3deaf1d4c1569b61fb15ba4627c24d36b53e06fd%2F0_0_6900_4493%2F6900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20should%20sexual%20violence%20be%20reported%20by%20humanitarian%20organisations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fhow-should-sexual-violence-be-reported-ngos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20should%20sexual%20violence%20be%20reported%20by%20humanitarian%20organisations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fhow-should-sexual-violence-be-reported-ngos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3deaf1d4c1569b61fb15ba4627c24d36b53e06fd%2F0_0_6900_4493%2F6900.jpg>
 Tuesday, Jan. 19, 2016, displaced people walk next to a razor wire fence at 
the United Nations base in the capital Juba, South Sudan. Photograph: Jason 
Patinkin/AP 
Many people outside of South Sudan questioned why it took four weeks for UN 
agencies and NGOs to publicly discuss the attack. In an article that was 
circulated among humanitarians but not published online, an NGO representative 
admonished the survivors and organisations for “failing to proactively speak 
out”.

How should the media report rape and sexual violence?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/19/how-should-the-media-report-and-sexual-violence>
This silence, the paper suggested, contributed to an environment in which the 
cost of perpetrating these types of attacks had become increasingly negligible. 
The paper concluded that in these types of situations “the decision to speak 
out needs to be taken by those at a safe distance” given the “impossible 
decisions” facing staff on the ground.

I’ve been thinking about this. And I can’t help but feel that while the 
dangers of silence are indeed real and may contribute to a continuation of 
impunity, the answer is not to further take away control from the survivors.

In fact, this may achieve the opposite of what it intends. Knowing that the 
decision to share deeply personal information will be taken by someone “at a 
safe distance” is likely to prevent survivors from coming forward at all – 
meaning that not only will the issue not be addressed, but the survivor will be 
far less likely to receive critical medical, psychological and organisational 
support.

The decision to speak, or not to speak, should rest with the survivor

One of the most fundamental aspects of critical incident management in cases 
of sexual violence is helping the survivor to regain control over their lives 
and over the decisions that affect them. The decision to speak, or not to 
speak, should rest with the survivor, and our responsibility as organisations 
and as a humanitarian community is to create the conditions in which either one 
of those options is possible. If the survivor wants to speak out, we should do 
everything in our power to support that. And equally, if the survivor wants to 
keep their experiences private, we have an obligation to respect that as well.

While the paper mentioned above specifically addressed reporting for advocacy 
purposes, the same principle applies to mandatory reporting within 
organisations for other reasons. Many NGOs and UN agencies require staff to 
report security incidents so that managers can track trends and understand the 
security environment. Both of these objectives are of course completely 
warranted (though as a general rule of thumb, managers should assume sexual 
violence is a risk, even if there is no evidence to prove it). But making 
reporting mandatory, regardless of the rationale, is simply counterproductive 
when it comes to cases involving sexual violence.

Sexual violence in the aid sector: what should NGOs be doing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/19/sexual-violence-aid-sector-ngo-action>
To take it to the hyperbolic extreme, threatening a survivor with negative 
consequences for not reporting an incident is much less effective than helping 
them to understand the positive benefits and support they would receive if they 
were to report voluntarily. Forcing someone to report under duress is only 
likely to contribute to a hostile work environment and discourage others from 
reporting in the future.

With this context in mind, the question we should be asking ourselves is, 
“What can be done to create an environment in which a survivor feels 
comfortable coming forward on their own?” The first step to this process is 
understanding the barriers to reporting, so that one by one, these barriers can 
be broken down. Unsurprisingly, some of the most common fears of survivors are 
that confidentiality will not be respected, or that they will be pressured to 
do something they are not comfortable with, whether it’s advocate publicly on 
the issue, or be evacuated to a location where they have no support network.

We have to ask ourselves how we can better support survivors of sexual violence

The second step is making sure that the organisation is prepared to manage 
sexual violence cases so that they can respond effectively and sensitively if 
and when a survivor does come forward. This means ensuring that staff have been 
trained on managing incidents of sexual violence, providing psychological first 
aid, and respecting confidentiality, and that they know how to help survivors 
access appropriate medical and psychological care. Organisations cannot 
encourage (much less require) individuals to report sexual violence without 
first having these basic measures in place.

We also have to ask ourselves how, as a broader humanitarian community, we can 
better support survivors of sexual violence. Stigma and the rumour mill are 
still significant barriers to reporting. For many people, a natural reaction to 
hearing about an incident of sexual violence is to find out as much information 
as they can (who it was, when it happened, how it happened), as if somehow by 
knowing all the details, they will find out something that means it won’t 
happen to them. Unfortunately, knowing all the details is not only unlikely to 
make the person feel better, but it compromises the well-being and rights of 
the survivor. Briefing staff on the information that’s available, and 
encouraging them not to gossip, can avoid this.

How should sexual violence be reported by humanitarian organisations?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/17/how-should-sexual-violence-be-reported-ngos>
Finally, if and when a survivor does want to speak, we should be ready to 
support this as well. This requires standing together as a community: advocacy 
on these types of issues can rarely be done by one actor alone, particularly if 
the incidents are being perpetrated by men in uniform. This advocacy doesn’t 
necessarily have to been done publicly (sometimes the greatest successes are 
won through private conversations), but regardless of the approach, there has 
to be solidarity in supporting one another to deliver a common message. This 
advocacy must be done on the survivors’ terms. When done carefully and 
collectively, this type of unified action can make a powerful statement.

Attacks on humanitarian staff have reached an alarming scale, and as a 
community we must all think through how we can best prevent and respond to 
these types of incidents. The most important issue is to maintain the focus on 
the survivors: while they may be humanitarians, they are first and foremost 
humans, and our role is to be there to support them.

If you or your organisation needs advice on how to prepare for incidents of 
sexual violence,Report the Abuse <https://www.reporttheabuse.org/> has a list 
of resources on their website, including this helpfulpreparedness checklist 
<http://www.reporttheabuse.org/website/wp-content/uploads/Prevention-Policy-and-Procedure-Checklist-Report-the-Abuse-August-2016.pdf>
. Other organisations such as ODI have releasedGood Practice Reviews 
<http://odihpn.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/GPR_8_revised2.pdf> that discuss 
effective approaches to preventing and responding to these types of incidents.

Caelin Briggs is a protection specialist currently working in South Sudan. She 
writes here in her personal capacity.

We are reporting stories on this subject; you can contact us confidentially at 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com <mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com>with “Aid 
worker safety”in the subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 