
Fashion week has been hijacked by the real world. For decades, “the shows” 
existed in a champagne bubble, a parallel universe in which celebrities were 
jammed together on long benches, as if for a very glamorous school photo, and 
where mysterious diktats – Navy is the New Black; Minimalism is Dead – were 
pronounced six months ahead of time, as if by a cabal of fortune tellers.

But this is 2016, and identity politics has trumped everything else. From 
Brexit to the presidential election, public debate centres on issues not of 
policy, or economics, but of class, race and gender. On social media, if you 
are not cooing over cute panda videos you are probably debating a hashtagged 
identity issue – Kim Kardashian and the politics of nude selfies, or diversity 
at the Oscars. Themost striking image of summer 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/french-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach>
 was of a woman in a burkini, surrounded by armed police. On 4 September,Kanye 
West caused a furore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/05/was-kanye-west-wrong-cast-multiracial-women-only>
 with a casting call requesting “multiracial women only” for his Yeezy catwalk 
show. On 8 September, the day New York fashion week opened, Lionel Shriver wore 
a sombrero on stage during aninstantly controversial speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/lionel-shrivers-full-speech-i-hope-the-concept-of-cultural-appropriation-is-a-passing-fad>
 about cultural appropriation. In other words, this season’s fashion headlines 
were never all that likely to be about the sleeve shapes.

Was Kanye West wrong to seek to cast 'multiracial women only'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/05/was-kanye-west-wrong-cast-multiracial-women-only>
What’s more, this is a moment of structural change in fashion. This London 
fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week> marked 
the beginning of a new era of immediacy in fashion, with Burberry leading the 
charge of straight-to-consumer shows. The cultural import of See Now Buy Now 
fashion is that the clothes on the catwalk relate not to the theoretical world 
of six months’ time, but to the world as it is now. The new business model is 
still only embraced by a minority of designers, but its mindset is impacting 
everybody. Fashion week has simply become more relevant. In a world where you 
can order a delivery of milk on Amazon Prime and put the kettle on to make tea 
pretty much straight away, our relationship with time is shifting. “Speed is 
everything,” said Christopher Bailey after his See Now Buy Now Burberry show on 
Monday evening. “It’s changing how we think.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F220935621b5ba93f10dc51c28816e10efc01dbae%2F0_291_5122_3074%2F5122.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F220935621b5ba93f10dc51c28816e10efc01dbae%2F0_291_5122_3074%2F5122.jpg>
 Outsider chic is the must-have look on the front row. Photograph: John 
Phillips/Getty Images 
You can tell fashion week has changed, because the people in its orbit look 
different. Look at the front row of any fashion show right now, and you will 
see oversized hoodies, tracksuit bottoms, flat shoes. The front-row look – high 
heels, sample-size dresses, everything dry clean only – was once all about 
signalling elite status. By contrast, this season’s must-have pieces – jeans 
with raw, lopsided hems and sweatshirts whose extra-long sleeves give the 
impression of having been borrowed from a flatmate in a scruffy student house – 
present an uncompromising vision of outsider chic. (Some aspects of fashion, 
however, do not change. A pair of jeans from Vetements, the flagship label for 
this look, costs around £800.)

Fashion’s shift towards democracy, with catwalk streams livestreamed and 
increasingly open to consumers, is reflected in the clothes themselves, as a 
broader vision of what aspiration looks like. At London fashion week, 
Christopher Kane, one of the standout LFW talents of his generation, has made 
“Outsider Art” a theme of his recent collections. At his show at Tate Britain 
on Monday, pencil skirts in what he dubbed “road kill fur” represented “the 
alchemy of making something out of the humble and the discarded”. Richard 
Malone’s collection, part of the Fashion East show, was based on the aesthetic 
of workers’ uniforms. Tunics were elevated, tailored versions of those worn by 
hospital cleaners. “I wanted to integrate [workwear] into fashion, to make it a 
respected, beautiful thing,” Malone said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc602d185d4fd4936610156ef2956dfb1b344d997%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc602d185d4fd4936610156ef2956dfb1b344d997%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Model Adwoa Aboah arrives for the Burberry show at LFW. Photograph: Luke 
Macgregor/Reuters 
Fashion week’s intersection with identity politics is most high-profile where 
it is most photogenic. Gender fluidity is a talking point in public debate; 
fashion has turned it into a trend. London fashion week’s current It girl, 
Adwoah Aboah, a model who walked for her friend Ashley Williams’ show and sat 
front row atBurberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/19/burberry-september-show-seasonless-clothes-fashion-stream-of-consciousness-era>
, has a staggering buzzcut beauty which does not conform to feminine tropes. 
What started with a menswear influence on womenswear has evolved into Gucci’s 
aesthetic of velvet, pearls, rainbow colours and tumbling curls for both men 
and women, a look that is almost post-gender. Orlando was the inspiration for 
Burberry this week, where the clothes for men and women were an interchangeable 
collage of silk pyjama shirts, blazers, and – of course – trenchcoats. 
Backstage after his JW Anderson show this week, designer Jonathan Anderson 
talked about an “urban cultural reappropriation of Tudor silhouettes” and 
borrowing “something of that masculinity and aggression” of Henry VIII’s 
wardrobe for modern womenswear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5eaa2d37a1db0dcc55421413d63e1168bb62576d%2F0_112_2568_3652%2F2568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5eaa2d37a1db0dcc55421413d63e1168bb62576d%2F0_112_2568_3652%2F2568.jpg>
 Post-gender? A model walks the runway at the Burberry show. Photograph: Jeff 
Spicer/Getty Images 
Most significantly, gender neutrality is influencing designers strongly 
associated with traditionally feminine modes of beauty. At the presentation for 
her Victoria Victoria Beckham secondary line in London this week, Beckham 
showed loose trousers with oversized jackets, an anti-bodycon look that is very 
different from the corset dresses that were the starting point for her main 
line. “Soft tailoring is what I wear myself, most of the time, these days,” she 
said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d2b5a2e128556df62db848abb2c00391400bb49%2F0_199_1020_1180%2F1020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d2b5a2e128556df62db848abb2c00391400bb49%2F0_199_1020_1180%2F1020.jpg>
 Anti-bodycon look: loose trousers and oversize jackets at Victoria Victoria 
Beckham. Photograph: Courtesy of Victoria Victoria Beckham 
A fashion-show audience typically numbers around 500; two million people 
watched livestreams of the most recent New York fashion week. The exploding 
audience figures mean fashion week is being held to account on issues to which 
the fashion industry has for a long time been wilfully blinkered. Model health 
and body image was the first flashpoint, and continues to be a touchpaper 
issue, the glacial pace of change reflecting the resistance by an industry 
which has long played by its own rules to accept accountability. Those who have 
watched fashion shows for decades and long ago stopped registering the size of 
the models are bewildered by this new audience, who see jutting collarbones as 
something more significant than a handy clothes hanger. Who look at models and 
see not just “girls”, as they are always known, but people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43d9ce637430b0d0b65a1fba5249adf5984697c%2F0_94_3432_2059%2F3432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43d9ce637430b0d0b65a1fba5249adf5984697c%2F0_94_3432_2059%2F3432.jpg>
 Models Bella Hadid (left) and Kendall Jenner wear Marc Jacobs pastel 
dreadlocks during New York fashion week 2106. Photograph: Angela 
Weiss/AFP/Getty Images 
On the same night that the prime minister hosted Christopher Bailey and 
Vivienne Westwood at aDowning Street reception for British fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/15/theresa-may-shows-britain-is-still-open-for-business-at-london-fashion-week>
, Marc Jacobs walked into a furore by putting pastel woollen dreadlocks on 
white models on his New York catwalk. Jacobs’ initial response to criticism – 
“I don’t see colour or race” – displayed an insensitivity, for which he has 
since apologised. In the year of Black Lives Matter, not seeing colour is 
hardly a defensible position. Coco Chanel’s line about fashion reflecting the 
world we live in has been reproduced more often than her boucle tweed jacket, 
but, a century later, many designers are still slow to recognise that if 
fashion wants to be taken seriously in the real world, it has to play by 
grown-up rules. With cultural power comes responsibility, after all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1d28790092e32ece8d46eceb46b2f1ac37f3363%2F0_300_2717_2869%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20real%20world%20hijacked%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Freal-world-hijacked-fashion-race-gender-class-london-catwalks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1d28790092e32ece8d46eceb46b2f1ac37f3363%2F0_300_2717_2869%2F2717.jpg>
 Exploring ideas of black male identity: Grace Wales Bonner’s SS16 collection. 
Photograph: Edward Quarmby 
While some designers are still struggling to navigate their place in the newly 
accountable fashion industry, a generation is emerging who have an instinctive 
grasp of fashion’s place in a connected world. Grace Wales Bonner, the British 
winner of this year’s LVMH prize – the most valuable and prestigious in the 
global fashion industry – explores ideas of black male identity. “I feel like 
I’ve seen enough images of black men looking really aggressive, very 
hypersexualised or “street”. That’s not how I think about men at all. That’s 
not the men in my life,” she said last year of her ultra-elegant menswear.

The key trends of this London fashion week were a speeded-up business model, 
gender-fluidity, and outsider chic. Which is all very well, except it doesn’t 
really explain what to wear. The more interesting fashion week becomes, the 
less significant the trends on the catwalk feel. My tip for the standout look 
as seen at this London fashion week? Forget Burberry’s Cavalry jacket, or 
Christopher Kane’s Roadkill skirt. I’m calling it for the asymmetric white 
party shirt, as seen at Downing Street on Theresa May.
 