
It’s been a whole three years since the last true instalment in the Pokémon 
franchise. While you may have been biding your time withPokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-review-it-may-not-be-a-good-game-but-its-a-great-experience>
 over the summer, none of those skills are going to carry over to Pokémon Sun 
and Moon no matter how hard you may tap the screen. Here then, are some simple 
tips and tricks for getting good, or at least better, at the serious end of 
Pokémon hunting.

Two’s company, three’s a crowd

 The “Call for Help” feature is a double-edged sword. When wild Pokémon call 
for an ally to fight by their side, it can make levelling your own Pokémon go 
by that much faster. On the other hand, it can make a battle twice as long as 
it needs to be. In order to be best prepared, arm your Pokémon with moves that 
can affect multiple enemies – like Razor Leaf, Earthquake, or Discharge.

Carry Repels

There’s no shame in carrying a repel. It doesn’t make you a weak trainer, it 
makes you savvy. Sometimes arming yourself with a repel is the best way to 
avoid lengthy encounters like the above – especially when you’re trying to get 
something else accomplished, and really just wanted to cut through the tall 
grass to get to that Max Revive down a side path …

Stay battle ready

Because of the new system of Trials and Kahunas instead of Gyms and Gym 
Leaders, it’s not always explicitly clear when you’re about to enter a Very Big 
Important Battle. Don’t be surprised if you find yourself suddenly facing off 
with a Kahuna when you least expect it. Make sure you always know where the 
Pokémon Centres are, and carry Potions and Revives with you.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIylfh-7uQkc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIylfh-7uQkc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIylfh-7uQkc&media=>
Keep your Pokémon fat and happy

Using Pokémon Refresh to feed your Pokémon brightly coloured beans might not 
seem like a top priority, but giving your little monsters some TLC has some 
hidden side effects. A happy and well-fed Pokémon has the potential to surprise 
you in battle by landing more critical hits, and surviving would-be one hit 
takedowns.

Not every battle is the same

Ordinary encounters with wild Pokémon, as previously mentioned, might end up 
with twice the amount of Pokémon than you bargained for. This goes double for 
Totem Pokémon, the fierce monster which lies in wait at the end of a Trial. Pay 
attention to your effectiveness indicators, and remember to focus your 
attention on the Totem first. Getting rid of their side-piece Pokémon will only 
encourage the Totem to call for more allies.

Talk to everyone

This should be RPG law by now, but make sure you talk to everyone you see. 
Many of the inhabitants of Alola are ready and willing to give Trainers items, 
quests, or secret tips if you just talk to them. This goes double for that guy 
at the Café in the Pokémon Centre. If you buy a drink from him, he’ll reward 
you with wisdom, beans, and other goodies. It’s well worth the cash.

Pokémon pay attention to the clock – and so should you

One of the neat things about Pokémon Sun and Moon is the attention to the time 
of day, using your DS’s internal clock. Much like in previous games, some 
Pokémon only show up during certain times of day, or will evolve to different 
forms. This can make some of the more common daytime finds difficult, however, 
if you’re playing Moon and your game’s internal-clock is reversed. A quick 
change in the DS systems menu can swap the clock. It’s up to you if this one’s 
cheating or not.

Every Sun needs their Moon!

Like in years past, the Pokémon available in either version of the game will 
vary. It pays to have a friend or two with alternate versions of the game, who 
are willing to trade with you (not to mention some Pokémon, like Graveler, will 
only evolve when traded). If you really want to catch ‘em all, maybe make a few 
more friends in the real world! So hey, do you have an Alolan Vulpix you’re 
willing to trade?
 