
The victory of Donald Trump has led to fears about the impact of his presidency
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/13/will-trump-presidency-honour-pledge-stop-sending-foreign-aid-to-countries-that-hate-us-usaid>
 on US humanitarian and development aid. Campaigners and NGOs worry a Trump 
administration could scale down or even abolish the US Agency for International 
Development (USAid). Karen McVeigh asks whether a new stance on abortion could
jeopardise hundreds of millions of dollars of aid for maternal and children’s 
health. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/12/us-aid-women-sexual-health-worldwide-could-be-cut-drastically-under-trump>

From West Papua, Indonesia, Susan Schulman reports on claims from indigenous 
tribes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/02/100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia>
 that their communities have been racked with poverty, disease, oppression and 
environmental degradation since the Grasberg gold mine began operations in 1973.


Elsewhere on the site


Hydroelectric dams emit a billion tonnes of greenhouse gases a year, study 
finds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/14/hydroelectric-dams-emit-billion-tonnes-greenhouse-gas-methane-study-climate-change>

Sudan steeled for sharp price rises as state cuts fuel and electricity 
subsidies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/10/sudan-steeled-sharp-price-rises-state-cuts-fuel-electricity-subsidies>

COP22 host Morocco launches action plan to fight devastating climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/07/cop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference>

Climate finance dispute prompts Bangladesh to hand back £13m of UK aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/10/climate-finance-dispute-bangladesh-returns-13-million-uk-aid-world-bank>

Maria Sharapova reinstated as UN goodwill ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/10/maria-sharapova-reinstated-un-goodwill-ambassador>


In depth
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fwhat-donald-trumps-win-may-mean-for-us-aid-plus-the-real-cost-of-gold-mining%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac0bade7b7655d5dd0edaf56b698033d941a2c1c%2F0_0_2715_1629%2F2715.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20US%20aid%20will%20be%20affected%20by%20Trump's%20win%2C%20plus%20the%20real%20cost%20of%20gold%20mining&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fwhat-donald-trumps-win-may-mean-for-us-aid-plus-the-real-cost-of-gold-mining%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20US%20aid%20will%20be%20affected%20by%20Trump%27s%20win%2C%20plus%20the%20real%20cost%20of%20gold%20mining&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fwhat-donald-trumps-win-may-mean-for-us-aid-plus-the-real-cost-of-gold-mining%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac0bade7b7655d5dd0edaf56b698033d941a2c1c%2F0_0_2715_1629%2F2715.jpg>
Riding the Nile train: could lifting US sanctions get Sudan’s railway on track?
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/14/nile-train-us-united-states-lifting-sanctions-sudan-railway-on-track>

COP22 host Morocco launches action plan to fight devastating climate change  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/07/cop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference>

People in warzones feel needs not being met by humanitarian organisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/10/people-war-zones-needs-not-met-humanitarian-organisations-save-project>

Brazilian women kick back against Temer presidency with capoeira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/08/brazilian-women-kick-back-against-michel-temer-presidency-with-capoeira-protest>


Canada broadens aid horizons as focus falls on women and girls in Mozambique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/04/canada-aid-women-girls-mozambique-marie-claude-bibeau-interview>

Myanmar casts minorities to the margins as citizenship law denies legal 
identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/03/myanmar-casts-minorities-to-margins-citizenship-law-denies-legal-identity>

Book extract

Scarred body, scarred soul: life as Joseph Kony’s bodyguard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/09/scars-body-soul-joseph-kony-bodyguard-when-the-walking-defeats-you-ledio-cakaj-book-extract>

Opinion
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fwhat-donald-trumps-win-may-mean-for-us-aid-plus-the-real-cost-of-gold-mining%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec1aef10d491b54a7723f0368f2e400cd2e33578%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20US%20aid%20will%20be%20affected%20by%20Trump's%20win%2C%20plus%20the%20real%20cost%20of%20gold%20mining&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fwhat-donald-trumps-win-may-mean-for-us-aid-plus-the-real-cost-of-gold-mining%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20US%20aid%20will%20be%20affected%20by%20Trump%27s%20win%2C%20plus%20the%20real%20cost%20of%20gold%20mining&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fwhat-donald-trumps-win-may-mean-for-us-aid-plus-the-real-cost-of-gold-mining%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec1aef10d491b54a7723f0368f2e400cd2e33578%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Margaret Chan: Every tobacco death is an avoidable tragedy. The epidemic must 
stop here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/06/tobacco-death-avoidable-tragedy-epidemic-india-conference-margaret-chan-world-health-organisation>


Tiffany Mugo: Why are we ignoring the sexual health of women who have sex with 
women? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/09/why-are-we-ignoring-the-sexual-health-of-women-who-have-sex-with-women>


Jessica Horn: Khwezi showed how to challenge rape culture – the rest is up to 
us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/03/khwezi-showed-how-to-challenge-culture-fezekile-ntsukela-kuzwayo-fezeka-jacob-zuma>

Milford Bateman and Jonathan Glennie: Cuba must shun capitalism and seek 
development solutions from within 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/11/cuba-shun-capitalism-seek-development-solutions-within>

Multimedia


Rebuilding in Nepal’s Langtang valley – gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/nov/07/rebuilding-begins-in-nepal-langtang-valley-in-pictures>

West Papua’s verdant highlands devastated by mine waste – gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/nov/02/west-papua-indonesia-verdant-heartlands-devastated-by-mine-waste-in-pictures>

Seeking shelter at the UN’s Bentiu camp in South Sudan – gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/nov/08/seeking-shelter-un-united-nations-bentiu-camp-south-sudan-in-pictures>

Volunteers who fought Ebola for Sierra Leone: one year on – gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/11/volunteers-who-fought-ebola-for-sierra-leone-one-year-on>

What you said

On the opinion piece by Milford Bateman and Jonathan Glennie about Cuba, 
ChrissyLew said:

“Economically, I think Vietnam would be a good model to take a look at. It is 
communist with a mix of central control and a fair amount of free market. But I 
hope Cuba takes a much more socially liberal path than Vietnam and allows 
people many more freedoms, for instance free speech.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Writing on Development Horizons, Lawrence Haddad calls for a better 
understanding of howurbanisation impacts malnutrition 
<http://www.developmenthorizons.com/2016/11/the-world-is-urbanising-so-is.html>.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. On Twitter, follow 
@gdndevelopment <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – 
@LizFordGuardian <https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @BenQuinn75 
<https://twitter.com/BenQuinn75> and @karenmcveigh1 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%40karenmcveigh1&src=typd> – and join Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 