
“Recent events have thrust our company under a spotlight …” It was with those 
words, in September 2014, that Lucas J W Johnson, one of the founding members 
of Silverstring Media, begana blogpost about his company 
<http://silverstringmedia.com/news/2014/9/1/intent-and-ideology>. “Under a 
spotlight”, it turned out, was something of an understatement. Silverstring 
Media had been targeted by the burgeoning online movement GamerGate, a loose 
affiliation of Twitter, Reddit and game forums users claiming to expose and 
protest corruption in the video games media. The company was accused of being 
“corrupt” and “creepy”, supposedly pushing ideologies and cultish practices 
that worked towards taking “the fun out of video games”. Connections were 
established between Silverstring and the original GamerGate targetZoe Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/11/gamergate-a-brief-history-of-a-computer-age-war>
. Then everything snowballed.

“[GamerGaters] got it into their heads that Silverstring Media was a PR firm, 
and that as such we must have been behind a conspiracy to release a series of ‘
gamers 
<http://kotaku.com/we-might-be-witnessing-the-death-of-an-identity-1628203079> 
are <http://dangolding.tumblr.com/post/95985875943/the-end-of-gamers> dead 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/josephbernstein/gaming-is-leaving-gamers-behind>’ 
articles all at once from multiple different venues,” Johnson said. “As 
conspiracies do, that then spiralled into further corruption with the Digital 
Games Research Association (DiGRA), and eventually allegations that we work 
with the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (Darpa). We became ‘the 
final boss’ of GamerGate, responsible for all their woes.”

The thing is, Silverstring isn’t a PR firm. As described by Johnson, it’s a 
small-scale studio founded in Vancouver in 2013, which develops its own 
experimental video games, as well as acting as a narrative design and creative 
direction consultant across games and other digital media. Its clients don’t 
include the likes of DiGRA or Darpa either. Instead, Silverstring typically 
works with independent artists and other small studios, and is inclined to work 
with people that are “a little bit weird” and a “little bit queer”; qualities 
that also define the members of Silverstring.

Specialising in digital storytelling (from ebooks to social media to games), 
Silverstring’s work includes the interactive short story Azrael’s Stop, which 
is told through tweet-sized updates, steadily building an impression of its 
single location through snippets of its daily activity. Similarly, in the 
acclaimed Glitchhikers, a car travelling a midnight road becomes the hub for 
multiple dreamlike conversations; the other founding member of Silverstring, 
Claris Cyarron, says they approached the car “as if it were a room ... a 
meditation chamber whose ability to move you physically is secondary to its 
spiritual function”.
 Trailer for Azrael’s Stop, an interactive short story told through 
tweet-sized updates 
During the opening months of GamerGate, Johnson (considered “the possibly 
nefarious head of the company”, as he puts it) had his personal information 
leaked and analysed online. One of the game designers that Silverstring works 
with got the same treatment, which led to an effort from GamerGate to get the 
designer fired from his full-time job at another company. “While we did keep 
working, those four months were kind of time off and away from the industry, 
laying low and keeping quiet. That helped,” Johnson says. “But I also want to 
be clear that the kinds of attacks we suffered as a company were nothing 
compared to what most women suffered. It sucked, yes, but we got off easy. We 
took time away, worked on our projects, commiserated with our friends, then got 
back to it.”

Storytelling is extremely important. Culture reshapes itself one piece of 
media at a time
Claris Cyarron 
While that is now all in the past, Cyarron says that she isn’t sure that she’s 
recovered from it even now. Her first impulse was to study the structures that 
enabled the GamerGate attacks to happen. “But of course, studying GamerGate is 
like wading through a toxic swamp, and I usually save all of that kind of 
action for my Dark Souls playthroughs,” she said. What she ended up doing in 
order to deal with the harassment was to throw herself at the project 
Silverstring were working on at that time. Called Book of the Dead, it grew in 
size to become what Silverstring call a “digital triptych”. It’s a series of 
three projects about how we consume media. The first part, a game-like 
personality quiz based on those you can find on Facebook and Buzzfeed, was 
released in August 2015.

“It was always going to be about the internet, but it wasn’t always going to 
be about fandom, social media and harassment specifically,” Cyarron said. 
“We’re still slowly working on the final two parts but it’s hard. I can’t not 
make art about something like this, but when I sit down to work on it, I’m back 
in fall 2014. I sometimes wonder if it’d be healthier or better if I just 
walked away from the project and stopped trying to look back and make sense of 
it all, but I know I could never do that. We’ll finish it and hopefully then I 
will have actually, fully recovered?”

What presumably hasn’t helped with the recovery is that Cyarron also suffers 
from ADHD. It means that she can be impulsive, hyper, and space out frequently. 
Eight years ago she stopped taking medication for the condition, while it 
helped with focus, it led to a decrease in her creativity. To make up for it, 
she now has a strict morning routine: a calm breakfast, a long shower, 15 
minutes’ meditation, and then lets her mind wander as she breezes across the 
internet, reading, writing and sketching. She says this is a necessary ritual 
as she can’t predict what her mind will be drawn towards each day. “Sitting 
down to get work done is often like dealing with a very fussy child that won’t 
eat the food you’ve prepared,” she said. “Sometimes I can coax my mind to get 
in the groove and eat its vegetables, sometimes it digs in, but most of the 
time, trying to get myself to focus on a specific task at a specific time is 
quite an endeavour. I’ve learned to have a wide variety of tasks available and 
to let myself pick whatever I’m feeling the most energised about at the time.”

It’s not until the afternoon, her “best hours”, that Cyarron will begin work 
on whatever Silverstring’s major projects are at that time, aiming to put five 
or six hours of dedicated work into them. Even then, her wandering mind can let 
work on projects go astray. “I’ve once left [Johnson] waiting for feedback on a 
draft for over a year while I founded a non-profit, brought a publication on 
board, submitted to architecture competitions, and continued to crank out 
client work,” Cyarron says. “I didn’t mean to let a whole bunch of new ideas 
jump the queue, it just wasn’t alluring to my annoyingly fickle mind at the 
time.”

More compassionate, more inclusive and more nuanced stories make a huge 
difference, especially for younger generations
Claris Cyarron 
To keep track of all the places her mind takes her, Cyarron has put together 
and regularly updates a Tumblr blog of inspirations. She usually looks it over 
once a week as part of her routine. It also helps to tackle her most recent 
problem of maintaining positivity and self-confidence; a side-effect of the 
ADHD she has. Fortunately, even when Cyarron is having a particularly stressful 
week, she has the support to find peace again. “Having a work environment of my 
own making and a business partner like Lucas who is so talented at production 
management and coordination has been absolutely instrumental in finding this 
peace,” she says. “Which is great for me, but quite grim for the many people 
who really need but do not have such accommodation. Our education system needs 
to get better at offering alternative work approaches and strategies, and our 
employers must be encouraged to support good workers who may not function well 
in a standard environment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsilverstring-gamergate-adhd-compelling-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b6772e1b38cfe49789619d062374074d5176428%2F121_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Silverstring%20Media%20%20fought%20GamerGate%20and%20ADHD%20to%20make%20compelling%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsilverstring-gamergate-adhd-compelling-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Silverstring%20Media%20%20fought%20GamerGate%20and%20ADHD%20to%20make%20compelling%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsilverstring-gamergate-adhd-compelling-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b6772e1b38cfe49789619d062374074d5176428%2F121_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Crypt of the Necrodancer, the multi-award-winning game on which Silverstring 
worked with Brace Yourself Games. Photograph: Brace Yourself 
It’s taken a long time for Cyarron to admit to herself that she needs to work 
differently from most people and have enough self-love to allow herself that 
admission. “At the very least my life would have been a lot more pleasant if I 
didn’t have to suffer through two decades of schooling not at all designed for 
minds like mine,” she said. However, while having ADHD has been a cause of 
great anguish for Cyarron over the years, it contributes to her creative role 
at Silverstring.

“A wandering mind is one that is great at finding hidden connections, and 
drawing upon a wide array of inspirations,” Cyarron says. “We’re a small 
company and (especially during our early startup years) I believe my ADHD has 
helped us be more nimble and experimental. I’m always getting excited about one 
weird thought or another, and so we always have a bank of interests and ideas. 
They often come back to us in interesting ways, adding a new layer to a client 
project, or morphing a single game into a triptych. It gives our work a certain 
kind of meandering sprawl; it takes you to places you weren’t expecting.”

Testament to this is Silverstring’s portfolio of original works and those 
produced for clients. In the latter category, the duo contributed toward the 
story and cut-scenes in the multi-award-winningCrypt of the Necrodancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/14/crypt-of-the-necrodancer-review-a-truly-engaging-genre-love-in#comments>
, an ingenious combination of dungeon crawling adventure and rhythm action 
game, and worked with Lazy 8 on the visually impressive alien landscape 
exploration sim, Extrasolar. Other projects include a soundtrack based on a 
series of live role-playing sessions, a virtual reality game, location-based 
and event-based experiences, and a dating app carrying an erotic architecture 
theme. What unites these disparate projects is an interest in telling 
compelling stories that may help to shape the world.

“Storytelling is extremely important,” Cyarron says. “Culture reshapes itself 
one piece of media at a time and it’s important to always create with 
intention. Better, more compassionate, more inclusive and more nuanced stories 
make a huge difference, especially for younger generations who are just getting 
a sense of the shape of the world.”

The compulsion within Cyarron that has driven her to act creatively in the 
face of GamerGate rather than shy from it is crucial to her role at 
Silverstring. It started from a young age, born of a fascination with what she 
calls “arcane systems that unlock new understandings and methods”. This led to 
her pursuing the sciences in her education, but as she was about to graduate, 
she recalls having “a series of profoundly moving experiences in art museums”. 
This would lead her on a winding path through art history, philosophy and 
architecture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsilverstring-gamergate-adhd-compelling-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4514d91c68210109b8f4201383630c247696ce0%2F0_96_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Silverstring%20Media%20%20fought%20GamerGate%20and%20ADHD%20to%20make%20compelling%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsilverstring-gamergate-adhd-compelling-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Silverstring%20Media%20%20fought%20GamerGate%20and%20ADHD%20to%20make%20compelling%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsilverstring-gamergate-adhd-compelling-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4514d91c68210109b8f4201383630c247696ce0%2F0_96_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 A scene from the alien landscape exploration sim Extrasolar, on which 
Silverstring worked with Lazy 8 Games. Photograph: Lazy 8 
No matter the subject, then, Cyarron looks to interrogate the notion of 
edifice. “I’m interested in analysing the structure and codified establishment 
– including architecture – as presented in a work, and its impact on 
narrative,” she says. “I gravitate towards projects that are fresh and exciting 
but which also frustrate or alarm me. I want to agitate and stimulate, and I 
want to be agitated and stimulated.”

Fortunately, even when Cyarron is having a particularly stressful week, she 
has Johnson on hand via Google Hangouts, Slack, or simply over the phone to 
help her through it. Business partners they may be, but they are also close 
friends, creative fellows, and seem to complement each other. This relationship 
is summarised by their first meeting at a mutual friend’s wedding, during which 
Cyarron remembers saying something like, “I have these weird ideas about 
architecture and I’m not sure how to get them out to people. How do you find an 
audience?” To which Johnson replied by introducing her to Twitter. He pulls 
back the string, she fires the arrows.
 