
Kolenkitbuurt is a neighbourhood in western Amsterdam with a bad reputation. 
It was built shortly after the second world war as part of a major urban 
expansion plan, following the garden city principlesoutlined by Ebenezer Howard 
<http://urbanplanning.library.cornell.edu/DOCS/howard.htm>. Today, the 
neighbourhood is characterised by a repetitive pattern of monotonous, 
four-storey tenement blocks. Ninety-five per cent of the mostly small houses 
are in the social-rent sector, and they are occupied by some 7,000 people, many 
of them from large immigrant families.


Built between 1949 and 1953, the neighbourhood wasn’t originally given a name, 
just a number, so residents began calling it by the same nickname as the church 
around which it was built: Kolenkit, or “coal-scuttle”. Fifty years on, the 
area had fallen into despair and in 2004 was proclaimed the least popular 
neighbourhood in Amsterdam, with all “liveability” indicators in the red: high 
unemployment, poverty, youth crime and a relatively high rate of high-school 
drop-outs.

By then an urban renewal programme had started, demolishing more than 1,000 
houses and building back bigger homes to diversify the housing stock and 
attract more wealthy residents. Yet in 2007, when neighbourhood liveability and 
social security were made priorities on the national political agenda, 
Kolenkitbuurt was still listed as one of theworst neighbourhoods in the 
Netherlands 
<http://www.expatica.com/nl/news/local_news/Most-problematic-Dutch-neighbourhoods-made-public_49986.html>
. All 40 areas on that list were targeted with an intensified programme to 
prevent ghettoisation.

The need for a different approach to solving the problems of disadvantaged 
neighbourhoods has been widely supported in theory and practice. Academics 
argue that“bottom-up” urbanism 
<http://bettercities.net/sites/default/files/Tactical%20Urbanism%20Final.pdf> 
can respond more quickly to societal needs, compared to a top-down approach. 
Kolenkitbuurt is an example of this strategy – for the social part of the 
programme, the district government adopted an unusual approach.

A tender call was put out to garner ideas on improving liveability in the 
neighbourhood. The eventual winner would be awarded the opportunity (and an 
operational budget) to execute their plan for a limited amount of time, during 
which they could prove their value to the neighbourhood.

The tender was won by Cascoland <http://www.cascoland.com>, a small 
international network of artists, architects and designers formed by Dutch 
community artists Fiona Bell and Roel Schoenmakers. Cascoland has guided 
participatory projects in South African slums and in Rio de Janeiro, among 
other cities; each time it has provided an emptycasco (“frame”) of facilitation 
and artistic skills which is eventually given meaning by local communities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fhow-art-chickens-revived-amsterdam-kolenkitbuurt-cascoland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F15%2F1400170219850%2F53c09a19-0512-4513-b52a-8a27936fe2a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20and%20chickens%20revived%20Amsterdam's%20most%20unloved%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fhow-art-chickens-revived-amsterdam-kolenkitbuurt-cascoland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20and%20chickens%20revived%20Amsterdam%27s%20most%20unloved%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fhow-art-chickens-revived-amsterdam-kolenkitbuurt-cascoland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F15%2F1400170219850%2F53c09a19-0512-4513-b52a-8a27936fe2a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Four mobile henhouses – with added decoration. Photograph: Mark Weemen 
Cascoland had already been working in the Kolenkit area for three years as 
part of a study by the University of Amsterdam into the role of cultural 
enterprises in disadvantaged neighbourhoods. The fact they were already known 
by major stakeholders in the area – indeed were residents themselves – created 
the preconditions for a higher degree of local involvement, which was an 
advantage over other competitors.

According to Stephen Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/13/cities-under-siege-stephen-graham>
, professor of cities and society at Newcastle University, one of the benefits 
of bottom-up urbanism is that it highlights creativity – in addition to 
encouraging entrepreneurship, providing incentives to property owners to 
maintain properties, and supporting environmentally sustainable development. In 
this sense, Bell and Schoenmakers have acted as cultural process managers for 
bottom-up initiatives and ideas.

Due to the open character of their approach, however, no promises could be 
made about the outcome – which meant policymakers were initially reluctant to 
accept Cascoland unconditionally. The collective was allowed to run a pilot 
project for eight months from August 2010, with an operational budget that 
enabled two or three artists to work in the neighbourhood. The local housing 
corporation also made two small locations available for free; to gain a better 
understanding of the local residents and what services or activities were 
lacking, Cascoland began by organising weekly activities in these locations. 
The first was an open neighbourhood dinner where ideas were exchanged over an 
affordable meal.

By hosting activities with a low barrier to entry, Schoenmakers and Bell 
gathered many participants to share information about what small additions 
would impact the quality of life in the neighbourhood most efficiently. This 
research phase revealed that the issue of liveability in itself was not 
perceived as problematic. Instead, the local families, many originating from 
rural areas of Morocco and Turkey, expressed a desire to keep small cattle as 
they had done in their home countries.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1adphPMW7FQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1adphPMW7FQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1adphPMW7FQ&media=>
 Video: theCascoland Kolenkit project 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/RoelCascoland> 
According to Nina Wallerstein <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10146784>, 
professor of family and community medicine at the University of New Mexico, 
“empowerment is a social-action process that promotes participation of people, 
organisations and communities towards the goals of increased individual and 
community control, political efficacy, improved quality of community life and 
social justice”. Cascoland’s involvement in Kolenkit increased its residents’ 
feeling of responsibility about the interventions and services developed in the 
neighbourhood. Moreover, the empowerment process increased the residents’ 
happiness with their living environments, because they could replicate some 
habits and activities typical of life in their home countries.

For example, residents said they wanted more meeting places such as parks in 
the area. As a result, one of Cascoland’s first interventions focused on a 
one-acre plot that had been vacant for years: the plot was derelict and 
surrounded by a fence, and perceived as a source of discomfort. Still, this 
piece of land was valuable because of its central location and its proximity to 
shops and the main walking routes in the neighbourhood, so Cascoland began by 
organising playful activities connected to the boundaries of the site – 
creating a labyrinth made from the fences so people could interact with the 
fenced environment in a positive way.

As some residents had expressed a desire to keep chickens, Cascoland also 
developedfour mobile henhouses 
<http://www.cascoland.com/2009/index2_dt.php?id=1689&cat=50&artist=Fiona%20de%20Bell,Inge%20Roseboom,Mark%20Weemen,Roel%20Schoenmakers>
 for the site, which were designed and made in collaboration with the 
residents. Several neighbourhood families with children were selected to keep 
the chickens, under the condition that they would feed them and clean the 
henhouse.

Gradually, the vacant plot developed into a meeting place. The henhouses 
stimulated commitment from neighbours and encouraged them to take 
responsibility for the management of their public space. The government saw the 
success of this intervention and eventually removed the remaining fences, 
allowing the community to fully reappropriate the unused plot.

Indeed, the mobile henhouses proved such a success that Cascoland could not 
meet the demand of neighbours interested in keeping chickens. Schoenmakers and 
Bell saw this as an opportunity to implement another important aspect of their 
approach: empowerment. They helped these interested neighbours apply for a 
permit at the district office to enlarge the henhouse project, and ultimately 
enabled the community to co-operatively design and build a large chicken coop 
surrounded by fruit trees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fhow-art-chickens-revived-amsterdam-kolenkitbuurt-cascoland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F15%2F1400169894163%2F6e38ec9b-9f3d-42cc-8397-f2633c7012d9-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20and%20chickens%20revived%20Amsterdam's%20most%20unloved%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fhow-art-chickens-revived-amsterdam-kolenkitbuurt-cascoland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20and%20chickens%20revived%20Amsterdam%27s%20most%20unloved%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fmay%2F19%2Fhow-art-chickens-revived-amsterdam-kolenkitbuurt-cascoland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F15%2F1400169894163%2F6e38ec9b-9f3d-42cc-8397-f2633c7012d9-1020x612.jpeg>
 The community-designed and built chicken coop. Photograph: Paul Fennis 
Meanwhile, Kolenkitbuurt residents who frequented barbecue spots outside the 
city expressed a wish to have the same facility within their neighbourhood. At 
the time, other districts of Amsterdam were imposing stricter regulations to 
prevent the development of barbecues in parks and squares, but thanks to the 
moderation of Cascoland and the involvement of the local community, Kolenkit 
was able to implement this project. TheHoutsKolenkit 
<http://www.cascoland.com/2009/index2_dt.php?id=1730&cat=50&artist=Fiona%20de%20Bell,Jair%20Straschnow,Zsollt%20Kamaras,Wouter%20Nieuwendijk,Roel%20Schoenmakers>
, a publicly accessible area furnished with three barbecue grills and several 
picnic tables, created a viable place for residents to cook dinner and eat 
together; it was a valuable social asset to the neighbourhood.


Cascoland’s strategy went further than simply facilitating general requests 
from residents, however. It was also able to identify less visible problems 
around the neighbourhood – for instance, children at the local school who were 
often appearing tired in class.

Upon investigation, this was traced to families letting visiting relatives 
sleep in children’s bedrooms due to lack of space. The kids, forced to sleep on 
the couch, were tired the following day. Cascoland and the residents came up 
with a simple solution: one of the vacant apartments was turned into a
neighbourhood guestroom 
<http://www.cascoland.com/2009/index2_dt.php?id=1700&cat=50&artist=Fiona%20de%20Bell,Mark%20Weemen,Roel%20Schoenmakers>
, maintained and managed by neighbours, that can be booked for a small amount.

In all, more than 20 interventions have been implemented since the beginning 
of the Cascoland project in 2010. Others include thedecoration of a formerly 
dark and dank tunnel 
<http://www.cascoland.com/2009/index2_dt.php?id=1756&cat=50&artist=Tara%20Karpinski,Cecilia%20Hendrikx,Jessica%20Hammarlund%20Bergmann,Annemarie%20van%20den%20Berg>
by neighbours, the creation of anice-skating rink 
<http://www.cascoland.com/2009/index2_dt.php?id=1780&cat=50&artist=Fiona%20de%20Bell,Shahin%20Abdalla,Jair%20Straschnow,Zsollt%20Kamaras,Wouter%20Nieuwendijk,Roel%20Schoenmakers>
 and a festive neighbourhood breakfast. Each project has its own purpose, its 
own planning, management and financing process, and different combinations of 
artists and residents are involved in each one.


 In the beginning, policymakers had been reluctant to agree to such an 
open-ended approach to the Kolenkitbuurt programme. However, the openness of 
Cascoland’s strategy – which did not include a precise set of outcomes, only a 
working method – can be considered its strength. No single “result” should be 
regarded as the final stage of an urban revival process, and when institutions 
support the creation of a bottom-up initiative, they should also define how to 
transmit the management of the process to the citizens themselves.

Cascoland was always focused on empowering the community to keep the programme 
going in the long term, helping residents to initiate and manage their own 
projects without outside assistance. In theory, this makes the Kolenkit 
programme resilient and Cascoland, in itself, redundant – so they can move on 
and focus on new initiatives.

This is an edited extract from CITIES Foundation 
<http://citiesthemagazine.com/>'s new book, We Own the City: Enabling Community 
Practice in Architecture and Urban Planning, published by Trancity/Valiz and
launching from Amsterdam on 27 May 
<http://citiesthemagazine.com/2014/book-launch-in-brief-may-27th/>. Read more of
We Own the City here <http://issuu.com/citiesthemagazine/docs/weown-issuu>
 