
Theresa May’s recent visit to India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/theresa-may-india-trip-post-brexit-britain>
, during which discussions about cooperation over trade in health services were 
apriority 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/india-and-the-uk-establish-a-strategic-partnership-in-healthcare>
, is a reminder that trade and investment cannot be isolated from other areas 
of policy.

Key among these is universal health coverage – the provision of quality 
medical services to all people when they need them, without causing financial 
hardship. This is a concept that is having its moment: it is championed by 
everyone from health activists to theWorld Bank 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/universalhealthcoverage>, and is one of the 
targets <http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/health/> in the sustainable 
development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
.

Healthcare innovations won’t cure global health inequality – political action 
will | Ben Ramalingam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/09/healthcare-innovations-wont-cure-global-health-inequality-political-action-will-world-health-summit-berlin>
What is obvious, but perhaps less palatable to some of its advocates, is that 
achieving universal health coverage requires addressing polices far beyond the 
health sector. Policies that need to work for universal health coverage include 
those on water and sanitation, nutrition and education, but also global 
policies and practices that impede the right to health.

In the context of Brexit, UK trade is one such policy we urgently need to 
examine. Trade has hugeimplications 
<https://www.healthpovertyaction.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Health-and-Trade-briefing-WEB.pdf>
 for health. This was seen very clearly in the EU’s failed attempt to agree a
trade deal with India 
<http://www.livemint.com/Politics/TjPyP4XTzWOTuKqJWDHTFJ/Breakthrough-unlikely-in-stalled-IndiaEU-free-trade-agreeme.html>
. When the EU proposed to include stricter patenting rights for companies in 
the deal, Indian negotiators, the UN and activists all raised seriousobjections 
<http://www.msf.org/en/article/eu-india-summit-india-must-defend-its-%E2%80%98pharmacy-developing-world%E2%80%99>
, fearing it would drive a huge increase in the cost of medicines relied on by 
poor communities across the globe.

Fears about trade rules are well-founded. One third of the world’s population 
lacks access to essential medicines 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=5&ved=0ahUKEwj9pOrR-bnQAhXkI8AKHZU0Dw0QFgg4MAQ&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.unmillenniumproject.org%2Fdocuments%2FTF5-medicines-Chapter1.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHIwOZlUlDXuEjLTQRqIkD9q-Fy6g&sig2=O-IQ_t6DtzRxMomCWYiPsQ&cad=rja>
. New treatments for people living with HIV in middle-income countries can cost 
between $3,000 (£2,400) and $28,000per person each year 
<http://missingmedicines.co.uk/whats-the-problem/>. No surprise that for many 
people this is out of reach. Inequalities in power between companies and 
citizens is at the heart of this. Patent protection given to pharmaceutical 
companies through provisions in trade agreements restricts access to cheaper, 
generic medicines and pushes up drug prices. In the US, the Food and Drug 
Administrationreports 
<http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely/UnderstandingGenericDrugs/ucm167991.htm>
 that the cost of a generic drug is 80% to 85% lower than the brand name 
product.

Similar power distortions are unmistakable in bilateral investment treaties 
<http://www.tjm.org.uk/documents/Worried_about_your_BITS_report__FINAL_copy.pdf>
. Like the controversialTTIP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip> and 
Ceta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/eu-canada-sign-ceta-free-trade-deal-trudeau-juncker>
 agreements, these trade deals include a parallel judicial system allowing 
companies to sue governments at private international tribunals, curbing the 
ability of states to provide for the right to health for their people, and 
undermining democracy.

How Sri Lanka bit back at mosquitoes and wiped out malaria – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/oct/24/how-sri-lanka-bit-back-mosquitoes-wiped-out-malaria-podcast>
Companies are already using such provisions to challenge government health 
policy. In 2012, pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly beganlegal proceedings 
<http://www.italaw.com/cases/1625> against the Canadian government for $500m for
invalidating two of its patents 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/business/eli-lilly-files-500m-nafta-suit-against-canada-over-drug-patents-1.1829854>
. The invalidations were the result of a new national law that required the 
“utility” of an invention to be demonstrated when the patent was filed – in 
other words the drug did not do what the inventor said, or implied, it would do 
when the patent application was made, as was the case with the two contested 
drugs from Eli Lilly. The company then sued Canada under the Nafta treaty for 
lost profit and unfair treatment – a lawsuit that is not only intended to 
challenge the withdrawal of the patents but also Canada’s national law.

While there are no public cases of health companies suing India, UK companies 
have certainly been using the provisions of UK bilateral investment treaties to 
challenge other aspects of Indian government policy.Vedanta Mining 
<http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/ISDS/Details/733> and Vodafone 
<http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/ISDS/Details/581> have both challenged 
changes to Indian tax law. The companies had used offshore vehicles to buy out 
Indian companies, neatly avoiding having to pay significant amounts of tax. 
When India attempted toclose the loophole 
<http://www.incometaxindia.gov.in/Lists/Press%20Releases/Attachments/21/Draft_Report.pdf>
 (pdf) that allowed this to happen, the companies used the UK-India treaty to 
sue the government for “compensation”.

Every day 16,000 children under-five 
<https://data.unicef.org/topic/child-survival/under-five-mortality/> (5.9 
million a year) die. The causes of their deaths are largely preventable, 
meaning these children are not killed by illness, but bad policies. As theAlma 
Ata <http://www.who.int/publications/almaata_declaration_en.pdf?ua=1> – the 
first international declaration underlining the importance of primary health 
care – made clear almost 40 years ago, health inequalities within and between 
countries are “politically, socially and economically unacceptable”. Achieving 
universal health coverage requires training more health workers, improving 
health information systems and mobilising more domestic financing. It also 
requires addressing the global causes of poverty and inequality. Trade and 
investment policies should be first on the list. India has already revised its 
bilateral investment treaties to limit the range of policies that can be 
challenged. The UK now has an opportunity to make sure its own trade policy 
supports the health of people across the world. We must demand that MPs act now 
to ensure it.

• Natalie Sharples is senior policy advisor at Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Poverty Action
 