
It’s the million, perhaps billion dollar question that everyone wants 
answered: how do they do it? How did Google go from a company name to the 
dictionary definition of internet searches? How did AirBnB and Uber rapidly 
build loyal customer bases in hundreds of cities around the world to disrupt 
powerful existing marketplaces?

Tiffani Bova, the global customer growth and innovation evangelist at business 
software innovator Salesforce is certain she knows the answer. “The most 
disruptive thing in the market today is not technology, it’s the customer,” she 
says.

“Customer experience is the new product.”

Visiting Australia from her base in San Francisco, she’s excited by what she 
calls “pockets of innovation” in the country, and is encouraged by signals that 
Australia wants to be seen as more technically innovative. How, then, can 
Australian businesses apply the lessons of Silicon Valley to their customers?

“Customers are saying, I want more, I want you to know me better,” Bova says. 
“It’s technology that enables the disruption that the customer wants. We have 
more power with smartphones in our hands today than many businesses had just 
ten years ago. The moment of truth is going the first mile with the customer,” 
she says.

The most disruptive thing in the market today is not technology, it’s the 
customer

“One area is which Salesforce does an amazing job is going on the joint 
journey with the customer,” says Bova. Indeed, it’s one of the reasons she 
joined the company earlier this year from her position as a vice president at 
technology research giant Gartner. “We need our customers to succeed,” she 
continues, “investing in their success is enormously important.”

Bova thinks that most businesses look at personalising customer experience the 
wrong way around, and that too many companies make the mistake of trying to 
solve the problems of only their largest customers.

The Pareto Principle, or the ‘80/20 Rule’ as it is frequently called today, 
says that 20% of your customers generate 80% of your revenue, so businesses 
frequently focus their energies on the problems of just 20% of their customers. 
“If 80% of customer experience is scale, then only solving for only 20% of them 
isn’t,” she says. “The mistake is thinking that the customers of our brand are 
going to come out with one experience.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fhow-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7572d7a9837a6aecc8b83f83348b3b21f606b0c4%2F0_55_7360_4414%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20the%20most%20valued%20brands%20in%20the%20world%20meet%20customer%20expectations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fhow-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20the%20most%20valued%20brands%20in%20the%20world%20meet%20customer%20expectations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fhow-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7572d7a9837a6aecc8b83f83348b3b21f606b0c4%2F0_55_7360_4414%2F7360.jpg>
 The Pareto Principle concept.
 Photograph: marrio31/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
Big data has endless possibilities, concludes Bova, and companies are best 
served looking at better segmentation and analysis that technology can offer to 
understand their entire customer base.

Robert Wickham, Salesforce’s regional vice president of innovation and digital 
transformation in the Asia-Pacific agrees that the unprecedented connectivity 
in our lives today have fundamentally changed business-customer relationships.

“We’re seeing a new marketplace, one that has gone from reactive to proactive 
to predictive,” he says. “To anticipate problems or identify opportunities, 
businesses need to aggregate data, connect into customer touch points, and find 
a rich reservoir of context.”

Building your business around your customers is about more than just brand 
recognition and positive media. From day one, Salesforce ran on a subscription 
model – a radical idea in the software industry, which ran exclusively on 
perpetual licences. In other words, Salesforce cannot survive as a company if 
it is not customer centric, and has built its entire software lifecycle around 
this principle.

“Salesforce customers can submit ideas for the features they want in 
products,” Wickham explains. “We have three software releases per year, and ask 
our hundred-thousand plus customers to vote on the features they want.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fhow-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8392c41785e28fa3018f374c1dc8a2ed93cdbfd%2F467_0_1800_1800%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20the%20most%20valued%20brands%20in%20the%20world%20meet%20customer%20expectations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fhow-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20the%20most%20valued%20brands%20in%20the%20world%20meet%20customer%20expectations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fhow-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8392c41785e28fa3018f374c1dc8a2ed93cdbfd%2F467_0_1800_1800%2F1800.jpg>
 Tiffani Bova, the global customer growth and innovation evangelist at business 
software innovator Salesforce. Photograph: Tracy Wright Corvo/2014 Tracy Wright 
Corvo 
So how can businesses look at themselves from the perspective of the customer, 
and re-orient their operations to be customer centric?

Tiffani Bova offers a simple maxim to remind businesses that they cannot 
compromise on a culture of customer centricity in a global marketplace: “Make 
sure you disrupt yourself before someone disrupts you.”

“The big problem is that most businesses operate from the inside out,” she 
warns, noting that customer centricity has to be a conscious move requiring a 
multifaceted approach to people, processes, and culture.

 Robert Wickham says in his experience, you need to create employee incentives 
to drive the outcome, and that employees need to opt-in to those plans. “But 
what’s hardest to change is the culture,” Bova adds.

To innovate for the future, it’s important that businesses go back to the 
customer, because ultimately, customer success is a business’s most important 
asset.


How do you best ensure a good understanding of your value to potential 
customers?Find out if your innovative business has a customer-centric DNA 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/311050452;138766931;a>



 