
Last October, video game developer Playground Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> sent six staff members from its 
studio in Leamington Spa to a tiny town 120 miles south-west of Sydney called 
Braidwood, New South Wales. Armed with a custom built 12K-resolution camera 
worth tens of thousands of pounds, they weren’t there to capture the scenery or 
film movie sequences with a cast of actors. They were there to record the sky.

Released in September, Forza Horizon 3 is widely credited as one of the most 
visually impressive console games ever made. A driving simulation based in and 
around a fictitious car festival, the game gives players hundreds of miles of 
accurately modelled Australian scenery to explore, from dense rain forests to 
sun-bleached outback wastelands.

There are races to enter, challenges to attempt and hundreds of new vehicles 
to unlock, but it’s the developer’s obsession with detail that has really stood 
out. The game provides a neat indication of where real-world simulation is 
heading in this ever-more graphically ambitious industry. And it all starts 
with those skies.

If you’ve played Forza Horizon 3, you will have noticed them: dramatic, 
ever-changing panoramas of cloud, punctured by light rays and accompanied by 
evolving weather patterns.

For the previous game in the series, Playground did what most studios do: they 
created a bunch of cloud models, then lit and rotated in them in various ways 
to suggest a seemingly changeable skyscape. For the third title though, the art 
team had a new idea: what about taking a high resolution camera, pointing it at 
the sky and capturing the whole expanse over many hours, as a detailed 
time-lapse sequence.

For a while, it was just that – a crazy idea. Until they tried it.

“We shot a pre-production test here in Leamington Spa, just sitting in a 
field,” explains the lead lighting artist, Jamie Wood. “And what we got from 
it, frame by frame … there was so much more nuance to the lighting changes. In 
just an hour, we had more variety than the whole of the system we used last 
time.”

So the plan was hatched to send a team out to Australia to capture the 
country’s very specific lighting, weather and cloud formation patterns. It 
wasn’t just about replicating pretty cloud shapes: in the Forza series, as well 
as a lot of modern video games, the game’s lighting effects are physics-based.

In other words, the game simulates a realistic sun. All the variations in 
light and shadow that the player sees in the world are calculated in real-time, 
based on how light is dispersed and how it is occluded by objects between the 
source and the surface; whether that’s a rain cloud blocking the light, or 
buildings casting shadows across the road. And the direction and length of 
those shadows is calculated based on the real-world light direction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafda736955642cdd22ef80c5c91dbf673ea61cc2%2F0_275_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Forza%20Horizon%203%20became%20the%20most%20beautiful%20game%20on%20Xbox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Forza%20Horizon%203%20became%20the%20most%20beautiful%20game%20on%20Xbox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafda736955642cdd22ef80c5c91dbf673ea61cc2%2F0_275_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Playground Games shot the Australian sky through the summer, in total 
recording 30 24-hour periods. Photograph: Sean Murray/www.seanmurray.com.au 
“It was quite a romantic idea,” says Wood. “To take the research footage of 
the light out there and bring that into the studio and project it into the 
game; to give players the experience of those cloud scapes and how that lights 
the world. But it was a very risky concept, with a lot of sensible push-back 
internally, we were thinking: should we really do this?”

For a start, the creative director, Ralph Fulton, had to weigh up the 
practicalities of sending experienced staff into the Australian bush for 
several weeks of expensive development time.

“I mean, how do you insure them for something like that?” Fulton said. 

And then there were the logistics and uncertainties of a reasonably 
unprecedented shoot. Wood said: “During our two year development period we only 
had one window to capture an Australian summer. We had to plan so much in 
ahead.”

Eventually, three teams of two carried out the shooting process, beginning in 
October 2015, and running throughout the Australian summer. Each team headed 
out into the countryside near Braidwood, set up a camp, pointed the camera at 
the sky and waited as it took thousands of high-resolution images over 24-hour 
periods.

“The skies are captures as an interpolated series of frames, like a movie but 
with shorter increments,” says Wood. “Per frame, we derive an image-based 
specular cue for reflections and also a diffuse light source. So whatever the 
sky’s doing, whether it’s got really sharp shadows or its very hazy, it will be 
picked up frame by frame.”

But travel to the other side of the world? Why not use the Leamington test 
footage? “The heat in Australia generates a lot of different clouds that we 
don’t tend to see here,” says Wood. “You have a lot of big cumulonimbus and 
amble clouds. But it’s more to do with the arc of the Sun, the timings of 
sunsets and how dark it gets at night.

“Because the sun actually drops much lower below the horizon in Australia in 
summer than it does here, you get these pitch black nights and very quick 
dramatic sunsets – and the sun will be much higher in the sky during the day. 
We took light probes and captured all that data - we didn’t have to guess what 
the light would be like.”

All of this is visible in the game. Whizzing along the cliffs beside Byron Bay 
at sunset, the sky quickly drops from broad daylight to almost hallucinogenic 
orange, the strong midday sun above Surfer’s Paradise, cutting great sharp 
shadows into the road – it all adds to the visual grandeur.

But in this era of HDR visuals, where subtle gradients of light are 
detectable, some of the most impressive effects in modern games will come from 
how light is treated when it hits and reflects off objects. “Forza Horizon 3 
uses a voxel-based global illumination system to calculate light bounces in 
real-time,” says Fulton. “This system uses the HDR sky, other light sources and 
offline-generated occlusion data to work out which surfaces the light bounces 
onto.

“For an easy way to see the impact that bounced light has on a scene, look at 
locations with complex shadows like the entrance to a cave or crevices in a 
rock formation – in Forza Horizon 2, those shadows would have had a single 
colour value which meant the shadow would be uniform everywhere there was no 
direct light. In Forza Horizon 3, we calculate how light – and hence colour – 
bounces into partially occluded areas so shadows have a much higher variation 
in darkness and colour. The depths of a tunnel, with no direct and minimal 
indirect light, will be almost black; whereas the edges of shadow will bleed 
naturally from dark to light based on indirect bounced light.”

In the end, the team caught 30-days worth of 24-hour sky shoots, which are 
used to create the game’s naturalistically evolving skyscape. In free roam 
mode, the game will effectively “play” a full day’s footage across the game 
sky, the data streamed in, on the fly, from the hard-drive. “If you sit in the 
same place, you’ll see the sky elapse as it did in real life,” says Fulton. The 
only difference is, in the game, the footage is sped up so that a Horizon day 
doesn’t last 24-hours.

“One of the knock on effects of this system was that it made our days much 
longer than in Forza Horizon 2” says Fulton. “Speeding up time beyond a certain 
point makes the cloud movement look ludicrous. I think that benefits the game – 
sunsets are longer, sunrises are longer, but we mitigate the slower passage of 
time by using in-game events – a cutscene, the start of a race etc – to jump 
around a bit and prevent monotony.”

The weather system is connected too, so when dark clouds roll in, the rain 
starts on cue, altering the surface feel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18728c59969652c417bf27f028384c329251a19f%2F34_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Forza%20Horizon%203%20became%20the%20most%20beautiful%20game%20on%20Xbox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Forza%20Horizon%203%20became%20the%20most%20beautiful%20game%20on%20Xbox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18728c59969652c417bf27f028384c329251a19f%2F34_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Lightning makes all the difference. Photograph: Microsoft 
“People have asked us, why are you so obsessed with the sky?” says Fulton. 
“Well, it’s a massive part of our frame. In a driving game you have sky, car, 
terrain, road. But it’s more than that: the sky is the lightsource, so 
everything in the world benefits from a realistic system.

“Through the detail of the light and the reflections, the cars, the leaves on 
the trees, the tarmac, all of them benefit from the much higher detail lighting 
data that’s coming from the sky. So the whole scene looks better - not just the 
blue bit at the top.”

The teams shot for three weeks, a physically demanding task that required 
camping out with the cameras, which would get clogged with dust and grit.

“We needed to clean the lenses every half an hour, and the light sensors after 
every shoot,” says Wood. “We also needed to change the lenses every sun rise 
and sunset. Because we were capturing the whole dynamic range of the Sun, once 
it dropped away, we’d need a more sensitive camera set-up for night.”

There was also the local wildlife to contend with, including unidentifiable 
but scary-looking spiders climbing into the camera cases, and other terrifying 
fauna.

Wood said: “Something kept landing on my arm during one shoot, it was a fly 
the size of a mouse. One of the locals saw it on me and said, ‘whoa, that thing 
is not your friend, you need to get that off right now’”.

The vagaries of the weather also added to the challenge. “You’re at the mercy 
of what the sky is doing that given day,” says Fulton. “There was a lot of 
amateur meteorology going on, trying to predict the periods we should be out in 
the field.

“We had a list of all the skies we needed for the game, but it was down to 
luck if we’d manage it. Sometimes we’d get a whole week of identical clear 
days. It was the most expensive blue sky we’d ever seen.”

The car’s the star
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6f682c03be295c5687668d0a1931f645d42f63a%2F0_742_4191_2514%2F4191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Forza%20Horizon%203%20became%20the%20most%20beautiful%20game%20on%20Xbox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Forza%20Horizon%203%20became%20the%20most%20beautiful%20game%20on%20Xbox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6f682c03be295c5687668d0a1931f645d42f63a%2F0_742_4191_2514%2F4191.jpg>
 The real Lamborghini Centenario on show at the Geneva International Motor Show 
on 1 March 2016. Photograph: Chesnot/Getty Images 
A similarly obsessive level of detail went into the car models. When the deal 
was struck to include the new Lamborghini Centenario in the game, it still 
hadn’t been announced, so Playground had to send a staff member over to Italy 
to photograph the one production model available. He took thousands of images 
and measurements, but once again, there was significant time pressure.

“They were still building this car as we were building our model,” says 
Fulton. “They announced it at Geneva in April and we were building it to show 
at E3 in June – but it takes six months to build a car for Forza. That shoot 
was the last day that the car was actually complete - the next day Lamborghini 
tore it apart to make the moulds for the production parts.”

From there, it’s a process of modelling a mesh of the car in the art package 
3D Studio Max, turning all those images and measurements into a highly accurate 
representation.

“We need to identify where different materials need to be placed in the car,” 
says the principle vehicle artist, Simon Gibson. “We also have to construct 
models that will allow the doors to open. We used to try to match cinematic 
levels of detail. We’re beyond that now.”

Indeed, the process of creating a 3D model of a car for a game is now almost 
as intensive as producing the actual model for production. The real Centenario 
production car uses more than 620 different types of materials, including 
carbon fibre, various alloy metal types, and plastic and composite materials on 
the exterior, as well as leather in the interiors and heat shield materials in 
the engine.

Playground has sought to simulate all of these – “to the sub-pixel level”, 
insists Fulton. Most manufacturers will supply their blueprints and CAD data to 
development studios working on licensed racing games, so that their cars are as 
authentically reproduced as possible.

“There’s definitely a convergence now between how cars are designed and how we 
make game models,” says Gibson. “We actually borrow each other’s software. But 
some cars don’t have CAD information, so you have to use your skill as an 
artist to reproduce them.

“With older cars especially, the panels were hand-beaten together so even if 
you make an accurate representation, that’s only accurate to one car. You have 
to think about how each car was produced in reality in order to recreate it.”

Another challenge was tracking down some of the more specialist vehicles to 
garner modelling details from them. When the designers thought it would be fun 
to include a Reliant Regal in the line up, it took weeks to track one down. 
They eventually found a collector who’d converted one into a tribute to the 
famous Only Fools and Horses van.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbee7a48be29abb23abcf5137919165480e62e40a%2F590_293_3101_1862%2F3101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Forza%20Horizon%203%20became%20the%20most%20beautiful%20game%20on%20Xbox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Forza%20Horizon%203%20became%20the%20most%20beautiful%20game%20on%20Xbox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fforza-horizon-3-game-perfect-skies-photorealism-detail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbee7a48be29abb23abcf5137919165480e62e40a%2F590_293_3101_1862%2F3101.jpg>
 A beautifully lit coastal scene in Forza Horizon 3. Photograph: Playground 
Games 
What’s fascinating about the video game production process is how these 
extravagant techniques are combined with ingenious short cuts and workarounds. 
The sea is an expensive element to include in a game, with wave simulation 
requiring a lot of complex physics. But then Playground discovered that another 
nearby Microsoft studio was working on similar technology.

“The sea in Forza Horizon 3 is also the sea in Sea of Thieves,” says Fulton. 
“Doing proper sea tech is incredibly complex. We knew the guys up the road at 
Rare were working on the same problem. They’re doing more deepsea stuff, but we 
got in touch with them, shared a bit of code, and we optimised it back and 
forth, so we’ve both benefited.

“Our challenge was making the sea interact with the beach, so lapping waves, 
foam, wetting and drying the sand correctly – that was a whole other area of 
work. The 12 Apostles area is a sort of hero image for us, and we wanted the 
car to be down there racing. If you’re going to be on a beach, the sea has to 
look good. That work paid off because driving the cars into the sea looks 
awesome.”

Some interesting workarounds were also employed in the sound design. When the 
audio team decided to move on from the collision samples they’d sourced for 
Forza Horizon 2, they went to a scrapyard and recorded themselves smashing the 
hell out of an old Ford Ka with sledgehammers.

“One of our team had a car he was going to scrap, so we said, wait a minute, 
we need this,” says the audio designer Fraser Strachan. “We ended up spending a 
day throwing stones at it, to simulate the sound of gritty road surfaces. It 
didn’t look good at the end.”

Elsewhere, when they wanted to get the isolated sound of tyres on a beach, 
they took a bunch of microphones up to St Andrews and recorded kite buggies. A 
more modest field trip than Australia, but still a symbol of the growing 
importance of accurate source materials in the age of photorealism.

So does Playground think that the sky system in Horizon 3 will instigate a new 
era of month-long location shoots throughout the games industry? Wood doesn’t 
think so.

“The practicalities of it were crazy,” he says. “We’ll probably lead the field 
on this going forward because the thought of copying it ... you’d be mad to 
try. I could tell you all our secrets, but you still wouldn’t want to do it.”
 