
On the day the BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> store in 
Edinburgh closed down, Lin Macmillan, a former employee, decided to visit it 
one last time.

“It was really sad,” she said. “The staff were obviously very upset but still 
acted professionally.”

Macmillan worked for BHS for a decade and is one of more than 20,000 
pensioners who face a cut to their income after the collapse of the company.

“I first realised something was wrong in March when I got a leaflet from the 
pension trustees about what would happen if the company went into 
administration. I was like, hmm – they wouldn’t do that if there wasn’t a 
problem.”

A month later, BHS did indeed collapse into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-owner-retail-acquisitions-25m-administration>
. This led to the closure of all 164 shops, the loss of 11,000 jobs, and left a 
£571m pension deficit.

“I was angry and sad,” Macmillan added. “It was avoidable if Green and his 
family hadn’t milked the company in the way they did. Chappell was way out of 
his depth. He took something on that he didn’t understand. The Green family are 
entirely to blame. They must have been delighted to find an idiot to sell it 
to.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267262f057f315814dcd168b5747caff97bcc726%2F0_255_3580_2148%2F3580.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20attempts%20to%20save%20BHS%2C%20and%2011%2C000%20jobs%2C%20were%20doomed%20by%20chaos%20and%20mistrust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20attempts%20to%20save%20BHS%2C%20and%2011%2C000%20jobs%2C%20were%20doomed%20by%20chaos%20and%20mistrust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267262f057f315814dcd168b5747caff97bcc726%2F0_255_3580_2148%2F3580.jpg>
 Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Green and Chappell – Sir Philip Green and Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell> – became two of the 
most vilified people in Britain after the demise of BHS. At a time when Britain 
was divided about its future in the European Union, it was united in anger at 
Green, the billionaire tycoon, and Chappell, the three-time bankrupt.

According to a parliamentary report into the failure of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
, Green and Chappell had systematically plundered the retailer before it shut. 
Green controlled BHS for 15 years until he sold it to Chappell’s company, 
Retail Acquisitions, for £1 in March 2015. During this period, the tycoon, his 
family and other shareholders collected more than £580m in dividends, rent and 
interest payments on debt. Retail Acquisitions, meanwhile, was paid at least 
£17m – despite having owned the chain for only 13 months before its demise.

In June 2016, Green pledged before MPs that he would “sort” the problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bhs-pension-problems-can-be-solved-sir-philip-green-tells-mps>
 facing the BHS pension scheme. However, as 2016 drew to a close, a rescue deal 
had failed to appear.

The repercussions of BHS’s failure – one of the biggest corporate scandals to 
hit Britain in the 21st century – will continue to be felt through 2017. 
Although the parliamentary committee led by Labour MPs Iain Wright and Frank 
Field has delivered its verdict, there are other investigations still underway. 
The Pensions Regulator, the Insolvency Service, the Financial Reporting 
Council, HM Revenue & Customs and the Serious Fraud Office are all still 
looking into the circumstances surrounding the collapse of the 88-year-old 
chain.

Macmillan hopes the Pensions Regulator, led by Lesley Titcomb, can force the 
Green family to pay money into the BHS pension scheme. “I hope she uses the 
power she has to force them to pay up,” she said. “They will still be 
fabulously wealthy anyway.”

The Pensions Regulator has started legal proceedings against Green and 
Chappell in an attempt to force them to fill the BHS pension deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
. It is understood to be seeking £350m from Green and as much as £17m from 
Retail Acquisitions, which is 90% owned by Chappell. At the same time, the 
Insolvency Service is investigating the conduct of the former directors, the 
Financial Reporting Council is examining the audit of BHS’s 2014 accounts by 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, and the SFO is looking into possible grounds to launch 
a formal criminal investigation into the closure of the retailer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bc96ebf36018f1fe992e8e48dc6f9f6a5a5d35f%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20attempts%20to%20save%20BHS%2C%20and%2011%2C000%20jobs%2C%20were%20doomed%20by%20chaos%20and%20mistrust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20attempts%20to%20save%20BHS%2C%20and%2011%2C000%20jobs%2C%20were%20doomed%20by%20chaos%20and%20mistrust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bc96ebf36018f1fe992e8e48dc6f9f6a5a5d35f%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Philip Green tells Sky News to go away in Greece after questions over BHS 
closure Photograph: Sky News 
Green’s knighthood also remains on the line after MPs voted in favour of 
stripping it from him. This will ultimately be decided by honours forfeiture 
committee, which will make a recommendation to the prime minister and the Queen.

A spokesperson for Green said he had nothing further to say on the collapse of 
BHS or his discussions with the Pensions Regulator. However, Chappell was 
unrepentant when contacted by theObserver, and insisted the blame for the BHS 
collapse lay with Green and the retail managers who ran the store chain from 
day to day.

“There are three reasons why it collapsed,” he said. “Philip undertook to deal 
with the trade credit insurers [who ensure that retailers do not have to pay 
suppliers upfront for goods] and he did not do that. We needed another £30m 
that we had not budgeted for because we couldn’t deal with the trade credit 
insurers. He also undertook to deal with his moral hazard on the pension 
scheme, which he did not do. This screwed our finances. The third thing that 
crippled us was the very bad trading that the company did last Christmas, led 
by Darren Topp [the former chief executive].

“We have been criticised heavily for having no retail experience. We backed 
the management of BHS, we funded them, and we produced funds of around £80m for 
them to do their turnaround.”

Chappell, who says his life since the collapse of the company has been 
“extremely difficult”, also defended the millions Retail Acquisitions took out 
of the BHS.

“We’re not a charity,” he said. “We weren’t ever going to do this for nothing. 
We had significant costs pre-acquisition. We complied with every single thing 
that we needed to do as directors, and at no stage did we trade immorally. We 
did everything we possibly could to try to resolve the BHS issue and we were 
let down on three matters.”

However, others involved with the matter have significantly different views on 
the conduct of Chappell and Retail Acquisitions. Evidence submitted to the 
parliamentary investigation into the collapse of the company describes the 
chaos in the final days of the high street chain.

Topp and Michael Hitchcock, the two most senior retail executives at BHS in 
the run-up to its failure, have been severely critical of Chappell. They, and 
Green, dispute his version of events.

“Like many others throughout this process, I think I was duped,” Hitchcock, a 
former financial consultant, told MPs about his interactions with Chappell. “I 
think the technical term is a mythomaniac. The layperson’s term is that he was 
a premier league liar and a Sunday pub league retailer, at best.”

Topp added: “To be honest, I took it at face value that it was true [that 
Chappell could help turn BHS around]. Unfortunately, as time progressed, that 
unravelled in terms of that promise, and it became clear towards the end that 
rather than putting money in, he had his fingers in the till.”

The key to BHS’s survival was persuading landlords to reduce their rent bills, 
which Topp believed would be possible once BHS was free from Green’s empire. 
This turned out to be true: inMarch 2016, landlords voted in favour of 
dramatically cutting the rent on 87 of BHS’s 164 shops. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/bhs-creditors-approve-rescue-plan-company-voluntary-arrangement>

Unfortunately, by that point the company’s finances were unravelling and key 
suppliers, credit insurers and other stakeholders had lost faith in Chappell, 
warning Topp that BHS needed new owners in order to be successful.

Topp’s faith in Chappell had started to unravel the previous June, when 
documents submitted to the Pensions Regulator revealed financial transactions 
that made him uncomfortable. As part of its investigation into the company, the 
regulator had served BHS with a “section 72 notice”, requiring it to disclose 
financial documents. These documents showed that the £10m that Retail 
Acquisitions had put into BHS had been borrowed, that it had taken a £7m cut 
from the sale of BHS’s head office, North West House on London’s Marylebone 
Road, and that Chappell and his personal company, Swiss Rock, had been paid 
£1.8m after buying the department store chain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cbaad6c7ac9273b9e683e80101187e166313e0%2F0_322_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20attempts%20to%20save%20BHS%2C%20and%2011%2C000%20jobs%2C%20were%20doomed%20by%20chaos%20and%20mistrust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20attempts%20to%20save%20BHS%2C%20and%2011%2C000%20jobs%2C%20were%20doomed%20by%20chaos%20and%20mistrust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cbaad6c7ac9273b9e683e80101187e166313e0%2F0_322_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 The BHS headquarters on Marylebone Road was sold in March 2016. Photograph: 
Chris Ratcliffe/Getty Images 
Topp said he felt “exposed”, so had brought in Hitchcock to be his finance 
man. Hitchcock quickly became concerned about Retail Acquisitions, eventually 
changing BHS’s rules so that two directors had to sign off every expense.

The movement of money out of BHS became public just weeks before landlords 
voted on whether to cut the company’s rent,when the Guardian revealed the 
existence of an £8.4m loan between BHS and Retail Acquisitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/04/owners-84-million-pound-loan-from-bhs-staff-job-losses>
, of which roughly a third had gone to its directors, including Chappell. The 
anger was palpable among landlords who were being asked to take a financial hit 
and BHS staff who were losing their jobs.

Topp says he approached Green around this time over his concerns about 
Chappell and what they could do. Green’s retail business, Arcadia, still ran 
back-office functions for BHS such as payroll, sold products in its shops, and 
was owed £40m by the company – making it a key creditor and partner. Green had 
remained in contact with Topp and Chappell since selling BHS.

However, it was too late. Even though landlords agreed to reduce their rental 
payments, BHS needed to raise another £100m in order to survive. Chappell and 
his team could not raise enough from selling property and a new loan he 
proposed came with onerous and expensive terms, meaning it was rejected by the 
rest of the management team.

On Monday 25 April, BHS went into administration. Officially – and 
controversially – it was Green who pulled the plug and brought in Duff & Phelps 
as administrator, which he had the power to do because of the £40m debt BHS 
owed to Arcadia.

By this point, the relationship between the main parties had disintegrated. 
Topp did not trust Chappell, Chappell thought Topp was plotting behind his back 
with Green, and Green was hurtling into the biggest crisis of his career.
Chappell tried to reach a last-minute rescue deal with Mike Ashley’s Sports 
Direct, but failed. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/24/bhs-on-the-brink-of-collapse-unless-60m-pounds-funding-found>

Green claims that he was advised by Duff & Phelps to issue the demand that 
pushed BHS into administration in order to protect the salaries of its staff in 
the event a rescue package could not be secured. Green read a letter from Duff 
& Phelps to MPs that claimed HMRC had issued a seven-day winding-up notice 
against BHS, that lawyers acting for the board of BHS had advised the directors 
they were at risk of wrongful trading, and that the salaries of staff might not 
be paid unless the retailer was protected by an administration order. However, 
Chappell insists Green could have saved BHS and blames him for the company 
going into administration.

Amid those chaotic last days of BHS and the fraught meetings, Chappell moved 
£1.5m out of the retailer into an unconnected entity called BHS Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/bhs-owner-dominic-chappell-moved-funds-out-of-troubled-retailer>
. Topp said he initially thought this was theft and confronted Chappell, who
allegedly threatened to kill him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/bhs-owner-boss-says-dominic-chappell-had-his-fingers-in-the-till>
. Chappell said the money was for professional fees, but eventually paid it 
back.

After the collapse of the company the Guardian revealed other transactions 
that had caused concern for BHS management. These included Chappell using £1.5m 
of BHS money to pay off the mortgage on his family home just as it was about to 
be repossessed; the sale of BHS’s warehouse to a friend of Chappell’s (with 
Retail Acquisitions taking a third of the proceeds); and a series of complex 
loans and property deals between Chappell, BHS and property company Allied 
Commercial Exporters,which made millions of pounds from the transactions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/29/bhs-property-investors-profited-backing-dominic-chappell>
.

In the week that BHS fell into administration, Chappell was in the Bahamas. An 
abusive note was pinned on the wall in one of the lifts at BHS’s head office 
criticising Retail Acquisitions and the money they collected from the retailer. 
Chappell, meanwhile, sent a text message to Topp when it was confirmed that all 
BHS shops were to close. “Well done,” it read. “I hope you and Michael are 
happy that you got the out come [sic] you wanted. You fucking prick.”

Duff & Phelps, the administrator to BHS, has, according to sources, filed a 
damning report on the conduct of Chappell and Retail Acquisitions. FRP 
Advisory, the liquidator, is understood to be conducting further investigations 
into some of the transactions under Retail Acquisitions. Green, meanwhile, 
claims he was misled by Chappell and blames him for the furore of the past year.

Retail analysts say the lack of investment in BHS under Green and the 
mismanagement under Chappell pushed over the edge a business that would have 
been struggling anyway in the present retail market, where sales are moving 
from the high street to online, and department stores are under pressure.

“It was a relic. It was a model that had passed its sell-by date many years 
ago,” Richard Hyman, an independent retail consultant, said. “It had been 
overtaken by discount stores such as Primark, but it was also underinvested. 
The mismanagement was in fact the final of a number of straws.”

For the staff of BHS, however, the downfall of the business was about much 
more than its place on the high street: it was their livelihood.

Grant Atterbury <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/grant-atterbury>, a 
worker who wrote a diary for theGuardian during the last weeks of BHS, said: 
“There was no tearful farewell to the old building [in Tunbridge Wells] as we 
exited the front doors for the last time, because, having sat in the stifling 
heat doing nothing for the previous three hours, we were all desperate to 
stretch our legs and feel some fresh air on our faces. No one even looked back, 
as far as I recall.”

Last week – as Green and his family were reported to be spending the holidays 
in a Miami celebrity enclave –Atterbury wrote an update on his life post-BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/debt-christmas-bhs-workers-philip-green>
, outlining his struggle to pay the rent and how he had been forced to take a 
loan from his mother to cover his food bills until his benefit claim is 
processed. Hundreds of other former BHS workers have had to apply for grants 
from the Fashion and Textile Children’s Trust – a 163-year-old charity once 
chaired by Charles Dickens – for hardship payments. Atterbury wrote: “The fact 
that throughout the country countless other ex-BHS employees are facing similar 
situations and worse fills me with anger and sadness.”

Where are they now?

Sir Philip Green After appearing in front of MPs and pledging to “sort” the 
BHS pension scheme, Green spent the summer on his new £100m yacht, Lionheart, 
in the Mediterranean. His only public appearance since has been an interview 
with ITV’s Robert Peston, when he said he was “sad and very sorry” for the 
collapse of the company and that it has been a “horrible” time for him and his 
family. The Pensions Regulator has started legal proceedings against Green and 
a decision whether to strip him of his knighthood will be made when official 
investigations have been completed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8b027a07b6d02031dae91983e3d8e581ee69fe7%2F0_625_3374_2024%2F3374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20attempts%20to%20save%20BHS%2C%20and%2011%2C000%20jobs%2C%20were%20doomed%20by%20chaos%20and%20mistrust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20attempts%20to%20save%20BHS%2C%20and%2011%2C000%20jobs%2C%20were%20doomed%20by%20chaos%20and%20mistrust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbhs-collapse-mistrust-chaos-philip-green-chappell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8b027a07b6d02031dae91983e3d8e581ee69fe7%2F0_625_3374_2024%2F3374.jpg>
 Dominic Chappell pleaded guilty to speeding in Andover, Hampshire, in April. 
Photograph: PA 
Dominic Chappell Spent much of his time since BHS collapsed juggling requests 
for information and interviews by regulatory bodies. He was banned from driving 
for six months in August. Chappell claims Retail Acquisitions is looking to do 
new deals, but the liquidators want to wind the company up and it faces a court 
hearing in January that will determine whether it survives.

Darren Topp Left BHS after its shops closed in August, but is already back in 
retail. Topp was appointed in September as chief executive of luxury fashion 
and footwear chain LK Bennett. Michael Hitchcock has joined him as chief 
financial officer.

Paul Sutton Chappell was working as Sutton’s driver when Green pulled out of a 
deal to sell BHS to Sutton. This paved the way for Chappell to become involved. 
Green scrapped the deal because a whistleblower delivered him a dossier 
revealing that Sutton had been convicted of fraud in France in 2002. Sutton and 
Chappell have since fallen out, with Sutton claiming that he could have saved 
BHS, while Chappell bled it dry. Sutton is now looking to revive his business 
career and move back to Monaco.
 