
Four months after launching on Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/timbuktu/good-night-stories-for-rebel-girls-100-tales-to-dr/posts/1673433>
, a children’s book that tells the stories of 100 inspiring women has raised 
more than $1m (£754,000), making it the biggest original publishing project in 
the crowdfunding site’s history. Almost 20,000 backers from 71 countries around 
the world have signed up to orderRebel Girls, which introduces young readers to 
role models from the Brontë sisters to Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/25/good-night-stories-for-rebel-girls-is-dream-kickstarter-success>
.

The sums involved in the majority of Kickstarter’s publishing projects coming 
this autumn may be a little smaller, but the breadth and scope of the books is 
impressive: everything from a comic novel ofsmalltown Canada from a Québec 
humour columnist and broadcaster 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/389494575/a-hole-in-the-ground-a-novel/description>
, toan account of looking after a rescued Staffordshire bull terrier 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1870936832/lunakita-a-dog-log/description>
, charting the dog’s journey from troubled crackpot to treasured companion, toa 
graphic novel about a Victorian girl 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/593967745/a-dark-forest-issue-three?ref=category_ending_soon>
 who is the only one in her village to notice a series of sinister goings-on.

Of course, Kickstarter doesn’t get involved in the messy business of producing 
books – it’s a platform that puts people who want to produce books in touch 
with others all over the world who want to support their projects. But if you 
put the 1,973 publishing pitches that were successfully funded in 2015 together 
with the 994 successful comic and graphic novel projects, then last year’s 
tally of 2,967 literary projects puts the crowdfunding site up among 
publishing’s “Big Four”: Penguin Random House, Harper Collins, Hachette and 
Simon and Schuster. The latter, which is the smallest of the Big Fouraccording 
to Publishers Weekly 
<http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/publisher-news/article/67307-global-publishing-leaders-2015-simon-schuster.html>
, publishes “over 2,000 titles annually”.

Kickstarter’s publishing “lead”, Margot Atwell, wants to make it clear that 
the site “definitely doesn’t supplant the role of editor, publicist or 
publisher” and is really “just one more tool an author or publisher can use to 
connect with readers and spread the word about their book”. But writers all 
over the world are choosing this new route to publication in unprecedented 
numbers. The books and comics section has grown steadily since the site’s 
launch in 2009, and accounts for around 13% of successful projects. In 2015, 
pledges totalled $35.2m and already in 2016 more than $20m has been pledged for 
more than 1,500 projects.

This dwarfs competitors such as Crowdfunder.co.uk, which has raised £475,000 
for publishing projects in the six years since the site was founded in 2010, or 
the bespoke publishing platform Unbound, which has published 79 titles since 
launching a year later. Indiegogo, who didn’t provide any data on their writing 
category, has raised a total of$1bn across all categories since its 2008 launch 
 
<https://go.indiegogo.com/blog/2015/12/2015-crowdfunding-infographic-statistics-tech-film-social.html>
 – just 40% of Kickstarter’s $2.5bn – with a 2013 estimate suggesting they 
trail in writing and comics byas much as 10 to one 
<https://medium.com/@jonchiehlau/dollar-for-dollar-raised-kickstarter-dominates-indiegogo-six-times-over-2a48bc6ffd57#.xbkvs1jh9>
.

Using Kickstarter lets creators make something great that they might not 
otherwise have been able to make
Margot Atwell, Kickstarter 
For Atwell, projects that tend to be successful on the site are “ideas that 
ignited the imaginations of a community, creators providing greater access to 
their creative process, and voices that are often underrepresented among the 
most commercial success stories”.


“Certain communities, such as the comics world, have been faster to integrate 
Kickstarter into their process. Using Kickstarter lets creators gain support 
for their project in advance, so they can make something great that they might 
not otherwise have been able to make. Projects to create beautiful hardcover 
books, especially art books, children’s books, and comics in colour, tend to be 
more costly to produce, which might be why we see a lot of those creators 
coming toKickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> to 
make their projects,” she says.

Compared to the UK market as a whole, Kickstarter is funding a far bigger 
percentage of fiction, children’s books and comics. According to Nielsen 
Bookscan, fiction accounted for 5% of new titles in the UK, with children’s 
books at 10% and graphic novels only 0.3%. On Kickstarter, 10.1% of successful 
publishing and comics projects were fiction, with children’s books at 14.2% and 
graphic novels representing 8.8%.

As a publishing veteran who launched her own imprint (via Kickstarter) last 
year 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/margot/derby-life-stories-advice-and-wisdom-about-roller/description>
, Atwell says one of the most exciting things about crowdfunding is the way it 
inverts publishing’s conventional publicity dynamic.

“When you’re creating a book, it’s very affirming to know that it’s something 
there is desire and demand for, versus the traditional publishing model of 
investing in an author and the production of a book, trying your darnedest to 
get the word out and reach readers, but not really knowing whether there is a 
readership.”

The writers and publishers using the site are “innovative, tech-savvy, and 
very willing to talk directly with their readers and fans”, she continues, with 
some combining crowdfunding with more traditional approaches.

“Some of the most exciting projects we’ve seen in the past year have been run 
by great independent publishers such asCopper Canyon’s Then Come Back 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/896286441/2045227906>, a book of lost 
poems by Pablo Neruda, orMilkweed Books 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/628605595/milkweed-books-because-bookshelves-should-never-be>
, a project to create a new independent bookstore, which is live on the site 
right now,” Atwell explains. “I’ve also seen projects by hybrid authors who are 
published by mainstream Big Four publishers but also do projects on 
Kickstarter, such asKate Milford <https://www.kickstarter.com/profile/3548813>, 
who has run two great projects for novellas.”

Pitch and presentation are vital, when trying to stand out from thousands of 
other projects.Kate-Mia White 
<https://twitter.com/katemiawhite?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, who raised more than £2,000 to fund the third volume of her Dark Forest 
series, spends a few days on every pitch she makes. “I think it’s important to 
create an eye-catching video with a strong theme, and keep the whole page in 
that theme,” she says.

White never even considered traditional publication, “partly because I was 
producing 16-page comics and partly I feel the internet is now a better way of 
reaching an audience.”

For David Hill, who raised more than £3,000 to publish his memoir of living 
with a Staffordshire bull terrier, the “relentless” pitching didn’t come easily.

“I was advised to share the link on multiple social media accounts several 
times a day, and talk about it until I thought I’d talked about it too much, 
but then carry on talking about it anyway,” Hill says. “I found the first week 
or so to be quite dispiriting, but once the ball was rolling and it gained 
momentum, I started to feel encouraged, and finally, elated when it was 
successfully funded.”

When strangers are sharing their money to help with a project, the dynamic 
between writers and their backers can become very personal. “Most of the 
backers know about my struggles with anxiety, job loss, and all the sacrifices 
that I’ve made to give this rescue dog the life she deserves,” Hill says. 
“Everyone’s been so supportive, and I’ve been really humbled by that support.”

The artist-led model has seen substantial sums of money devoted to projects in 
areas where traditional publishing often struggles. Literary journals raised 
more than $200,000 on Kickstarter in 2015, while poetry received almost 
$300,000. Anthologies brought in almost $500,000, while art books picked up 
more than $4m.

“[Crowdfunding] certainly gives the writer much more creative freedom, and the 
ability to tell their story exactly as they originally envisaged,” Hill says. 
“I believe it’s really enriching the art of storytelling, and giving readers a 
much wider selection of stories to choose from.”

The broad range of projects that Kickstarter supports is no accident: in 2015, 
the business reincorporated as apublic benefit corporation 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/blog/kickstarter-is-now-a-benefit-corporation>, a 
profit-making model that includes having a positive impact on the world as a 
legally defined goal. Atwell says this is part of the site’s mission “to 
support a more creative, equitable world, and to fight inequality”. And while 
traditional publishingstruggles to address problems with diversity, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/27/us-study-finds-publishing-is-overwhelmingly-white-and-female>
 crowdfunding offers an alternative route to publication for writers who are 
struggling to be heard.

“I believe it’s critical to our culture and our society that people from every 
conceivable background have the opportunity to share their stories, and find 
stories that resonate with them and their experience,” Atwell says. “Even more 
than that, I think it’s important for people to seek out stories that seem 
alien to them, so they build greater understanding and empathy for others. 
Empathy seems to be in short supply in the world today, and I really do believe 
in the power of literature to help increase it.”

 * This article was amended on 20 September 2016 to make clear that Rebel 
Girls is Kickstarter’s biggest publishing project for an original work.
Bibliotecha 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/530877925/bibliotheca/description> raised 
more than $1.4m for a new edition of the Bible in 2014.  