
If you think we are late with this Stan Smith story, then I can hazard a guess 
as to what part you played in our collective fashion endeavour of the past half 
a decade. Because for the past five years, unwittingly or not, we have together 
made some era-defining fashion footwear history. Peak Stan Smith could well be 
to the teenies (we still don’t have an official name for 2010 onwards, do we?) 
what skinny jeans were to the noughties. If you think that the Stan Smith 
phenomenon was finished well over a year ago, then your minimal white trainers 
with their rounded toe and green heel padding are likely a bit trashed and you 
probably don’t think you can wear them anymore. Maybe you think they’re over. 
Mainly because nicely dressed mums on the school run in their 40s are wearing 
them. The truth is that fashion people can’t admit that Stan Smiths owned 2015, 
but real world evidence says that, “Oh, yes, they did.”

Shoe of the day: polka dot Stan Smiths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/14/shoe-of-the-day-polka-dot-stan-smiths>
Jon Wexler, marketing boss at Adidas, pretty much knew we would be discussing 
this way back in 2009. And if you are squeamish about how some fashion trends 
happen, then I advise you look away now. In a talk to a group of very 
interested parties – aka entrepreneurs in Portland – Wexler pretty much 
confirmed everything Miranda Priestly says in thelegendary cerulean blue Gap 
jumper monologue in The Devil Wears Prada 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_wp5yCBhwS4>. He describes the Stan phenomenon 
as “the classic model of a trend continuum actually working”. Which basically 
means that marketing bods follow the triangle principle of starting with the 
fashion-forward kid, then on to the trend adopters, then the trend 
communicators, then bedding into the mainstream with mass trend adoption.
 The classic Stan Smith. Photograph: PR image 
The people at Adidas believe that they planned it properly: “We knew three and 
a half years before we did step one what would happen,” boasted Wexler. Rather 
than being an entirely new launch, the Stan Smith project was the reboot of an 
already popular trainer. “First we cleaned it up out of the market,” says 
Wexler – a classic retail move of making a product less available. The next 
stage is practically folklore within the fashion industry.Céline’s Phoebe Philo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/mar/31/phoebe-philo-celine-interview-vogue-festival-alexandra-shulman>
 came out for her bow at the end of her catwalk in autumn 2010wearing a 
moss-green polo neck, black trousers and those tennis shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/05/sneaker-peak-how-phoebe-philo-made-trainers-high-fashion>
. The designer’s personal style is so closely watched that her five-second 
appearance had the power to turn that particular sneaker into a bonafide trend 
in a matter of weeks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01472c4ff8b44b152e21b0618cc4ecd95b948064%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%202015%20was%20the%20year%20the%20Stan%20Smith%20went%20mass&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%202015%20was%20the%20year%20the%20Stan%20Smith%20went%20mass&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01472c4ff8b44b152e21b0618cc4ecd95b948064%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
 Rapper Wiz Khalifa in Pharrell’s Stan Smiths. Photograph: Tommaso 
Boddi/WireImage 
Sure enough, the Philo blessing boosted the kudos of the 1963 tennis shoe 
exponentially. Adidas admits that theCéline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/celine> association was key: “She made it 
palatable to women,” says Wexler.

She wasn’t the only designer to endorse the shoe, either. Marc Jacobs, and Raf 
Simons – who also designed a version of the shoe with a punched out “R” on the 
side – were both loyal fans.Alexander Wang used them as inspiration on his 
catwalk 
<http://fashion.telegraph.co.uk/galleries/TMG11079921/Alexander-Wang-springsummer-2015-collection-in-pictures.html>
, supermodel Gisele appeared on the pages of Paris Vogue in November 2013 in
Stan Smiths and nothing else 
<http://www.highsnobiety.com/2013/10/24/body-double-gisele-bundchen-by-inez-and-vinoodh-for-vogue-paris-november-2013/>
, and they became a permanent fixture on the feet of streetstyle stars such as
Caroline de Maigret <https://uk.pinterest.com/pin/432627107930068344/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cf5578909b15cb293cd23c328f52045b4fcd342%2F0_0_2446_3744%2F2446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%202015%20was%20the%20year%20the%20Stan%20Smith%20went%20mass&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%202015%20was%20the%20year%20the%20Stan%20Smith%20went%20mass&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cf5578909b15cb293cd23c328f52045b4fcd342%2F0_0_2446_3744%2F2446.jpg>
 Stan Smiths, street style, in Milan. Photograph: Silvia Olsen/REX/Shutterstock 
Sneaker peak: how Phoebe Philo made trainers high fashion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/05/sneaker-peak-how-phoebe-philo-made-trainers-high-fashion>
The Stan-Smith effect took hold within the music industry, too. The brand 
produced iterations of the trainer bearing several famous faces on the tongue – 
including A$AP Rocky and Stan Smith himself. SingerPharrell Williams released 
his own line of hand-painted Stan Smiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/14/shoe-of-the-day-polka-dot-stan-smiths>
, which sold out almost immediately. Then cameYouTube love letters to the style 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLUKTNbe0Z2mpEBai2l_hbqxORfNO3TP-a> from 
actors Will Arnett, Max Greenfield and Ana Girardot; tennis star Andy Murray; 
musicians Sky Ferreira and Momo Wu, DJs Kim Ann Foxman and Terranova; designers 
Lucio Castro and Louis-Marie Castelbajac; as well as artists Hisham Akira 
Bharoocha and Xander Gaines. It was an unsubtle and highly effective cultural 
love bomb.

By the time of the re-release of the shoe, in 2014, the trainer-wearing world 
greeted Stans with open arms. They were female-friendly, male-friendly, they 
suited every age demographic – from the 69-year-old tennis star Stan Smith 
himself, tofashion-forward toddler North West 
<http://popandpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/North-West_12.jpg>. And 
although we’re not privy to Adidas’s sales statistics, Wexler has admitted that 
the brand made sure that it had enough quantities that people could actually 
buy them. If you saw a person who had dressed with thought by the beginning of 
2015, chances are that, when you looked down, they were wearing Stan Smiths.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12e907c764f1f47782469924e79593be4b375a60%2F0_119_3088_1853%2F3088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%202015%20was%20the%20year%20the%20Stan%20Smith%20went%20mass&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%202015%20was%20the%20year%20the%20Stan%20Smith%20went%20mass&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2F2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12e907c764f1f47782469924e79593be4b375a60%2F0_119_3088_1853%2F3088.jpg>
 Limited-edition Stan Smiths. Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
Arguably, by the end of 2015, the fashion heat has gone from the shoe. Philo 
was last seen publicly in hers at the end of last year – she has since moved on 
to challengingglove shoes of her own design 
<http://www.whowhatwear.co.uk/celine-glove-shoe-trend/slide9>. And yet the 
style can still claim to be the shoe of 2015, because by now they’re now too 
embedded into the wardrobes of everywoman to disappear into the style ether. 
They’re not a high-fashion statement, but they are comfortable, just chic 
enough, ageless and affordable. They go with jeans and cropped trousers, and 
all the other pillars of the grownup woman’s wardrobe. But will they stay the 
course until the end of the decade? It’s debatable. But surely the Stan Smith 
has made its imprint on our wardrobes deep enough to claim to be the shoe of 
the teenies thus far?
 