
One emotion that I don’t get to experience as much as I’d like to is smugness. 
This is especially true when it comes to clothes. Feeling smug about your 
outfit can only be achieved by very particular means. You have to wear 
something devastatingly perfect at the right time and the right place, find a 
bargain of staggering proportion or buy something ethical that makes more 
people feel good about life than just you.

This third option is easier now that green fashion brands have realised that 
people will buy ethical clothes as long as they don’tlook like ethical clothes. 
Lots of labels have sprung up that consider ethics and aesthetics together. For 
some, the ethical element is in itself organic. British designer Christopher 
Raeburn, for example, uses recycled military fabrics and decommissioned 
parachutes to make clothes because he wants to rather than because he feels 
morally obliged to. This change and lightening in attitude is really apparent 
in the new eco clothes.

And it’s easier to go ethical shopping, too. Some great boutiques have 
appeared which do all the sorting of nice from naff and the worrying about bona 
fides for you. All you have to do is loll on the sofa browsing their websites 
and buy.

My favourite two are The Acey <https://www.the-acey.com/> and 69b. 
<http://www.69bboutique.com/> The former was set up by Holly Allenby, who 
worked at ethical footwear brand Toms, and the latter is by Merryn Leslie, an 
erstwhile fashion editor ati-D magazine. For great basics in simple shapes and 
patterns, go for 69b. The Acey is more trend-led, though not try-hard.

I really like Reve en Vert <http://revenvert.com/>, too. This boutique was 
started last year by friends Natasha Tucker and Cora Hilts. Their own basics 
line – REV – is also available on the site and I recommend the T-shirts, which 
are deliciously soft.

If you want something cool, try Gather & See <http://www.gatherandsee.com/>. 
Steph Hogg and Alicia Taylor are co-founders of this shop and it’s a youthful 
eye that has picked out their range of playsuits, crop tops and short shorts. 
Gather & See also categorises clothes by whether they’re organic, recycled, 
made in small-scale production, fairtrade or handcrafted, which appeals to me – 
I’m often adrift with eco terminology.

All of the above have great accessories sections, but if you’re looking for 
jewellery, do also look atMade <http://www.made.uk.com/> and Justin Duance 
<https://www.justind.co.uk/>. Made’s fairtrade jewellery is handmade in their 
Kenyan workshop, where they invest in staff, offering training and job 
security. And Justin Duance is a UK-based jeweller who uses recycled metal and 
reclaimed wood in his designs.

Buy some of these wares and you will feel smug. You will be a better person 
and you might even find the perfect outfit for the perfect occasion. You won’t 
find an amazing bargain, but it’s that unsustainable and selfish search that 
got us and the fashion industry in trouble in the first place. Settle for two 
out of three. That really isn’t too bad.

Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 