
In July, Kendall Jenner <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kendall-jenner> 
walked across a glass-topped Trevi Fountain in a blue astrakhan coat with full 
swing skirt. Fendi had hired private jets to fly guests from the couture shows 
in Paris straight to Rome, where the label had recently invested €2.5m into the 
fountain’s 18-month rehab. “It will go down,” wrote Nicole Phelps inVogue, “as 
one of the most majestic show venues ever.”

Three months later I’m pushing politely through thousands of American tourists 
to see the renovated fountain for myself. People lean in with waterproof selfie 
sticks, queuing for a chance to grin beside the gleaming horses. Visitors throw 
in almost €3,000 a day. During its renovation, the water was drained from the 
fountain, but a small basin was set up so tourists wouldn’t miss out on any 
potential luck.

“The city is part of our creative heritage,” said Silvia Venturini Fendi 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fendi>, third-generation member of the family 
fashion house. “It’s like an open-air museum where inspiration can come from 
anywhere.” Fendi is not the only fashion house investing in Italy’s monuments: 
Bulgari has donated €1.5m to restore the Spanish Steps, and Tod’s, of loafer 
fame, has put up €25m to repair the Colosseum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffashion-industry-rebuilding-rome-eva-wiseman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa1b37612ba2b300686b085714b90c88e365f7ae%2F0_0_5272_3164%2F5272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20fashion%20industry%20is%20rebuilding%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffashion-industry-rebuilding-rome-eva-wiseman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20fashion%20industry%20is%20rebuilding%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffashion-industry-rebuilding-rome-eva-wiseman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa1b37612ba2b300686b085714b90c88e365f7ae%2F0_0_5272_3164%2F5272.jpg>
 In the pink … the opening ceremony of the Spanish Steps after the restoration 
work financed by Bulgari. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images 
It seems apt that this city, its story so tightly wound with ideas of luxury 
and taste, can be propped up by fashion brands in a way that, say, London 
can’t. The idea of Topshop sponsoring a clean-up of Nelson’s Column is almost 
unthinkable.

It’s a short walk from the Fountain to the Steps, the air warm and thick with 
the smell of candied peanuts and drains. On the way, I meet a woman briskly 
directing her young daughter through the dawdling tourists. Marta has lived in 
Rome all her life, and watched the renovations with some suspicion. “Oh, 
they’re beautiful,” she says, “but they’re not for us.”

The Spanish Steps are at the heart of our history

Preserving Italy’s landmarks is crucial for the businesses whose heritages are 
invested in it. “The Spanish Steps are at the heart of our history,” explained
Lucia Silvestri <https://www.instagram.com/lucia_silvestri/>, creative director 
of Bulgari. ‘‘They’re between Via Sistina, where Sotirio Bulgari opened in 
1884, and our flagship in Via dei Condotti.” But what their investment says to 
locals, believes Marta and her friends, is that the government can’t be relied 
upon to protect their monuments, let alone improve their transport system or 
police the streets. “And even when it looks like something is changing to 
improve Rome” – meaning the place her child goes to school, rather than “Rome”, 
the place of honeymoons and prosecco – she adds, “the red tape means it takes 
forever.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffashion-industry-rebuilding-rome-eva-wiseman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267ce8c5fe4939fda8b11bfe39110badf311d256%2F0_295_5104_3063%2F5104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20fashion%20industry%20is%20rebuilding%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffashion-industry-rebuilding-rome-eva-wiseman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20fashion%20industry%20is%20rebuilding%20Rome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffashion-industry-rebuilding-rome-eva-wiseman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267ce8c5fe4939fda8b11bfe39110badf311d256%2F0_295_5104_3063%2F5104.jpg>
 Monumental achievement: renovation of the Colosseum in Rome. Photograph: 
Sigurcamp/Getty Images 
The Spanish Steps were unveiled at the end of September, just before Bulgari’s 
accessories presentation in Milan. The project involved more than 80 restorers, 
who repaired the 32,300 sq ft of travertine stone. In the bright autumn light, 
they gleam grey-white between the tired legs of slumped, lunching tourists, 
despite Mayor Virginia Raggi having ordered police to stop people “loitering”.

Following their restoration, Paolo Bulgari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/29/italian-tax-clampdown-bulgari>
 (chairman of the jewellery house) toldLa Repubblica that their restorers had 
removed coffee, wine, chewing gum, “but now I am worried. If we don’t set 
strict rules, the steps will go back to being used as a camping site for 
barbarians.” A Plexiglas barrier, he said to waves of controversy, “doesn’t 
seem like an impossible task”. Perhaps, I wonder, as I climb the steps and look 
out on the selfie-stick sellers and tourists kissing, it’s the inevitable 
consequence of luxury brands taking over a city. The introduction of VIP areas.
 