
It’s not easy being a girl.

Just being born can be an accomplishment, as more female foetuses are aborted 
than male 
<https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/Sex%20Imbalances%20at%20Birth.%20PDF%20UNFPA%20APRO%20publication%202012.pdf>
.

Getting into school is the next hurdle because for some people education is 
still considered a male preserve. Globally,twice as many girls as boys will 
never start school 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/education-for-all/single-view/news/263_million_children_and_youth_are_out_of_school_from_primar/>
. If you do get into primary school, as a girl, you may be forced to withdraw 
before you reach secondary if your family want you married. More girls than 
boys will marry young – one in four girls globally are married before they 
reach 18 (one in three in poorer countries).

'I just got trapped': Nepal tries to expand girls' horizons beyond marriage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/18/trapped-child-marriage-nepal-attempts-to-expand-girls-horizons>
And if you do make it through school, dodge early marriage and get into paid 
employment, the chances areyou’ll earn less for doing the same job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/09/women-business-and-the-law-2016-getting-to-equal-world-bank-report>
 as your male colleagues.

Last week, the children’s agency, Unicef, published figures 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/media_92884.html> that showed girls between the 
ages of five and 14 spend 40% more time doing unpaid housework and collecting 
water than boys –a trend that will continue into adulthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/27/un-women-report-less-pay-more-work-no-pension-the-21st-century-womans-lot-laid-bare>
, UN Women found in its flagship report last year.

But things are improving. The Unicef reports also points out that, despite the 
difficulties, more girls are surviving childhood and are attending school, and 
Girls Not Bridesreports a drop in figures for child marriage 
<http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/reports-and-publications/it-takes-a-movement/>.


World leaders have also committed to end discrimination against women and girls
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 by 2030; although this will need a huge effort – if we continue at the current 
rate of progress, it willtake more than 100 years 
<http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2015/press-releases/> to 
achieve.

And, of course, we now have an international day, on 11 October, dedicated to 
recognising and promoting girls’ rights and the “unique challenges” faced by 
the 1.1 billion girls around the world.


We want to know how you are marking International Day of the Girl 
<http://www.un.org/en/events/girlchild/background.shtml> on Tuesday.


Are you holding an event in your school, youth club, in your local community? 
You can share your images, stories and videos by clicking on the blue 
GuardianWitness buttons on this article. We may use some of your contributions 
in our reporting.

And what was it like being 13? Or what do you hope life will be like when you 
become a teenager? We want to hear about your experiences on Twitter. Tweet 
#Girlat13 and tell us your story.

 * GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/series/guardianwitness> is the home of 
readers’ content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, 
and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be 
reviewed prior to publication.  