
Spill a glass of wine on the wooden floor at Abbey Road and the studio 
triggers an emergency procedure. In this,England’s most storied recording venue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2012/jun/10/jon-savage-abbey-road-studios>
, change is resisted at a molecular level – and not only because, in 2010,the 
government listed the building as a heritage site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/23/abbey-road-studios-listed-heritage>
 to ward off vampiric property developers. A few years ago, decorators 
varnished the floor of Studio Two, whose decor is somewhere between a 1950s 
prep school gym and a ballroom on the Titanic. Complaints quickly followed. The 
room’s acoustic resonance, made famous on most of theBeatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles>’ albums, had changed. The 
varnish was promptly chipped off, at vast expense. Since the 1960s, the studio 
door has been repainted and the seaweed once used to stuff the drapes that hang 
from the ceiling swapped for a less pungent material. Everything else remains 
preserved, with monastic reverence.

Final Fantasy XV footage reveals magic, quests and chocobos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/19/final-fantasy-xv-footage-reveals-magic-quests-and-chocobos>
As such, the sight of the London Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/london-philharmonic-orchestra> (LPO) tuning 
up in Studio One on a sweltering September evening in 2016 looks much the same 
as when Edward Elgar took up his baton duringits opening in 1931 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/16/abbey-road-studios-sale-emi>. 
There is one key difference: the music performed tonight will not end up on 
vinyl, film or in a concert hall. It is destined, instead, for a video game,
Final Fantasy XV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/19/final-fantasy-xv-footage-reveals-magic-quests-and-chocobos>
, the next instalment in a series that debuted in 1987.

Concerts at Abbey Road are rare, but this work by the 48-year-old Japanese 
composer Yoko Shimomura – who sits on a tidy throne facing the 85-piece 
orchestra and a 35-piece choir appendage, one of the largest orchestral 
gatherings in the room since the recording of the soundtrack to Star Wars: 
Episode I – is far from the first video-game soundtrack to be played here. 
According toAbbey Road <https://www.abbeyroad.com/>’s managing director, Isabel 
Garvey, the medium is an increasingly major component of the studio’s business, 
as game outfits hope to borrow the scent of its best-known cinematic scores – 
Star Wars, Lord of the Rings and Harry Potter – that lingers in these old walls.

It’s been a swift invasion. Senior engineer Andrew Dudman, who joined Abbey 
Road 20 years ago as an intern during his third year of college, remembers the 
first orchestral recording for a video game, Headhunter, almost 15 years ago. 
“It snuck under the radar,” he says. “But soon after we gotTomb Raider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tomb-raider>, and suddenly everyone 
here started paying attention.” The 2003 score Tomb Raider: Angel of Darkness, 
written by Peter Connelly and performed by theLondon Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/london-symphony-orchestra>, was one of the 
first recorded orchestral video game soundtracks, and was a galaxy away from 
the bleeps and snicks that had defined the medium’s music. Since then, 
blockbuster scores, from Halo to The Sims to Uncharted, have been recorded here 
at a quickening rate. “These days, game music is expected to be on a level with 
the films people watch,” explains Garvey. “The sound must match the advances in 
gaming’s visual fidelity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fabbey-road-studio-final-fantasy-xv-soundtrack-london-philharmonic-orchestra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9bc5270a1e5ebbe9244da270b2ab7446cbb39a7%2F695_952_3004_1802%2F3004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Abbey%20Road%20got%20game%3A%20the%20invasion%20of%20the%20video-game%20soundtrack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fabbey-road-studio-final-fantasy-xv-soundtrack-london-philharmonic-orchestra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Abbey%20Road%20got%20game%3A%20the%20invasion%20of%20the%20video-game%20soundtrack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fabbey-road-studio-final-fantasy-xv-soundtrack-london-philharmonic-orchestra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9bc5270a1e5ebbe9244da270b2ab7446cbb39a7%2F695_952_3004_1802%2F3004.jpg>
 Yoko Shimomura and the LPO perform the Final Fantasy soundtrack at Abbey Road. 
Photograph: Michael Bowles 
Connelly is one of a raft of game composers, like Richard Jacques, who did the 
Headhunter score <http://www.richardjacques.com/headhunter/>, little known 
outside the industry. “So many game composers have made fantastic careers and 
you’ve never heard of them,” says Dudman. “But now we’re entering the era when 
film composers are crossing over.” Hollywood stalwarts Harry Gregson-Williams 
and Stephen Barton, who started as Williams’s assistant, have numerous game 
scores in their oeuvre, as do Tyler Bates and Ryan Amon. Video-game music is 
also being aired increasingly in public. Shimomura’s music was recently 
performed by the LSO at the Barbican, while a concert of pieces taken from the 
Game of Thrones-esque fantasy game Skyrim takes place at the Palladium later 
this month.

Game composers are also increasingly attracting acclaim for the work. In 2012, 
Austin Wintory’s score for Journey becamethe first video game soundtrack to 
receive a Grammy nomination 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/carolpinchefsky/2012/12/06/journey-earns-the-videogame-worlds-first-grammy-nomination/#7cd23453475a>
. The LPO’s bluntly titled album Greatest Video Game Music entered the US 
charts at No 23 – the highest debut for an orchestral recording since the Star 
Wars: Episode III soundtrack. Five years ago, Mark Robins organised an online 
campaign to encourage fans of video-game music to vote for their favourite 
tracks to be included inClassic FM <http://www.classicfm.com/>’s Hall of Fame. 
“Film scores have long made an appearance in the chart, and it didn’t feel 
right that game scores were completely ignored,” he says. “Clearly people 
agreed with me, because they responded and we’ve had video-game scores on the 
chart for the last five years. Plenty of people will say the music is terrible 
without listening to a bar, just because it comes from a game. But if you play 
it to them without revealing the source, they often really enjoy it.”


The pieces don't always feel like they have beginnings and ends. There's less 
of an arc

There are few differences between recording an orchestral film and video-game 
score. In both cases, the musicians hunch beneath looming booms, a many-legged 
creature of points, jabs and vibrato spasms. Tonight, Shimomura’s soundtrack 
lurches from timpani rumbles to quivering, naked violin lines, as pushy and 
memorable as any John Williams theme. In its final context, however, there are 
key differences. A game score is rarely played in a linear form; instead, it 
drifts and blends between phrases to match the action. “The pieces don’t always 
feel like they have beginnings and ends,” says Dudman. “There’s less of an arc, 
because that’s all done dynamically by the programmers. Film scores have more 
of a clear narrative.”

Dudman, who says he doesn’t have time to play games, typically listens to the 
finished game scores on CD, where they’re presented in linear form. But he 
recently had the chance to see one of the scores he’d recorded for Sony’s 
gothic masterpieceBloodborne 
<http://www.bloodborne-wiki.com/2015/12/soundtracks.html> while on holiday in 
California. “The music was being mixed at Sony’s Los Angeles office, and the 
team was sitting in a 300-seat cinema in the middle of their building. The team 
was playing the game to make sure the music all worked properly. It was 
immense.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0gvlKB8Npg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0gvlKB8Npg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU0gvlKB8Npg&media=>
Hear the orchestral score of Final Fantasy XV in this gameplay preview 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U0gvlKB8Npg> 
While packing away his Eberle violin – made in 1786, almost two centuries 
before the first video game debuted – Philippe Honoré, the former principal 
violinist with the LPO and guest leader for the night’s performance, reflects 
on the music. “For me, there’s not much that distinguishes video game music 
from film music,” he says. “It fits a particular character, or mood. It can be 
very beautiful.” For some players in the orchestra, Shimomura’s music has an 
image-changing effect. “I was surprised,” says Honoré. “I always imagine video 
games as being quite violent, but this was melodic.”

Not everyone in the orchestra remains convinced. As we head out into the 
night, I overhear the loud bits of a conversation between two of the younger 
players. “I think my brother used to play it when he was younger,” one woman 
says to another. “On Nintendo, maybe? So yeah, I was familiar withFinal Fantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/final-fantasy>, but I don’t play it 
myself.”

“Yeah,” her colleague replies. “Not my cup of tea.”

 * Final Fantasy XV <http://www.finalfantasyxv.com/> is released on 29 
November.  