
Juan knows Barcelona’s downtown very well; he has spent four years sleeping 
rough on its streets. An incident with drugs had brought about his deportation 
from Germany, where he was subsequently banned from living or working for a 
decade.

The Andalusian found himself all alone, back in a country that was no less 
strange despite being his original home. “My parents and sister were still in 
Germany, where our family moved when I was six,” he says. “So the plan was to 
stay here for a while and then move to the Netherlands, where I would at least 
be a three-hour car ride away from them. But then I ran out of money.”


Juan is now a guide for Hidden City Tours <http://www.hiddencitytours.com/>, 
half social project, half tourism agency, offering an alternative view of 
Barcelona. The only difference is that up to three times a day, come rain or 
shine, homeless people are your trusty guides. As the company motto asserts, 
who better to show you around the streets of Barcelona than someone who has 
lived on those very streets?
 Juan, who spent four years living on the streets where he is now a tour guide 
It’s 10am in Plaça Nova 
<http://www.barcelona.com/barcelona_directory/monuments/placa_nova>. I’m 
standing with a German couple who heard Juan being interviewed on local radio 
and decided to give it a try. “Our clientele is not your regular consumer of 
guided tours,” explains Hidden City Tours founder Lisa Grace. “On the contrary, 
they usually avoid such things like the plague. But we offer that something 
more: access to the social reality of Barcelona, and that’s what draws their 
attention.”

In between a cathedral, or architectural details about the Barrio Gótico 
<http://gospain.about.com/od/barcelon1/tp/gothic-quarter-barcelona.htm> (Gothic 
Quarter), Juan introduces random stories, the kind you won’t find in the 
average guidebook. “In this corner over here there used to be a hole where I 
would leave my bag so I didn’t have to carry it the entire day long, but it’s 
been covered up, and that’s why you can see that ugly overlay now,” he says, 
indicating a wall where other locals and tourists wander past.

Juan confesses that he finds dates the hardest things to remember but that, in 
any case, it’s stories that the clients usually ask him for, not numbers. “This 
is one of the biggest soup kitchens in Barcelona,” he says, as we stroll 
through the Raval neighbourhood. “Most of them allow you to eat three days a 
week without asking for anything in return, but if you want to go in more times 
than that, you’ll need to sign up for some kind of a card.”

The tour is about three hours long, taking in a number of areas, but Juan 
obviously feels most at home in the Raval. He takes us to another soup kitchen 
a few streets away, called El Chiringuito, where he has another job serving 
breakfast every morning. He introduces us to his colleagues, shows us how the 
food is stored, runs us through the menu for the day …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F22%2Fbarcelona-homeless-guides-tourists-city-underbelly-hidden-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413389218521%2Fd0da6d2c-a953-46c1-8ec5-c8bd0d25c448-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Barcelona's%20homeless%20are%20guiding%20tourists%20round%20the%20city's%20underbelly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F22%2Fbarcelona-homeless-guides-tourists-city-underbelly-hidden-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Barcelona%27s%20homeless%20are%20guiding%20tourists%20round%20the%20city%27s%20underbelly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F22%2Fbarcelona-homeless-guides-tourists-city-underbelly-hidden-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413389218521%2Fd0da6d2c-a953-46c1-8ec5-c8bd0d25c448-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Hidden City tour guides with founder Lisa Grace 
Hidden City Tours started last year with only two English-speaking guides. A 
year later, Juan is one of five guides who help with the tours, which are now 
offered in German and French too. Founder Lisa says she was inspired by similar 
projects in British cities like Bath (Secret City Tours 
<http://www.bathchronicle.co.uk/Secret-City-Tours-Bath-led-homeless-people/story-18664229-detail/story.html>
) and London (Unseen Tours <http://sockmobevents.org.uk/>). After losing her 
job as a market research consultant, she approached a homeless charity in 
Barcelona to find possible candidates to train as tour guides. It makes sense 
to her: “This city has more than 3,000 homeless people,” she says, “yet still 
continues to flourish as a tourist destination.”

The tour ends in the Mercat de la Boquerìa 
<http://barcelona.de/en/mercat-boqueria-sant-josep-barcelona.html>, a famous 
food market just offLas Ramblas 
<http://www.barcelona-tourist-guide.com/en/ramblas/barcelona-las-ramblas.html>. 
I take my leave, feeling as if I have just discovered a part of my city that 
was once somehow obscured. Funnily enough, Lisa says that my fellow Spaniards 
are the least likely to participate in these tours: “The crisis … you know,” 
she shrugs.
 