
As fashion weeks become increasingly aimed at consumers, designers are using 
all sorts of digital means to reach broader potential audiences and drive sales.

In practice, that means many of the shows so far this season have been focused 
on attracting more public fanfare than ever before, with shopping embedded in 
the experience. During New York Fashion Week, for instance, Tommy Hilfiger 
hosted atwo-day carnival 
<http://fashionista.com/2016/08/tommy-hilfiger-carnival> complete with 40ft 
ferris wheel, food stands, pop-up shops and more, all of it designed to support 
the launch of the brand’s collaboration with supermodel Gigi Hadid. And yes, 
you could buy the range there and then, as well as online.

In London, Burberry juxtaposed craftsmanship with digital savvy. It introduced 
a week-long public exhibition and series of activities in collaboration withThe 
New Craftsmen <https://www.thenewcraftsmen.com/> in a pop-up space called the 
Makers House. Alongside that was the fact that its entire line was immediately 
shoppable, ranging from the clothing to accessories and even make-up.

Digital has changed the fabric of UK fashion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/may/09/digital-changed-uk-fashion-industry>
At the heart of such strategies is the fact that digital has overturned what 
fashion week is fundamentally about. Once a trade-only affair, it has become 
increasingly consumer-led off the back of design houses opening up to social 
media audiences, and using their shows as significant marketing opportunities 
accordingly. The challenge lies in fact that the hype isn’t easily 
commercialised when fans can’t buy the looks until up to six months later.

This season has been about turning that on its head, reworking the very notion 
of the fashion system in order to meet consumer demand in real-time, and 
importantly doing so in the most innovative manner possible in a bid to stand 
out from the deafening noise such weeks bring.

See-now, buy-now 

Core to the reshaping of fashion week is the basic idea of what’s being called 
“see-now, buy-now” – a strategy that enables consumers to watch the show and 
immediately make purchases. For some, like Burberry, Tom Ford and Topshop, this 
has meant reconfiguring their entire lines, for others including Tommy Hilfiger 
it’s been about a capsule collection.

There have also been smaller examples – Temperley London released three looks. 
The majority of such initiatives have typically been enabled via the brand’s 
own e-commerce and physical stores, but for the latter, it was in the form of 
an exclusive tie-up with social appVero <http://www.vero.co/#true-social>. 

Digital has upturned what fashion week is fundamentally about

Chatbots

The shopability of the shows was also promoted heavily this season on Facebook 
Messenger, where both Burberry and Tommy Hilfiger introduced chatbots powered 
by artificial intelligence. Users could explore both collections via all manner 
of additional content, including a behind-the-scenes look at life with Gigi 
Hadid, and a journey through a gamified maze with the models from Burberry. 
From there they were given nudges to e-commerce pages once the line had been 
launched.

Puneet Mehta, founder and CEO of msg.ai <http://msg.ai/>, which was the tech 
company behind Hilfiger’s TMY.GRL bot, said : “The consumer and brand 
relationship is on the cusp of the most significant change since the 
smartphone. Messaging is becoming the new browser and the gateway to consumer 
life, with artificial intelligence bots being the new user interface.”

Snapchat versus Instagram Stories

On social media, the conversation in both New York and London was around 
whether Snapchat or Instagram Stories were the channel of choice. Both formats 
make sense for bringing events to life fast; for satisfying a “see-now, 
buy-now” audience that is hungrier than ever for access through candid content. 
But some of the more interesting uses surrounded the idea of entire designer 
showcases.

Misha Nonoo <https://mishanonoo.com/>, for instance, decided to forego a 
traditional show format and instead turned to Snapchat to release what she 
called a “live lookbook” in partnership with Refinery29. On a single day she 
dripped the reveal of her collection as its shoot took place. “Snapchat is a 
recent discovery for me, and it has put the fun back into social media. I want 
to inject that same creative, experimental energy into how I present and share 
my collection,” Nonoo explained.

J Mendel, meanwhile, took exclusively to Instagram Stories to debut his entire 
collection, sharing looks from inside the showroom where he was otherwise 
holding private appointments for those in the industry.

What does Instagram Stories mean for brand engagement?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/sep/22/instagram-stories-brand-engagement-loreal-ted-baker>
While both platforms are playing out for now, Thomas Rankin, co-founder and 
CEO of social analytics companyDash Hudson <https://dashhudson.com/>, suggests 
Instagram Stories will be the overall winner of this fashion week season and 
beyond. “The ongoing challenge with Snapchat is that it’s notoriously difficult 
to grow an audience and to measure your success as a brand. Those things 
considered, Instagram Stories is the perfect medium for fashion week, be it 
behind-the-scenes or on the runway. The fans are already there and hungry for 
the content,” he explained.

Alternative realities 

Also evident during the shows was the use of different digital realities, 
including virtual, mixed and augmented. In New York, Intel partnered with 
numerous designers, including Erin Fetherston, Prabal Gurung and Band of 
Outsiders, to live broadcast their shows in virtual reality. Powered byVoke’s 
GearVR <https://www.oculus.com/experiences/gear-vr/1078081848954500/> app, this 
provided fans with a fully immersive version of a classically flat live stream 
experience – enabling them to feel as though they were sat front row.

Rebecca Minkoff meanwhile, turned to augmented reality via a partnership with 
shopping appZeekit <http://zeekit.co/>, which allowed viewers to upload a 
picture of themselves and see what they looked like in their favourite items 
following the show.

One of the most interesting innovations of the season however came in the 
mixed reality space. This time it wasn’t so much about capturing and 
replicating an experience to transport users to (as with VR), but creating one 
layered over the real world. Attendees to emergingLondon designer Martine 
Jarlgaard’s 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/brooke-robertsislam/martine-jarlgaards-mixed-_b_11919578.html>
show, wore Microsoft Hololens headsets to see the full spring/summer 2017 
collection coming to life in the form of holograms in front of them, exploring 
the collection from all angles.

Was it a PR stunt? Yes. But introducing a new version of showcasing at a time 
when the very format of fashion week is being questioned isn’t such a bad idea. 
Imagine if everyone could attend a fashion week show by putting a headset on 
and seeing it appear in their front room. Make that shoppable and they could be 
on to a winner.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 