
Nature has given special gifts to many Australian cities but few could argue 
that Perth hasn’t made out like a bandit.

Home to one of the world’s largest inner city parks, white sandy beaches and 
premium wine country, the natural features of Perth and its surrounds are a 
main event, and a complementing feature for many local restaurants and bars. 
Add to that the fact that Perth gets more hours of sunshine than any other city 
in Australia and you’ve got a formidable combination.


Just 1.5km from the CBD lies Kings Park. At more than 400 hectares, it’s more 
than 60 hectares larger than Manhattan’s famed urban oasis of Central Park, and 
boasts a lush riverfront as well. The area is a colourful mix of manicured 
gardens and native bushland, which are home to 319 species of native plants and 
80 different bird species.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ee511802c41302273a462a2b05165706d11477f%2F0_0_3100_1860%2F3100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Perth%E2%80%99s%20natural%20talents%20deliver%20the%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Perth%E2%80%99s%20natural%20talents%20deliver%20the%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ee511802c41302273a462a2b05165706d11477f%2F0_0_3100_1860%2F3100.jpg>
 Spend some time exploring Kings Park Photograph: lleerogers/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
If you’re travelling solo you could easily while away an afternoon wandering 
the park taking in the views of the Swan and Canning River, the Darling Ranges 
and the city skyline. If you’ve got company, pack a bag with picnic supplies 
and take advantage of one of the communal barbeques. Or better yet, plan ahead 
and take a trip out to Twin Hill Wines in the Swan Valley where you can buy 
handmade cheese and olives, and of course, taste a wine or too.

Only 25 minutes from the city, the valley is blessed with the perfect climate 
and conditions for Chenin Blanc, Verdelho, Shiraz and Petit Verdot varieties. 
There are around 150 wineries to visit, as well as breweries, distilleries, 
restaurants, cafes and art galleries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd32d7eed3608e8b1bf9858780d81faf8490e8d82%2F0_0_3987_2392%2F3987.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Perth%E2%80%99s%20natural%20talents%20deliver%20the%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Perth%E2%80%99s%20natural%20talents%20deliver%20the%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd32d7eed3608e8b1bf9858780d81faf8490e8d82%2F0_0_3987_2392%2F3987.jpg>
 Tempranillo grapes hang heavy on the vine waiting to be picked in the Autumn 
wine harvest. Photograph: Sharkyjones/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
With many family-owned vineyards making up that number, wine snobbery is a 
rarity here. In the Swan Valley, they’re all for a relaxed appreciation of good 
wine, with numerous opportunities to sample award-winning drops in rustic 
tin-sheds and the like.

Tyler’s Vineyard, for instance, features some of the oldest grapevines in the 
Valley, at more than a century old. But any fear of a visitor encountering a 
formal, old-world atmosphere will be quickly put to rest by meeting a few of 
vineyard’s residents, which include a friendly sheep who believes he is a dog 
and a social goose.

For the perfect illustration of how Perth combines its natural assets to 
superb effect, take Ugly Duckling Wines. The winery has teamed up with local 
favourite the Bindoon Bakehaus to bring a premium approach to one of 
Australia’s humblest icons—the meat pie, offering gourmet options such as 
steak, mushroom and shiraz, or chicken, leek and chardonnay.

There are more energetic experiences available too, with no reservation 
required. For instance, if you want to visit one of Perth’s most picturesque 
destinations, Cottesloe Beach, your only requirement is a pair of swimmers and 
a towel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1bf1cc2b4440321d817945f1a1c38bac899c6e6%2F0_485_7309_4387%2F7309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Perth%E2%80%99s%20natural%20talents%20deliver%20the%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Perth%E2%80%99s%20natural%20talents%20deliver%20the%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhow-perths-natural-talents-deliver-the-goods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1bf1cc2b4440321d817945f1a1c38bac899c6e6%2F0_485_7309_4387%2F7309.jpg>
 Spend a day basking in the sun at Cottesloe Beach Photograph: Neal Pritchard 
Photography/Getty Images 
Just 15 minutes from the city centre, this 1.5km stretch of white sand and 
crystal blue water can be swum, surfed, paddle-boarded, snorkeled, walked, 
lounged on or even admired from a nearby cafe or grassy picnic spot. And in 
March, scores of international artists will make the foreshore their canvas for 
the Sculptures by the Sea exhibition.

A few minutes further along the coast lies Bathers Beach, an inner-city beach 
featuring the first bar in Australia to be granted a liquor license for 
alfresco beach dining. This means that guests at Bathers Beach House are able 
to watch the sun set over the ocean with their toes in the sand and a cold beer 
in hand.

It’s far from the only venue offering luxe-casual beachside dining though. 
Near City Beach, sun-kissed patrons straight from the surf rub shoulders with 
sharply dressed visitors at Odyssea Beach Café, which combines a focus on 
Mediterranean-style seafood and minimalist Scandinavian décor while somehow 
maintaining a distinctly welcoming Perth vibe.

The same goes for the Cott & Co Fish Bar in Cottesloe, where the focus on 
seafood and fine wines comes with a casually elegant twist, thanks to offerings 
such as fish ‘n’ chips (beer-battered Shark Bay whiting to be exact) served 
with 2005 Dom Perignon. It’s a meal deal that encapsulates much of what Perth 
offers, taking the best of the surrounding bounty of nature and adding a dose 
of accessible sophistication.

The Bankwest More World MasterCard 
<http://www.bankwest.com.au/personal/credit-cards/compare-credit-cards/more-mastercard-rewards-credit-cards>
 - helping you open a world of real experiences with the people that matter 
most.
 