
I heard only the beginning of the sentence. “That manufacturer has not solved 
his sizing problem. I had 15 of his suits sent round...”

The speaker was one of the most engagingly down-to-earth fashion journalists 
in the business and her concern with sizing was reasonable. But her words just 
proved, yet again, that most people in and around the rag trade have no idea 
what sheer murder the average woman suffers shopping for clothes. Where, for 
example, wouldyou go to see 15 suits, confident that they would all be what you 
wanted and about your size, even if they did vary a bit?

I know the stores get all the blame from the public and it isn’t all their 
fault. Manufacturers are unreliable at deliveries, they make up a limited 
number of pretty dresses to get them featured in the Press and then don’t 
produce enough of the goods. Their sizes are limited and frustration is intense 
for anyone with hips under 34 and over 38, and quite frustrating enough for 
anyone in between.

There is a huge market awaiting the first designer to realise that girls want 
pretty, well-cut clothes in large sizes.

Even the few manufacturers who shine like a good deed in a stock-size world 
and do make up large and/or tiny sizes seem to think that anyone so disfavoured 
wants to wear only the drabbest and most conservative clothes. There is a huge 
market awaiting the first designer to realise that a lot of large girls just 
want his pretty, well-cut clothes in large sizes. They aren’t all plump and 
stately matrons; they are just well-built women. Similarly, not all little 
girls are cuddly pieces of blonde candy floss dressing like baby dollies. They 
are just searching in vain for adult clothes in small sizes.

Screaming-point
But whatever the faults of the manufacturers, it is at store level that 
screaming-point is reached by most women. Something has gone wrong and the 
stores haven’t kept pace with the revolutionary developments in the clothing 
industry. Not so long ago a department store had a definite character, stocked 
a certain kind of clothes, and you were fairly sure that it would have what 
suited you.

Now for a store to be exciting it must have an ever-changing variety of 
clothes from many different manufacturers rather than a comprehensive range of a
certain kind of clothes. This makes shopping difficult if you are a stock size, 
and almost impossible if you are large or small, because no buyer is going to 
order a lot of sizes and run the risk of being left with slightly passé dresses 
in sizes that are difficult to sell.

It would be nice to see more manufacturers selling in their own retail shops – 
as the Polly Peck Boutique in Bond Street and such firms as Jaeger and 
Aquascutum. The great advantage of this is that you feel that the salespeople 
have some contact with the people who supply the goods and can pressurise them. 
This doesn’t, alas, always work out in practice and everyone has her own bitter 
tale of bad service in individual shops. The trouble at the moment seems to be 
that it is impossible to lay down what service in a shop should mean. Are the 
salespeople there just to wrap your goods and take your money or do you want 
their advice, even when it is frank and useful?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdress-sizes-shopping-department-stores-1964-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff24c6bf5291dd5c69ffa665fa721d1ea991c5bd4%2F0_254_5370_3223%2F5370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20stop%20murder%20in%20the%20dress%20store%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2031%20May%201964&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdress-sizes-shopping-department-stores-1964-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20stop%20murder%20in%20the%20dress%20store%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2031%20May%201964&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdress-sizes-shopping-department-stores-1964-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff24c6bf5291dd5c69ffa665fa721d1ea991c5bd4%2F0_254_5370_3223%2F5370.jpg>
 Women shopping in Marks & Spencer, 1955. Photograph: Charles Hewitt/Getty 
Images 
One solution
This problem has been solved in other retail markets. Either you go to a 
specialist shop if you want more service, or else goods are more or less 
standardised wherever you buy them. When buying food you go to a supermarket 
for freedom and lack of interference or a small grocer for service. It seems to 
me that the big stores should follow suit.Either they should be self-service 
stores with no pressure to buy and the minimum of attention. Their attraction 
would then be just this and the fact that they had large stocks at all price 
levels.Or they should offer real service to attract custom.

A department store depending on service should have – among other things – a 
children’s creche, somebody in every department to advise dispassionately on 
materials and brands, a fashion co-ordinator to advise on clothes and 
accessories, a real rest room with writing materials, magazines, etc. It should 
send goods on approval, refund money immediately, give you advice about where 
to obtain goods unavailable in the store.

If the idea of service were to become a highly skilled reality this might also 
go some way to solving the salesgirl’s plight. At present her life is a pretty 
unrewarding one. The paltry commission is her only incentive and her 
relationship with her customers is fraught with resentment on either one or 
both sides. Yet the most interesting thing potentially for a salesgirl is 
making contact with the customer and guiding her with the knowledge of 
something she knows about and the customer doesn’t – i.e., clothes in general 
and the store’s stock in particular.

If the department stores would only make up their minds about service – either 
to do away with it completely or to make it a specialised rewarding job – we 
might, just possibly, see shopping reinstated as one of life’s pleasures.

This is an edited extract, click to read more 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/05/31/Shopping_dress_stores_David_Bailey_Observer_31_May_1964.jpeg>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdress-sizes-shopping-department-stores-1964-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbedae3adc5d2c407aec73ef610ce8bcb146117dd%2F0_25_3560_2508%2F3560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20stop%20murder%20in%20the%20dress%20store%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2031%20May%201964&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdress-sizes-shopping-department-stores-1964-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20stop%20murder%20in%20the%20dress%20store%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2031%20May%201964&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fdress-sizes-shopping-department-stores-1964-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbedae3adc5d2c407aec73ef610ce8bcb146117dd%2F0_25_3560_2508%2F3560.jpg>
 The Observer, 31 May 1964. The photographer is David Bailey.  