
There is a lot to celebrate in international development 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/10things>. Despite what can sometimes feel 
like an overwhelming number of bad news stories, incredible progress has been 
made. Over the past quarter of a century, more than 1 billion people were 
lifted out of extreme poverty, 137 million additional children were enrolled in 
primary school, and in the last 15 years alone, some 59 million deaths from 
diseases like malaria and tuberculosis were averted.

The millennium development goals <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/> (MDGs) 
played a role in these achievements. Their successor, thesustainable 
development goals (SDGs) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, comprised of 17 goals and 169 targets, has the potential to accelerate 
progress across an even broader range of issues.

However, in order to reach the new goals by 2030, we need to act now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/11/global-goals-sustainable-development-act-fast-or-risk-leaving-the-poorest-behind>
. Without early action there is risk of leaving people behind and failing to 
achieve certain goals altogether. A closer look at trends across the range of 
issues – both globally and by region – reveals just how much more effort is 
needed.

Our research 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/publication/projecting-progress-reaching-sdgs-2030>
 shows that without increased effort, none of the goals will be met for all 
people everywhere, although progress on some issues and for some people will 
inevitably move faster than others.

Globally, projections show that ending extreme poverty, sustaining economic 
growth in least-developed countries and halting deforestation will all get more 
than halfway toward selected targets by 2030 if current trends continue.

We must focus on the UN goals that are the best value for money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/20/we-must-focus-on-the-un-goals-that-are-the-best-value-for-money>
For Africa <http://www.developmentprogress.org/SDG-Africa-scorecard>, 
strengthening domestic resource mobilisation is also set to do well.Asia 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/SDG-Asia-Scorecard> will see additional 
likely progress in improving access to sanitation and expanding energy access. 
InLatin America <http://www.developmentprogress.org/SDG-LatinAmerica-Scorecard>
, if present trends continue, reductions in inequality will count as some of 
the most impressive globally.

A large number of other goals are heading in the right direction, yet they 
would need to speed up by several multiples of current rates in order to reach 
SDG targets. This includes the‘unfinished business’ of the MDGs 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/blog/2015/09/17/millennium-development-goals-success-stories-and-%E2%80%98unfinished-business%E2%80%99>
 in areas such as hunger, health, education, sanitation and gender. Ambitious 
efforts are unquestionably needed here.

Most worryingly, however, are a group of SDG targets that require outright 
reversals in their trajectories. Based on analysis we conducted, there arefive 
targets needing complete turnaround 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/publication/projecting-progress-reaching-sdgs-2030>
: reducing inequality, limiting slum populations, reducing waste, combating 
climate change and protecting marine environments.

Reduce income inequality - target 10.1

Income inequality is set to worsen globally if current trends continue. Four 
out of five people live in countries where the bottom 40% has experienced 
slower growth than the average. Globally, since 2000, the bottom 40% has grown 
around half a percentage point slower than the average rate of growth annually.

Reduce slum populations - target 11.1

The number of people living in slums continues to rise, if the numbers follow 
their current course they are predicted to rise from 850 million today to over 
1 billion people by 2030. The vast majority of this increase is due to take 
place in sub-Saharan Africa, where slum populations will almost double.

Reduce waste - target 12.5

Projections show that the total amount of solid waste generated globally will 
almost double from 3.5 million tonnes a day in 2010 to 6.1 million in 2025. 
Projected growth is mainly driven by emerging market economies in east and 
south Asia where waste generation is forecast to triple, and other developing 
countries where it is projected to double. This of course is on top of what is 
already quite a high level per capita in OECD countries.

Combat climate change - target 13.2 

While this target does not refer to a quantifiable indicator, reduction in 
greenhouse-gas emissions is a useful proxy. Significant growth of greenhouse 
gases is projected to occur in emerging markets, on top of already high levels 
in OECD countries. These emissions need to be reduced in order for the world to 
be able to address climate change effectively.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fsustainable-development-goals-most-difficult-targets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc12de132b9eca4992fea53df8e2a9a53827540d6%2F0_0_2800_2100%2Fmaster%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20we%20reach%20an%20SDG%20target%20when%20we're%20moving%20in%20the%20wrong%20direction%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fsustainable-development-goals-most-difficult-targets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20we%20reach%20an%20SDG%20target%20when%20we%27re%20moving%20in%20the%20wrong%20direction%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fsustainable-development-goals-most-difficult-targets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc12de132b9eca4992fea53df8e2a9a53827540d6%2F0_0_2800_2100%2Fmaster%2F2800.jpg>
 The Great Barrier Reef in Australia is in danger of destruction. Photograph: 
Mark Mccormick/AFP/Getty 
Protect marine environments - target 14.2 

Projections show that 90% of reefs will be under threat by 2030, up from a 
starting point of 75% in 2007. While harmful coastal practices like overfishing 
are of current concern, part of the increased threat is due to anticipated 
thermal stress and acidification linked to carbon emissions.

These turnaround targets, cutting across issues of inequality and environment, 
are central to the overall development agenda. They go beyond the traditional 
MDG focus on social sectors and remind us that SDG commitments demand a broader 
and more ambitious approach.

Moreover, developed countries are set to play a significant role in any 
success or failure to achieve gains in these areas. More attention is needed to 
these about-turns if there is any hope of attainment of the SDG agenda.

Susan Nicolai is head of Development Progress 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/> at the Overseas Development Institute. 
Follow@susan_nicolai <https://twitter.com/susan_nicolai> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.
 