
The very inclusion of a specific sustainable development goal (SDG) to reduce 
inequality <http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/inequality/> is a 
gamechanger.


For a generation or more, any serious mainstream discussions of inequality had 
been off the table. In the formulation of the millennium development goals all 
the key players knew that income or asset inequality was to be kept off the 
agenda. Governing elites and international organisations would hardly 
acknowledge it as a relevant concept for development, often dismissing 
inequality focused academics and activists as hard-leftists. Many commentators 
vehemently argued that inequality promoted competition, by reducing 
inefficiency, which in turn created jobs and profit.

The global financial crash of 2008 and the fallout that continues to affect so 
many people, has changed the conversation. A small group of people made vast 
profits while tens of millions lost their jobs, houses and dignity. The 
evidence of the damage to society caused by high levels of inequality has been 
re-examined, while new research and popularcampaigns 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/media-centre/press-releases/2016/01/62-people-own-same-as-half-world-says-oxfam-inequality-report-davos-world-economic-forum>
 have seen a new consensus form relatively rapidly.

How can we reach an SDG target when we're moving in the wrong direction?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/05/sustainable-development-goals-most-difficult-targets>
Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett set the ball rolling in The Spirit Level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/13/the-spirit-level>. They argued 
that rising inequality in rich nations negatively impacts on our physical and 
mental health, education, experience of work and even life satisfaction, and is 
associated with the use of illegal drugs and mental illness. Detailed studies by
Martin Ravallion <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=780485> 
and World Bank colleagues showed that as inequality rose in poor countries, the 
poverty-reducing impacts of economic growth declined. Subsequent work revealed 
how rising inequality also slowed downs rates of improvement in human 
development indicators. Rising income inequality was bad for the citizens of 
both rich and poor countries.

The SDG for reducing inequality, with a specific target to “progressively 
achieve and sustain income growth of the bottom 40% of the population at a rate 
higher than the national average” encapsulates the broad acceptance of the 
perils of inequality, not just between countries, but within them. The fact 
that the target applies and demands action from all countries enhances its 
potency as evidence of shifting global norms.

However, this is not a radical goal, such as arguing that top incomes must be 
capped or that theGini coefficient 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gini_coefficient> must be reduced every year. 
Rather, it is a modest, reformist goal that seeks to ensure that those at the 
bottom of the income scale are not left behind as economic growth moves forward.

Yet for all the evidence, the hand-wringing from business elites at Davos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/19/davos-2015-tackling-inequality-world-economic-forum>
, calls from parties across the political spectrum and increasing disaffection 
with the status quo from those left behind (at least in rich nations), 
relatively little is being done to seriously address the problem of rising 
inequality around the world.

The real income of the global top 1% rose by more than 60% over 1988-2008

Since 2000, the incomes of the bottom 40% have experienced slower growth year 
in, year out. Inequality is rising at spectacular rates. While different 
measures (wealth or income), different datasets (national accounts or taxation) 
and different analysts disagree on the detail, they all agree that the 
wealthiest are getting richer faster than anyone else (except in Latin 
America). The real income of the global top 1% rose by more than 60% over 
1988-2008.

Turning this situation around will take a Herculean effort, for two main 
reasons. First, contemporary capitalism is based on economic processes that 
permit those who manage to amass money by their brain power or political 
connections or both, to increase their wealth faster than others. As Thomas 
Piketty tells us, the returns to capital (owning physical and financial assets) 
are greater than the returns to labour (working). So the rich get richer.

A 'paradigm shift' is needed from governments to fight poverty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/23/paradigm-shift-needed-governments-fight-poverty-inequality>
Secondly, when the rich get richer, they have the ability to keep it that way. 
They are able to shape national and international public policies to such an 
extent that they remain on a rising tide of prosperity. They can also safeguard 
national and international patent and competition laws, enabling them to 
dominate the markets in which they operate, and influence rules which allow 
them to avoid paying tax.

To top it all, by gaining control of the media plutocrats, the super-rich even 
persuade the public that inequality is good for everyone. Billionaire Donald 
Trump somehow becomes the voice of those left behind. Gold taps in private jets 
seem to be a qualification for public office in what Francis Fukuyama terms “
political decay 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/the-rise-of-trump-brought-to-you-by-the-decay-of-americas-institutions/2016/03/10/ca6438b4-e6f2-11e5-b0fd-073d5930a7b7_story.html?utm_term=.a9c7aff2c01c>
” in the US.

So what can be done? Few support the 20th century revolutionary solution of 
seizing and redistributing land and assets, as happened after the second world 
war in China, South Korea, Japan and Taiwan. Perhaps more reformist measures 
are a more popular 21st century answer? In most low income countries, effective 
public expenditure on domestically-financed education, health and social 
protection would raise the prospects for sustained growth, structural 
transformation and welfare advances. The evidence for such policies is clear 
but, enacting them in the places they are most needed is very problematic. The 
nature of domestic business and political elites – often greedy, extractive and 
predatory – allied to international business elites and the social norms they 
transmit, means that socially beneficial policies are not effectively 
implemented.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fhow-has-billionaire-donald-trump-become-the-voice-of-those-left-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff156da1939bf531ce7ed3ec5edf66eed6ceba9d1%2F0_0_3210_2211%2F3210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20has%20billionaire%20Donald%20Trump%20become%20the%20voice%20of%20those%20left%20behind%3F%E2%80%8B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fhow-has-billionaire-donald-trump-become-the-voice-of-those-left-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20has%20billionaire%20Donald%20Trump%20become%20the%20voice%20of%20those%20left%20behind%3F%E2%80%8B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fhow-has-billionaire-donald-trump-become-the-voice-of-those-left-behind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff156da1939bf531ce7ed3ec5edf66eed6ceba9d1%2F0_0_3210_2211%2F3210.jpg>
 Brazilian Maria Nilza, 36, and mother of four, shows her bolsa familia social 
plan card. Photograph: Vanderlei Almeida/AFP/Getty Images 
Significantly reducing inequality doesn’t have to be the stuff of utopian 
dreamers. In Brazil, a sustained decline in inequality levels has been of the 
most striking aspects of its development performance over the last 10 years. In 
addition to raising an estimated 40 million people out of poverty, the Brazil’s
Gini coefficient fell by 12%, from 0.59 in 1995 to 0.52 in 2012 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?end=2014&start=2014&view=map>. 
While inequality in Brazil remains high, this reduction stands in stark 
contrast to other OECD and Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Africa) countries, which have seen levels rise.

The e-waste mountains - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/oct/18/the-e-waste-reduce-waste-old-technology-mountains-in-pictures>
Recently published research investigating the Brazilian development model 
<http://www.brazil4africa.org/> looked in detail at the factors behind this 
trend. An estimated 35-50% of the reduction in inequality in Brazil can be 
attributed to changes in non-labour incomes, largely as a result of growing 
social assistance programmes. Despite costing just 0.7% of GDP, the extremely 
effective targeting of thebolsa familia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/dec/17/brazil-bolsa-familia-decade-anniversary-poverty-relief>
, a conditional cash transfer scheme, has been vital. A further 10% or so can 
be attributed to demographic factors, particularly the declining household size 
among poorer families. The remaining 40-55% is attributed to changes in the 
distribution of labour earnings. This had previously been attributed to the 
effects of an increasingly educated workforce, but our research suggests that 
reduced wage gaps for women and ethnic minorities actually made the biggest 
impact.

Achieving the SDG target to reduce inequality will require a huge shift in how 
economies and political systems operate right around the world. Some Latin 
American countries, such as Brazil, demonstrate that sustained reductions in 
inequality are achievable, when there’s a fairly explicit shift in the social 
contract, enabling politically difficult decisions to be taken and sustained 
over a long period. AsAngus Deaton tells us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/angus-deaton-wins-nobel-prize-in-economics>
, humanity has made amazing progress in reducing income poverty and raising 
health standards. The next big task is reducing inequality so that we can all 
enjoy a better life.

Reducing inequality in every country will be extremely difficult. But a 
growing tide of protest and its consequences (sometimes socially progressive 
and sometimes regressive) may persuade the 1% that they will not get the world 
they want for their grandchildren if business continues as usual.



Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.
 