
As a military campaign against Boko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/cameroon-says-92-boko-haram-militants-killed-and-850-captives-freed>
 continues in northern Cameroon, leaders of the country’s biggest mosques in 
the south are deploying another weapon to ensure that the Islamist insurgency 
doesn’t spread: education for girls.

Militants started to spill over the border from northern Nigeria three years 
ago <http://genocidewatch.net/2016/04/21/nigeria-boko-haram-timeline-of-terror/>
, and while their attacks and recruitment drives remaincontained to the far 
north region 
<https://www.crisisgroup.org/africa/central-africa/cameroon/tracks-boko-haram-cameroon>
, imams in the Cameroonian capital, Yaoundé, are taking no chances.

Mohaman Saminou, director of the Grande Mosque in Briqueterie – one of the 
city’s poorest and predominately Muslim districts, is providing free education 
for girls every weekend because he believes they are most at risk of being 
radicalised. “They can be influenced more than boys as they go for love or for 
money,” he says.

Dr Souley Mane, a professor and assistant imam at the Essos mosque, agrees 
that education is the most important tool in the battle for ideas. “InCameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cameroon> we have a problem with the [low] 
numbers of girls in education, but it’s worse in the Muslim community as the 
parents don’t always understand its importance,” he says.

Mane adds that it is crucial western education is taught alongside Islamic 
studies. “Boko Haram says Muslims shouldn’t go to western schools. But no, 
Muslims need to study science and information technology to contribute to the 
development of our country,” he says.

“Western values and Islam are very, very compatible,” he adds, citing London’s 
first Muslim mayor, Sadiq Khan, to illustrate his point. “If I was ‘against the 
west’ I wouldn’t use this computer, this mobile phone,” he says, pointing 
around his house.

At Saminou’s mosque, the girls are taught computer science, alongside the 
Qur’an and sewing. As the Guardian is shown around, a young girl runs in to the 
room and declares that her favourite subject is the Qur’an. “She’s lying – it’s 
actually computers,” laughs her teacher, Dsaratou Oumarou.

There is also a modernist attitude in the school attached to the Yaoundé 
Central Mosque, the capital’s largest. Here students are taught in French, 
English and Arabic, with posters around the building promoting “bilingualism as 
a gateway to quality education and sustainable development”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcameroon-mosques-offer-free-education-girls-fight-radicalisation-boko-haram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c94f72012993adb077447bf755df94b9b549673%2F120_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20fight%20Boko%20Haram%3F%20Open%20a%20school&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcameroon-mosques-offer-free-education-girls-fight-radicalisation-boko-haram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20fight%20Boko%20Haram%3F%20Open%20a%20school&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcameroon-mosques-offer-free-education-girls-fight-radicalisation-boko-haram%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c94f72012993adb077447bf755df94b9b549673%2F120_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Girls take a test at the school in Yaoundé Central Mosque. Photograph: Maeve 
Shearlaw 
The classes are split by gender to “boost productivity”, with the girls 
outperforming the boys academically, says the education director, Hassan 
Mohamed. “An educated population doesn’t give away to extremism, soBoko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> have very few opportunities,” he 
adds.

If education is Saminou’s first priority, his second is religious cohesion in 
the country, which is 70% Christian and 20% Muslim.

He allows Muslim women to marry men of other faiths in his mosque and says 
that most of the government security forces that guard Friday prayers are 
Christian. “For me it’s symbolic, we come to pray and the Christians make sure 
we are safe. Perhaps there is another place like this? But I’ve never seen it,” 
he says.

Despite the problems in the north, these religious leaders regard Cameroon as 
a country at peace and none recognise the religion that the militant group 
preaches. “They are killing everyone, Muslim and Christian, they are killing 
people in mosque in the market,” says Saminou.

Mane says: “Boko Haram is not Islam, Islam is not Boko Haram,” adding that “we 
ask the almighty to help with the security situation”.

The professor, who has published a book on the Boko Haram threat in Cameroon, 
says cooperation with government security forces is also vital and that uncover 
agents are present in most mosques to monitor what is happening in the 
community.

Despite fears of a potential attack, Mane is confident that there is no 
current threat in the capital. “No one has come in to the mosque with a bomb. 
The situation is changing positively, even in the north things are getting 
better,” he adds.
 