
In August it looked like game over. The National Videogame Arcade, a 
fascinating institution thatopened in March 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/28/national-videogame-arcade-nottingham-opens>
 to promote the cultural and economic significance of games, was facing 
closure. Although the large building in Nottingham’s creative quarter attracted 
plenty of visitors with its mix of classic arcade machines, specialist 
interactive installations and events, it was not turning a profit. Meanwhile 
there were 40 staff to pay and a large rented building in central Nottingham to 
maintain. Over the summer, directors Iain Simons and Jonathan Smith made the 
decision to call in an insolvency firm.

“It became horribly clear, horribly suddenly, that we weren’t going to be able 
to pay salaries,” says Simons, who has been creative director of the GameCity 
festival, which spawned the NVA, since it began a decade ago. “We sat down with 
everyone individually and told them. We asked everyone if they would work for 
deferred payment in order for us to get a plan together. This was in the middle 
of the summer season, our busiest time – and every single member of staff came 
back to work. We stayed open seamlessly while this all took place; the only 
reason we’ve been able to survive is because the staff cared about it so much.”

With the time available, Simons set about finding investors to keep the NVA 
afloat. They weren’t sure what to expect, primarily because with its mix of 
archive, event space, museum and industry networking centre, there’s nothing 
like the NVA anywhere else in the UK. There are small-scale festivals; there 
have been major installations such as the Barbican’s excellentGame On 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/03/barbican-video-games-global-tour-art>
 exhibition in 2002, and there are several video game hubs and shared working 
collectives dotted around the country. But nothing offering a permanent home to 
the idea of video games as a sociocultural and educational endeavour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fnational-videogame-arcade-nottingham-gaming-institution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b8817dc71e305293e8dd8c6eaab83df4170bcae%2F0_0_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20group%20of%20industry%20veterans%20rescued%20the%20National%20Videogame%20Arcade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fnational-videogame-arcade-nottingham-gaming-institution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20group%20of%20industry%20veterans%20rescued%20the%20National%20Videogame%20Arcade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fnational-videogame-arcade-nottingham-gaming-institution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b8817dc71e305293e8dd8c6eaab83df4170bcae%2F0_0_2160_1296%2F2160.jpg>
 A games enthusiast at the Barbican’s Game On exhibition in 2002. Photograph: 
Frank Baron for the Guardian 
But help came. Ian Livingstone, founder of Domark and Games Workshop, a 
longtime advocate of games as an artistic and creative force, came aboard as an 
investor, as did Sumo Digital and PlayGroundGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>, two highly successful British 
development studios. Several independent game makers who have found success 
after first exhibiting their games at the NVA’s annual GameCity festival, have 
also invested, including Rami Ismail of Dutch studio Vlambeer, a regular 
attendee of the festival, and William Pugh, award-winning co-creator of the 
Stanley Parable.

“The NVA is incredibly valuable,” says Pugh. “It is the only UK institution of 
its size that’s consistently championed the cultural and experimental work 
going on in the games space.”

The result is the formation of the National Videogame Foundation, which will 
run both the NVA and the GameCity festival, but will also expand its remit to 
take on education and public advocacy work. Later this year, the foundation is 
collaborating with the Times Educational Supplement, to stage a series of 
“subject summits”, “bringing together educators with experts to explore ways in 
which video games can be used to enhance learning”.

Simons hopes the events will help to create school resources that can be 
applied to various curriculum areas. “The Foundation aims to inspire new people 
to make video games, start new conversations about them, and find new ways in 
which they can contribute to culture, society and education,” states the press 
release.

“It’s a really exciting time,” says Simons. “We’re already working on new 
exhibitions and outreach for the next year and onwards and in particular we’re 
ramping a lot on international collaborations. We participate actively in an 
international curatorial group, helping to develop strategies for interpreting 
and touring games around the world. It’s great to see the kinds of things that 
we’ve been thinking about for years start to become shared conversations.

“We’re also going to be doing a lot more work advocating for video games in 
culture more broadly. The ‘Continue’ conference we did earlier this year with 
the Arts Council is something we’re going to be building on a lot. We really 
want to make the NVAfor something, turn the cultural capital that we’ve managed 
to generate into cultural confidence for video games themselves. That means 
working hard to inspire new people, to make new games about new things.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fnational-videogame-arcade-nottingham-gaming-institution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea84b56199a8e729c1c6c8bbd337b2c393968095%2F0_48_1805_1083%2F1805.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20group%20of%20industry%20veterans%20rescued%20the%20National%20Videogame%20Arcade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fnational-videogame-arcade-nottingham-gaming-institution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20group%20of%20industry%20veterans%20rescued%20the%20National%20Videogame%20Arcade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fnational-videogame-arcade-nottingham-gaming-institution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea84b56199a8e729c1c6c8bbd337b2c393968095%2F0_48_1805_1083%2F1805.jpg>
 The GameCity festival, which will now run as part of the National Videogame 
Foundation, has always shown games in a different light. Here developer Robin 
Hunickie gives a liver performance of the game Flower in a Nottingham shopping 
mall. Photograph: National Videogame Foundation 
Simons is also promising to rejuvenate the GameCity festival which has been an 
important annual highlight of the UK games calendar for10 years, with 
developers coming from all over the world to put on often offbeat and ambitious 
events around Nottingham. A Harry Potter concert in St Mary’s Church, a 
molecular gastronomy evening with developer Éric Chahi, a live Resident Evil 
experience; while most game events focus on banks of demo units playing the 
latest triple A titles, GameCity has always taken a more thoughtful, inclusive 
and idiosyncratic look at what a gaming festival should be.


“The truth is, last year we didn’t deliver the thing we wanted to and 
disappointed some people.” he says. “We’d just started a company, designed, 
built and opened a National Videogame Arcade and survived our first summer 
season – then we went directly into trying to deliver a GameCity and we just 
couldn’t do it. I’m not offering that as an excuse, because we let people down 
and we’re really sorry, but it was through exhaustion rather than laziness.”


The National Videogame Arcade and GameCity live on, with what looks like sound 
financial backing from many in the industry that have attended the building and 
festival in the past. Simons say revenue will come via a restructured 
commercial plan, from patrons and sponsors, and from new research projects. But 
the arcade also needs to attract more visitors, and that will involve building 
on the idea that games are a worthwhile cultural day trip. In the US, Japan and 
throughout Scandinavia, video games seem more intuitively accepted into the 
arts and culture firmament. It would have been a blow for the UK games industry 
for the NVA to close – it just needs to communicate what has been saved.

“There was a moment a few weeks ago, when I thought we were going to lose 
everything,” says Simons. “It’s terrifying having worked on something for so 
long to contemplate what that might be. It’s just incredibly humbling and more 
than a little moving to be given the chance of having a new chapter.”
 