
Alan Parker, director

I had four young children and we used to go to a cottage in Derbyshire at 
weekends. On the long, boring car journey up there, I started telling them the 
story of a gangster calledBugsy Malone 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bugsy_Malone>. They’d ask me questions and I’d 
make up answers, based on my memories of watching old movie reruns as a kid.

I’d won a Bafta for a Play for Today, The Evacuees 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Evacuees>, for the BBC in 1975. Now I was 
trying to get into movies. The British film industry was flat: nobody would 
finance my scripts because they were too “parochial”. So I wrote an American 
film, choosing to fuse two classic Hollywood genres: the musical and the mob.

It was my son Alex who said: “Can the heroes be kids?” I’d done plenty of 
adverts with children, but a feature film is a logistical nightmare: the legal 
constrictions, schooling, minimal hours allowed “under the lights”. But I was 
just starting out. I was fearless and a bit naive.

For casting, I lugged a video camera all over America, and even went to US 
airforce bases in the UK. We recorded almost 100 school Christmas shows and saw 
almost 10,000 kids. In a Catholic school in Brooklyn, I asked: “Who’s the most 
badly behaved kid in the class?” Thirty kids pointed to one chubby little boy 
at the back. “Cassisi!” they screamed. John Cassisi put his hands up and 
smiled. Although he had never acted before, he yelled out lines from script 
with gusto. I knew right away we had our Fat Sam.

Jodie Foster <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_tKdAu7Fnao>, who played his 
moll Tallulah, had made more films than I had, so probably knew more about 
film-making. She was 13 but had been acting since she was three, and had just 
filmedTaxi Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/29/my-favourite-cannes-winner-taxi-driver>
. She got on well with the cast, and certainly wasn’t aloof, which she had 
every right to be. I suspect she relished being surrounded by kids for once, as 
she had spent her professional life surrounded by adults.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_tKdAu7Fnao&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_tKdAu7Fnao>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_tKdAu7Fnao&media=>
 ‘My name is Tallulah’ … Jodie Foster as the nightclub singer 
Although Scott Baio, our Bugsy, was perfectly behaved on set, he was probably 
a handful for the chaperones. Each morning, he’d regale us with the antics from 
the night before. A starchy version of Cinderella was shooting at Pinewood at 
the same time we were there. Its makers constantly complained that our 
mini-gangsters were running up and down the corridors, terrorising the 
Cinderella cast in their crinolines and powdered wigs.

The film was quite successful in the UK, but not in the US. Over the years, 
when I’ve done retrospectives, I’ve never included it, as I didn’t think it 
fitted with the rest of my work. But curiously, as I get older, I realise it 
still looks modern. It hasn’t dated. I’m rather proud of it.

Scott Baio, actor

I was 13 and sick of showbusiness, sick of all these auditions. So when I went 
and auditioned for Alan, I threw the script at him and walked out. They’d 
already cast Bugsy, they said, but they liked my attitude.

My father was dead against it, but my mother talked him into it. I’d never 
even been out of New York and now I was in England. I’m not sure I totally 
understood what it meant to play the lead: all I knew was that I had a lot of 
lines. I was worried I’d have to sing, but then they usedadult voices for those 
bits <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NwMzhJW7IB4>.

The set was incredible – this whole street, full of stores. For the first few 
days it was like being at Disneyland. All we did was fool around, getting into 
all these nooks and crannies, looking for stuff to break or steal. I remember 
the cars: they were actually bikes, with car frames wrapped around them. If we 
saw any sitting about the set, we’d just jump in them and pedal about wildly. 
In all, there were 200 kids: I’m surprised Alan didn’t go crazy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fhow-we-made-bugsy-malone-jodie-foster-scott-baio-alan-parker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F12%2F1444652573413%2F23643e34-8613-456b-9f2e-5b538ea4b2f9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20Bugsy%20Malone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fhow-we-made-bugsy-malone-jodie-foster-scott-baio-alan-parker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20Bugsy%20Malone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fhow-we-made-bugsy-malone-jodie-foster-scott-baio-alan-parker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F12%2F1444652573413%2F23643e34-8613-456b-9f2e-5b538ea4b2f9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘They were loud and pretty dangerous’ … the splurge guns. Photograph: 
Allstar/Tristar 
At first, the splurge guns fired these big wax pellets. They were hooked up to 
air jets and had a quite a kick. They were loud and pretty dangerous, so it was 
decided they should shoot ping-pong balls instead. For the splurge impact, 
they’d cut to another shot made by someone throwing artificial cream.

I remember Jodie walking in for her first day. She was a little shy. It’s hard 
to come into a situation where people are already friends – and everyone 
thought John and I were these tough, scary New York kids. But we stayed in the 
same hotel and our families hit it off. We’d be driven around and go for 
dinner. She liked doing goofy things. I think we ended up kissing. We made out 
at the Holiday Inn in Slough.

• This article was amended on 14 October 2015. An earlier version incorrectly 
quotedAlan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker> as saying that 
The Evacuees was “a play I’d written”. He did not say that. In fact the play 
was written by Jack Rosenthal. The error was introduced at the editing stage.

 