
Bob Budiansky, comic writer and editor

In 1983, Hasbro bought the rights to some toys from Japan, which could change 
from robots into vehicles. But there was no backstory to explain who they were.
Hasbro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/08/star-wars-toys-hasbro-revenue>
 had worked with Marvel to developGI Joe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/15/paramount-hasbro-gi-joe-toy-movie-universe>
 as a toy, comic and animated series, so they turned to us again.Jim Shooter 
<http://jimshooter.com/>, my editor, came up with a six-page description of the 
Transformers world and asked an editor to develop names and personalities for 
the 26 original toys.

Jim did not much like what he got back, so he walked down a row of offices and 
said to all the editors working in them: “Look, we need to redevelop this, but 
time is running out – you’ve only got the weekend to do it.” It was just before 
Thanksgiving, though, and everyone said they weren’t interested. Finally he got 
to me. I’d only been atMarvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> for 
six months and said: “Sure, I’ll give it a try.”

A lot of the names came from my own experiences of pop culture. Ratchet, a 
medical robot, was inspired by Nurse Ratched from the filmOne Flew Over the 
Cuckoo’s Nest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/27/why-i-love-supporting-cast-cuckoos-nest>
. Ironhide came from the old TV showIronside 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ironside_(1967_TV_series)>. I was trying to 
humanise them, give them relatable qualities, such as “this guy likes jazz”. 
People ask how I came up with so many personalities in a weekend, but at Marvel 
we were creating new characters every day. That was the job.

Related: Transformers: The Last Knight trailer – this time it's serious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/06/transformers-the-last-knight-trailer-mark-wahlberg-anthony-hopkins>

One name I’m proud of is Megatron <http://tfwiki.net/wiki/Megatron_(G1)>. Back 
in 1983, the threat of nuclear war felt very real – and destructive force was 
talked about in megatons. At first, Hasbro rejected it for sounding too scary. 
Gently I said to them: “Well, he’s the main bad guy. He’s supposed to be 
scary.” Luckily, they changed their minds.


The franchise became so popular, they kept introducing new toys. It was a real 
challenge working out ways to bring in 15 or 20 new characters at a time. I 
tried to make each one unique, but after about 250, I was struggling. By the 
time I’d done 50 issues of the comic, I was pretty burned out.


A Hasbro executive told me that any toy that lasts two Christmases is 
considered a success – that was their barometer. Transformers lasted six or 
seven years before they started dying out. It seemed like a good run. I don’t 
think anybody had a clue that they would come back as a multibillion-dollar 
movie franchise. I certainly didn’t.
 A scene from the animated TV series, from 1984. Photograph: Marvel Productions
Bryce Malek <http://tfwiki.net/wiki/Bryce_Malek>, animated series story writer


It was summer 1984 and I’d just started at Marvel, along with my writing 
partner Dick Robbins. We thought we were going to be doing lots of different 
things – but ended up just working on Transformers full-time. A three-part 
pilot had already been produced, but Hasbro then wanted a 13-episode series, so 
we had to develop a “bible” for writers, explaining how the show worked. The 
Transformers were stranded on Earth, but we invented a space bridge back to 
their home planet ofCybertron <http://tfwiki.net/wiki/Cybertron_(planet)>. This 
turned out to be useful when it came to introducing new characters.

Some writers pitched really inappropriate stuff for a kids’ show, such as the 
Transformers meeting space prostitutes. Oddly enough, no one ever provided us 
with any of the toys – we worked from photocopies of designs. I actually went 
out and bought a few but I never got Optimus Prime. He was too popular. You 
could never find one.

Related: Kiss me, Chromedome: how the Transformers found peace and same-sex 
partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/02/transformers-lost-light-comic-same-sex-partnerships>

When those first 13 episodes were a huge hit, Hasbro said: “We want 49 more.” 
And we said: “Uh, OK.” Delivering the scripts on time was such a challenge: we 
were all just getting to grips with the computer age and our office was in the 
process of switching from typewriters to word processors. We had a dot matrix 
printer that took half an hour to print a single script – and it was state of 
the art.

I really wanted to emphasise the human characters in the show, to give the 
audience something to identify with. But in retrospect, I think the kids just 
really liked the robots. We were working so fast, the plots were full of holes. 
But I know from fan letters that kids would simply fill in any gaps with their 
own stories. These days I work as a clinical psychologist. I like to joke that, 
after screwing up so many little brains with cartoons, I’d better start fixing 
them.
 