
With a flurry of new fashion adverts appearing over the weekend, from Saint 
Laurent <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/saint-laurent> to Marc Jacobs, the 
goal posts have shifted over what makes an eye-catching, talked about one. Here 
are four pointers on what works now.

Get a social-media favourite involved 
 Selena Gomez for Vuitton. 
As we swirl into a new era, in which people are celebrities solely because 
millions of people watch them take things out of boxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2014/jul/21/unboxing-youtube-phenomenon-videos-unpackaging-toys>
, so the casting of fashion adverts has followed suit. Increasingly, asCalvin 
Klein told Fashionista <http://fashionista.com/2016/04/calvin-klein-scadstyle>: 
“Models are paid for how many followers they have. They’re booked not because 
they represent the essence of the designer ... they’re booked because of how 
many followers they have online.” In a less genteel manner, 80s supermodel
Stephanie Seymour 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2016/06/stephanie-seymour-kendall-jenner-gigi-hadid-supermodels>
labelled as “Bitches of the moment” such social-media-made models as Kendall 
Jenner and Gigi Hadid, in a voice, we can only imagine, not unlike Norma 
Desmond in the last reel of Sunset Boulevard. Klein hired Vine celebrityCameron 
Dallas <https://vine.co/dallascameron> (9.4 million followers) to front the 
label’s spring campaign, which saw the teen heart-throb channelling his inner 
Backstreet Boy in a series of beach scenes. More recently, Selena Gomez has 
been announced as the face of the newLouis Vuitton campaign 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BG1q8O_wGZ7/?hl=en> (as shot by Bruce Weber): her 
career as Bieber’s side chick is very much in the rear-view mirror, while her 
musical career threatens to eclipse her status as the most followed person on 
Instagram. I know.

Shadows, shadows, shadows
 Saint Laurent’s new campaign. 
Thanks to the judicious use of a shadow, deep mise-en-scene setups always make 
for a interesting, storybook-like shot that looks as if it’s a still from a 
French art-house movie. The first post-Hedi Slimane adverts from Saint Laurent 
are a case in point. Shot by the Helmut Newton-influenced photographer Collier 
Schorr, under the eye of new creative director Anthony Vaccarello, the 
black-and-white portraits feature individuals and couples apparently knee-deep 
in some post-coital/pre-argument relationship 101. It begs so many questions: 
who are they? Have they just had the mother of all rows about who’s doing the 
washing up? Is incidental music by Grizzly Bear playing in the background? What 
we’re saying is: if this was a show on Netflix, we’re ready to binge watch and 
ignore our basic personal hygiene.

Nudity is never a bad thing
 Kendall Jenner in the Calvin Klein campaign. 
Calvin Klein has always been a master of the provocatively NSFW advertising 
campaign, from Brooke Shields in 1981 to its mid-90s use of yogic poses, wood 
panel and customised denim to hint at outlaw sexuality. Recently, it turned its 
gaze toJustin Bieber in his pants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/27/justin-bieber-flaunts-for-calvin-klein-stylewatch>
, and some new ads with the tag line “I _________ in #mycalvins”, which 
featured buttocks, upskirt shorts and Kendall Jenner squeezing a grapefruit (oi 
oi). Saucy and playful? Or attention seeking and desperate? In the end, what 
really matters is that we’re still dissecting and pondering the images.

The more leftfield the celebrity the better
 Marilyn Manson for Marc Jacobs. 
Last year, when Joan Didion was unveiled as the new face of Céline and Joni 
Mitchell took the mantle for Saint Laurent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/jan/09/joni-mitchell-the-new-face-of-saint-laurent-stylewatch>
, it was taken as a sign that fashion had finally embraced the older face. 
Whether or not that proves to be true in the long term has yet to be seen, but 
it did give both Céline and Saint Laurent airtime and added nuance to the both 
brands. Certainly, that’s what Dior – by getting Larry “Kids” Clark to pose for 
one of their adverts – and Marc Jacobs – by using the likes of Marilyn Manson 
and Courtney Love – have done. By eschewing the regular 
model-wearing-the-latest-season vibe, you are adding depth, colour and cultural 
kudos to the signature of the line.
 