
Games firm Valve has made its long-anticipated move into virtual reality, 
teaming up with HTC for theVive VR headset <http://www.htcvr.com/>, which will 
launch later in 2015.

It’s the second move into hardware for Valve – best known for the Steam 
digital games service as well as games like Half-Life, Portal and Left 4 Dead – 
with the company also developing itsSteam Machine console 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/16/the-steam-machine-valve-pc-gaming>
.

Vive is a fully-functional VR headset rather than a VR housing for a 
smartphone like Samsung’s Gear VR.HTC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/htc> will launch a developer edition of 
the new device in the spring before a commercial version goes on sale by the 
end of the year.

HTC is designing the Vive hardware, but using tracking and input technology 
from Valve’s Steam VR team. TheSteam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/steam> store will also act as a 
prominent distribution channel for Vive games and software.

The Vive will ship with two wireless controllers to help its users play games 
and explore virtual worlds viewed through the headset, but they’ll also be able 
to walk around these environments thanks to a pair of base stations tracking 
their physical movements.

The headset, meanwhile, includes two 1,200 x 1,800-pixel screens, promising 
refresh rates of 90 frames-per-second and “eliminating the jitter common to 
previous VR technologies” according to HTC.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeTITJSSRUso&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeTITJSSRUso>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeTITJSSRUso&media=>
Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> developers are already 
announcing their support for the Vive headset, with a number of titles due to 
be shown off at the GDC show this week in San Francisco.

They include The Gallery 
<http://www.roadtovr.com/the-gallery-to-be-demod-on-steam-vr-at-gdc-you-will-not-believe-this-tech/>
 from CloudHead Games, a first-person adventure that started life asa 
Kickstarter-crowdfunded Oculus Rift game in 2013 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/494598080/the-gallery-six-elements>; and 
Job Simulator <http://jobsimulatorgame.com/> from Owlchemy Labs.

Virtual reality documentaries 'take the middle man out of journalism'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/29/virtual-reality-documentary-middle-man-journalism-chris-milk-film>
Fireproof Games, which makes the widely-lauded series of mobile games, The 
Room, is also working with the Vive. The company had already been making a new 
game, Omega Agent, for Samsung’s Gear VR.

Even at this early stage, it seems many developers will be making games for 
both Oculus Rift (including Gear VR) and the HTC Vive, rather than choosing 
between them – even if individual games are exclusive to one or the other.

Like Facebook, which bought Oculus VR for $2bn in July 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/22/facebook-oculus-rift-acquisition-virtual-reality>
, HTC has ambitions that go well beyond games for virtual reality. “Travel, 
attending a game, meeting friends or even shopping will never be the same 
again,” claimed HTC’s announcement of the Vive, with Google and TV firms HBO 
and Lionsgate already on board.

Oculus still hasn’t confirmed a release date for the first commercial edition 
of its Oculus Rift, although it too is expected to launch by the end of 2015.
 