
Fifty years in frocks could be considered a bit of a life sentence. Hard 
labour at that. That’s how long Hubert deGivenchy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/givenchy> was in the fashion business. Yet 
he’s still smiling. He even thinks he loved every minute of it. That may be 
open to question, but it’s true that now, at 72, he’s having the time of his 
life. However, he admits that it’s taken a while to rid himself of his 
Pavlovian response to the annual rhythm imposed by four collections a year. 
Fashion minds tend to be programmed to react at certain times of the year. 
First hints of spring? Think muslin and chiffon. Autumn coming on? Tweeds and 
cashmere.

 It’s only three years since Givenchy retired from his fashion house, where he 
had worked for 43 years. But if he isn’t looking back, he certainly hasn’t 
forgotten the good times. ‘There are a lot of good things I miss, of course,’ 
he says. ‘Especially at collection time – couture collections time – I think of 
the good old days. My people, who were so marvellous. My studio, where so many 
exciting things began. Fashion was my great passion for so many years. It’s a 
part of my spirit.’

Givenchy made up his mind when he was very, very young that he would be a 
dress designer. His family, rather grand French provincial, wasn’t exactly over 
the moon. His father died in a plane crash when Hubert was two, so his 
grandfather was left to provide the anxiety over his chosen career. A former 
pupil of Corot, his grandfather had been a director of the Gobelin’s tapestry 
works and exerted a considerable influence on the young Givenchy. But perhaps 
the most telling portents of his future career came from his grandmother. 
Givenchy recalls how, when he was a schoolboy, she rewarded him for good grades 
by “showing me her treasures – whole cabinets filled with every kind of fabric, 
all of which left me utterly dazzled”. More than anything else, it was fabric 
that was the great stimulus to creativity for Givenchy. For him, the most 
exciting part of a collection wasn’t the end result, but the very start of the 
design process, when new fabrics arrived.


 Tall, aristocratic, pretty when young, austere in age, Givenchy has always 
presented a controlled, distant face to the world. His passions have been 
hidden from the public eye. What wild nights of sexual excitement he has 
enjoyed in his life will remain private. He is opposed to overt emotional 
display, as he is opposed to vulgar fashion tricks used to gain quick and easy 
publicity. But what sensuality is to be found in him comes out when he talks of 
his love. “The allure, the odour of silk, the feel of velvet, the crackle of a 
satin – what intoxication!” His voice softens. “So wonderful to touch. I miss 
that feeling of touching fabric.”

Givenchy has been luckier than most in fashion in that, from an early age, he 
was in a position to do exactly what he wanted. When he was ten, he was taken 
to the 1937 International Exhibition in Paris, where he became so excited by 
the Pavilion de l’Elégance that he immediately decided to become a couturier. 
Bowing to family pressure, though, he studied law. Then, in 1945, he started 
drawing lessons at the Ecole des Beaux Arts in Paris. When not at his studies, 
he was working part-time for one of the most successful couturiers in Paris – 
Jacques Fath. Fath was the first French dress designer to become known in the 
US, through a deal with an American manufacturer to make and sell a range of 
his designs there, under his own label. After Fath, came Dior.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgivenchy-hubert-fashion-archive-1998%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F375d9732e148fe184cb93c70a7deb63b78bb616f%2F0_22_1884_1130%2F1884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simply%20Givenchy%3A%2050%20years%20in%20frocks%2C%20fashion%20archive%20%2010%20October%201998&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgivenchy-hubert-fashion-archive-1998%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simply%20Givenchy%3A%2050%20years%20in%20frocks%2C%20fashion%20archive%20%2010%20October%201998&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgivenchy-hubert-fashion-archive-1998%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F375d9732e148fe184cb93c70a7deb63b78bb616f%2F0_22_1884_1130%2F1884.jpg>
 Hubert de Givenchy during the opening of an exhibition titled “Dream Dresses 
of Timeless Elegance” in Budapest, Hungary, October 2002. Photograph: Noemi 
Bruzak/AP 
 Today, this is common business practice, but in the mid-Forties it was 
revolutionary. Working at Fath, Givenchy learned far more than how to design a 
collection; he began to appreciate the importance of the American market. 
Three-quarters of his couture customers – the sort of women who as late as the 
Eighties might buy 20 hand-made suits and ten expensively-embroidered evening 
gowns per season – are American, and most, he airily admits, are close personal 
friends.

The greatest of these friends was Audrey Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audrey-hepburn>. Having learned from Fath, 
Givenchy moved to various other prestigious French fashion houses, including 
four years spent running Schiaparelli’s boutique in Place Vendome, before 
opening his own house in 1952. Two years later, Hepburn came to him looking for 
clothes for her role in the Billy Wilder film Sabrina Fair. Givenchy says that 
this was a “moment” – things are never the same again. In career terms, it 
meant that Givenchy had an instant American profile.

 As he worked with Hepburn to create her style for films such as Funny Face 
and Breakfast At Tiffany’s, publicity appearances and her private wardrobe, 
Givenchy realised how fortunate he had been. Hepburn’s ingenue beauty and 
well-bred charm were perfectly matched by his elegance and courtly manners. 
They made a spectacular couple, and she wore only his creations.

Hepburn led Givenchy to that fabled road where fashion’s gilded ladies dwell, 
the road where he found the billionaire wives of America’s most powerful 
industrial figures. “Babe” Paley, Mona Bismarck, “Bunny” Mellon and Mrs Jock 
Whitney – all with eye-wateringly large dress budgets and eager for real 
Parisian elegance – locked to him, especially when their prime couturier, 
Givenchy’s mentor, Christobal Balenciaga, closed his doors in 1968. These women 
adored the man they called “Oobare”, singing his praises across Capri’s pools, 
Upper East Side drawing rooms and on yachts from Florida to the Adriatic. Bunny 
Mellon even had him make her gardening clothes. After all, there’s nothing a 
rich lady requires more when plucking her roses than a pair of couture 
gardening gloves.

Continue reading <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/04/givenchy.jpg>

Colin McDowell is an author and fashion historian. The Givenchy Style, by 
Francoise Mohrt, is published by Assouline on October 20, priced pounds 40. 
This title can be ordered through the Guardian CultureShop for the discount 
price of pounds 35, incl UK p&p, by ringing our free credit-card hotline 0500 
600102; by e-mailingbid@mail.bogo.co.uk <mailto:bid@mail.bogo.co.uk>; or by 
sending a cheque to CultureShop, 250 Western Avenue, London W3 6EE E
 