
Are humanitarians demanding too much? The latest catalogue of human misery  
<http://www.unocha.org/2017appeal/>seeks $22.2bn for 92.8 million people in 33 
countries. This consolidated humanitarian appeal for 2017 is the largest-ever 
issued by the UN (although on recent trends, it will be lucky to get half 
funded, as the gap between what is sought and what is provided continues to 
widen each year).


In fact, what they ask for is less than the annual spend on chewing gum 
<https://www.statista.com/statistics/627860/global-chewing-gum-market-revenue/>
and equal to just 3% ofglobal military expenditure 
<https://www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2016/world-military-spending-resumes-upward-course-says-sipri>
 (US$1.7tn).

However, the deeper problem is that, of all good endeavours, humanitarian 
financing must be among the most primitive, based as it is on little 
rationality and even less fairness. The result is that the life chances of 
millions of people trapped by disasters and conflicts depend on a lottery. Not 
even an ordinary lottery where the natural laws of chance prevail. Instead, the 
humanitarian dice spins in strangely whimsical directions, depending on who you 
are and where you live.

The UN appeal acknowledges 128.6 million people in need but only seeks to help 
92.8 million. Presumably, the rest are to fend for themselves. Bear in mind 
that these numbers only apply to situations considered worthy for appeals. 
Uncounted others suffer or die without the consolation of becoming an official 
statistic. Moreover, not all suffering is equally compelling. In 2016, 78% of 
South Sudan’s enormous $1bn humanitarian needs were funded, while only 24% of 
the modest $1.2m sought for the Sahel was covered. As the Syria crisis demands 
a record-breaking $8.1bn in 2017, do we still remember the 4 million people 
still stuck in the bloodied sands of Darfur where we left them when 
humanitarian aid started petering out?

Meanwhile, half of all government-donated largesse goes to six UN organisations
 
<https://consultations.worldhumanitariansummit.org/bitcache/32aeda5fe90ceba891060ad51d0bd823da273cf9?vid=555986&disposition=inline&op=view>
. A third of all NGO funding is shared by just ten of them. A derisory 0.2% of 
humanitarian funds are directlychannelled through local actors 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/%5BHLP%20Report%5D%20Too%20important%20to%20fail%E2%80%94addressing%20the%20humanitarian%20financing%20gap.pdf>
. The same humanitarian agencies are judge and jury on the adequacy of both 
needs assessments and responses, while remaining remarkably coy on their own 
transaction costs. Such unfairness, and a lack of transparency and 
accountability undermines trust in the humanitarian system. Only 27% ofsurveyed 
respondents <http://sohs.alnap.org/#what-can-be-done-to-improve> considered the 
aid they received to be relevant.

Western populism is a fundamental threat to the humanitarian system | András 
Derzsi-Horváth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/26/western-populism-is-a-fundamental-threat-to-the-humanitarian-system>
Arguably, the humanitarian system is both broken and broke. If so, what should 
be fixed first? Should we continue to expand the range of what qualifies as 
humanitarian action? After all, we have already expanded from the original 
mission of simply saving lives to rebuilding livelihoods, from providing 
disaster relief to reducing disaster risk, from helping people with sudden 
shocks to building their resilience to prolonged crises, from mitigating the 
effects of conflicts to tackling their root causes, from protecting human 
survival to bringing wider human security.

The truth is that while creating the conditions for sustainable peace and 
development <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300> is obviously 
important, we need to question whether that should be the priority for 
humanitarians struggling to make their scarce resources go further. Covering-up 
for the failures of politicians is a moral hazard from an expansive 
humanitarianism.

Isn’t it time to consider the idea that narrowing the range of humanitarian 
action would allow the saving of more lives in more places? Not just here and 
there, now and then, but every time and everywhere. This means doing less but 
reaching out reliably to more desperate people to survive their darkest hours. 
Then it would be for them and their leaders to take the responsibility to solve 
their own underlying problems. Outsiders can’t do that and, arguably, their 
meddling complicates crises.

The bill for this new tightly-defined humanitarianism is likely to be lower 
too. As a global public good, the new humanitarian enterprise must be funded 
through predictable burden-sharing by all nations – perhaps throughassessed 
contributions <http://www.un.org/en/ga/contributions/assessments.shtml>as done 
for UN peacekeeping. Not only is this fair but it would create incentives for 
states to work together to solve crises that generate huge humanitarian costs. 
It would also mean more objective needs assessments, stronger accountability of 
humanitarian agencies, and greater dignity for the unfortunate people who 
currently rely on the humanitarian lottery.

Nothing else will restore belief in the universality of our core humanitarian 
principles. Such a new global humanitarian compact – and not a self-serving
grand bargain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/15/the-future-delivery-of-emergency-aid>
 between a selective monopoly of donors and aid contractors – would do much 
more to heal our broken humanitarian system and, who knows, even make it 
solvent again.

Mukesh Kapila is professor of global health and humanitarian affairs at the 
University of Manchester. Follow@mukeshkapila <https://twitter.com/mukeshkapila>
 on Twitter.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 