
Kelly McJannett was on a train backpacking in northern India when she saw the 
sight that would her crystallise her life’s mission.

At 24 she had already worked with Indigenous communities in remote outback 
Australia, but it was travelling through this seemingly endless slum in 
Rajasthan and seeing such stark poverty that made her realise she needed to 
make change on a global scale.

“In big cities of third world countries you are always going to have a 
circumference of poverty, but I had never seen an Indian slum before,” the Food 
Ladder International CEO says today. ”It just went on and on. It was a shock.

“I specifically remember the number of children and the look on their faces. I 
was totally alien in their world. In a place like the slums of India I may as 
well be from a different planet, when the truth is I am just extraordinarily 
lucky to have be born with opportunity.”

After returning home, McJannett realised she would need to create a solution 
that would be both environmentally and economically sustainable to help address 
the pressing global concern of food security.

Through her contacts, she got in touch with experienced businessman and 
renowned social entrepreneur Alex Shead and together they created what is now 
Food Ladder.

The organisation uses commercial hydroponic technology to deliver innovative 
greenhouse growing systems to disadvantaged communities, both in Australia and 
abroad, as well as providing training to allow locals to run production 
themselves.

The customised artificial environment can grow healthy food like spinach, 
kale, tomatoes, cucumbers and herbs, with improved agricultural efficiency – up 
to five times greater than traditional methods.

Each venture typically creates between five and 10 jobs and the aim is to run 
them as sustainable social enterprises, with the food eaten or sold depending 
on local needs, McJannett says.

Having that global insight at that stage of my life was pivotal and it had an 
impact
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fhunger-for-global-change-drives-food-security-entrepreneur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F728b6a9eca39152643a2b18bb4175d185509175e%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunger%20for%20global%20change%20drives%20food%20security%20entrepreneur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fhunger-for-global-change-drives-food-security-entrepreneur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunger%20for%20global%20change%20drives%20food%20security%20entrepreneur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fhunger-for-global-change-drives-food-security-entrepreneur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F728b6a9eca39152643a2b18bb4175d185509175e%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Food Ladder systems uses commercial hydroponic technology to create a 
customised artificial environment that can grow healthy food like spinach, 
kale, tomatoes, cucumbers and herbs, with improved agricultural efficiency. 
Photograph: Supplied by Food Ladder 
One major Australian project is at Katherine in the Northern Territory where 
the local Indigenous community is now able to grow more than 70,000 plants a 
year – nutrition-rich vegetables which would otherwise need to be trucked in at 
great environmental and economic cost.

The rollout is currently expanding into remote Indigenous communities in East 
Arnhem Land.

The international deployment has projects at different stages of development 
in India and Afghanistan and is funded through the Department of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade’s Direct Aid program.

“We really believe in creating sustainable economic development which empowers 
local people to address the issues in that community, in perpetuity,” McJannett 
says. “It may sound like common sense, but Food Ladder has always approached 
development with strong business acumen and cutting edge technology to help 
support communities around the globe.”

The current Indian projects include five greenhouse systems housed on the flat 
rooftops of disadvantaged village schools in Uttar Pradesh to maximise space 
and provide fresh produce for over 2000 local school children.

McJannett travels to India about four times a year and has just returned from 
opening another project in a village school just outside Delhi.

“We are in a position where we can be working hand-in-hand with governments, 
aid organisations and serious impact investors that, like us, are committed to 
creating sustainable change,” she says. “In the slums, each day is life or 
death.”

Growing up on Sydney’s northern beaches, conversation around the family dinner 
table centred on issues of social justice. At 14 McJannett also had her first 
extensive overseas trip, backpacking through Europe, Asia and the Middle East 
with her parents and younger sister.

“Travel is always a humbling and enlightening experience,” she says. “Having 
that global insight at that stage of my life was pivotal and it had an impact.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fhunger-for-global-change-drives-food-security-entrepreneur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9abb70c52c6cda8124d74254b9214ad035c4843%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunger%20for%20global%20change%20drives%20food%20security%20entrepreneur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fhunger-for-global-change-drives-food-security-entrepreneur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunger%20for%20global%20change%20drives%20food%20security%20entrepreneur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnab-meet-the-changemakers%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fhunger-for-global-change-drives-food-security-entrepreneur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9abb70c52c6cda8124d74254b9214ad035c4843%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Kelly and Simon O’Connor from the Australian High Commission in India 
inspecting a Food Ladder system on the roof of a village school in Baipura 
providing fresh produce to over 1,500 children. Photograph: Supplied by Food 
Ladder 
In recognition of her work, McJannett, now 30, was also recently the recipient 
of the Sydney University 2016 Anstice MBA Scholarship. There she met and 
impressed the Head of National Australia Bank’s innovation hub NAB Labs with 
her vision and ability to effect sustainable social change.

NAB Labs has since built the Food Ladder website as part of NAB’s program of 
skilled volunteering.

“They have done a beautiful job,” McJannett says. “It’s been wonderful through 
their input, insight and energy to help us create the online presence and reach 
that we need.”

Since 2002, NAB’s Australian employees have contributed more than a million 
volunteer hours to community projects, generating $50 million in salary value.

NAB’s general manager, corporate responsibility, Jodi Geddes says she is 
“immensely proud” of their achievements since the inception of the program.

“Every year we work with more than 400 community organisations to advertise 
over 22,000 volunteering activities,” Geddes says. “We are humbled to be 
recognised as a leader in corporate volunteering across Australia.

“Food Ladder is a NAB customer and we admire the work they do in food 
sustainability within communities in Australia and abroad.”

“Our volunteers can provide invaluable assistance to build further capacity 
within community organisations and deliver critical work where it’s needed 
most.”

For McJannett, her Food Ladder journey has been “a four-year overnight 
success” and she is grateful for the support the organisation receives. “We are 
constantly evolving and growing to meet the need,” she says.

“I hope that looking back we will have been instrumental in changing the way 
aid is addressed globally and driving economic development in disadvantaged 
communities. We want to be the cornerstone in a new way forward.”
 