
To survive, there is no other option but to cross the river back to Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>, says Ajak Adong, a mother of six, as 
she cooks a lunch of leaves. It’s all the family has been eating since arriving 
in the border town of Kiir Adem two months ago.


For decades, South Sudanese fought to secede from Sudan, home to a government 
they accused of marginalising them. Now, five years after the world’s youngest 
nation attained independence, hunger is driving tens of thousands back.

“There is no work, nothing to eat here and no money,” says Adong, one of more 
than 3,500 people stranded near the border in South Sudan’s Northern Bahr el 
Ghazal state.

'Very, very severely malnourished': South Sudan's children on the brink | 
Nadene Ghouri
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/14/south-sudan-children-on-the-brink-very-severely-malnourished>
The region was heavily contested during the second civil war with Sudan, which 
began in 1983. The war ended with a 2005 peace deal signed between the Khartoum 
government and the SPLM, theSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> Liberation Movement turned 
ruling party, paving the way for South Sudan’s independence in 2011.

Yet the nation’s short existence has been plagued by yet another conflict, 
this time fought between rival factions of the SPLM. Despite apeace deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/27/south-sudan-peace-deal-greeted-with-quiet-optimism-by-humanitarian-world>
 signed in August,heavy fighting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/10/south-sudan-capital-juba-violence-salva-kiir>
 between government and opposition forces continues, with hundreds killed in 
the capital, Juba, last weekend.

The protracted violence has created one of the world’s worst humanitarian 
crises. More than 4.8 million people – almost half of the population – face 
“unprecedented levels of food insecurity”, according to aUN survey 
<http://www.ipcinfo.org/ipcinfo-detail-forms/ipcinfo-news-detail/en/c/421964/> 
last month.


Hunger was once confined to conflict-ridden areas, but, owing to poor rains 
and pests, food insecurity has now spread to other, relatively peaceful, 
regions. In Northern Bahr el Ghazal, last year’s harvest failures have left 84% 
of the population food insecure, with many relying on leaves and palm fruits. 
The crisis has been made worse by afloundering economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/14/south-sudan-no-work-no-money-oil-rich-cash-poor>
 and skyrocketing food prices.

More than 100,000 people have left South Sudan for Sudan due to hunger 
<https://www.wfp.org/news/news-release/wfp-governments-sudan-and-south-sudan-continue-cooperation-moving-assistance-south>
, according to South Sudanese government estimates, while another 6,000 are 
stranded in border towns such as Kiir Adem, waiting for an opportunity to cross.

Food rations bring respite to South Sudanese forced to live in swamps | Simona 
Foltyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/23/food-shortages-security-south-sudan-unity-state>
Yet getting across the roughly 2,000km-long border that separates the two 
countries is not that simple.

To start with, it’s unclear where exactly the border is. Even though Sudan and 
South Sudan separated five years ago, the border has yet to be demarcated. Kiir 
Adem lies in acontested area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2014/dec/08/south-sudanese-displaced-in-pictures>
 known asMile 14 
<http://www.smallarmssurveysudan.org/facts-figures/borderdisputed-areas/14-mile-area.html>
, claimed by both Khartoum and Juba. A river – called Kiir by South Sudan and 
Bahr el Arab by Sudan, marks the de-facto boundary, although the Sudanese 
government insists the border should run 23km further south, along the 1956 
colonial borders upheld by the 2005 peace deal.

On paper, the two governments have committed 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?mot2143> to free movement of goods and 
people. But except for abrief opening this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/sudan-opens-border-with-south-for-first-time-since-2011>
, the border hasremained sealed 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article58473> amid mutual accusations of 
harbouring rebel groups.

The simmering political tensions between Khartoum and Juba have complicated 
matters for South Sudanese people. To travel to Sudan, they require either 
approval by South Sudan’s national security services, granted only in rare 
circumstances, or money to bribe border officials on both sides.

Most people uprooted by hunger don’t have either, and so they are left with 
two unappealing options: stay at the border and hope for food aid, or sneak 
across without papers; a risky undertaking that involves days of trekking 
through the bush and on muddy roads made impassable by seasonal rains.

Faced with this difficult choice, many families have been torn apart trying to 
hedge their bets, with the weakest staying behind while the strongest try their 
luck across the border. Adong’s three older sons, aged between 16 and 22, 
crossed the border illegally in the hope of finding work in Sudan, while she 
stayed in Kiir Adem with the younger children.

That was weeks ago, yet Adong still hasn’t received any news. She is worried 
her sons might have run into trouble with the authorities. When South Sudan
descended into civil conflict in December 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/23/south-sudan-state-that-fell-apart-in-a-week>
, young men reportedly crossed the border at Kiir Adem to join defected 
generals who based themselves in Sudan’s southern Darfur region. Since the 
August peace deal,ceasefire violations are frequent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/05/violence-erupts-again-in-south-sudan-wau-as-faith-in-peace-deal-flounders>
, and anyone sneaking across the border could be suspected of joining rebels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fsouth-sudan-hunt-for-food-drives-back-across-border-to-sudan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac24c1f46cd357068dae627b9306226d4f8622de%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunt%20for%20food%20drives%20South%20Sudanese%20back%20across%20border%20to%20Sudan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fsouth-sudan-hunt-for-food-drives-back-across-border-to-sudan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunt%20for%20food%20drives%20South%20Sudanese%20back%20across%20border%20to%20Sudan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fsouth-sudan-hunt-for-food-drives-back-across-border-to-sudan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac24c1f46cd357068dae627b9306226d4f8622de%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 A government official appeals to displaced people in Kiir Adem to stay in 
South Sudan. More than 6,000 have been stranded in such border towns, waiting 
to cross to Sudan. Photograph: Simona Foltyn 
Yet it’s not just fear of insurgents making the authorities unhappy. Now that 
South Sudanese finally have their own country, the government “feels shame” 
that many are opting to go back to Sudan so soon after independence, one local 
government official who wanted to remain anonymous told the Guardian.

In Kiir Adem, South Sudanese government officials pleaded with dozens of 
families who had gathered near the office of the district administrator to 
stay, promising that relief was on the way. “We don’t want them to go. We are 
trying our level best to get help,” said Nyanut Kiir, the area coordinator from 
the government’s Relief and Rehabilitation Commission.

By the end of June, the UN’s World Food Programme had completed registrations 
for a food distribution, while a medical charity had started supplemental 
feeding for malnourished children. More help was needed, but the contested 
nature of the border has made it difficult for agencies to work in the area.

As the day in Kiir Adem drew to a close, new arrivals started to trickle into 
the town. Carrying a few basic belongings, they had walked for days along the 
deserted gravel road leading north, frequented only by nomadic cattle herders 
and military trucks. The bridge across the river Kiir to Sudan was just a 
couple of kilometres away but, for now, all they could do was wait and hope 
that aid would arrive soon.
 