
Haiti, devastated by successive natural disasters including hurricane Matthew 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/un-haiti-aid-hurricane-matthew> 
and a massiveearthquake in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/13/tsunami-alert-haiti-earthquake-disaster>
, is one of a handful of countries still suffering“alarming” levels of hunger, 
according to the annual global hunger index 
<http://www.ifpri.org/news-release/global-hunger-index-over-45-countries-pace-%E2%80%9Cmoderate%E2%80%9D-%E2%80%9Calarming%E2%80%9D-hunger-levels-2030-un>
 (GHI).

More than half the 10 million population of the Caribbean country were 
undernourished before Matthew struck but the report suggests that little or no 
progress has been made in eradicating hunger there in the past 15 years.
top 15 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-11T12:33:15/embed.html>
The index, which annually measures levels of malnutrition, stunting and the 
mortality rates of under fives in 129 countries, reports that about795 million 
people <https://www.wfp.org/hunger/stats> – more than the total population of 
Latin America – are said to be “chronically undernourished” today, while 
roughly one in four children are stunted and8% of the world’s children suffer 
from wasting <http://www.worldhunger.org/world-child-hunger-facts/>. 

But the number of hungry people has fallen by nearly 210 million since 2000 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwi-udH_wNDPAhWJ2RoKHbCMCJwQFggkMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.fao.org%2F3%2Fa-i4646e%2Fi4646e01.pdf&usg=AFQjCNE46YFkdnQx0BJfsecF3R9N22Ey-Q&sig2=Oijb4aQ7VsLOwV7m85kNDw&cad=rja>
 and some countries have improved dramatically, say the authors. Myanmar, 
Rwanda and Cambodia have each halved the proportions of undernourished people 
since 1992.

Haiti, Zambia, and Central African Republic have the highest proportion of 
undernourished people 
<http://www.ifpri.org/blog/795-million-people-chronically-undernourished-armed-conflict-root-cause-hunger>
 – between 47.7% and 53.4% of the population.Timor-Leste, Burundi and Papua New 
Guinea have the highest prevalence of stunting 
<https://www.sightmagazine.com.au/news/6261-east-timor-has-highest-percentage-of-stunted-children-report-finds>
, with 50% or more under-fives so undernourished that they are too short for 
their age.

Somalia, Chad and Angola 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=12&ved=0ahUKEwjMo_Tyw9DPAhWP0RoKHXvgBIYQFghbMAs&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.unicef.org%2Fmdg%2Fchildmortality.html&usg=AFQjCNFH1xkVNmJ1vDGKOr_kmk3AwOGZtA&cad=rja>
 have the highest under-five mortality rates, ranging between 13.7% and 15.7%.

According to the report, compiled by the International Food Policy Research 
Institute (IFPRI) and Concern Worldwide, levels of hunger are still “serious” 
or “alarming” in 50 countries. Central African Republic (CAR) and Chad have 
barely reduced hunger since 2000, it says.

Violence and mass displacement caused by a four-year civil war have taken a 
heavy toll onfood production in CAR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/12/central-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided>
 and a recent influx of refugees and extreme weather events have left Chad 
desperately food insecure.

The situation could be worse, say the authors, because insufficient data was 
available for 13 countries, of which 10 were cause for concern. Burundi, the 
Comoros, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Libya, Papua New 
Guinea, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan and Syria were all thought to be in trouble.

However, the index suggests many developing countries are making strong 
progress with an overall drop of 29% in the level of hunger since 2000. But 
Namibia and Sri Lanka stood out for having the lowest percentage reductions 
since 2000.


The speed of improvement in eradicating hunger is desperately slow, say the 
authors. If hunger declines at the same rate as it has since 1992, more than 45 
countries will still have “moderate” to “alarming” levels in 2030. The 2030 
agenda for sustainable developmenthas a goal of zero hunger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/advertisement-features/2015/sep/25/vision-to-end-hunger-captured-among-new-global-goals>
 for all by 2030.
reduction 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-11T12:34:31/embed.html>
“The MDG target of halving the percentage of the population experiencing 
chronic hunger was met by 73 of 129 countries, and the number of the 
chronically hungry has fallen by 210 million. However, almost 800 million 
people still do not have enough food to eat to lead healthy and fulfilling 
lives,” says the report.

In terms of the major regions of the developing world, sub-Saharan Africa and 
south Asia have the highest 2016 GHI scores, at 30.1 and 29.0 respectively.


Data on the indicators comes from the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation, 
the World Health Organisation, the UN’s children’s charity, Unicef, and IFPRI 
estimates.

“The cost of hunger is measured not only in lost lives but also in unrealised 
potential for individuals,” say the report’s authors. “It affects the ability 
of communities, countries and regions to meet their own social development 
goals, and it stunts their economic prosperity. How we choose to grow, process, 
distribute and consume the food we eat will have a profound effect on people, 
planet, prosperity and peace.”

Rose Caldwell, director of Concern Worldwide UK, said: “The world has made 
progress in the fight against hunger but it has so far been too slow; we won’t 
reach the globally agreed target of zero hunger by 2030 if we carry on at the 
same rate.Hunger <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/hunger> 
continues to waste lives and limit potential – we need urgent action from the 
global community to wipe it out for good.”


Declines in average hunger levels across regions or individual countries do 
not tell the whole story. Even within regions and countries that have broadly 
reduced hunger to low levels, lagging areas are leaving millions still hungry, 
and demonstrate the need to target solutions to communities facing the greatest 
need.Haiti, for example, has the fourth highest GHI score at an “alarming” 36.9 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjJhpOYydDPAhXFrxoKHdGvC9sQFggfMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.concern.net%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2Fmedia%2Fresource%2Fglobal_hunger_index_2015_-_full_report.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHqLLPXOjaJn0bmLc_Yu6G6eEEkOg&bvm=bv.135258522,d.d2s&cad=rja>
, despite the Latin America region having the lowest regional GHI score in the 
developing world. Mexico has a low level of overall hunger, but also has areas 
where child stunting – an indicator of child undernutrition – is relatively 
high.

The 2030 agenda set a clear global objective for an end to hunger – everywhere 
– within the next 14 years, said David Nabarro, special adviser to the UN 
secretary general on the 2030 agenda for sustainable development and climate 
change. “Too many people are hungry today. There is a need for urgent, 
thoughtful and innovative action to ensure that no one ever goes hungry again.”
Table 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1WeSbGNQO1gVlWGMhnT6ULd04V_wtNXhfsSrs-h7Y6vA> 