
Hydroelectric dams contribute more to global warming 
<http://www.scidev.net/global/environment/climate-change/> than previously 
estimated, according to a studypublished in BioScience 
<http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2016/10/02/biosci.biw117.full>
.

It appears that the current and planned boom of hydroelectric projects 
<http://www.scidev.net/global/environment/energy/> would double the current 
cover of dams in the world and will aggravate the problem.

COP22 host Morocco launches action plan to fight devastating climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/07/cop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference>
Researchers found that rotting vegetation in the water means that the dams 
emit about a billion tonnes of greenhouse gases every year. This represents 
1.3% of total annual anthropogenic (human-caused) global emissions.

When considered over a 100-year timescale, dams produce more methane than rice 
plantations and biomass burning, the study showed.

“We estimate that dams emit around 25% more methane by unit of surface than 
previously estimated,” said Bridget Deemer, from the School of Environment at 
the Washington State University in Vancouver, and lead author of the study.

“Methane stays in the atmosphere for only around a decade, while CO2 stays 
several centuries, but over the course of 20 years methane contributes almost 
three times more to global warming than CO2, a relevant period for 
policymakers,” she added.


Methane is produced at the bottom of the reservoirs, where oxygen is low and 
bacteria decompose organic material, like trees and grasses, which is already 
present or carried bywatercourse 
<http://www.scidev.net/global/environment/water/>. Part of the methane becomes 
CO2; the rest is carried to the surface as bubbles.

Analysing more than 250 dams and including bubble-based emissions, the 
researchers found that dams also emit more methane than lakes and wetlands.

Emily Stanley, a professor in liminology and marine science at the University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, said that the study is “very relevant” because it 
delivers the best available information about greenhouse gas emissions from 
dams. It shows that high methane emissions are not linked to the location or 
antiquity of the reservoirs, as other researchers suggest, but to the quantity 
of organic material.

According to the study, algae that proliferates in downstream dams may receive 
more nutrients such as nitrogen or phosphate, and therefore produce more 
methane.

Deemer is enthusiastic about the possibilities that this research presents for 
designing, situating and operating dams that emit fewer gases.

The researchers have suggested that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change <https://www.ipcc.ch/> consider these methane emissions in future 
budgets.

 * This article originally appeared in SciDev.Net 
<http://www.scidev.net/global/energy/news/dams-raise-global-warming-gas.html>
 