
Hoo-gah. Repeat after me. Rhymes with hula, as in hoop, but with a more 
pronounced stress on the first syllable. It matters, because this autumn you 
either need tomaster the water bottle challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/water-bottle-challenge-craze>
, or you need to learn to pronounce “hygge”. If you don’t know what the water 
bottle challenge is, that puts you automatically in the hygge camp.

Hygge is a Danish word that roughly translates as cosiness, conviviality, 
intimacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2016/sep/04/hygge-denmark-danes-cosiness-wealth-antidepressants-scandinavians>
. It is a homespun, Nordic take on the French concept ofjoie de vivre. Coffee 
pots, cinnamon buns, candles; cashmere socks, hands wrapped around mugs. It is 
a chic way to bow out of the frenzied jollity of party season, but more 
sociable and fun than the yoga andclean-eating lifestyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/05/modern-tribes-clean-eating-blogger>
. (Hot chocolate and red wine can be hygge, you will be glad to hear.)

You will need to know how to pronounce hygge by December at the latest, because
it will be inescapable this Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/11/hygge-the-danish-art-of-living-cosily-on-its-way-to-uk-bookshops>
. If you don’t getThe Little Book of Hygge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/11/the-little-book-of-hygge-by-meik-wiking-digested-read>
 (£7.99, teapot and china-plate bluebirds on the cover) orHygge: The Danish Art 
of Happiness <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hygge-434405.html> (£12.99, 
looping, lower-case calligraphic cover) in your office Secret Santa, you will 
almost certainly getThe Art of Hygge 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/art-of-hygge.html> (socked feet in front of a 
fire) orHow to Hygge <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-to-hygge.html> 
(artfully crumbled baked goods against an wall painted in Farrow & Ball) in 
your stocking on 25 December. Not to mention the Hygge candle by Cloudberry 
Living (£15) or the hand-thrown espresso cups or ribbed oatmeal cashmere hot 
water bottle cover selected from hygge-themed gift displays.

Fashion, too, has lost no time in embracing hygge. Norwegian footwear designer 
Astrid Andreassen <https://www.aandreassen.com/collections/womens> sells £60 
hygge slippers, in felted Italian wool and natural tan leather, “inspired by 
the woven baskets that children in Scandinavia make to fill with sweets and 
hang on the Christmas tree”. The Hygge range from luxury loungewear label Mint 
Velvet includes charcoal marl leggings, £29,“to wear with knitwear pieces for a 
luxe layered feel” 
<http://www.mintvelvet.co.uk/charcoal-skirted-legging/trousers-&-shorts/mint-v/fcp-product/4740>
.

Cold comfort form: 10 of the best Hygge pieces – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/oct/18/cold-comfort-form-10-of-the-best-hygge-pieces-in-pictures>
Hygge tells us a lot of things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/17/modern-tribes-hygge-enthusiast>
 about how we live now. First, it represents the amplification of Christmas in 
our culture. Christmas, which used to refer to a few days in December, has 
expanded into a festive season that begins in November with window displays of 
fairy lights and sequinned dresses, with themed knitwear days and mince pie 
popups. (I made that one up, but it can’t be long now.) The premiere of certain 
Christmas adverts have become an annual red letter day, a retail FA Cup final. 
In Denmark, hygge is most potent during the long winters,but exists all year 
round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/08/congresbury-somerset-kind-acts-philanthropy>
 – bicycle rides can be hygge, pebbles can be hygge, blue skies can be hygge – 
so it is interesting that in translation hygge has become fixed to the winter 
months. Hygge is a neat trick to take the Christmas feelgood factor and evolve 
it into something that works as soon as the nights have drawn in, filtering out 
the garish colourways as deftly as theInkwell filter on an Instagram selfie 
<http://gramfilters.com/inkwell/>. Fireside chic with a longer shelf life.

It is easy to see why hygge has got a hold on us this particular winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/29/book-of-hygge-louisa-thomsen-brits-review>
. 2016 has been a traumatic and abrasive year, spiked with the sudden loss of 
beloved icons of culture, rocked by moments that have altered the political 
landscape and our national identity. A heart-rate monitor attached to 2016 
would look like the topography of the Rocky mountains, so the soothing balm of 
hygge is just what the doctor ordered. TheDanish anthropologist Jeppe Trolle 
Linnet <http://linnetresearch.dk/about-jeppe-linnet/>, who has written 
extensively about hygge, says that if a social gathering ishyggelig (adj), this 
means that “no one will discuss opposite opinions about politics, economic 
development or raising children”. And if hygge seems at first glance a 
surprising rebranding of what the “Scandi” or “Nordic” prefixes conjure up in 
popular culture – from the unsettling Scandi noir of box set sensation fame, 
with the extreme violence and flawed protagonists of The Killing and The 
Bridge, to the solid hearth-and-home hygge values – then consider what Agatha 
Christie represents. Crime dramas have always been perfect Sunday night fodder, 
once the curtains are drawn and the fire on.

The Nordic gift for extrapolating meaning from the everyday, for creating 
drama without glitz or glamour, has become particularly resonant in a decade 
that has seen mindfulness morph from a hippy eccentricity to a buzzword that 
shifts apps by the million. (Headspace <https://www.headspace.com/> has more 
than 3 million users in 150 countries.) Intrinsic to hygge is the concept of 
lavishing your full attention on ordinary moments; lighting a scented candle on 
the family breakfast table, for example. TheNorwegian author Karl Ove Knaussgard
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/09/some-rain-must-fall-my-struggle-volume-5-by-karl-ove-knausgaard-review>
, whose six-volume autobiography is an immersion in the everyday, a 4,000-page 
page-turner with barely a cliffhanger, is made compelling by what Zadie Smith 
called an ability “to be fully present in and mindful of his own existence”. 
Hygge is being sold by the yard this Christmas, but in its native habitat it is 
not a trend, but a way of life. There are many mini-rituals connected to hygge:
fika, for instance, is a Swedish word for the hygge-esque ritual of breaking 
for coffee and cake <http://www.scandikitchen.co.uk/fika/> once or twice a day.

Hygge reflects the way we live now in that it gathers interiors, entertaining, 
food and fashion into one cohesive picture, like a perfectly curated Instagram 
still life. But it is in fashion where it is disrupting the norm, because – in 
contrast to almost any other fashion trend – the hygge wardrobe is about how 
clothes feel, rather than how they look. Hygge is a verb as well as a noun, and 
the hygge wardobe is an experience, not an aesthetic. This may be the future of 
fashion.

Which is odd, because we have forgotten how to talk about fabric and 
construction. A generation that shops online and for whom at-home dressmaking 
is folklore, rather than family memory are seldom inclined to inspect seams or 
feel the weight of fabric in the way their mothers would have. Nonetheless, 
there is a clear appetite for clothes that feel nice, which has already made 
itself felt in the rise of cashmere as a status tag in itself.Cashmere is a 
brand that stands for pleasure and indulgence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jan/16/does-cashmere-get-your-goat>
, like Häagen-Dazs.

This matters, because the biggest change in consumer habits of the past decade 
is that we spend our disposable income on experience over possessions. 
Millennials willchoose to spend their money on an event 
<http://eventbrite-s3.s3.amazonaws.com/marketing/Millennials_Research/Gen_PR_Final.pdf>
, rather than a thing. There are solid economic factors behind this, not least 
that the rise in house prices has produced a generation of adults who are not 
homeowners, and who are therefore inclined to treat their salaries as pocket 
money rather than housekeeping. Meanwhile, social media has turned individual 
experience into social and cultural capital. We are aware of the lives of those 
around us, from their teen sleepovers to festivals to long-haul winter 
holidays, in real time. Other people’s photos are part of the daily fabric of 
modern life.

Virtual reality is about to explode the market for experiences. The incoming 
launch of virtual reality at a consumer level will take the possibilities of 
selling experience to another level. What began with a boom in festivals and 
live music and eating out, and expanded into augmented reality with Pokémon Go 
this summer, will grow exponentially once VR offers highly desirable 
“experiences” through a headset. Just asFomo-driven debt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/17/hephzibah-anderson-fomo-new-acronym>
 replaced shoe addiction as the twentysomething’s financial achilles heel, VR 
could make a skydive over Mount Everest, or a close encounter with a leopard – 
or, for that matter, a dinosaur – available to click and buy. If these 
temptations make fashion feel two-dimensional, then fully immersive fashion 
that feels as good as it looks may become more appealing.

Balenciaga, which with Georgian designer Demna Gvasalia at the helm is perhaps 
the most avant-garde, agenda-setting brand in fashion right now, put the 
tactile experience of clothes at the centre ofits Paris SS17 fashion show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/02/demna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect>
 a fortnight ago. An exploration of “the intimate relationship between couture 
and fetishism which runs beneath the surface”, the show focused on how it feels 
when fabric touches skin. It was about the intimacy of a couturier pinning and 
draping fabric around a woman’s body, and the intensity of sensation in wearing 
wet-look Spandex, or very high heels. All very different from the cosy world of 
hygge, but the focus on how the wearer experiences what she is wearing is the 
same. Don’t be fooled by the soporific fireside glow, because hygge is more 
radical than you might think.
 