
Hyper Light Drifter is a game about struggle. Released in March to wide 
critical acclaim, it opens with a wordless three-minute animation in which an 
unknown land is ravaged by a blinding explosion; a lake of blood forms and 
quickly fills with the corpses of alien creatures. It looks like a standard 
science-fiction tale of doomed planets and extraterrestrial invasion, but it 
turns out these scenes of massacre are the visions of a single person, the 
titular drifter.

Put in the eight or so hours to beat Hyper Light Drifter and it’s likely you 
won’t learn much more about its mysterious world. Ostensibly an action 
role-playing game, it borrows the best parts of classic titles such as The 
Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past and Diablo, to produce something that looks 
like a classic 1990s console adventure. You dash through lush woods and crystal 
lagoons, and you fight poison wolves and old knights with an electric blue 
sword and a modifiable gun. Yet not much is told of the world along the way 
save the occasional slideshow of images that stand-in for the spoken words of 
the frightened locals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fhyper-light-drifter-heart-disease-inspired-alex-preston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ce203424e50dcdb9223d5c266816d1cb156fccf%2F58_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hyper%20Light%20Drifter%20%E2%80%93%20how%20heart%20disease%20inspired%20one%20of%202016's%20great%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fhyper-light-drifter-heart-disease-inspired-alex-preston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hyper%20Light%20Drifter%20%E2%80%93%20how%20heart%20disease%20inspired%20one%20of%202016%27s%20great%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fhyper-light-drifter-heart-disease-inspired-alex-preston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ce203424e50dcdb9223d5c266816d1cb156fccf%2F58_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Hyper Light Drifter Photograph: Heart Machine 
It’s a game that shows rather than tells, and it expects you to pay attention 
to its every detail to piece it all together. But everything you need to know 
about the game’s underlying story is there in that opening animation, which 
recurs like a nightmare throughout the journey. In it, you see the drifter 
coughing up bright pink blood, bent over in pain as their insides rip apart. 
Right after that, the character is shown entering a colossal fight with a 
large, relentless monster made of black ooze, which eventually engulfs the 
drifter in a dark webby prison.

This is all metaphor – and it is about the game’s developer Alex Preston. 
“I’ve dealt with serious health issues since I was born: congenital heart 
disease, to start,” he says. “A plethora of digestive and immune system 
problems have left me hospitalised on numerous occasions, often near death. 
This gives me a certain perspective on life, and plays into the stories I want 
to tell.

“The main character in Hyper Light Drifter suffers from a deadly illness, one 
he is desperately seeking a cure for. It haunts him, endlessly. That’s 
something I’m keenly familiar with.”

Hyper Light Drifter isn’t the first time that Preston has channelled his 
fluctuating health – and the proximity of death – into art. He explored the 
subject during college in the form of painting and film, experimenting with 
both abstract and hyper-real styles. “I made a lot of unsatisfying, straight-up 
bad work,” he says. “I think most [art students] should. I threw stuff at the 
walls to see what stuck, what resonated with me and my peers. It was incredibly 
helpful to make some trashy work that I eventually burned or gave away, as it 
made me a better artist, brought me closer to defining what I actually wanted 
to say with any of my work moving forward.”

Preston underwent gruelling open heart surgery as a baby and had a pacemaker 
installed a few years ago. The sense of physical fragility has been with him 
his whole life. “I see my cardiologist every six months, as well as another for 
my cholesterol and pacemaker checkups,” he says. “I just had a heart valve 
installed in November of 2015. I still struggle daily with diet, medications, 
trying to feel less like horrible garbage so I can get up and work on 
something.”

“My life will never be normal, I doubt my health will get much better – there 
will always be problems, and I suspect this state of generally feeling bad is 
sticking around for some time. But I currently have enough support through 
family, friends, people I care about and my work that I can deal with the 
struggle. This month, at least.”

It’s his reliance on machines and skilled doctors that led to the name of 
Preston’s studio,Heart Machine <http://www.heart-machine.com/>. It’s the name 
under which Preston intends to make his most ambitious and personal projects. 
“The biggest component here is my ability to tell a story I can identify with, 
expressing something personal to a larger audience, so I feel more connected 
and have an outlet for the many emotions that crop up around life-altering 
issues,” Preston says. This was the dream he had in mind when putting Hyper 
Light Drifter, the studio’s debut, on Kickstarter back in September 2013. A 
month later and his game had raised $645,159 in funding, far beyond the $27,000 
Preston was initially looking for to make the full game.

The original plan was to have Hyper Light Drifter finished and released in 
2014. However, the opportunity provided by the success of the crowdfunding 
campaign meant Preston was able to expand the scope of the project. He also 
suffered from health problems at the time, meaning that certain development 
goals had to be delayed. The combination pushed the game’s release date back to 
2016.

Fortunately, while making Hyper Light Drifter was at times tough, Preston had 
plenty of support from those close to him in Los Angeles. Most importantly, he 
was able to move out away from making the game in his home by founding a 
community space known asGlitch City <http://glitch.city/> with some of his 
friends.

He says: “A small group of us were all tired of working in our bedrooms or 
living rooms or garages, and knew we had a lot of common knowledge and enjoyed 
each other’s company, so why not find a place we could all work together?

“No longer lonely, we can consult one another, provide support in many ways 
and build a larger community to host positive events and foster other work 
we’re fascinated by.”

Glitch City comprises around 1,000 sq ft of office space in Culver City, 
California, typically hosting 10 people at a time, though Preston says some 
days can become much busier. Over the past couple of years he worked there with 
the small team he put together for Hyper Light Drifter, which includes coders 
and designers Beau Blyth, who previously made popular local multiplayer game 
Samurai Gunn, as well as Teddy Diefenbach.

Other regulars there include Ben Esposito (creator of Donut County), Brendon 
Chung (known for the award-winning Thirty Flights of Loving), and Ben Vance 
(creator of the virtual reality game Irrational Exuberance). There are also a 
number of “developer friends” who drift in and out of the space as they wish. 
Preston is particularly fond of the show-and-tell session that is held at the 
end of each week for people to recap their work and open it up to others.

Preston says being a part of Glitch City helped greatly with inspiration and 
motivation while toiling away on Hyper Light Drifter. “We can ask for advice 
from one another, ask for play testing, thoughts, have long conversations about 
detailed design topics,” he says. “But because it’s not a conventional office 
environment, it’s also possible to just not turn up when solitude is needed. 
Sometimes you want to hide in a dark cave alone and work, shut everyone else 
out. There are, ups and downs, like any situation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fhyper-light-drifter-heart-disease-inspired-alex-preston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e33853bede5b69e68679e0a65cd8df19254499d%2F33_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hyper%20Light%20Drifter%20%E2%80%93%20how%20heart%20disease%20inspired%20one%20of%202016's%20great%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fhyper-light-drifter-heart-disease-inspired-alex-preston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hyper%20Light%20Drifter%20%E2%80%93%20how%20heart%20disease%20inspired%20one%20of%202016%27s%20great%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fhyper-light-drifter-heart-disease-inspired-alex-preston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e33853bede5b69e68679e0a65cd8df19254499d%2F33_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Hyper Light Drifter Photograph: Heart Machine 
It’s not only the people who were physically close to Preston that helped him 
push through those harder days. While making Hyper Light Drifter he publicly 
shared some of his health struggles, which led to him receiving a number of 
letters from anticipating fans with similar issues. “It’s been one of the most 
incredible aspects of this whole process,” he says. “To have people willing to 
share such intense experiences with a stranger – one they have found enough 
common ground with to find the courage to do so – is stunning. It reminds me to 
take a moment outside of my own struggles. It’s also deeply inspiring for me to 
know that I’ve had any kind of meaningful impact or effect on people. I can’t 
ask for much more.”

Over time, with these messages of support from people all around the world, 
Hyper Light Drifter’s story shifted from being about the struggle of one person 
to the similar struggles of many. The game itself upholds this through its 
ambiguity; by avoiding words and a clearly defined narrative, people are able 
to project their own experiences with illness and pain onto it. It is a canvas 
for these people and one that encourages them to bite down and overcome their 
struggles, just as the drifter does.

“I’m fairly satisfied,” Preston says reflecting on the finished game. “There’s 
always more you want to do; more polish, more content, more ideas that never 
make it into a work with this scope and scale. The story, the underlying 
messages, for those that care to dig and observe a bit, I feel communicates 
what I had wanted. People identify with it; they feel an attachment.”

Hyper Light Drifter is only the beginning of a larger endeavour for Preston. 
For him, the success he’s achieved in creating a game so personal yet 
far-reaching is part of a struggle that continues beyond the game. He can’t 
just turn it off. “I have a deep need to keep funnelling my personal nightmares 
and frustrations into my work,” he says. “It keeps me functioning. I don’t 
think I can avoid it.”

 * The 12 most visually arresting games on PS4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gallery/2016/may/31/12-visually-arresting-games-playstation-4>

 * The 12 most visually arresting games on Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gallery/2016/may/30/xbox-one-visually-beautiful-games-the-witcher-rise-of-the-tomb-raider-ori-and-the-blind-forest>
 * Total War: Warhammer review– intimidating blend of high fantasy and strategy
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/19/total-war-warhammer-review-intimidating-blend-of-strategy-and-high-fantasy> 