
Australia Day <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day> has 
passed and for all the debate, Indigenous people woke up today to the same 
reality. These are lives framed by statistics that condemn so many to misery. 
But it is not enough to wallow in that pain or to remain shackled to our 
history.


The challenge now for us all is to lift our gaze and live up to the greatness 
that we have celebrated in barbecues and cricket games, in the bush and on 
beaches around the country.

Aboriginal and Torres Straight Islander people came together to mourn and to 
commemorate survival. For some there is still an unbearable pain, and we saw 
flashes of anger and protest symbolised inburning the Australian flag 
<http://www.cairnspost.com.au/news/cairns/man-arrested-after-australian-flag-allegedly-set-on-fire-outside-cairns-rsl/news-story/ac4b3e7584df3f5f6500a12ae667bc12>
. Some may cringe or take offence at such acts, but this is a democracy and if 
it means anything, we respect the right of all to express themselves and we 
reserve the right to respond and disagree, fiercely if we choose.

Australia Day: what makes us great, and what that greatness demands of us | 
Stan Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/25/the-overwhelming-response-to-my-speech-tells-me-we-can-be-better-than-our-racist-history>
But we can also come together around a shared love of country and a future 
that makes good on the great fortune and blessings we enjoy. We live in a place 
prosperous and secure. When we look at the war-ravaged lives of those in Syria 
or Iraq or countries torn apart like Somalia or Ukraine, the divided line that 
marks the unending conflict between North and South Korea we realise, frankly, 
how lucky we are.

We know there is a groundswell of goodwill towards Indigenous people. It has 
been there for decades. We have seen it in the overwhelming carriage of the 
1967 referendum finally acknowledging the full citizenship of the first people 
of this land. It was there in the freedom rides to end segregation, in the 
passage of land rights legislation, in the high court overturning the motion of 
terra nullius and accepting native title, in marches for reconciliation and in 
Kevin Rudd’s apology to the stolen generations. I believe this is who we are.

So where do we go from here? There is a pathway to constitutional recognition 
but it appears long and winding. For all the bipartisan political support we 
don’t know what recognition would mean, what legal force – if any – it would 
carry or what practical outcomes would ensue. Would it make any difference to 
the lived reality for Indigenous people?


Blackfellas are sceptical at best, hostile at worst. In communities around 
Australia, Aboriginal and islander people are wondering if it is not a con. 
Some want recognition of sovereignty and a treaty. Without consensus among 
Indigenous people – at least to the idea – then what hope of a successful 
referendum demanding a majority of people in a majority of states?

Indigenous people may be united in a sense of shared identity but like any 
population we are lacerated by divisions – economic, geographic, gender, 
political – we don’t all agree, there is no common voice, nor should there be. 
But our voices – all of them – do need to be heard and we need to have the 
ability and the mechanisms to shape our destiny.

Some see a future apart from Australia. There are those who choose to remain 
steadfast to their traditional lands and communities, some of which are remote, 
and there are challenges for the delivery of services and opportunities.


Stan Grant's speech on racism and the Australian dream goes viral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/24/stan-grants-speech-on-racism-and-the-australian-dream-goes-viral>
Others engage with “mainstream Australia”. Is this assimilation? Some think 
so. I can’t deny the facts of my life: education, employment opportunities, 
better access to healthcare and housing. I enjoy a good life certainly in 
contrast to many of my Indigenous brothers and sisters and indeed many other 
Australians. Yes, I enjoy the best of Australia, but I take my place proudly as 
a Wiradjuri/Kamilaroi man with a community that nourishes and sustains me. 
Should we not all enjoy the right to choose our path and the equal chance to 
succeed?

We all have our personal responsibility. We need to make a contribution, pay 
our taxes, obey our laws, honour our families and raise our children. 
Indigenous people right across Australia do this every day. Where some fall 
short or wrestle with the weight of disadvantage, there are consequences and 
there needs to be support.

There is a deep discussion stirring in Australia. We need to seize it and we 
need to do so with respect.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fstan-grants-powerful-speech-on-racism-and-the-australian-dream-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F25%2F1453698824719%2FKP_1501050_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stan%20Grant's%20powerful%20speech%20on%20racism%20and%20the%20Australian%20dream%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fstan-grants-powerful-speech-on-racism-and-the-australian-dream-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stan%20Grant%27s%20powerful%20speech%20on%20racism%20and%20the%20Australian%20dream%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fstan-grants-powerful-speech-on-racism-and-the-australian-dream-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F25%2F1453698824719%2FKP_1501050_crop_640x480.jpg>
Stan Grant’s powerful speech on racism and the Australian dream – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jan/25/stan-grants-powerful-speech-on-racism-and-the-australian-dream-video>
Australians are cautious if not conservative in our politics. We are 
inherently suspicious of extremes and we tend not to like labels. We see this 
in our approach to issues like marriage equality or the republic. A favourable 
public sentiment still needs to be carefully managed.

We live in an age of 24/7 news and constant opinion polling. Nervous 
politicians are reluctant to show leadership that gets too far in front of the 
public. Making yourself a small target can be a successful political strategy.


I am aware that as Indigenous people we need to find a language and a 
narrative that speaks to non-Indigenous Australia, that acknowledges that 
generosity of spirit that we see everyday. But there are those who want to 
shout from the extremes on all sides.

Much has been made of a speech I gave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jan/25/stan-grants-powerful-speech-on-racism-and-the-australian-dream-video>
 as part of a debate on whether racism is destroying the Australian dream. 
Frankly it has left me a little embarrassed; I have never aspired to that sort 
of leadership. It was short and direct and it didn’t pretend to provide answers 
to what plagues us still. Yes, we emerge from a racist history and the original 
dispossession is still being felt. But the point of my speech ultimately was 
simple:we are better than this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/25/the-overwhelming-response-to-my-speech-tells-me-we-can-be-better-than-our-racist-history>
.
 