
Q I am buying a house for me and my girlfriend to live in at a cost of 
£450,000. The mortgage will be solely in my name and I alone will be named on 
the Land Registry as she already owns another property. But we will act like we 
own it together as we want both to feel at home there.

We have a 20% deposit: I have £72,000 and my girlfriend has £18,000. I plan to 
take out a repayment mortgage for the remaining £360,000. I will pay 80% of the 
monthly mortgage cost and she will give me 20% of the repayments. After the 
first two years the repayments will go up in amount, but we plan to keep the 
same 80/20 split.

While I don’t want to be insensitive or come across as selfish, I feel it’s 
important to make sure everything is clear just in case we went our separate 
ways in five or 10 years’ time. But I can’t figure out what would be a fair 
split.

If the house appreciates in price and is worth, say, £500,000 in five years’ 
time, do I simply give her £100,000 as that’s 20% of the value? But then what 
about the fact that I still have to pay back the full mortgage? Or do I give 
her back her £18,000 plus 20% of the gain from any appreciation? But does this 
then fairly reflect that her equity stake has increased from making some 
capital repayments?

What would be a fair way of agreeing any lump sum payment I should make to her 
in the future if we ever split up?JM

A It is sensible of you to make sure that there is an agreement in place about 
how much you girlfriend should get back should you split in the future.

If your girlfriend is contributing £18,000 to the cost of the property, her 
stake in it will initially be just 4%, not 20%. Even if you pay off the 
mortgage each month through an 80/20 split, if and when you do eventually sell, 
she will still not have a 20% stake. As you are aware, you’ll need to take into 
account how much of the mortgage her 20% contribution has paid off over the 
years. As you are getting a repayment mortgage, this will not simply be a case 
of adding up her total contributions. You would need to get detailed statements 
from your mortgage lender showing how much of each payment was interest and how 
much went towards paying off the amount you borrowed.

To start with, the amount paid off will be a lot less than the interest paid 
but as the years go by, the amount paid off each month increases. By the end of 
the first year of a £360,000 25-year repayment mortgage charging 4% interest, 
the 12 monthly mortgage payments would have been made up of a total of just 
under £14,255 in interest and £8,560 of capital repayment. But by the end of 
year five, the interest bill would have gone down to £12,760 and the amount of 
capital repaid over that year would have increased to £10,040. This reflects 
the fact that the outstanding mortgage would have gone down to £313,575.

Assuming that your girlfriend did pay 20% of the mortgage payments over five 
years, her 20% share of the £46,425 capital repayment would be £9,285, which 
represents an extra 2% share on top of her original 4% in the property if you 
use the original purchase price, or 1.85% if you use a value of £500,000.

To keep things simple and fair, I would suggest that your girlfriend doesn’t 
contribute anything to the mortgage so that if you split, you only have to work 
out what to pay her by taking 4% of the house’s value at the time.


It would be even simpler not to take her £18,000 as a deposit at all and more 
in your girlfriend’s interest, since without being named on the mortgage or at 
the Land Registry, she’s reliant on your goodwill to get her money back. 
Perhaps just splitting the other bills between you will make you both feel at 
home, although jointly buying furniture and appliances isn’t advisable as it 
can make things messy if a split happens.
 