
Bloomindales, a secondhand bookshop in Hawes 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hawes>, North Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>, sounds delightful in the 
online guides. “General and varied with lots of categories,” saysThe Book Guide 
<http://www.inprint.co.uk/thebookguide/shops/town.php?loc=North%20East&locc=North%20Yorkshire&loccc=HAWES>
. “Specialising in maps, especially Ordnance Survey. The old library is one 
room packed with shelves of books, hardly room to move about!” Sounds like my 
kind of place. I must remember to pay a visit when I’m next in the Dales.

Admittedly the comments under the entry do give you pause for thought. “In the 
much-recommended bookshop in Hawes I met the man I never thought I would – 
someone who made me ashamed for liking books,” says a poster called Katherine. 
“Someone who made me more than that, ashamed for a moment for even having an 
interest in books ... What an unbelievable moment – the man who owned a 
secondhand bookshop who would happily charge for browsing.”

Yorkshire's 'bookseller from hell' regrets calling customer 'a pain in the 
arse'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/04/yorkshires-bookseller-from-hell-regrets-calling-customer-a-pain-in-the-arse>
“I was threatened with being thrown out for spending too much time browsing 
when I’d barely been in the place five minutes,” adds Robin. “Won’t be back.” 
“Like many others here, I was appalled to be asked to pay an entry fee,” chimes 
in Keith Walker. “The world of secondhand books is filled with lovely people, 
but this guy isn’t one of them. My sympathies to the people who work for him.”

Most of those commenting reckon that charging 50p for entry to a secondhand 
bookshop, and being a little brusque even with the people who cough up for a 
chance to scan the shelves, will more or less guarantee that Bloomindales will 
have a short shelf life. But I wouldn’t be so sure.

Bloomindales – and its idiosyncratic owner, Steve Bloom – has become a cause 
célèbre after media reports branding him “the bookseller from hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/04/yorkshires-bookseller-from-hell-regrets-calling-customer-a-pain-in-the-arse>
” and the rudest shopkeeper in Britain. It’s a fair bet that the shop will be 
mobbed today by people who want to experience his unusual approach to 
retailing, and by journalists desperate to interview him. Appearances onI’m A 
Celebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/i-m-a-celebrity> and 
Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> will no doubt 
follow. Life for Mr Bloom is about to come up roses.

He has been singled out for calling one customer “a pain in the arse” – a 
comment Mr Bloom now says he regrets. He also appears to have a difficult 
relationship with the local parish council, which is tired of fielding 
complaints about his behaviour, and thinks he is bad for the image of the town 
(though they may revise their opinion when tourists keen to see this now famous 
bookshop start to flock in). Mr Bloom freely admits he is “not really a people 
person”.

If you don’t buy a book, you are wasting their time; if you do a buy a book, 
you are stealing one of their friends. Either way, they will hate you

His critics would argue that someone who is not really a people person should 
probably not be running a business that relies on interacting with people. But 
they misunderstand the nature of secondhand bookselling. Secondhand booksellers 
don’t like people. They like books. That’s the whole point. People who come in 
to secondhand bookshops – especially the ones who spend an hour sheltering from 
the rain, leaving puddles over the floor and making the cat wet when they 
stroke it – are bloody irritating.

The book dealer Driff Field <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Driff_Field> (aka 
Drif, Driffield and Dryfield) used to publish a marvellous guide to secondhand 
bookshops – when they were numerous across the UK. Most of those bookshops have 
now disappeared – and Driff’s guide ceased publication in the mid-1990s after 
six treasurable editions. All killed by the wretched internet. Driff understood 
secondhand booksellers exactly: they were generally men of a certain age who 
had been disappointed in life. Books were their only solace – friends who never 
let you down.

The abbreviations Drif uses in his guides are inspired. FARTS: “Follows around 
recommending the stock.” GOB: “Grand old bore.” WYLAH: “Watches you like a 
hawk.” “WEBCOC: “Was expecting a better class of customer.” His summings up are 
magisterial: “V. erratic but will answer if you ring bell. FARTS. Rumoured to 
be closing down.” He is especially good on booksellers who don’t actually want 
to part with their stock. The books are their friends, remember. Why should 
they sell them to an oik like you?

Mr Bloom is one of the last, honourable remnants of this dying breed. 
Secondhand bookshops have been decimated by the internet. There used to be 
seven in Richmond, south-west London. None remains. Everywhere they are an 
endangered species. That is why Mr Bloom feels he has to charge 50p to browsers 
– refundable if you actually buy a book, it should be noted.

As for the rudeness, it goes with the territory. Secondhand booksellers are 
natural misanthropes. If you don’t buy a book, you are wasting their time; if 
you do a buy a book, you are stealing one of their friends. Either way, they 
will hate you, so enjoy the miserable experience. And like Drif, aim to give as 
good as you get. Book lovers are life haters – and Mr Bloom is a hero, not a 
villain, keeping an ancient tradition alive.
 