
Q A friend and I have bought a property to let. We are paying the mortgage 
50/50 but our deposit amounts are 80/20, therefore our splits come out at 
around 60/40.

I own the 60% share of property and would like your opinion on the correct way 
to split rental income from the property. The way I see it, should the property 
yield £1,000 a month in rent, I am owed 60% of this and my friend is owed 40%. 
Similarly, if we were both living there, as I own more of the property I would 
have the right to request a small amount of rent from my friend to compensate 
for the fact that she doesn’t own 50% and therefore must part rent from me.


However, the way my friend sees it is that if we rent out the property for 
£1,000, our total monthly mortgage repayment would be paid off first, say, £800 
and then the £200 remaining would be split 60:40. I feel this is unfair to me 
and doesn’t reflect my larger share of ownership. Any help on this would be 
gratefully received.NA

A It’s not my opinion that matters, it is the opinion of HM Revenue and 
Customs (HMRC). It says that if a rental property is jointly-owned, the way in 
which the rental income is taxed willdepend on the share of the property that 
each person owns 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/income-tax-when-you-rent-out-a-property-case-studies>
.

As luck would have it, it has set out an example that is made for you and your 
friend: “Alice and Lucy are friends and invest in a flat together. Alice owns 
60% of the property and Lucy the remaining 40%. The property is let out and in 
the tax year rental income is £8,400 and allowable expenses [such as mortgage 
interest] £4,600. This results in a profit of £3,800. The profit is shared as 
follows: Alice (60%) – £2,280; Lucy (40%) – £1,520.”

In your case, over a tax year the figures would be £12,000 rental income and 
allowable expenses of £9,600, giving a profit of £2,400, of which you get 
£1,140 and your friend £960. This assumes that the whole of the monthly 
mortgage payment is mortgage interest, as is typical on a buy-to-let mortgage. 
If it’s not, you have to work out how much interest you paid and how much was 
the reduction in capital, or ask your lender for the figures.


HMRC doesn’t have an opinion – but I do – on whether, if you both lived at the 
property, you should charge your friend rent. If it were me, I wouldn’t but if 
you did, you should also make sure that you paid 60% of the fuel bills, council 
tax and insurance and your friend 40%, rather than keeping things simple and 
splitting them down the middle.

 