
As children hunt for Easter eggs in homes and gardens across the country this 
weekend, some might stumble upon Danny the big city bunny, tucked away behind a 
vase or a bush.

The bunny is just one of the Easter products from Hotel Chocolat - a brand 
claiming to have an obsession with cocoa, a flair for creativity and a 
determination to turn the traditional chocolate industry on its head. Another 
is the giant Ostrich egg, made to reflect the size of the genuine article and 
weighing more than 1kg (2.2lb). The shell is so thick a hammer would come in 
handy to break the £75 egg into bite-sized pieces.

Little more than a decade after it was started by business partners Angus 
Thirlwell and Peter Harris, Hotel Chocolat has carved out a place for itself as 
the Britain’s best-known luxury chocolatier. And in a milestone for the 
relative youngster, profits have recently crept ahead of those at its 
century-old Thorntons for the first time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fhotel-chocolat-boss-easter-angus-thirlwell-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427994931667%2F6e5d203d-a4bd-4d66-8b04-e20abf74b087-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20should%20cocoa%3A%20Hotel%20Chocolat%20boss%20aims%20for%20more%20bounce%20than%20an%20Easter%20bunny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fhotel-chocolat-boss-easter-angus-thirlwell-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20should%20cocoa%3A%20Hotel%20Chocolat%20boss%20aims%20for%20more%20bounce%20than%20an%20Easter%20bunny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fhotel-chocolat-boss-easter-angus-thirlwell-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427994931667%2F6e5d203d-a4bd-4d66-8b04-e20abf74b087-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Angus Thirlwell, pictured, and business partner Peter Harris opened their 
first Hotel Chocolat shop in Watford in 2004. Photograph: Anna Gordon for the 
Guardian 
The company says it wants its chocolate to be thicker, tastier, and healthier 
than other brands – “less sugar, more cocoa”. It wants to inject “fun” and 
“hedonism” into the market, and rates itself alongside other luxury British 
brands such as Burberry as much as it does other chocolatiers.

The recipe, so far, appears to be working. Hotel Chocolat’s pre-tax profit 
jumped 306% in the last six months of 2014 to £6.6m – from revenues of £47.2m, 
up 9.5%. Thorntons made a pre-tax profit of £6.5m in the first half to 10 
January 2015 from revenues of £128.2m. Its board decided not to pay a dividend 
to shareholders.

One of the things that sets Hotel Chocolat apart from its rivals is that it is 
more than just a chocolate shop chain or online retailer. It boasts its own 
cocoa plantation on St Lucia, which is also home to a luxury hotel where you 
can pay up to £10,000 for a two-week stay.

Then there are the two UK restaurants, one in London’s foodie Borough Market 
and the other in Leeds – as well as its network of cocoa-bar cafes, tasting 
sessions and a Cambridgeshire chocolate factory.

But the shops are what the brand is built upon. After the first one opened in 
Watford in 2004, the number has grown to 81 in the UK, mostly in London and the 
south. As well as becoming established on Britain’s high streets over the past 
decade, it has a spattering of shops at London train stations and one at Luton 
airport.


Thirlwell’s father, Edwin, co-founded the Mr Whippy ice-cream empire and 
founded the Prontaprint printing business. Born and schooled in the north-east, 
Angus went to university in Sheffield to study French and economics but dropped 
out to spend two years working in France instead.

Back in the UK, he got a job at a computer company in Cambridge where he met 
Harris. They left a year later with ambitions to set up a business of their 
own, a business that would eventually become Hotel Chocolat.

Some of our competitors have suffered from having a revolving chair of 
different strategies

Now chief executive and 50% shareholder in the business, Thirlwell says that 
sticking to his original business plan has enabled the brand to grow where 
others might have faltered. “One of the things we have benefited from is taking 
a medium-term view of the business. Some of our competitors have suffered from 
having a revolving chair of different strategies.”

Thirlwell says its Britishness has enabled it to constantly innovate: 
“Innovation for us means British design creativity and British sense of humour. 
It’s fresh, it’s new, it’s creative, it’s what Brits do really well, we’re 
great designers.

“When we analyse British fashion, there’s lots of brands – Burberry, Mulberry, 
Paul Smith and Ted Baker – all making a good move internationally and we have 
an aspiration to be in that group.”

Among Hotel Chocolat’s recent innovations is a milk-free milk chocolate range, 
aimed at vegans and people who are lactose intolerant. Almond powder replaces 
the traditional milk powder to make a dairy-free version of milk chocolate.


As the war on sugar debate rages in the UK, Hotel Chocolat has more to offer 
customers whose tastes are changing, he says, with its “less sugar, more cocoa” 
approach setting it apart from the cheaper alternatives which tend to use 
sugar, and not the more costly cocoa, as the filler ingredient.

Hotel Chocolat’s milk chocolate range includes a 65% cocoa option, as well as 
100% dark options – higher contents than usual for the industry.


Thirlwell stops short of describing chocolate as healthy, but says his 100% 
products are becoming increasingly popular with a “hardcore fan base. Think of 
triathletes and gym bunnies, those are the crowds that are the early adopters.”


It’s difficult to imagine someone more enthusiastic about chocolate and he 
says he is not sick of the sight of it, despite working with it every day.


“I eat chocolate every day. My wife will tell you that if I don’t eat 
chocolate every day I get in a slightly bad mood. I don’t classify chocolate as 
being a vice. For me it’s part of my balanced diet.”

He even likes to sprinkle crushed up cocoa beans on his fried eggs for 
breakfast.

“They’re nutty and delicious and it’s got all sorts of amazing natural 
chemicals in that dilate the blood vessels, stimulate feelings of happiness, 
and power you as well,” he says.

I eat chocolate every day. My wife will tell you that if I don’t eat chocolate 
every day I get in a slightly bad mood

But despite Hotel Chocolat’s clear positioning at the luxury end of the 
market, the owners have no desire to make the brand elitist. Prices start at 
£1.75 for an “egg on toast” chocolate lolly, and rise to £10,000 for that 
two-week stay in the Caribbean. While its products are not stocked in 
supermarkets, it does have concessions at John Lewis.

“The easiest thing in posh chocolate is to become elitist and you can see that 
perhaps with other brands. We’ve always tried to make our top quality chocolate 
very accessible,” Thirlwell says.


Ultimately the challenge will be to take a successful UK brand and replicate 
it elsewhere. Its Britishness acts as a valuable currency, according to 
Thirlwell. He points to Downton Abbey, Stella McCartney, British music and the 
London Olympics all doing the British background a favour overseas.

So far Hotel Chocolat is only dipping its toe in international waters. After 
an unsuccessful trial in the US ended in the closure of its two stores 
there,just three shops outside the UK remain, all located in the Danish capital.

“We picked Copenhagen because it’s a sophisticated world city and there’s a 
lot of English spoken. It’s a very sophisticated foodie city.”

The company has no institutional shareholders to answer to – with the business 
still split between Thirlwell and Harris. If they make mistakes, there is no 
queue of investors asking them what went wrong.


Thorntons on the other hand is a listed business. It has been closing stores 
as it seeks to reduce its shop network gradually from about 250 shops now to 
between 180 and 200. It has suffered from changes in strategy, and lately from 
an unexpected decision by two of its supermarket customers to cut orders.

Matthew McEachran, a retail analyst at N+1 Singer, says that while Thorntons 
is undeniably having a tough time, it would be wrong to write it off. “The 
brand is being repositioned and we’re seeing some progress there,” he says. It 
is still profitable.


As Hotel Chocolat expands, are Thirlwell and Harris considering a stock market 
flotation, or any other deal would see them sell all or part of their stake?


“We’ve got no firm plans at the moment to do anything like that. We’ve 
obviously got a whole range of options,” says Thirlwell. “We’re always looking 
and working out what we need to do but for the moment we’ve got no plans to do 
anything with the share ownership structure.”

Thirlwell will not be drawn on where the next likely destination for Hotel 
Chocolat shops will be. “We’ve got really big ambitions but by the same token 
it’s very important that we build it carefully.”

The big challenge now is whether Danny the bunny can pack his bags, hop on a 
plane, and make it abroad.

Chocolate bonds

Hotel Chocolat prides itself on being creative and has adopted an innovative 
way of raising finance.

Steering clear of raising money through the traditional channels, the company 
issued “chocolate bonds” to customers and private retail investors when it 
needed to raise some capital to expand back in 2010. Interest was to be paid in 
chocolate, rather than cash.

A second issue of chocolate bonds followed, and Hotel Chocolat was able to 
raise a total of about £7m in development capital from the two schemes.

“It’s a simple concept and if there’s any group of people we’d like to pay 
interest to, it’s our lovely customers,” says Thirlwell.

More than 90% of the original bondholders have rolled over their investment, 
opting to enjoy the chocolate returns rather than be repaid in cash.
 