
Iain Dyer has said there is only one man within the sport who could fill the 
role ofBritish Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> 
performance director but the head coach said he cannot identify him, nor is he 
sure he would even apply.

Dyer also ruled himself out of filling the shoes of Sir Dave Brailsford, who 
left in April 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/10/sir-dave-brailsford-team-sky-leave-british-cycling>
, and the former technical director Shane Sutton,who resigned in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/shane-sutton-resigns-british-cycling-paralympians>
 amid allegations of using “inappropriate and discriminatory language” towards 
the sprinter Jess Varnish.

GB youngsters defy crisis talk to top track cycling World Cup medal table
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/emily-kay-team-sprint-gold-track-world-cup>
After the World Cup in Glasgow, where a youthful Great Britain squad won five 
golds andtopped the medal table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/emily-kay-team-sprint-gold-track-world-cup>
, Dyer, who has been overseeing the team since Sutton’s departure along with 
the programmes manager, Andy Harrison, was asked how many candidates from 
within cycling could carry out the role of PD.

“One, probably. That person has to remain nameless. I’m not sure if they are 
even going to apply for it. I don’t think there are many candidates within the 
British sporting landscape that would successfully be able to tackle the full 
performance realm of that role within this Olympic cycle.”

Sutton can be counted out of getting the role, as a recent internal review 
upheld the allegations against him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
, although hedenies using the precise terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/shane-sutton-jess-varnish-british-cycling-allegations-discrimination>
 and has said he will appeal. Brailsford is fully engaged with Team Sky and the 
founder of the Lottery-funded cycling programme, Peter Keen, has been working 
at British Tennis, although he turned down the chance to work with them 
long-term during the summer.

Other coaches who have detailed knowledge of the British Cycling system 
include the former sprint coach Scott Gardner, a consultant after a spell as 
the head coach at British Canoeing, the endurance coach Dan Hunt who has worked 
asthe Premier League’s head of performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/27/premier-league-team-sky-homegrown-players>
 but has just taken up the performance director role at British Ski and 
Snowboard, and Matt Parker, British Cycling’s head of marginal gains up to 2012 
and most recentlypart of Stuart Lancaster’s backroom staff at the RFU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/19/rfu-bradley-wiggins-british-cycling>
. A recruitment agency is handling the appointment and applications close on 2 
December.

“I don’t just mean the realms of athletic performance,” Dyer said. “I mean the 
technical details Dave and Shane, and Peter Keen before them, exhibited. They 
had a huge technical understanding and knowledge that came from being 
associated with the sport for decades. There are not many people in that 
situation that would be capable of fulfilling that role with that degree of 
technical knowledge and precision.

“I think the PD could [either] be very much about front of house programme 
management, stakeholders and budgets and reporting to the CEO or it could be 
very rooted in performance so the scope there is enormous. It’s possible that 
someone from outside cycling could come in and bring a great deal with them. 
Were someone to be appointed from outside of BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> or outside of cycling in general 
then it’s possible we’ll have a great deal to learn from their presence.”

Dyer said he has “sat down with the recruitment consultants and with UK Sport 
to offer some input into the role and into the recruitment process.” He added: 
“I don’t plan on applying myself.”

Shane Sutton denies sexism but admits telling Varnish to ‘lose some timber’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/shane-sutton-denies-sexism-jess-varnish>
Asked if that meant he did not want the job, he said: “I’m not planning to 
apply. There’s a lot of jobs out there. We’ve all heard about other performance 
director roles, head coach roles and other things. It’s a very fluid job 
market, also a very international job market.”

Sutton has expressed an interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/04/shane-sutton-australia-cycling-performance-director-job>
 in the high performance director’s role advertised by Cycling Australia, 
although it is understood he is uncertain about a return to his homeland as he 
has six children in the UK as well as grandchildren.

Reflecting on Great Britain’s strong showing in Glasgow, Dyer said since 
Sutton’s resignation he and his colleagues had been trying to ensure the 
uncertainty at the head of the squad would not disrupt performances. “I’ve said 
all along since Shane resigned that at the coalface all we are trying to do is 
to minimise distraction for the riders. What you’ve seen here and in Paris two 
weeks ago” – a reference to the same young team’s medal topping showing at the 
European championships – “demonstrates that whether it was at the top of the 
programme in Rio or down the academy pathway, we’ve been able to do that.”

James to skip worlds and reprise sister act

Becky James has ruled herself out of next year’s world track championships in 
Hong Kong, preferring to take an extended post-Olympic break before building up 
to the 2018 Commonwealth Games in Australia where she hopes to reforge her team 
sprint partnership with her elder sister Rachel as part of the Wales team.

“If I aim to be back for the worlds, then it’s going to be difficult,” said 
the 24-year-old, who won silver medals in the match sprint andkeirin at Rio 2016
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/becky-james-olympic-keirin-silver>
 after her preparations were disrupted by aknee injury and cancer scare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/23/becky-james-cycling-great-britain>
 that came close to ending her career.

“I know what I’m like,” James said. “If I start pushing myself too hard then 
my body will break down. I’m just going to build and see how it goes. I think 
it’s only healthy to give myself a good break.

“I’ve realised how long Olympic cycles are, from London, to when I won my 
world champs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/feb/23/becky-james-track-world-championships>
 [in spring 2013] to being injured, to getting back into it, to going and 
getting two silver medals. When you’re injured and you’re ill and you’re not 
really riding your bike, it’s so intense and it’s hard, it’s stressful.”

James expects to begin training again in the new year. Having taken two bronze 
medals in the2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/oct/05/commonwealth-games-cycling-becky-james>
at the age of 18, she missed Glasgow in 2014 because of a knee injury.

An added incentive is the inclusion of the team sprint; James won the national 
title in 2012 together with Rachel, 28, who is the starter among the duo. The 
sisters have not raced together since. Her older sibling has been a member of 
the Paralympic cycling squad for three years but will join the national team 
for next week’s World Cup in Apeldoorn in the Netherlands.
 