
A federal politician complained of discrimination because he was banned from 
employing his wife in his office but would not be prohibited from employing a 
mistress.


Documents released under freedom of information 
<http://finance.gov.au/foi/disclosure-log/2015/foi-15-116/> (FOI) laws show Ian 
Macdonald, a Liberal National party senator for Queensland, described the
Abbott-era rule 
<http://australianpolitics.com/2013/11/09/govt-tightens-expenses-rules.html> 
against employing spouses or immediate family members as “intolerable”.

The same bundle of documents shows numerous other political figures wrote to 
the finance department to question moves to curb the scheme that entitles them 
to free domestic flights after they have left parliament.

The former West Australian MP Wilson Tuckey was particularly forthright, 
demanding to know 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/FOI%2015-116%20Document%203.pdf> 
how the government could acquire his property “without just terms as required 
under section 51 (xxxi) of the constitution” – the section that rose to 
prominence in the Australian comedy film, The Castle.

Expenses of Australian politicians for January to June 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/ng-interactive/2015/dec/04/expenses-of-australian-politicians-for-january-to-june-2015>
Macdonald’s letter 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/FOI%2015-116%20Document%2027.pdf>
, sent in September 2014 but released under FOI this week, criticised “the 
non-payment of my wife for work which she does work in my office”.

“What I find intolerable is that because my wife happens to be married to me, 
she is unable to be paid for the work which she continues to do for me,” 
Macdonald told the head of the finance department in a letterfirst published by 
Crikey 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2016/02/01/ian-macdonald-and-the-strange-case-of-the-imaginary-mistress/>
.


“I reiterate that if rather than my wife, I was employing a mistress, that 
would be in order. It appears that simply because my wife is married to me she 
is precluded from receiving payment from her work.”

In the letter, Macdonald said his wife worked five or six days a week when the 
senator was in Canberra yet was paid for only two. It is understood she still 
works full-time during parliamentary sitting weeks but is not receiving any 
payment.

The senator described his wife as a “most trusted and valuable employee” and 
the “employee of longest standing with the greatest corporate knowledge”.

Macdonald said on Thursday the issue was yet to be resolved. “She continues to 
do the work but doesn’t get paid; how fair is that? She does the work and she 
does it well,” he told Guardian Australia.

The Department of Finance’s entitlements handbook 
<http://www.maps.finance.gov.au/entitlements_handbooks/senators-and-members/Part_Five_Staff_Matters_-_5.1_Employees.asp>
 says senators and members cannot employ a spouse, de facto partner, child, 
parent or sibling under the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984.


The then special minister of state, Michael Ronaldson, announced the 
restrictions along with a crackdown on politicians’ travel entitlements shortly 
after the 2013 election, saying the “employment of family members may not be 
consistent with good, merit-based employment practices”.

The government subsequently used its 2014 budget to declare it would wind back 
gold pass entitlements because “we all must contribute” to fiscal repair.The 
life gold pass scheme entitles 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/FlagPost/2015/August/Life_Gold_Pass>
 eligible former MPs to travel within Australia at taxpayer expense for the 
rest of their lives, albeit with caps on the number of flights each year.

The FOI documents show the decision to rein in the scheme caused a stir.

While many former MPs wrote to the finance department’s entitlements 
management branch with simple factual queries about the impact, some took the 
opportunity to sharply criticise the decision.

Tuckey, who had publicly raised the spectre of a high court challenge 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/regional/south-west/a/23521424/ex-mps-may-fight-perks-cut/>
, told the department he was seeking legal advice. He sought an explanation of 
“the grounds upon which my property of the gold pass which I obtained after 18 
years of my 30 in parliament can be acquired by the government without just 
terms compensation”.

Ian Macphee, a former Fraser government immigration minister, wrote 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/FOI%2015-116%20Document%2013.pdf>
: “I am sure that it is not the department’s fault but I am surprised at this 
decision as this entitlement was part of my superannuation – given that the 
income earned as a minister was half what I would have earned as a lawyer at 
that time. I look forward to more detail from you.”

The former Howard government defence minister Brendan Nelson thanked the 
department 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/FOI%2015-116%20Document%206.pdf> 
for its information but added: “I was a minister and opposition leader who left 
the parliament after 14 May 2008, does that still make me intelligible [sic]?”

The FOI applicant, Evelyn Doyle, published the details of her request on the 
Right to Know website 
<https://www.righttoknow.org.au/request/gold_pass_travel_and_employment>. The 
documents released by the department did not include its responses to the 
queries.
 