
It has been a fixture on so many high streets. It has traded for 88 years. But 
todayBritish Home Stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
 is going into administration, with the loss of 11,000 jobs. In retrospect, its 
fate was probably sealed a year ago when the entrepreneurPhilip Green sold the 
company for the token sum of £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
.

If he was so keen to offload it, if he could not make the sums add up, you had 
to question its prospects. Nor was it just the fact of the sale that boded ill: 
the buyer was one of those faceless, generically named consortiums – Retail 
Acquisitions, in this case – whose intervention tends, or so it seems, to delay 
rather than avert the end.

Comparisons are made with Woolworths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/woolworths> – another out-of-date, 
out-of-time, high-street fixture that folded in 2008. And to be honest, if you 
even so much as crossed the threshold of a BHS in the past couple of years, you 
could sense that death was probably close.

Efforts were made – there were shops within shops (which makes for brand 
confusion); coffee concessions were added. And I will cheerfully admit that as 
I took the warm and dry shortcut through BHS from Oxford Circus toJohn Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> in central London, I would 
occasionally buy something. I have some useful BHS sandals; it used to do a 
good line in tights (better colours and better quality, to my mind, than Marks 
& Spencer). It was ahead of the competition in lightweight jackets and stretchy 
pyjamas for men. My husband liked his BHS slippers more than any he had before 
or since.

But you had to search, or strike lucky. It won accolades at one point for 
lighting, but the attempts at “homeware” were inconsistent and ultimately 
failed. Little could really be done to make the acreage of shopfloor work 
harder. The upper-floor restaurants left a lot to be desired, even as the smell 
pervaded surrounding departments. The mismatch between space and sales, and 
between current finances and past and future pension liabilities, is what 
ultimately killed offBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>.

How Britain fell out of love with BHS - timeline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/bhs-sold-pound-sir-philip-green-cuts-losses-timeline>
Nor will it necessarily be the last. Pension commitments – how they are 
honoured and who pays in the event of company insolvency – seem to be a flaw of 
many a British commercial model. They are one of the reasons, along with cheap 
Chinese competition, whyTata Steel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> 
found it so hard to find buyers for its UK companies. Should there not be 
another way?

But retail also has specific problems. BHS failed to keep up with the internet 
revolution; it faced competition from cheap fashion chains, such as Primark and 
H&M; it lost the lucrative youth market, by and large, but still tried to 
appeal across the generations.

You can say, all worldly wise, that it was bound to fail. But will it be a 
one-off? I doubt it. That description of BHS – enormous spaces, prominent 
positions on the high street, the attempts to please everyone, the regular 
rebranding, the diversification – applies to others. M&S would be one – might 
it one day become food only?Debenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams>? Even, dare I say it, the 
sainted John Lewis. It could be that the classic department store is in 
decline, not just because of technology, but because of changing habits and 
taste. How many of the shops regarded as institutions will still be around in, 
say, 20 years?

If you crossed the threshold of a BHS in the last couple of years, you could 
sense that death was probably close
 