
One of the big stories to come out of this year’s E3 video games conference 
was that virtual reality was definitely there. Not hiding in little booths at 
the peripheral of the main halls, but there, front and centre, with big 
publishers and big franchises on board.

We saw demos of Resident Evil 7 (RE7) and Fallout 4 running in VR, we saw 
standalone VR experiences in the form of Star Trek: Bridge Crew and Batman: 
Arkham VR and we had the promise of virtual reality modes for major releases 
such as Final Fantasy XV and Star Wars: Battlefront. Meanwhile, Sony promised 
that 50 titles would be available for itsPlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> VR headset by the end of 
the year, showing that its (comparatively) accessible, wallet-friendly device 
had major developer support. Suddenly, over the course of four hot June days in 
Los Angeles, we seemed to have the killer apps that every consumer technology 
needs and that VR had arguably been missing.

Or did we?

Reactions to E3 as a showcase for the potential of VR gaming have been mixed – 
especially from those working within the sector. We spoke to a number of 
virtual reality specialists about the demos shown at the LA Convention centre 
last month, and while there is a general consensus that mainstream support for 
the medium is positive, there were plenty of reservations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb0b24a5b1e58d8987998cee47f1479a16efed51%2F38_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20the%20future%20of%20video%20games%20is%20VR%2C%20it%20needs%20to%20stop%20making%20us%20feel%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20the%20future%20of%20video%20games%20is%20VR%2C%20it%20needs%20to%20stop%20making%20us%20feel%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb0b24a5b1e58d8987998cee47f1479a16efed51%2F38_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 The Resident Evil 7 VR demo created an excellent sense of place, and didn’t 
rely too heavily on jump shocks, which are more invasive in VR. But its 
movement system made some E3 attendees feel sick. Photograph: PR Company Handout
“It’s brilliant to see VR being taken seriously by large publishers and 
developers that are not making their own hardware,” says Katie Goode, a veteran 
virtual reality game developer at small studio, Triangular Pixels. “It means 
big IP within VR, with Fallout 4 possibly being the most interesting and 
exciting announcement. For us smaller VR devs, it could also mean there’s more 
chance of getting funding for our titles from major publishers. However, quite 
a lot that was shown seems to ignore all the work and research the VR developer 
community has been sharing and shouting about for some time.”

A key example here is Capcom’s RE7 demo. The game will be playable in VR in 
full when it arrives next January, but the version shown at E3, while 
impressively creepy, relied heavily on traditional movement controls. Although 
players could turn their head to look around, they also needed to use the 
analogue stick for fine-tuning, and this separation of physical head movement 
from in-game motion led to nausea for a lot of attendees.

“It’s not as simple as just turning on the ‘make it VR’ switch in your leading 
IP,” says Tom Gillo, VP of development at UK-based VR developer,nDreams 
<http://www.ndreams.com/>. “Any of us that have been in VR development these 
past three years know that comfort is a huge issue and, in particular, 
traversal in VR is notoriously tricky. I wasn’t surprised to read about VR 
sickness being reported by many after playing RE7 VR; it seems they haven’t 
reworked the control scheme to account for virtual reality and they - or rather 
players of the demo – paid the price.

“This, though, is the challenge that VR presents. It’s just not good enough to 
simply take an existing control scheme and expect it to work – the rulebook 
changed with the new medium and developers really need to spend the time – and 
money – to figure out conceits that work well and then design controls to 
support that conceit.”

So if using the left-stick to provide artificial locomotion is a fast lane to 
motion sickness, what’s the solution? For the past few years, VR developers 
have been experimenting with alternative methods of simulating movement and 
many – such as nDreams with its VR title The Assembly andOculus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/oculus> with its own project Damaged 
Core – have gone for something very different: teleportation. The player looks 
at a space in the virtual world and hits a button on their controller to move 
there. Judging by the very limited E3 demo, this is what Bethesda is 
experimenting with in its VR version of Fallout 4, while Batman: Arkham VR 
provides specific points in the scene that the player can select and move to. 
Both, however, are a little clunky: “player disorientation and breaking 
immersion are big issues with that system,” says Goode.

Tom Gillo claims that nDreams has already refined beyond this approach to 
something more subtle. “While we do offer a traditional first-person control 
scheme, by default players are presented with our ‘blink mode’ – a 
line-of-sight based movement scheme that enables players to transition from 
point-to-point within the game literally in the blink of an eye,” he says. 
“It’s too fast to make a person sick, but just slow enough to register as 
movement rather than a teleport. We spent a lot of time refining and testing 
the scheme and we’re very confident that the vast majority if people will not 
feel unwell when playing. This system has enabled us to build a full five-hour 
game.”

He also points to Bullet Train 
<https://www.unrealengine.com/blog/introducing-bullet-train-new-vr-experience>, 
a virtual reality project from Unreal developer Epic Games, which uses a 
similar hybrid system that sits between traditional motion and teleportation. 
“It demonstrates that they absolutely get it,” says Gillo. “Epic, arguably the 
seminal FPS developer, hasn’t shoe-horned in standard FPS controls, but instead 
built a new locomotion and control system to support VR and touch controls from 
the ground up.”

Elsewhere, Electronic Arts has bypassed the issue by setting its Battlefront: 
X-Wing VR mission 
<http://starwars.ea.com/starwars/battlefront/news/x-wing-vr-mission-announce> 
in the cockpit of a spacecraft, while Ubisoft (which has invested heavily and 
relatively early in VR experimentation) has discovered thatnarrowing the 
player’s field of vision 
<http://uploadvr.com/eagle-flights-solution-to-vr-movement-looks-incredible/> 
in its interesting sim Eagle Flight reduces instances of nausea. “Exploring a 
scene with your hands rather than your legs seems to give better results at 
this stage,” says Dave Ranyard, an independent virtual reality developer who 
previously headed up Sony’s VR division. “My advice to developers is to avoid 
navigation at the moment and concentrate on immersion. I truly believe someone 
will crack navigation in the next year, but I haven’t seen it yet.”

What E3 also showed is that there’s uncertainty in the mainstream industry 
about what format virtual reality projects should take. While both Resident 
Evil 7 and Fallout 4 will let players take on a major narrative adventure in 
VR, Star Trek: Bridge Crew and Batman: Arkham VR feel much more like heavily 
mediated short-form experiences, designed to introduce users to the virtual 
reality proposition.

That’s not necessarily a negative. Star Trek: Bridge Crew is a co-op 
challenge, which gives four players different roles on the bridge of a USS 
starship, requiring them to collaborate on a series of mission objectives. 
Resembling a high-tech version of the award-winning mobile game Space Team, it 
assumes you’ll be able to find three friends with VR set-ups (the game will 
supportHTC <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/htc> Vive, Oculus Rift and 
PlayStation VR when it arrives in the autumn), but it’s interesting in that it 
introduces social dynamics to the virtual space.

“I’m super excited for Bridge Crew,” says virtual reality developer, Joe 
Radak. “I think of all the VR games announced by the major publishers at E3, 
this one showed the best use of VR and the Rift/Touch capabilities. It’s 
social, it uses the hand motion controllers very well in ways that you can’t do 
in traditional media and on top of that, it looks immersive and fun. It showed 
that there are some AAA companies that really took time to research what works 
and what doesn’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe00ac1661db83755b22160447cf202651a14fe58%2F63_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20the%20future%20of%20video%20games%20is%20VR%2C%20it%20needs%20to%20stop%20making%20us%20feel%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20the%20future%20of%20video%20games%20is%20VR%2C%20it%20needs%20to%20stop%20making%20us%20feel%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe00ac1661db83755b22160447cf202651a14fe58%2F63_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 In Star Trek: Bridge Crew, players get to use the Rift and Vive motion 
controllers to make frantic arm gestures at each other during heated moments. 
Photograph: Ubisoft 
In the Batman Arkham VR demo, players had to modes to chose from. A simple “be 
the Batman” option let you descend from Wayne Manor into the Batcave then try 
on the suit as well as toy with a few bat gadgets. It’s basic, but it provides 
a powerful sense of embodiment, the PlayStation Move controllers giving players 
expressive use of Batman’s arms and really inhabit the costume, and the role. A 
second mode provides a short narrative involving an attack on Nightwing, which 
leaves the hero sprawled in an alley. The player, as Batman, has to run through 
recorded witness footage to work out what happened. There’s little action as 
such, and it feels like a virtual reality take on the detective mode from the 
other Arkham titles. But again, it’s the work of a developer prodding at the 
technology.

The question is, are mainstream publishers and developers exploring lessons 
that the VR sector has already mastered? “We’d have loved it if these new 
titles were more like a long-form, fully-fledged game rather than more limited 
mini experiences, especially as that’s not what gamers have come to expect from 
those IPs,” says nDreams co-founder, Patrick O’Luanaigh.” It does feel as 
though some of these developers haven’t been paying attention to a lot of the 
advances made and best practice techniques established by the VR development 
community over the last 18 months.”

Radak agrees. “The E3 demos showed that a lot of the AAA companies are still 
learning VR’s capabilities and that they’re behind the indie developers right 
now,” he says. “That’s not to say that the indies have fully discovered all of 
VR’s capabilities yet either, but the AAA companies are making mistakes that 
almost all the indie developers have already made, learned from and shared with 
each other – specifically looking at locomotion methods and what makes ‘fun’ VR 
gameplay. If the AAA publishers took some time to talk with small indie devs, 
like those behind Fantastic Contraption, Chronos, Budget Cuts, Cosmic Trip and 
many others, that would go a long way for the industry”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F948f24e03e63906b33fae7b0d4fcffe98230694f%2F181_0_5397_3240%2F5397.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20the%20future%20of%20video%20games%20is%20VR%2C%20it%20needs%20to%20stop%20making%20us%20feel%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20the%20future%20of%20video%20games%20is%20VR%2C%20it%20needs%20to%20stop%20making%20us%20feel%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fvideo-games-virtual-reality-e3-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F948f24e03e63906b33fae7b0d4fcffe98230694f%2F181_0_5397_3240%2F5397.jpg>
 Concept art from Edge of Nowhere, an innovative third-person virtual reality 
adventure from Insomniac Games. Photograph: Insomniac Games 
Of course, it’s too simplistic to suggest that all virtual reality innovation 
is going to come from indies, while mainstream publishers trundle along behind 
attempting to retro-fit their most profitable IPs with VR titbits. Ubisoft is 
clearly innovating in the VR space, and projects like Epic’s Bullet Train and 
Insomniac’s promisingEdge of Nowhere 
<http://www.insomniacgames.com/games/edge-of-nowhere/>, a Lovecraftian horror 
adventure set in the Antarctic, show that big, traditional studios are just as 
likely to successfully exploit this burgeoning technology.

“For me one of the highlights of the E3 was seeing Double Fine announcing 
their VR title, Psychonauts in the Rhombus of Ruin,” says VR developer Daniel 
Ernst. “They have a history of story-driven games with heart and character. For 
me one of the most attractive characteristics of a point and click adventure is 
lack of pressure: no deaths, no push to get from A to B … instead you can let 
the world sink in. This focus on story and experiencing unique spaces works so 
incredibly well in VR.”

Perhaps what E3 really showed was that the idea of virtual reality as a 
“genre” rather than a “platform” is a mistaken one. Developers will need to 
forge new game styles and new conventions and these will serve a wide variety 
of experiences that may not resemble those that we’ve been having for the last 
40 years. The biggest mistake the industry could make now would be to rush VR 
translations of successful properties on to the market. Video game consumers 
will forgive a lot of things, but nausea is not one of them.


 * 11 video game trends that will change the future of the industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/11-video-game-trends-that-will-change-the-future-of-the-industry>

 * Scorpio rising: Microsoft’s plans for Xbox One and the future of video games
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/scorpio-microsoft-xbox-one-s-future-video-games> 