




More than 800 children 
<http://www.unmultimedia.org/radio/english/2015/11/poor-sanitation-puts-millions-of-children-at-risk-of-disease-unicef/#.Vu76B2SLTu0>
 die each day from diarrhoea. About663 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/23/millennium-development-goal-seven-sustainability-mdg7-sanitation-deforestation-drinking-water-explainer>
 people still use water contaminated by human waste and other pollutants. And
roughly 2.4 billion people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/23/millennium-development-goal-seven-sustainability-mdg7-sanitation-deforestation-drinking-water-explainer>
 still lack access to a basic toilet. Open defecation presents a major, 
avoidable public health hazard. Women and girls living in communities that lack 
basic facilities live in fear of sexual assault, because they need to go 
outside to go to the toilet.

Women and girls are also affected in other ways by water access. Often tasked 
with finding water for their families, they act almost as beasts of burden, 
carrying water vast distances. Collectively, women and girls spend roughly125m 
hours <http://water.org/water-crisis/women-children-facts/> a day fetching 
water. The absence of basic menstrual sanitation also meansmillions of girls 
are absent from school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/22/india-menstruation-periods-gaokor-women-isolated>
for up to a quarter of the academic year.

Many people are uncomfortable even talking about these issues. We need to 
overcome this.



World Water Day quiz – are you a fount of wisdom?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/22/world-water-day-quiz-are-you-a-fount-of-wisdom>
As the recent multilateral meeting of the global partnership on Sanitation and 
Water for All <http://sanitationandwaterforall.org/> in Addis Ababa reminded 
us, the cost of building the infrastructure to deal with the problem can be 
prohibitive. The World Health Organisation calculates it is$11.3bn (£7.9bn) a 
year <http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wsh0404summary/en/> beyond 
current investments. But this presents an insuperable problem only if we see 
public finance – through national governments, international development banks 
and national development agencies – as the only source of capital.

There is also a critical role for domestic private finance and international 
private investment, although creating such financial partnerships can be 
difficult. Businesses require monetary returns on their investments; projects 
must be “bankable.”

Access to clean water and basic sanitation is a human right and a public good. 
But those declarations alone do not solve the financing problem.Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> and sanitation services must 
therefore be paid for, with tariffs adjusted according to the ability of local 
communities and individuals to pay. For the poorest of poor communities, this 
will mean zero tariffs or simple public water provision until social and 
economic conditions improve.

A new generation of public-private partnerships 
<http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/sector/water-sanitation> 
(PPPs) is helping the response to these challenges.

Such partnerships are sometimes deeply flawed, failing to balance financing 
and social needs effectively, and this has given them a bad name. But the 
answer lies in the legal and financial design of each contract: from the 
smallest, village-level agreements to larger, nationwide projects.

Partnerships involving small-scale private operators are growing in developing 
countries, partly through donor-sponsored PPP projects for water and 
sanitation. As these projects are implemented and scaled up, they engage new 
local operators who take them forward as external support fades. Such 
partnerships are enjoying success from Latin America to Africa and beyond.

Papua New Guinea has world's worst access to clean water, says WaterAid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/22/papua-new-guinea-worst-access-clean-water-wateraid>
We must now begin to do this at scale. Suggestions on filling the global 
funding gap for water, sanitation and hygiene, not least in the critical area 
of faecal sludge management, should be welcomed.

The principle is clear: no money, no progress. Without finance, the 
sustainable development goals agreed by UN member states in September are just 
laudable normative statements of what the world should look like, lacking the 
means to make it that way.

The social, economic and business case for a quantum change in investment 
patterns in water, sanitation and hygiene is clear. The World Health 
Organisation calculates thatevery $1 invested in water and sanitation has a 
return of at least $4 
<http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/2012/globalcosts.pdf>
in lower health costs, more productivity and fewer premature deaths. Yet the 
sector has arguably been the slowest to adapt to the harsh new financial world 
in which we live, where the constraints of domestic public finance and foreign 
aid are becoming sharper each year.
 