
I’ve been reading a lot about how fashion has to represent “real women.” But 
what does this mean and who are these “real women”?

Caroline, by email

Excellent question, Caroline! I’ve been thinking about this a lot, especially 
since the publication of thelatest issue of Vogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/03/british-vogue-latest-issue-model-free-zone-real-women-emily-blunt>
, which proudly proclaims itself to be a “model-free zone”, in which clothes 
are photographed – as editorAlexandra Shulman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexandra-shulman> explains – “through a 
more real filter”. We’ll return to those claims later, but the point here is 
that this clarifies the real/non-real divide in fashion: “Non-real women” are 
models and “real women” are not models. I’ve been pondering long and hard over 
who this dichotomy insults more: the models with the insinuation that they’re 
fake women, or the non-models with the overt suggestion that they’re barely 
evolved peasants rolling in the mud at the foothills of the models’ golden 
palaces. And after much consideration, I’ve settled on the latter. Oh, pity us 
potato-faced proles, living alongside the perfect superhumans that are the 
models! The only way we can cope is if we are repeatedly insulted by 
condescension.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fvogue-real-woman-non-real-woman-fashion-magazine-model-insulting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F147f28119bd9cc617a7a1e8b3b3b502f7d469142%2F0_0_945_1260%2F945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Vogue%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20difference%20between%20a%20%E2%80%98real%20woman%E2%80%99%20and%20a%20%E2%80%98non-real%20woman%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fvogue-real-woman-non-real-woman-fashion-magazine-model-insulting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Vogue%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20difference%20between%20a%20%E2%80%98real%20woman%E2%80%99%20and%20a%20%E2%80%98non-real%20woman%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fvogue-real-woman-non-real-woman-fashion-magazine-model-insulting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F147f28119bd9cc617a7a1e8b3b3b502f7d469142%2F0_0_945_1260%2F945.jpg>
 Vogue, November 2016 edition.
 Photograph: Vogue/PA 
But look, I’m not getting at Vogue about this. I’m really not. I honestly take 
my hat off to Shulman because, let’s face it, she at least makes more of an 
effort to deal with fashion’s, shall we say, problematic body issues than any 
other editor I can think of. She also, quite frankly, can’t win. Some of the 
funniest moments in her upcoming book, A Diary of My Hundredth Year, about 
editing Vogueduring its centenary year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/07/vogue-happy-100th-birthday-magazine-exhibition>
, are not to do with theDuchess of Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/duchess-of-cambridge>, Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>, Naomi Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/naomi-campbell> or any of the other 
gossipy bits that have already been filleted by the Daily Mail. Rather, they’re 
to do with a certain rightwing tabloid’s female columnists, who barely even 
look at the magazine before knocking out another 1,500 words on their editor’s 
orders about how Vogue is so evil because it causes eating disorders and it 
makes these columnists feel so very unhappy about themselves and can we run 
some pretty pictures of models to brighten up the column and me me me and 
here’s an invoice for a grand thank you very much (I’m paraphrasing a tad, but 
you get the point.) So on the one hand, there’s the connection between models 
and mental illness being made by a tabloid that, on a daily basis, reduces 
women to their physical appearances; and on the other, there are designers who 
simply do not make sample size clothes any bigger than a size 10.

British Vogue ditches models in favour of 'real' women – for one issue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/03/british-vogue-latest-issue-model-free-zone-real-women-emily-blunt>
Thus we end up with the current result we see in the new Vogue, in which “real 
women” are represented by the impossibly beautiful 55-year-old 
Spanish-Vietnamese-American actor (and, ahem, model)Anh Duong 
<https://www.instagram.com/anhduongart/?hl=en> and the ridiculously sexy 
30-year-old playwrightPolly Stenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/polly-stenham>. Well, all I can say is, if 
these are “real women” then I must be a troglodyte. Models have never made me 
feel bad about myself because I understand that they are not supposed to 
represent me. But to be told that a real woman who lives in the “real filter” 
looks like the gorgeous artistPhoebe Collings-James 
<https://www.instagram.com/phoebethegorgon/> (one of notably few “real women” 
of colour, incidentally) is a little jarring. Which filter am I in? I hope it’s 
Valencia.

Yes, it’s Vogue, so of course you’re only going to see gorgeous people. But 
what’s the point in substituting professionally beautiful women for ones who 
are just as beautiful but happen to do something else for a living? Is it the 
fact that models don’t have a second job that makes them objectionable? And, in 
any case, this issue of Vogue is clearly not a “model-free” zone, given that 
all its adverts, which make about a third of its pages, feature nothing but 
models, or, as I guess we’re supposed to call them now, “non-real women”. And 
’twas always going to be thus. After all, Shulman might be able to get in some 
attractive artists to wearGucci <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> and 
Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/22/burberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay>
, but she can’t reinvent the wheel.

But let’s look a little more at this idea of “real women”. Who are they? Where 
do they live? What do they do for work? I’m sure there’s a chap who works in 
advertising – presumably for a certain soap brand – who has a checklist that 
answers all of those questions. The only answer I can give with any certainty, 
speaking as a fellow real woman (I think?), is that she is not a model, as we 
have already established that this is what shifts a woman from the realm of the 
real to the non-real. (Hilariously, Vogue includes an interview with a 
25-year-old solicitor who, until two years ago, was a model. Welcome to the 
world of “real women”, ma’am! I hope your transition was not too bumpy!)

Look, you don’t need to be as annoyingly obtuse as me to find this “real 
women” versus “non-real women” schtick annoying. Yes, models present a very 
limited perspective of female beauty, and I get that what Vogue andvarious 
advertising campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/hm-advert-diversity-ad-women>
 are trying to do is provide a broader perspective. But to suggest that models 
are otherworldly creatures who the rest of us can never equal is just another 
way of deifying them and patronising the rest of us. So instead of this “real” 
versus “non-real” nonsense, how about just referring to them as “models” and 
“non-models”, and not insinuating that the latter represent ALL non-models. 
Because, as frustrating as this must be to market researchers, advertisers, 
fashion magazine and tabloid columnists, the female world is not divided into 
models and the rest of us: it is just a lot of diverse women, doing their 
thing. And the only thing I’m pretty sure you can say for certain about all of 
us is that we’re all real.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
 