
In February, like countless other young Indian women, Meena expected to give 
birth to a healthy baby. She and her husband were hoping their second child 
would be a boy. But she had a stillbirth, one of hundreds of thousands that are 
recorded in the country every year.

Sitting on the floor of her small home in Sampla, a village in Rohtak district 
in the northern state of Haryana, the 23-year-old said: “The doctor told me the 
child died in my womb. He said there was no heartbeat. There was no 
explanation.”

Six months earlier, Meena had taken what are known as sex-selection drugs 
(SSDs) – traditional remedies that Indian women turn to in their desire to have 
sons. What many women do not realise is that the sex of a child cannot be 
changed in the womb, and that they are being scammed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20Day%20of%20the%20Girl%3A%20how%20inequality%20starts%20before%20birth%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20Day%20of%20the%20Girl%3A%20how%20inequality%20starts%20before%20birth%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl&media=>
International Day of the Girl: how inequality starts before birth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/oct/11/a-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl>
“I took the drugs because we wanted a male child – because my first baby was 
female. I vomited a lot after it. I couldn’t digest it,” said Meena, sitting 
with her two-and-a-half-year-old daughter.

The drugs are typically taken six to 10 weeks after conception: women are sold 
them through an underground network involving rickshaw drivers and midwives, 
who connect families to sellers. They are promised a male child if they take 
the remedies – which come in tablet or powder form – following a strict ritual.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are often told to take 
the drugs in the morning with a glass of cow’s milk while looking at their 
husband. The drugs are sold for as little as $3 (£2.50) or up to $50, according 
to locals.

Research has found that the drugs often contain phytoestrogens – compounds 
from plants that are similar to the hormone oestrogen – in levels beyond that 
considered safe.

According to a recent study 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ppe.12246/abstract> published in 
the journal Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, SSDs were found to be a 
factor in20% of all stillbirths in Haryana 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26444206>, where the use of such drugs is 
pervasive.

Research by Dr Sutapa Bandyopadhyay Neogi, a maternal and child health 
specialist at the Public Health Foundation ofIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, found that large doses of 
phytoestrogens are linked to birth defects and developmental disorders in 
mammals that “could be potentially detrimental to the growth and development of 
the foetus”.

“In north India there’s a huge preference for a male child but it’s wrong to 
say that this practice is not happening elsewhere in India,” she said. More 
research had to be done to determine the drugs’ prevalence across the country, 
she added. “It’s not just the fact that the drugs are illegal. Women need to 
know that they are dangerous; that they are potentially harming their baby.”

'I paid the price, I own your son': Indian brides fight back in anti-dowry 
films | Amrit Dhillon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/03/india-anti-dowry-films-i-paid-the-price-i-own-your-son-brides-fight-back>
Neogi and her team are working to educate the public about the dangers through 
films and newspaper adverts. She, along with the non-profit organisation 
Apoorva Pande Foundation, has made a short film she hopes will be shown in 
cinemas across north India.

Sex-selective abortion and female foeticide have given India one of the 
world’s most skewed sex ratios. According to themost recent census 
<https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/resource-pdf/UNFPA_Publication-39866.pdf>
, in 2011, there were 914 girls to every 1,000 boys in India for children up to 
the age of six, but in Haryana that ratio was 830. According to government 
officials, the number crossed the 900 mark for the first time last December.

Experts attribute Haryana’s strong preference for boys to the ingrained belief 
that women are a liability rather than an asset and because of the state’s
strong tilt towards men inheriting land 
<http://www.tribuneindia.com/news/comment/hindu-women-property-myth-vs-reality/131896.html>
.

It is estimated that up to 60% of women who have a female child first take 
SSDs for their second birth.

“Haryana is infamous for killing its daughters,” said Dr Rakesh Gupta, 
additional principal secretary to the chief minister of Haryana. “We need to 
empower the girl child with the idea that girls are equal to boys. We need to 
create an environment where girls are actually equal, but this is going to take 
some time.”

Last year, Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government launched its national 
campaign 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/narendra-modi-launches-beti-bachaobeti-padhao-scheme-in-haryana/article6811642.ece>
to address the sex ratio in Haryana with a renewed focus on enforcing laws that 
forbid sex-selection abortion and diagnostic techniques that are used for 
female foeticide.

Outsourcing pregnancy: a visit to India's surrogacy clinics | Julie Bindel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/01/outsourcing-pregnancy-india-surrogacy-clinics-julie-bindel>
As a result, police and health inspectors have begun arresting people who 
peddle SSDs. Figures seen by the Guardian showed that 35 raids took place in 
the past 17 months, resulting in two convictions.

More than 300 complaints have been lodged against medics carrying out illegal 
ultrasounds since last May. The complaints have resulted in some convictions.

But government officials are quick to acknowledge there is only so much the 
law can do. Often offenders get bail and are back in business within a few 
months.

 “The demand in society for a male child is so high that even if the laws and 
acts are implemented, people will find a way,” said Dr Varun Arora, who works 
at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences in Rohtak.

Still, officials in Haryana remain adamant that law enforcement, rather than 
working to change people’s perception of having baby girls, is the way to 
tackle the issue. The state has set the ambitious target of a sex ratio of 950 
girls to 1,000 boys.

“Nothing can be done to change people’s mindset. They are practising 
century-old rituals. Nobody wants a girl child. The target is to save as many 
as possible,” Arora added.

Back in Sampla, Meena is unsure whether she will try for another boy but is 
resolute that the SSDs could not have caused any ill effects. “No, it’s not at 
all possible my stillbirth happened from the drugs,” she said.
 