
India’s supreme court has ordered cinemas across the country to play the 
national anthem before film screenings to encourage citizens to “feel this is 
my country and this is my motherland”.

Indians weary from weeks of standing in queues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/india-bank-lines-controversy-cash-for-queuing>
 at banks and ATM machines will get no reprieve at the cinema: the court also 
directed that moviegoers should “stand up in respect” while the anthem is 
played.

The decision by the country’s highest court on Tuesday is one of number of 
recent developments that have drawn India’s cinema industry into disputes over 
patriotism and national identity.

Indian films banned, Pakistani actors ejected – how the Kashmir crisis is 
hitting Bollywood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/09/indian-films-banned-pakistani-actors-ejected-how-the-kashmir-crisis-is-hitting-bollywood>
The panel of judges was responding to public interest litigation that claimed 
the national anthem was regularly being dishonoured, including in cinemas, 
where it was already required to be played before films in the states of 
Maharashtra and Goa.

“People should feel that they live in a nation and show respect to the 
national anthem and the national flag,” the court said.

Too much disrespect of national symbols had been indulged in the name of 
“individually perceived notions of freedom”, it added.

The Indian flag should be displayed and the doors of cinemas should be closed 
during the rendition to prevent people from entering or leaving, the court said.


It also banned anybody from dramatising the national song, printing it on an 
“undesirable object”, singing an abridged version or making money from it.

The anthem, Jana Gana Mana, was last ordered to be played in cinemas across 
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> after the country’s 1962 war 
with China, but its strains were largely ignored by most moviegoers, and the 
practice was eventually discontinued.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Findian-court-orders-cinemas-to-play-national-anthem-before-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feac757f9d5fd3e89cf9c68a0117f0785afe03f7e%2F0_218_4824_2894%2F4824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indian%20court%20orders%20cinemas%20to%20play%20national%20anthem%20before%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Findian-court-orders-cinemas-to-play-national-anthem-before-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indian%20court%20orders%20cinemas%20to%20play%20national%20anthem%20before%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Findian-court-orders-cinemas-to-play-national-anthem-before-films%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feac757f9d5fd3e89cf9c68a0117f0785afe03f7e%2F0_218_4824_2894%2F4824.jpg>
 People watching a film at a cinema in Mumbai. Photograph: Indranil 
Mukherjee/AFP/Getty Images 
Long known for its formulaic song-and-dance numbers, Indian popular cinema has 
in the past decade tackled significant social issues including religious 
tension – in My Name is Khan (2010), for example – and rape and sexual assault 
(Pink, 2016).

But the industry has experienced pushback, including from India’s censorship 
board, which in June ordered more than 90 changes to a film about drug problems 
in the state of Punjab, including the removalof any references 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/10/world/asia/india-film-censor-orders-94-cuts-to-movie-about-punjabs-drug-problem.html>
 to Punjab.

Mumbai police vow to protect cinemas showing film with Pakistani actor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/mumbai-police-vow-to-protect-cinemas-showing-film-with-pakistani-actor>
The cinema industry was caught up in recent tensions between India and 
Pakistan after 19 Indian soldiers were killed in Kashmir by militants with 
alleged Pakistani backing. The Indian Motion Picture Producers Association 
announced it wasbanning Pakistanis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/09/indian-films-banned-pakistani-actors-ejected-how-the-kashmir-crisis-is-hitting-bollywood>
 from appearing in Indian films.

Ultranationalist groups threatened to disrupt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/mumbai-police-vow-to-protect-cinemas-showing-film-with-pakistani-actor>
 the screening of a Bollywood blockbuster starring Fawaz Khan, an actor from 
Lahore. Khan was forced to skip the premiere of the film over the controversy, 
and has not returned to India since.

In Goa in October, Salil Chaturvedi, a writer and activist who uses a 
wheelchair, wasallegedly assaulted in a cinema 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/writer-and-disability-campaigner-thrashed-in-goa-theatre-for-not-standing-up-during-national-anthem-3093030/>
 by another patron who was incensed that he had not stood during the anthem.

The election in 2014 of the prime minister, Narendra Modi, a devotee of a 
Hindu nationalist ideology traditionally at odds with India’s secular and 
pluralist political customs, has fuelled fierce debates over the country’s 
character.

Critics say the political ascension of Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party has 
emboldened Hindu supremacists and given voice to a more divisive and narrower 
definition of patriotism.

Shylashri Shankar, a research fellow who has written a book on the Indian 
supreme court, said on Wednesday after the anthem ruling that it was “a bit 
worrisome that it is, in a sense, putting its weight behind notions of 
nationalism and what it means to be Indian”.

She said she remembered the anthem being played at cinemas when she was a 
child, “but the notion of the anthem then was different to what it is now, when 
it is imbued with much more weight”.

Tamil film industry glorifies the stalking of women, activists say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/tamil-film-industry-kollywood-glorifies-stalking-women-activists>
One cinemagoer in south Delhi, 22-year-old Surabhi, said the order was “going 
against what we go to the movies for”.


“We want to relax, to enjoy ourselves, to spend time with family and friends. 
We stand for the national anthem when it plays before a speech, or the Republic 
Day parade, or in school. At the beginning of a film it serves no purpose,” she 
said.

“Nationalism doesn’t mean standing up for the national anthem, it means 
standing up for your country, for what’s right. So encourage that.”

Furqan, 26, agreed. “I don’t have to prove my nationalism and patriotism every 
time I go anywhere. It’s coming into our private spaces, our private lives,” 
she said.

Nitin Datar, head of the Maharashtra-based Cinema Owners and Exhibitors 
Association, welcomed the supreme court’s order. He said some of the country’s 
9,000 single-screen cinemas might struggle to implement the order quickly, but 
would have no trouble making sure its patrons stood during the anthem.

“There are very few stray cases [where people don’t stand] but otherwise the 
public respect the anthem,” he said.
 