
Over the summer, I spent a month at Stugan <http://www.stugan.com/>, a Swedish 
“game development acceleration camp”. That may sound like a faintly sinister 
concept, but it was in fact stupidly idyllic. The eight-week event, organised 
by alumni from game publishers Rovio and King, took place in adorable red 
wooden cabins perched on a hill overlooking a lake – apparently called 
“Bjursen”, although we just called it The Lake, because we couldn’t pronounce 
anything correctly. While not working on our game development projects, we 
watched meteor showers from a nearby mountaintop, swam beneath the Northern 
Lights, and sat around a campfire getting sloshed on schnapps.

The Stugan attendees were from all over the world, but we’d ended up in this 
tiny corner of Scandinavia, brought together by the one thing we shared: the 
desire to create and play video games. I turned up three weeks late, and 
already an outsider as the only journalist, but within a few days I felt like 
I’d been welcomed as one of the team. There with me were people likeIvan Notaros
 <https://twitter.com/Nothke>, an incredibly talented Serbian developer who was 
ostensibly making a game called House of Flowers based on his experience and 
knowledge of the war in Yugoslavia in the 90s, but spent much of his time 
making tiny games, procedurally generated art, and incredible low-res 
photogrammetry of us as a group. There were Michael and Laura, a married team 
who were making a game despite being animators rather than programmers, using 
their artistic style to inform what their project, Thin Air, would become.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7h6-sjLwLg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7h6-sjLwLg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7h6-sjLwLg&media=>
 Stugan (Swedish for ‘cabin’) is a two-month game creation retreat. Developers 
have to apply to attend, and if selected get to stay for free 
Auston and Diana, another couple, were making Catdate – a game that seems like 
a simple dating sim (but with cats) but revealed itself to be a touching, 
meaningful exploration of connection, friendship and learning how to 
communicate with others. Robbie, Dorianne and Marc, the only three-person team, 
all from South Africa, were working on Kingdom in the Sky, a project they’d 
been unable to work on for months because of their full-time jobs.Mira and Tanja
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7EVL8LOvXdk>, a team of two women, one 
Swedish and one Danish, collaborated on their two-player game Tick Tock, when 
they weren’t playing incredibly tense rounds of Magic: The Gathering. The 
trailers of these games, and the others made during Stugan 2016, areall worth 
watching <http://www.stugan.com/stugan-2016/>.


It’s largely because of Stugan that I’ve started making my own games. My first 
-Awkward Dating Simulator <https://kategray.itch.io/awkward-dating-simulator> - 
has been downloaded over 1,000 times already, which is amazing and terrifying. 
Next year, I’ll be taking part in Train Jam - a 52-hour train ride from Chicago 
to the annual Game Developer’s Conference in San Francisco, where developers 
make games as the scenery rushes by. I’m doing it just to be around those 
people and that feeling again.
Train Jam (@IndieTrainJam) 
The best kind of inspiration #trainjam 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/trainjam?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/bZco7u7irk 
<https://t.co/bZco7u7irk>
 <https://twitter.com/IndieTrainJam/status/708320843319910401> March 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/IndieTrainJam/status/708320843319910401> 
There has always been an independent game development community. In the early 
1980s, small teams made their own games, downloaded them on to cassettes and 
sold them at trade fairs, bypassing the retail business that was growing around 
software. In the 90s, the rise of the internet meant these developers had the 
ability to sell their games digitally, to a global audience, without ever 
having to produce or distribute physical copies. More recently, platforms like 
Xbox Live Arcade,PlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> Network and the PC games 
service Steam have given indie developers access to huge online stores where 
they can sell their often offbeat and idiosyncratic games alongside major 
releases.

Now, perhaps more than ever, independent games – and the communities that make 
them – have a vital role in video game culture. The mainstream games business, 
similar to the mainstream movie business, is mostly about noise and bombast. 
Triple A titles are sold on action and violence; the industry’s biggest annual 
events E3 and Gamescom are cacophonous battle zones, where the loudest, 
brightest booths inevitably win (last time I went to E3, one major games 
publisher was issued a warning by the event organiser because their booth was 
so loud no one else could get anything done).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXD-gh_O3eaA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXD-gh_O3eaA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXD-gh_O3eaA&media=>
Indie games can often be about action and violence, too, but the creative 
atmosphere is very different. Instead of E3, the indie sector runs events like 
Mild Rumpus, a sweet, relaxing space taking up one corner of the otherwise 
frenetic GDC, where attendees could play titles likeLieve Oma 
<https://vltmn.itch.io/lieve-oma>, a game about taking a walk in the woods with 
a beloved grandma, orBeeswing <http://store.steampowered.com/app/365580/>, a 
semi-autobiographical game set in a small village in Scotland. This summer, 
London’s Somerset House hostedNow Play This <http://nowplaythis.net/>, a 
collection of innovative experimental games and installations, beautifully 
curated and housed within a disused wing of the grand building. Here we played 
reflective, artistic titles like the painterly pinball sim Inks and beautiful 
Where’s Wally-like puzzlerHidden Folks <http://hiddenfolks.com/>. 

Recently, the first ever IndieCade Europe event took place in Paris, nestled 
in the alcoves of a grand 18th-century museum. The highlights for me were games 
likeChalo Chalo <http://www.chalochalogame.com/>, a simple but brilliant 
multiplayer racing game that feels tense despite its treacle-slow movements; 
the incredibly heartbreakingKilling Time At Lightspeed 
<http://www.killingtimeatlightspeed.com/>, in which you can read your friends’ 
social interactions, but you’re light-years away, so every page refresh is 
another two years into the future; andOld Man’s Journey 
<http://www.oldmansjourney.com/>, a game about exactly what the title suggests, 
with a stunning art style.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c7aa0f4e0e905d0fea9b6c58b1de83658e76fe%2F0_33_1744_1047%2F1744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indie%20video%20games%20saved%20my%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indie%20video%20games%20saved%20my%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c7aa0f4e0e905d0fea9b6c58b1de83658e76fe%2F0_33_1744_1047%2F1744.jpg>
 Simple but brilliant … Chalo Chalo. Photograph: Sparpweed/Redshift Media 
Within these quiet, gentle spaces, there is an atmosphere of care rather than 
competition. AAA games are still, for the most part, thrilling and worth 
talking about, but, for me at least, they’re a business. At Stugan, people 
talked about their projects, worked with each other, and understood when others 
just needed to walk up the mountain alone. In the indie game community, when 
problems arise, people discuss them and share resources and experience. This 
almost certainly happens in the mainstream industry, but there it’s 
confidential and hidden. Here, it is simply a part of how things work. 
Successful indie developers likeTom Francis <http://www.pentadact.com/> (one of 
the attendees at Stugan and the guy behind crossover hit Gunpoint) write 
development blogs and talk about their design issues in video updates. Small 
studios even set up webcams and live stream the development process.

It’s this transparency and openness that makes the community feel welcoming. 
There is a softness, a kindness, a sincerity, that you don’t see often in the 
churn of the games industry at large. Being an indie developer is incredibly 
hard work. A lot of teams meet and collaborate online, often living thousands 
of miles apart, so their work is carried out through late night Skype calls and 
Google hangouts; they conduct hundreds of long-distance relationships with 
players and other developers through social media streams; they have to manage 
and juggle time zones as well as any international stock trader. So when an 
event takes place, it can often be more like family reunion than a showcase. 
Developers hug each other tight because they don’t know when they’ll next see 
each other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae359a406f04ea40a86fa7c6bf33ecb8a4d6bad7%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indie%20video%20games%20saved%20my%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indie%20video%20games%20saved%20my%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae359a406f04ea40a86fa7c6bf33ecb8a4d6bad7%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Orchids to Dusk Photograph: Pol Clarissou 
This sense of openness and compassion is flowing into the games. An emerging 
generation of developers want to share themselves through the work they 
produce, to connect with others in the same way as singer-songwriters in the 
1960s or indie bands in the 1970s and 1980s. They’re willing to be vulnerable 
with strangers, and they’re willing to explore the parameters of what games are 
in order to communicate how they feel. Pol Clarissou, another of the Stugan 
alumni, makes games likeOrchids to Dusk 
<https://polclarissou.itch.io/orchids-to-dusk>, in which there is limited 
interaction, and nothing you can do to save yourself – a game that teaches you 
the world is sometimes just as it is, and the only thing you can do is 
experience it.

In the last year we have also seen games like Cibele 
<http://store.steampowered.com/agecheck/app/408120/>, in which creator Nina 
Freeman provides an incredibly personal semi-autobiographical story of 
heartbreak. We’ve seen Lucy Blundell’s uncomfortable morning-after narrative,
One Night Stand <http://lucyblundell.weebly.com/one-night-stand.html>, which 
puts a stranger in your bed and asks you how you feel now you’ve woken next to 
them. These games – so open and honest with the feelings they explore – exist 
because the developers couldn’t see their lives, selves or experiences 
reflected in mainstream games, and so created them themselves. In turn, that 
inspires others to do the same.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCEJqyd-5VCI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCEJqyd-5VCI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCEJqyd-5VCI&media=>
This growing counter-culture of highly personal, highly experimental game 
design has faced criticism, resistance and even aggression from incumbent 
communities – the self-identifying ‘gamers’ – who think they know what games 
should be: the same thing they’ve always been. Many people who demand guns, 
explosions and intensity (which is all good), somehow see the existence of 
quiet, kind, thoughtful games as a threat. In 2013, when the developer Zoe 
Quinn released her interactive fiction game Depression Quest on PC, she was
threatened with physical harm 
<http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/zoe-quinns-depression-quest>. Dealing 
with mental health was considered provocative. Somehow in video games, 
vulnerability is a political act.

The games I saw being made at Stugan, being shown and shared at IndieCade, Now 
Play This and Mild Rumpus, are important and they will not be pushed from the 
industry. Video games are culture, and culture reflects life. For a lot of 
people, life is hard right now: global economies are failing, money is tight; 
2016 has been a year of mourning and political upheaval, old certainties have 
crumbled. It’s no coincidence that we’ve seen an explosion of interest in 
self-care concepts likehygge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/22/hygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend>
 and mindfulness. In difficult times, we seek simple, meaningful pleasures: we 
need to take care of ourselves, we need to wrap ourselves up against the cold.

Not all of the games I’ve seen this year are comforting or “nice” in the sense 
of being pleasant experiences. But they are real, personal and powerful. Like 
all true art, they invite us into the most intimate thoughts and feelings of 
others. Sometimes that’s what is needed: a way back to the warmth.

Five personal games to look out for in 2017

A selection of highly subjective and intimate projects set to arrive next year 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd10c86d3dc4d8ec70a5827987a93ccc1c86d3278%2F17_33_819_491%2F819.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indie%20video%20games%20saved%20my%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indie%20video%20games%20saved%20my%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Findie-video-games-events-community-kate-gray%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd10c86d3dc4d8ec70a5827987a93ccc1c86d3278%2F17_33_819_491%2F819.png>
 The kind of place you want to climb inside and live in … 29. Photograph: 
Humble Grove 
29 <https://humblegrove.itch.io/29> (Humble Grove)

The borderless, softened colours of 29 evoke the kind of place you want to 
climb inside and live in, even if one of its inhabitants is a huge, many-eyed 
monster. It follows two housemates, both transgender and non-binary, as they 
co-exist and explore their corner of the world. Their story is told in snippets 
and parenthetical observations, and it’s beautiful, calm and quiet.

Vignettes <http://vignettesga.me/> (Pol Clarissou, Armel Gibson and Pat Ashe)

Sometimes there comes an idea that’s so perfect and simple that you wonder how 
it hasn’t been done before. Vignettes is a game, at its heart, about rotating 
things until they change into other things, but it’s so much more than that: 
it’s a game about appreciating design, noticing details, immersing yourself in 
simple interactions. Many games give you control over the world; Vignettes 
gives you control over one object, asking you to focus, almost like cognitive 
behavioural therapy, on one thing at a time.

Ooblets <https://ooblets.com/> (Nonplayercat and Perplamps)

Pokémon is great, but the thread of any Pokémon game is to fight to the finish 
line. Ooblets is more like a walk in the woods, accompanied by a host of cute 
lumpy friends that toddle behind you like something in between a puppy and a 
two-year-old. Its palette is that of an old-fashioned sweet shop; its design is 
Adventure Time-esque, sweet but knowingly humorous. Every gif that the (two!) 
developers post on Twitter is filled with lightness and the kind of 
heartwarming loveliness that we could definitely do with right now.

Old Man’s Journey <http://www.oldmansjourney.com/> (Broken Rules)

OK, first off, Old Man’s Journey is the only game I know of that has given out 
temporary tattoos as part of their promotional merch. Secondly, this game is an 
absolute joy to look at and play. It’s reminiscent of a run-down but well-loved 
seaside town, in which you help an old man clamber around, sitting down now and 
again to reminisce about his long lost past. It’s beautifully layered, creating 
a sense of depth and warmth that invites you to explore and discover more.

Secret Legend <http://secretlegendgame.com/> (Andrew Shouldice)

When we’re most stressed, we retreat into behaviours that remind us of the 
safety of childhood. Nostalgic experiences are soothing, because they coax out 
memories of happier, simpler times. With soft, dappled light, gentle colours 
and music, and a very obvious Zelda influence, Secret Legend is the game to 
play if you want to escape from everything new into something that feels so 
comforting and familiar that it might have just been in your pocket the whole 
time.
 