
The former Indigenous affairs minister Robert Tickner has used the release of 
the 1992-93 cabinet documents to urge leaders to “command the authority of the 
nation” to improve Indigenous incarceration rates and end the “national 
embarrassment”.

Tickner has urged the Coalition and Labor to agree to a full audit of the 
recommendations 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/IndigLRes/rciadic/national/vol5/5.html#Heading5>
 from the royal commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody, which he says 
remain as relevant as they were 25 years ago.


Lack of progress on Aboriginal deaths in custody 'unforgivable'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/03/lack-of-progress-on-aboriginal-deaths-in-custody-unforgivable>
As the latest royal commission into youth detention in the Northern Territory 
continues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/don-dale-run-like-a-human-storage-facility-nt-royal-commission-told>
, Tickner said the last thing that was needed was another report.


“With limited exceptions, the royal commission’s recommendations are as 
relevant today as they were 25 years ago but overwhelmingly those 
recommendations have not been implemented either by the national government or 
by successive state governments,” Tickner said.


“Worse still, governments of all political persuasions covered up their 
failure by eroding the agreed monitoring and accountability arrangements that 
were to be put in place. Meanwhile the numbers of Aboriginal people in custody 
and the number of Aboriginal kids in detention has gone through the roof.”

Last year marked the 25th anniversary 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/FlagPost/2016/April/RCADIC-25>
 of thefinal report <http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/IndigLRes/rciadic/> of 
the royal commission, which was established in 1987 by Bob Hawke’s government 
to examine 99 Indigenous deaths in custody between 1980 and 31 May 1989.


The royal commission’s key finding was that the deaths were due to the 
combination of police and prisons failing their duty of care, and the high 
numbers of Indigenous people being arrested and incarcerated.


About 40% of the report’s 339 recommendations 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/IndigLRes/rciadic/national/vol5/5.html#Heading5>
 relate to social factors that now form the basis for theClose the Gap reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/closing-the-gap-2016-report-indigenous-infant-mortality-down-but-no-change-in-most-targets>
, including youth policy, education, alcohol, health, employment, housing, land 
rights, self-determination and reconciliation.


As minister, Tickner worked with the then prime minister on the government’s 
response to the royal commission report and the high court’sMabo judgment 
<http://aiatsis.gov.au/explore/articles/mabo-case> that recognised native title 
when it overturnedterra nullius.


The 1992-93 cabinet records, released by the National Archives on 1 January, 
show a cabinet regularly consumed by the national response to both issues. As 
debate raged, Keating gave hishistoric Redfern speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1S4F1euzTw> to launch the International Year 
of the World’s Indigenous People in December 1992.


Very often in the cabinet processes, it got very lonely for a minister for 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander affairs
Robert Tickner 
Tickner praised Keating’s leadership in fighting for a “just response” to the 
Mabo judgement in the face of a vitriolic campaign, some of which made “Donald 
Trump’s election campaign look like the free-flowing milk of human kindness”.


But in June 2015, he said, Indigenous prisoners accounted for 27% of prisoners 
while 54% of juvenile detainees between the ages of 10 and 17 were Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Island children.


“I call on our prime minister to support a national audit of the 
implementation of the royal commission’s recommendations and then to personally 
drive a reform agenda at [the Council of Australian Governments] as the Keating 
government committed to do had it been elected,” Tickner said.


“This is not a job for an Indigenous affairs minister; it is rather a job for 
a prime minister who can command the authority of the nation and his own 
government agencies to engender a whole-of-government response.


“These issues are no longer just state and territory issues, they are truly a 
national embarrassment over successive governments and the prime minister needs 
to address these things.”


The Keating government eventually negotiated the response with Indigenous 
leadership and then steered the resulting Native Title Act 1993 through a 
hostile Senate in a debate that took 51 hours and 49 minutes. According toTroy 
Bramston’s biography of Keating 
<https://scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/paul-keating>, the Labor 
government forced the Senate to sit on a Saturday to stop the Coalition 
filibuster before the bill passed at two minutes to midnight, four days before 
Christmas.


Tickner, a fierce advocate for the Indigenous position who was close to 
resigning at times, said he was sent a dead rat in the mail during the public 
debate process. The debate coincided with an emotional time in Tickner’s 
personal life. He revealed last month that he was reunited with his birth 
mother for the first time on the steps of the Sydney Opera House in 1993.

‘We’ve got to put our story out there’: Ms Dhu's family prepare for verdict on 
death in custody
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/weve-got-to-put-our-story-out-there-ms-dhus-family-prepare-for-verdict-on-death-in-custody>
But he acknowledged it was Keating’s authority and political capital that 
drove the government’s response.


“The bottom line of these cabinet deliberations was that the majority of 
cabinet was prepared to go to lengths to override Aboriginal interests to meet 
the demands of state and territory governments and the mining industry,” 
Tickner said.


“Very often in the cabinet processes, it got very lonely for a minister for 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander affairs. Some of my other colleagues were 
fierce advocates either in the interest represented in their portfolio or in 
some cases for a state Labor government.”


Keating had seized the leadership in December 1991, after a damaging debate 
between the Indigenous community and the mining industry over theCoronation 
Hill mining project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/01/cabinet-papers-1990-91-hawkes-fight-to-keep-mining-out-of-kakadu-helped-unseat-him>
.


But after the Mabo decision came down on 3 June 1992, the prime minister began 
a consultation process aimed at putting a national framework of state tribunals 
in place – a process Tickner said was designed to put “meat on the bones” of 
the reconciliation process.


The cabinet documents of October 1992 outlines its purpose – to find the “best 
means of giving practical effect to native title while creating greater 
certainty for various interests, encouragement and facilitation of negotiations 
in pursuit of speedier settlement outside the courts and funding of test cases 
clarifying key issues on native title.”


But it should also “limit potential litigation and ensuing uncertainty 
following the high court’s acknowledgement of native title”.


Cabinet papers 1990-91: Labor wrestled with rising asylum claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/01/cabinet-papers-1990-91-labor-wrestled-with-rising-asylum-claims>
Cabinet was advised that native title existed where Indigenous people had 
maintained connection with land and where title was not extinguished by 
government acts.

The Australian community was split on the decision, according to polls at the 
time. Some Indigenous groups started making ambit claims over the Sydney Opera 
House and sporting facilities. The former Victorian premier Jeff Kennett said 
every property in Australia could be at risk. The National party leader at the 
time, Tim Fischer, said it could break up Australia. The head of the Western 
Mining Corporation, Hugh Morgan, said Mabo directly threatened Australian 
unity. The then opposition leader, John Hewson, said people had “genuine 
concerns about their home, or their mine or their farm”.

But inside the cabinet room, the advice was clear. “It is important to note 
that existing legal rights in relation to property continue. It is far too 
crude, indeed incorrect, to see the problems posed by the Mabo decision in 
terms of existing landholders ‘losing their land’,” a cabinet submission says.

But doubt over pastoral leases remained and it was only a compromise brokered 
between Keating, the Indigenous leader Noel Pearson and the former National 
Farmers’ Federation executive Rick Farley that broke the deadlock.

• Cabinet records for 1992 and 1993 held by the National Archives of Australia 
reach the open access period on 1 January 2017. Information about the cabinet 
records, copies of key cabinet documents, including selected submissions and 
decisions, are available on thearchives’ website <http://www.naa.gov.au/>
 