
The world’s largest island nation, Indonesia comprises about 17,000 islands 
sprawling over almost two million square kilometres either side of the equator. 
It includes half of the world’s second-largest island, New Guinea, and most of 
the world’s third-largest, Borneo, as well as rugged Sumatra and busy Java. Its 
distinctive wildlife includes pygmy elephants, tree kangaroos and the Komodo 
dragon; its dramatic landscape embraces ancient rice terraces, untamed jungle, 
islands with pristine coral fringed by white sands and lava-spewing volcanoes. 
And now that national carrier Garuda has launched the first direct flights from 
the UK to Jakarta, the nation’s capital and transport hub, Britons are just two 
flights away from pretty much anywhere in the archipelago.
Indonesia map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/travel_indonesia_web/giv-27167yB0LCEwn8xTz/>
Indonesia’s cultures are as diverse as its geography. Home to the world’s 
largest Muslim population, it’s also studded with ancient Hindu temples, and 
its quarter of a billion inhabitants practice six officially recognised 
religions, as well as a range of animist rituals.

Swept by the Indian and Pacific Oceans, it’s one of the best diving 
destinations in the world – many would arguethe best. Year-round breaks in 
warm, tropical waters bring surfers flocking to Bali, as well as nearby Sumbawa 
and the westerly Mentawai islands.

Like any developing nation, Indonesia presents its travel challenges. Litter, 
particularly plastic, is an issue, while traffic, grime and massive inequality 
can make cities grim places at first glance. While cheap air travel has opened 
up great swathes of the nation, it can still take huge amounts of time to get 
from A to B. Java has a working rail network and Sumatra a handful of lines, 
but many journeys will involve internal flights, jolting bus journeys, ferries 
of a range of shapes, sizes and safety standards, or, quite often, all of these.
Travelfish.org <http://www.travelfish.org/> is a great Indonesia travel 
planning resource.

You could spend years exploring Indonesia and barely scratch the surface. We 
focus on the most-visited areas – Bali, Java, Lombok and up-and-coming Flores – 
with some suggestions for adventures further afield.

BALI

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8460e1fad7a3003fe6284b421194fc29762ae778%2F0_39_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8460e1fad7a3003fe6284b421194fc29762ae778%2F0_39_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Sidemen Valley, Bali. Photograph: Alamy 
While parts of lush, approachable Bali are textbook examples of the impact of 
mass tourism, it remains, in essence, the island that enchanted western artists 
in the 1930s. A well-rounded trip will include a bit of beach as well as time 
in Ubud and a few days elsewhere inland.

Bali in general is less about the beaches themselves than the water. Pemuteran 
on the north coast and Amed on the east coast offer outstanding diving and 
snorkelling: don’t miss the remains of the USS Liberty near Amed, one of very 
few substantial wrecks to lie in relatively shallow and calm waters close to 
shore.Euro Dive <http://eurodivebali.com/> offers two dives for £40. Hipster 
Canggu on the west coast and the peaceful Bukit peninsula in the far south are 
surfing destinations. Uluwatu and Padang-Padang on the Bukit peninsula have 
waves to challenge experts. In Canggu, Old Man’s Beach is kind to beginners 
(expect to pay under £20 for a two-hour lesson with board hire from any of the 
guys with board stands on the beach), while Echo Beach is better for 
intermediates and above.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54c2d1ec85b8c92612cd06adabca0ce6a50c42ed%2F0_266_5440_3265%2F5440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54c2d1ec85b8c92612cd06adabca0ce6a50c42ed%2F0_266_5440_3265%2F5440.jpg>
 Ubud is Bali’s spiritual centre. Photograph: Alamy 
Inland, Ubud, the island’s cultural and spiritual capital, may be touristy but 
still offers top-notch food, ancient temples and colourful ritual, handicrafts 
and self-improvement activities from silver-smithing to every kind of yoga on 
the planet. The annualUbud Readers and Writers Festival 
<http://www.ubudwritersfestival.com/> runs from 28 October-1 November this year.

The real Bali can be found deep inland. To the east is Besakih, with its Hindu 
Mother Temple, the sacred volcano, Mount Agung, and popularSidemen for rice 
field walks and staggering views. To the north and west,Munduk has waterfalls 
and highland hikes,Bedugul is cool enough for strawberries to grow, and there’s 
nothing quite like easing sore muscles in lakeside hot springs after a sunrise 
climb of theMount Batur volcano.

And today, thanks to metered taxis, Uber and a host of shuttle services 
including the newKura Kura bus <http://kura2bus.com/> with its mobile app, Bali 
is easy to get around without braving the hectic traffic or thebemo minibus 
network.

The rainy season peaks between December and February, bringing high humidity 
and grey days: weather is at its best between April and August, although 
traffic is particularly bad over the August peak.

What to eat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7047e120002285e31e714fc45797514e2ecc33f2%2F0_208_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7047e120002285e31e714fc45797514e2ecc33f2%2F0_208_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Make a pig of yourself … Babi guling roast pork is one of Bali’s iconic 
dishes. Photograph: Alamy 
Must-try Balinese dishes include babi guling (roast sucking pig with spices). 
This is usually eaten in the mornings or at lunchtime, from specialist 
restaurants with low prices and plastic chairs. Look out for duck or chicken
betutu (a smoky, spicy dish originally served at ceremonies), and sate lilit 
(lemongrass-heavy minced meat satay) in similar, street-style places that offer 
them as a speciality. Those with cash to splash can enjoy fine dining and 
cocktails at restaurants such asLocavore <http://locavore.co.id/> in Ubud 
(Jalan Dewisita 10, locavore.co.id), or in the beach resort ofSeminyak at 
Mozaic Brasserie <http://www.mozaic-beachclub.com/mozaic-brasserie/> (Jl Pantai 
Batu Belig, mozaic-beachclub.com/mozaic-brasserie) orMejekawi 
<https://www.facebook.com/mejekawi> (Jalan Kayu Aya 9), a “kitchen and 
laboratory concept” with five- and 12-course tasting menus (from £37 a head).

Where to stay

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15428ca431ce502332513e210a33d8d9f57e16bf%2F0_0_3048_1829%2F3048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15428ca431ce502332513e210a33d8d9f57e16bf%2F0_0_3048_1829%2F3048.jpg>
 Bamboo double at Serenity Eco Guesthouse, Canggu 
Serenity Eco Guesthouse <http://serenityecoguesthouse.com/> (doubles from £26 
B&B), is 150 metres from the beach in Canggu, with simple rooms, pool and yoga 
studio. InUbud, Taman Indrakila <http://www.tamanindrakila.net/> (doubles from 
£30 B&B) has pretty bungalows on a dramatic jungled gorge, and a cliffside pool.
Teras Bali <http://terasbalisidemen.com/> (doubles from £32 B&B, 
terasbalisidemen.com) sits amid rice fields nearSidemen with a striking 
swimming pool.Arjuna Homestay <http://www.arjuna-homestay.com/> (doubles from 
£21 B&B) inPemuteran makes a great base for diving the coral walls off 
Menjangan island, and has a pool.

JAVA

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32198f4da1fc7dd241bedb75304b85a15975abf0%2F0_0_5616_3746%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32198f4da1fc7dd241bedb75304b85a15975abf0%2F0_0_5616_3746%2F5616.jpg>
 Java is the home of Indonesian dance and courtly ritual. Photograph: Alamy 
More people live on Java than in the whole of Japan, which makes for slow 
travel and congested cities. Yet this is also the heartland that defines 
Indonesia: shadow puppets, courtly ritual, elaborate dances, smouldering 
volcanoes and timeless landscapes. At least until the long-awaited urban light 
rail system arrives (perhaps in 2018), the capitalJakarta, in the west of the 
island, is a gridlocked mega-city that most people will want to avoid. The main 
sights at this end of Java are the volcanic islands ofKrakatoa and the national 
park ofUjung Kulon, home to the endangered Javanese rhino. These are best 
visited on a tour from the resort of Carita Beach: trykrakatau-tour.com 
<http://www.krakatau-tour.com/>.

Banyunwangi in eastern Java is reached by an hour-long ferry hop from the port 
of Gilimanuk in north-west Bali, making the Ijen plateau above Banyuwangi a 
natural trip from Bali. Head here for hot springs, coffee plantations, spice 
gardens, perfectly conical volcanoes and a stunning crater lake where locals 
still mine blocks of sulphur. On the coast south of here,Plengkung beach has an 
iconic surf break (G-Land), and Red Island is an up-and-coming surf destination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2623b0fe39c7172fdf1c355eefc09ab7824299b4%2F0_118_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2623b0fe39c7172fdf1c355eefc09ab7824299b4%2F0_118_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Mount Bromo, the brooding volcano in eastern Java. Photograph: Antara 
Foto/Reuters 
Further west, brooding Mount Bromo, an Indonesian icon, sits stark in a black 
sand desert: the horse-riding Tenggerese people still makelive offerings to the 
volcano at the Yadnya Kasada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/aug/07/yadnya-kasada-festival-in-pictures>
 festival, usually in June (6-20 June this year).

In central Java, the eighth-century Buddhist temple of Borobudur, serene in 
the lush volcanic highlands, is one of the world’s great religious monuments: 
Buddhist pilgrims come here from across Asia to celebrate Waisak (the Buddha’s 
birthday, 20-22 May). The cultured university city ofYogyakarta, one of few 
Indonesian cities with a preserved historic centre, is much more than just a 
base for exploring Borobudur and the temples at nearby Prambanan. In town, 
visitors can catch a traditional masked dance performance in the Kraton walled 
city, explore museums and the bird market, and check out contemporary arts 
spaces likeCemeti <http://www.cemetiarthouse.com/index.php?lang=en> and 
Sangkring <http://www.sangkringartspace.net/>.

Trundling past Java’s timeless rice paddies on slow but not uncomfortable 
trains is far more preferable to sitting on buses in traffic. Most trains are 
bookable ontiket.com <http://en.tiket.com/> by credit card.


Java’s rainy season is between November and March. Around Eid (Idul Fitri in 
Indonesian, on 6-7 July this year), half of Indonesia heads home for the 
Islamic holiday. Don’t even think about travelling in Java around this time.

What to eat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7e2c5920b30e60f0aa82f1c312b32f4049bd56%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7e2c5920b30e60f0aa82f1c312b32f4049bd56%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Bakso is Javanese meatball and noodle soup. Photograph: Carlina Teteris/Getty 
Images 
You’ll find the meatball-noodle soup called bakso all over Java, as well as 
sop buntut (oxtail soup) and often kambing gule (delicious goat and coconut 
curry). InYogya, the signature dish is gudek, a curry of young jackfruit and 
coconut. Head to the city’s main drag,Jalan Malioboro, for street food, or the 
House of Raminten (Jalan Faridan Muridan Noto 7, +62 274 547 315) for dishes 
from across the archipelago.

Where to stay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9cb4f9cd4b26b1b3aa0384bd4456c0b90067224%2F0_52_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9cb4f9cd4b26b1b3aa0384bd4456c0b90067224%2F0_52_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Handicrafts on sale at Bamboo Bamboo Homestay 
The hot and cold spring swimming pools at Catimor Homestay (doubles from £10 
B&B, +62 8233 262 8342, no website), a short walk from coffee farms, more hot 
springs and waterfalls, make this basic spot a good base for exploring theIjen 
plateau. In Yogyakarta, centrally located Bamboo Bamboo Homestay 
<http://www.mybamboobamboo.com/> (doubles from £11 B&B, mybamboobamboo.com) has 
dorms, en suite doubles and a sweet two-bedroom house with bamboo bathrooms.
Archipelago Beach <http://www.archipelago-carita.com/>(doubles from £32 room 
only) inCarita Beach also has two- and three-bedroom villas in styles from 
across the archipelago. From £80 per night, they’re a great choice for groups 
headed to Krakatau or Ujung Kulon.

LOMBOK AND THE GILIS
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76092f695c3900da828b998caa55f7fad762ffdd%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76092f695c3900da828b998caa55f7fad762ffdd%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The Gili islands are Lombok’s most popular destination 
All most visitors to Lombok see of this intriguing island are the trio of 
white sand isles known as the Gilis, off the north-west coast: party-heartyGili 
Trawangan, stylish Gili Air and less-developed Gili Meno. Fast boats run 
directly from Bali to these hedonistic hotspots, which are famously free of 
powered vehicles – the crossing is often included in a hotel transfer, though
Eka Jaya <http://ekajayafastboat.com/> has returns from around £34. While there 
are many better diving destinations in Indonesia, the Gilis are a popular base 
to learn both scuba and freediving: tryManta Dive <http://manta-dive.com/> or 
Freedive Gili <http://www.freedivegili.com/> – the latter is run by British 
freediving champion Michael Board. Avoid the Gilis during the August peak 
period, when prices can triple.

But Lombok merits a longer stay. It offers world-class surf breaks between 
April and November – principally the metronomic barrel at Desert Point in the 
south-west, but also around Kuta in the south.Gunung Rinjani, the 3,762-metre 
peak that dominates the island, makes for an epic, three-day climb (for the 
properly equipped; seegunungbagging.com <http://www.gunungbagging.com/> for 
details). In its foothills are ancient mosques and villages still populated by 
practitioners of a Hindu-Islam fusion unique to Lombok, as well as pretty 
waterfalls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc19ab8709bfb3e3a5bfd400d8ca5371de78aad64%2F451_0_5066_3040%2F5066.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc19ab8709bfb3e3a5bfd400d8ca5371de78aad64%2F451_0_5066_3040%2F5066.jpg>
 Tourist walking around the crater rim of Gunng Rinjani volcano. Photograph: 
Alamy 
In the south, the coastline around Kuta is a series of gorgeous, white sand 
bays backed by stark green promontories – perfect road trip territory. The Bau 
Nyale festival, held around late February, is a three-day celebration of the 
rising of seaworms – a local delicacy – from the coral. TheSouthern (or Secret) 
Gilis are cluster of west coast islands reached by boats from the tiny ports of 
Tembowong or Tawun. Well off the beaten track, they are full of character and 
charm.

The main form of public transport on Lombok – besides the horse-carts known as 
cidomo, which remain very much in service – is short-hop minivans, though these 
are tricky to negotiate without time and language skills. Tourist shuttles run 
between major destinations, and the airport has national and international 
connections, as well as a shuttle to the eminently avoidable resort area of 
Senggigi. Fast and slow boats run from Bali to the port at Lembar.

What to eat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7311a4d97e7836f5826d27bf3917ca88dfbfb77%2F0_138_4218_2531%2F4218.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7311a4d97e7836f5826d27bf3917ca88dfbfb77%2F0_138_4218_2531%2F4218.jpg>
 Indonesian barbecued seafood with fish satay. Photograph: Alamy 
Typical Lombok dishes include sate pusut (spicy minced satay), and ayam 
taliwang (fiery fried chicken). In Mataram, the island’s capital, Dua-Em 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Ayam-Taliwang-Dua-Em-Lombok/412059408898011> 
(Jalan Transmigrasi) is a good place to experience these and weirder 
delicacies. Beachside fresh fish barbecues are a highlight of the Gilis:
Scallywags <http://scallywagsresort.com/> in South Beach, Gili Trawangan, is a 
classic choice. AroundKuta, Ashtari  <http://www.ashtarilombok.com/> has 
stunning views, healthy food and great cocktails.

Where to stay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda0cb63fcc967cd2ee775f53f54d3756aab9e1fc%2F0_0_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda0cb63fcc967cd2ee775f53f54d3756aab9e1fc%2F0_0_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Sempiak Villas make for a memorable stay 
There is budget accommodation in Lombok and the Gilis, but none of it is very 
special – better to splash out a little more for somewhere memorable. In Selong 
Belanak, west of Kuta on Lombok’s south coast, Sempiak Villas  
<http://sempiakvillas.com/>(from £80 a night, sempiakvillas.com) has six 
individually designed self-catering bungalows above a sweeping, white sand 
beach. InSenaru in the Rinjani foothills, Rinjani Lodge (doubles from £50 B&B, 
rinjanilodge.com <http://www.rinjanilodge.com/>), offers stunning views, 
infinity pools and hot-spring tubs. For basic beachfront chic, Madak Belo 
(bungalow from £26 room only, dorm beds from £13,madak-belo.com 
<http://madak-belo.com/>) is at Madak Belo Beach on Gili Gede, the largest of 
the Southern Gilis. It’s worth paying a premium for a quiet location onGili T: 
Wilson’s Retreat <https://wilsons-retreat.com> (classy suite with outdoor 
bathroom from £80) is on a peaceful north coast beachfront.

FLORES
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09cc51b2dbf5bb75e06f108df5176c7455e8c3bf%2F0_340_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09cc51b2dbf5bb75e06f108df5176c7455e8c3bf%2F0_340_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Here be dragons … the famous residents of Komodo national park. Photograph: 
Alamy 
After Lombok, the mostly Catholic Flores is the most visited of the hundreds 
of islands that make up Nusa Tenggara, although Sumba is increasingly popular 
too. Most people fly from Bali toLabuanbajo, the gateway to spectacular diving 
and the dragons atKomodo national park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/27/komodo-national-park-dragons-indonesia-adventure>
, Divers could splurge on a liveaboard such as traditionalphinisi sailing ship 
Moana <http://www.moanacruising.com/en/> (from £1,000 for a five-day dive 
cruise) or just pick up a deal at the harbour. Inland,Bajawa and Ruteng are 
gateways to fascinating tribal cultures in the island’s lush valleys. Buses run 
to both from Labuanbajo, or it’s easy to negotiate a car and a driver at the 
airport. Hotels and guesthouses in Ruteng will be keen to introduce you to a 
guide. Heading on east across the island, the lunar landscape ofKelimutu, near 
Ende, houses crater lakes so brilliantly coloured they look like paint spills.

What to eat

Labuanbajo has a diverse dining scene, and a huge choice of food at its busy 
night market: Italian-ownedMade in Italy 
<http://www.miirestaurants.com/flores/index.php?menu=review> (Jalan Soekarno 
Hatta) has strikingly good food. Padang food and Chinese-Indonesian 
specialities – besides dog meat - include sop ikan asam manis, a tangy, 
tamarind fish soup.

Where to stay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb3212e1e1050bed21d922447dacaaeea2d680c1%2F0_31_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb3212e1e1050bed21d922447dacaaeea2d680c1%2F0_31_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 The traditional village of Wae Rebo in the district of Manggarai. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Kanawa Beach Bungalows <http://kanawaislandresort.com/> (doubles from £40) on 
tranquilKanawa island, connected to Labuanbajo by one boat a day (at noon), 
remain a popular choice. Outside Labuanbajo, there’s little tourist-focused 
accommodation. An interesting place to stay is Hotel Susteran, actually part of 
the convent of Santa Maria Berdukacita inRuteng (doubles from £13, no website, 
+62 385 22 834). Local guides can arrange homestays in the cone-shaped huts of 
the remote Manggarai village ofWae Rebo (details at Flores Tourism 
<http://www.florestourism.com/where-to-go/wae-rebo-village> .

FURTHER AFIELD

Of course, there’s much, much more to Indonesia than Java, Bali, Lombok and 
Flores.Sumatra, the world’s sixth-largest island, is home to orangutans, tigers 
and more. Catch the wildlife in Gunung Leuser national park, explore pretty Weh 
island, and chill out by highland Toba, the world’s largest volcanic crater 
lake.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc185744e0685b083ec53d1f865385bdb5fb49b28%2F0_1506_2765_1659%2F2765.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc185744e0685b083ec53d1f865385bdb5fb49b28%2F0_1506_2765_1659%2F2765.jpg>
 Sumatra is home to orangutans and more. Photograph: Alamy 
With diverse tribal cultures, the thousands of islands that make up Maluku 
(the Moluccas) are an island-hopper’s mecca. Laszlo Wagner of website
East-Indonesia.info <http://east-indonesia.info/> recommends starting on the 
island of Ambon, then moving on to Saparua, then either the Banda islands – the 
original home of nutmeg – or the rarely visited Kei islands.

Indonesian New Guinea offers not only the Raja Ampat islands – 40,000 sq km of 
marine territory whose pristine reef makes it a diving haven – but outstanding 
jungle adventures. Mikel Leitzinger ofArchipelago Explorer 
<http://archipelago-explorer.blogspot.co.uk/> recommends guided trekking in the 
Baliem Valley and then a trip by boat and on foot upriver and through swamps to 
meet the treehouse-dwelling Korowai people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9ef283f839577f9b8b5ec63982b123757db0d60%2F0_180_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indonesia%20beginners%E2%80%99%20guide%3A%20Bali%2C%20Lombok%2C%20Java%20and%20Flores&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Findonesia-holiday-guide-bali-lombok-java-flores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9ef283f839577f9b8b5ec63982b123757db0d60%2F0_180_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 Snorkelling at Raja Ampat, in Indonesian New Guinea. Photograph: Ethan 
Daniels/Getty Images 
Though vast, jungled Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo) has been hit hard by 
logging, mining and palm oil farming, it is still home to animals from pygmy 
elephants to orangutans and maintains some unspoiled forest. Lucas Zwaal of
De’Gigant Tours <http://borneotourgigant.com/> recommends a guided trekking and 
riverboat trip through virgin jungle fromLong Bawan to Tanjung Selor.

The elongated geography of sprawling, spidery Sulawesi means that, even with 
internal flights, the island takes longer to explore than you’d imagine. A good 
plan is to start inMakassar, explore the karst landscapes of Rammang-Rammang, 
then head to theToraja highlands. Wildlife lovers could choose to fly from 
Makassar to Manado for theBitung-Tangkoko national park, with its huge-eyed 
tarsiers and unique marsupials, as well as the diving islands ofBunaken and 
Lembeh.

 * This article was amended on 11 April, 2016. The original wrongly translated 
the festival of Eid as Idul Adha; it should be Idul Fitri, which is on 6-7 July 
this year. The lead photograph was also wrongly captioned.
 