
Public health experts in east Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>
 have hailed an initiative that will fund research on the continent in the hope 
of fostering African innovation.


The $7m (£5.7m) Grand Challenges Africa innovation seed grants 
<http://gcgh.grandchallenges.org/challenge/grand-challenges-africa-innovation-seed-grants-0>
 programme – funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and coordinated by 
the African Academy of Sciences (AAS) and theNepad 
<http://www.nepad.org/content/african-leaders-endorse-science-funding-platform-africa-alliance-accelerating-excellence>
 Agency Alliance for Accelerating Excellence in Science in Africa (Aesa) – is 
calling for ideas from Africa-based innovators working in maternal and newborn 
child health.

'My mother did everything but she was left to bleed to death after giving 
birth' | Alon Mwesigwa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/14/maternal-child-mortality-uganda-citizens-hearings-white-ribbon-alliance>
In a statement, AAS/Aesa said the five-year programme would provide seed 
grants worth up to $100,000 each, with successful researchers eligible to apply 
for further funding of up to $1m to scale up their innovations.

“Solutions for Africa’s challenges do exist within the continent. As an 
African grant-making body, we are laser-focused on tapping the best minds on 
the continent to develop innovative local solutions to our health and 
development challenges,” said Aesa’s director, Tom Kariuki.

That view was echoed by Peter Waiswa, an associate professor at the Makerere 
University School of PublicHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
in the Ugandan capital, Kampala. Waiswa, a specialist in maternal and newborn 
health, said it was good the Grand Challenges scheme now had funds set aside 
specifically for – and managed in – Africa. Although the grants are small, 
Waiswa said, they are “most likely going to respond to local needs”.

A key problem for the continent’s scientists is the dearth of Africa-driven 
research. In Uganda alone, Waiswa said, maternal and newborn mortality and 
stillbirths add up to about85,000 deaths a year 
<http://watchdog.co.ug/over-80000-babies-mothers-die-during-childbirth-annually/>
. “These are double the number of people who die fromHIV and Aids in Uganda 
<http://www.avert.org/professionals/hiv-around-world/sub-saharan-africa/uganda>
,” he added, “but all the attention is on HIV. So I think it is good that they 
are funding into this specific area. But, as I said, they are still small 
grants and we have to compete for them as a region.”

Waiswa said researchers often faced a lack of money for scaling up 
innovations. This has meant researchers cannot do long-term work. He cited the 
case of Ugandan scientistMisaki Wayengera 
<http://www.internationalhealthpolicies.org/search/Misaki>, who created a 
prototype for a quick test for Ebola, but failed to get funding even after 
writing to the Ugandan president. Only after thelatest Ebola outbreak in west 
Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/23/west-africa-ebola-epidemic-out-of-control>
 that Wayengera received financial support, fromGrand Challenges Canada 
<http://www.grandchallenges.ca/grantee-stars/0280-01/>.

At Makerere University and Nsambya hospital in Kampala, researchers wanted to 
solve birth asphyxia (newborn breathing difficulties) bycooling babies to zero 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/newsevents/news/newsrecords/2014/July/Treating-oxygen-deprived-newborns-with-hypothermia-improves-survival-without-brain-damage-in-later-childhood.aspx>
, but they lacked funding. “There is a good effort,” said Waiswa, “but 
government and other partners must come on board to push the science to the 
rightful conclusion. Even us – we have come up with a couple of innovations but 
they just die.”

Pauline Irungu, the advocacy and policy manager at the health charity Path in 
Kenya, said maternal and child health in Africa suffered from a lack of 
investment relative to areas such as HIV and Aids, leading to limited 
innovation. The Africa-centred grants will challenge African innovators to 
address other continent-specific health problems, she said.

“HIV came with a bang. It was killing [so many] people and therefore there was 
a huge focus on it –there was a lot of investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/south-africa-hosts-aids-conference-as-experts-warn-of-stalled-progress>
,” said Irungu, who has worked in public health since 2000. “But I think 
because maternal and newborn child [mortality] has always been with us. I 
haven’t seen a similar impetus to put in resources and to push for innovation 
that can change the trajectory.”

Like Waiswa, Irungu hopes the new grants will lead to more Africa-led 
research. “Homegrown solutions combined with world-class innovation is what 
will solve the problems of Africa,” she said. “We can’t stand back and wait for 
someone to design something out there and bring it to Africa, and then we adopt 
it.”

International Women's Day: The fight for better maternal health care in Uganda 
| Jackie Tumuheirwe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/08/international-womens-day-fight-better-maternal-health-care-uganda>
Irungu is in no doubt that African scientists can tackle the continent’s 
problems if given a conducive environment in which to work. “Why are we talking 
about brain-drain? Africa – we – are exporting brains to the west,” she said, 
citing the use of antiretroviral therapy to prevent HIV infection, for which 
proof-of-concept wasdriven by researchers in South Africa 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1001534>
. “We don’t only have the brainpower; we also have institutions that are 
conducting world-class research in Africa. The Kenya Medical Research Institute 
is currently undertaking a study for a malaria vaccine for children.”

Just as enthused about the “Africanness” of the grants was Betty Walakira, 
chief executive officer of the Ugandan NGO Health Child. She says that, in poor 
countries, research funding is not a priority for governments. Yet local 
researchers continue to show good potential to address such problems as 
post-partum bleeding.

 “All this new knowledge is useful in the sense that it can be used in a 
developing country context,” said Walakira, whose organisation promotes 
maternal and child health.

The Ugandan president, Yoweri Museveni, has been talking up the potential of 
his country’s scientists, despite the government’s approach apparently being 
driven more by politics than cohesive policy. At the end of 2015, he was quoted 
as promising to increase the government’s innovation fund from $49m to about 
$143m. In June, Museveni created a department of science, technology and 
innovations, and its new minister, Elioda Tumwesigye, has alreadycalled for a 
substantive innovation fund 
<http://svaki.ru/en-af/a/38083045-science-ministry-needs-innovation-fund-tumwesigye/>
.
 