
To welcome a new year, we are profiling some of the best innovations in 
development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/12-days-of-innovation> – 
from anapp helping health workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/25/safe-delivery-app-maternal-deaths-newborns-baby-pregnancy>
 in remote areas deal with complicated births, todrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/26/drones-farming-crop-problems-uavs>
 monitoring crops for pests and diseases.

Proving that not all innovations have to rely on cutting-edge technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/02/street-lamps-dengue-fever-mosquitoes-malaysia>
, a scheme usingpainted concrete posts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/01/land-disputes-darfur-sudan-practical-action>
 is helping ease tensions between herders and farmers in Darfur. The posts 
allow communities to demarcate paths where cattle and camels are allowed to 
roam, reducing land disputes.

Elsewhere on the site

 * 2015 in review: the year’s top development stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/30/2015-in-review-top-development-stories>
 * The world in 2015: how much do you know? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/30/the-world-in-2015-quiz>
 * Impunity in conflict has cast a dark shadow over aid work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/28/impunity-conflict-cast-dark-shadow-over-aid-humanitarian-work-in-2015>
 * We have one generation to save our cities, global engineering firm warns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/31/one-generation-save-cities-arup-urbanisation-population-climate-change-gregory-hodkinson>
 * Rain just one of the blessings as return visit sees Katine forging ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/31/rain-katine-uganda-return-visit-guardian-readers-health-boreholes>

 * Tensions flare over Canadian gold mine in Kyrgyzstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/05/environmental-threat-canadian-gold-mine-kyrgyzstan>

Opinion

What does access to justice look like? Stacey Cram and Vivek Maru argue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/01/access-to-justice-for-all-sustainable-development-goal-16-indicators>
 that measuring the sustainable development goal of access to justice for all 
should be about more than police and prisons, writing: “We know that justice 
requires not just investment in state institutions but organisation and 
engagement by the people themselves. It is empowered citizens that create 
responsive governments.”



Multimedia

As Guinea was declared free of Ebola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/29/guinea-declared-free-of-ebola>
, two recent galleries explore life after the disease:‘My hope is that there is 
more peace here’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/dec/29/ebola-liberia-guinea-sierra-leone-disease-outbreak>
 andToilet cleaners, gravediggers and survivors tell their story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/jan/04/ebola-toilet-cleaners-gravediggers-survivors-in-pictures>
.

What you said

On Access to justice for all? Now that would be a measurably good thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/01/access-to-justice-for-all-sustainable-development-goal-16-indicators>
,dogbesotted wrote:

The fact about legislation that most people overlook is that from time 
immemorial it has been enacted as a protection for the rich and powerful. It is 
only in relatively recent time that there has been sufficient pressure to move 
towards making justice accessible to all … lately there is a definite swing to 
the good old days where power wields the greatest influence.


Highlight from the blogosphere

Africa Can: Poverty is falling faster for female-headed households in Africa 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/poverty-is-falling-faster-for-female-headed-households-in-africa>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 