
Ouagadougou in five words

Hospitality, culture, singed chickens, mopeds

Sound of the city

This sound conveys all the activities in the great Rood Wooko market of 
Ouagadougou. Located in the middle of the city, it is the centre of social 
activity, culture and trade. Butchers, clothing vendors, electrical shops, 
salons – you name it, it’s got it. In the clip you can hear the call of street 
vendors, the honking of vehicles and the sound of customers arguing for the 
best price.

Best building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a40c51289d2891964b57b45e0814f32e28b3f2f%2F0_0_730_548%2F730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Ouagadougou%3A%20singed%20chicken%2C%20potholes%2C%20but%20no%20plastic%20bags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Ouagadougou%3A%20singed%20chicken%2C%20potholes%2C%20but%20no%20plastic%20bags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a40c51289d2891964b57b45e0814f32e28b3f2f%2F0_0_730_548%2F730.jpg>
 Hall of Martyrs: Ouagadougou’s most famous landmark. Photograph: Burkina 
Tourism 
This hall of fame is located at the end of boulevard Muammar Gaddafi. 
Originally called the Memorial to National Heroes, it was renamed the Hall of 
Martyrs in May 2015 in homage to the victims of the popular uprising inBurkina 
Faso <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burkina-faso>, and in memory of those 
who died.

What this city does better than anywhere else

The kitchen is rich and varied in Burkina, and during a trip to Ouaga, you 
should sink your teeth into the singed chicken known aspoulet bicyclette. This 
delicious dish can be eaten with different vegetables accompanied byBrakina, 
the local beer, or various other natural juices (tamarind and tropical fruits 
juices). Boiled beans, peas and other leaf dishes are also local delicacies. 
You can order these in restaurants – but for the most authentic taste, go to 
the local markets.

Homegrown talent
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D63G5FvfEOcs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D63G5FvfEOcs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D63G5FvfEOcs&media=>
Sa Majesté Askoy is a young Burkinabé rap artist, and currently one of the 
most popular musicians in Ouagadougou, who performs in the localMooré language. 
He has participated in many music festivals and performances in the west 
African region, and in our city, he can be seen performing at theInstitut 
Burkinabè <https://www.facebook.com/InstitutDesArtsEtMetiersDuBurkinaibam/> or 
P’tit Bazar.

Street style

The Faso Dan Fani is a colourful local cotton fabric used by many Ouagalais to 
promote the country’s culture.

How green is the city?


Our city is full of many beautiful green spaces, like the Bangreweogo nature 
reserve, which is a perfect place to take a stroll away from the heat. Or, 
catch a live music performance in the Jardin de l’amitié, a culture park with a 
relaxing atmosphere. In order to protect these parks and other green spaces in 
Ouaga, a law prohibits the importation, marketing and distribution of packaging 
and non-biodegradable plastic bags in the country. This really helps to keep 
our spaces free from garbage.

Best Instagram

Instagram is not a well-used social media platform in Burkina Faso as the 
number of people with a mobile internet connection is very low. However,this 
popular account <https://www.instagram.com/ouagadougou/> provides a nice 
insight into what everyday life is like living in Ouaga.

Biggest controversy


The most recent controversy in Ouagadougou and elsewhere in the country is 
linked to a vigilante-styledefence group called Koglweogo 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/afrique/article/2016/03/11/burkina-faso-abandonnees-les-campagnes-forment-des-milices-armees-populaires_4881332_3212.html>
. This militia group, whose name means “guardians of the forest” in Mooré, was 
created by rural populations to stop, punish and judge criminals. The Koglweogo 
have multiplied around the major cities in central Burkina Faso, to counter 
increasing instances of robbery. Some are volunteers; others work on behalf of 
people who believe they have suffered, in most cases, from livestock or crop 
stealing.

Some of the population believes that this group contributes to the safety of 
neighbourhoods, while others oppose the violent practices of Koglweogo, which 
they believe do not respect human rights.

Worst building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b420c9e535fa45695cb5c604e9a0668c9bdff44%2F0_0_1135_435%2F1135.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Ouagadougou%3A%20singed%20chicken%2C%20potholes%2C%20but%20no%20plastic%20bags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Ouagadougou%3A%20singed%20chicken%2C%20potholes%2C%20but%20no%20plastic%20bags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b420c9e535fa45695cb5c604e9a0668c9bdff44%2F0_0_1135_435%2F1135.jpg>
 Boulevard des Tansoba: Ouagadougou’s worst road? Photograph: Jerome William 
Bationo 
Not quite a building, but the Boulevard des Tansoba is the worst road in the 
city. Connecting the interchange of the East National Highway 4 with the Ouaga 
2000 road, the Boulevard runs through four districts for a total of 6.5km, and 
is the worst piece of construction and infrastructure, according to many 
Ouagalais.

Built in the early 1990s, the road is seriously deteriorating, with huge 
potholes causing accidents. Due to complaints from the public, the authorities 
planned to renovate the route before the end of 2016. But 2017 is fast 
approaching ...

Moment in history


The fight against the amendment of Article 37 of the constitution 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/yuhniwo-ngenge/don%E2%80%99t-touch-my-constitution-burkina-faso's-lesson>
 – which limits presidential time in office to two terms of five years – led to 
a popular uprising in October 2014. Former president Blaise Compaoré wanted to 
amend the constitution to become a candidate once again, after already holding 
power for 27 years. And so, millions of Burkinabé took to the streets in big 
cities like Ouagadougou and Bobo Dioulasso, to demand his resignation. Being 
the capital and the seat of power in the country, Ouagadougou was home to a 
significant political uprising.

The National Assembly and several other public buildings were burned, and 
Compaoré was forced to resign, and fled across the border to Ivory Coast.





Insider’s tip
 Sculptures among the arid landscape outside Ouaga. Photograph: Burkina Tourism
Located about 30km from the heart of Ouagadougou, the site of the Sculpture 
Symposium on Granite Laongo is a field of artistic expression, where many 
sculptors fromAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and the whole 
world have left their mark. Artists come here in February to leave their work 
on the stones.

The biannual Fespaco <https://www.fespaco.bf/fr/> festival, devoted to 
Pan-African cinema, is also worth visiting, to catch some of the best 
up-and-coming African films screened across the city.

Five to follow

Burkina Cahier Culture <http://www.burkinacahierculture.blogspot.com>

Amélie Gué <https://fr-fr.facebook.com/public/Amélie-Gué>

Smockey Abazon <https://twitter.com/smockey_abazon>


Boukari Ouédraogo <http://mondoblog.org/author/boukariblog/>


Kindo Bassératou <https://twitter.com/kindob?lang=en>

About me
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c7935cb7461a766601870300a79e13f44cc0bec%2F0_1_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Ouagadougou%3A%20singed%20chicken%2C%20potholes%2C%20but%20no%20plastic%20bags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Ouagadougou%3A%20singed%20chicken%2C%20potholes%2C%20but%20no%20plastic%20bags&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Finsiders-guide-ouagadougou-tropical-drinks-colourful-fabrics-burkina-faso%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c7935cb7461a766601870300a79e13f44cc0bec%2F0_1_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 It’s me ... Photograph: Jérôme William Bationo 
Jérôme William Bationo <http://www.thisisafrica.me/fr/author/batiano> is a 
journalist andblogger <http://www.burkinacahierculture.blogspot.com> from 
Burkina Faso. He is currently chief-editor of the journalInfo Science and 
Culture <http://www.infosciencesculture.net/>, and works as an art critic and 
correspondent. You can follow himhere 
<https://www.linkedin.com/in/j%C3%A9r%C3%B4me-william-bationo-9a197760>.
 