
In five words

Not just Romeo and Juliet.

Sound of the city 

The River Adige is the focus of the city. In 49BC, Romans designed Verona 
inside a bend of the waterway, which worked as natural defence. Today, that 
area corresponds to the core of the city and is connected to the rest of Verona 
by a series of bridges.

From its start at an Alpine pass of around 1,500m, the river can be crystal 
clear, shining between light green and pinkish grey. During heavy rains, 
however, this pearly water turns into a violent brown mass, dragging mud, 
branches and ducks through the city. One flood was so devastating that there 
still is a plaque three metres above the banks marking the water level on 17 
September 1882, before the embankments were constructed. 

Best building 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87634c7677225355b33a80bfdeacf101680bc89a%2F0_263_4508_2706%2F4508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Verona%3A%20fine%20wines%2C%20opera%20and%20mountain%20psych-folk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Verona%3A%20fine%20wines%2C%20opera%20and%20mountain%20psych-folk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87634c7677225355b33a80bfdeacf101680bc89a%2F0_263_4508_2706%2F4508.jpg>
 Through invasions and earthquakes, San Zeno stands tall. Photograph: Giovanna 
Girardi 
Local people love San Zeno church. Not just for religious reasons, but because 
the big square in front is where old people chat, others read and children 
play. Of course, they also love its beauty: San Zeno is a magnificent example 
of Romanesque architecture. After invasions, destructions and a major 
earthquake, what is left today is the version built in 1138, with a few changes 
made in 1398.

… and the worst
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cc243405faafeba31f705040c175ca63a3c74d7%2F0_286_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Verona%3A%20fine%20wines%2C%20opera%20and%20mountain%20psych-folk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Verona%3A%20fine%20wines%2C%20opera%20and%20mountain%20psych-folk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cc243405faafeba31f705040c175ca63a3c74d7%2F0_286_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 The ugly neighbour next door. Photograph: Giovanna Girardi 
Less than two hundred metres from San Zeno, there’s a large underground car 
park. Completed in 2013 despite neighbourhood protests, Park San Zeno 
dramatically changed the look of the area, and according to some who work 
there, it’s ugly, expensive, not very busy and floods when it rains.

Homeground talent

C+C=Maxigross are a musical collective. The band records in a small village in 
the Lessini mountains to the north east of Verona – a place to which the group 
feels a strong connection. The titles of their albums: Singar, Ruvain and 
Fluttarn mean respectively “singing”, “making noise” and “fluctuate” in 
Cimbrian – a German dialect spoken only in the Lessini area. C+C=Maxigross have 
performed their mountain psych-folk at renowned national and international 
festivals including Arezzo Wave and Primavera Sound in Barcelona.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz8m4Okvy09w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz8m4Okvy09w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz8m4Okvy09w&media=>
Biggest controversy

Since mayor Flavio Tosi was first elected in 2007, the town hall has sold many 
historical buildings owned to private companies, often despite public 
opposition.

An ongoing case concerns the vast Hapsburg arsenal from the 19th century that 
was given to the city by the Italian Army in 1995. It functions as a large 
public garden, yet a big part of the building still needs to be structurally 
secured. The city’s administration recently approved a project with private 
firm Italiana Costruzioni, which is likely to alter the structure of the 
building, but a citizen-founded committee is opposing this decision. They are 
instead asking for a cultural centre, designed in collaboration withFondo 
Ambiente Italiano <http://eng.fondoambiente.it/> (FAI), a national trust 
protecting Italy’s natural and cultural heritage.

Most under-rated location?

Ex Macello is an ancient building on the River Adige. Once a butchers’ 
headquarters,the building is now home to bars and a few artisan shops. Despite 
its great potential, Ex Macello still isn’t too popular with Veronesi people.


The look on the street

How green is your city?

According to the Italian National Institute of Statistics (Istat), only 4.4% 
of Verona is public green space. This is mostly made up of villas or gardens of 
cultural interest – and parks. Moreover, people have been actively using 
recycling facilities since 2004, and many move around by bicycle, especially in 
the centre. However, a high presence of PM10 air pollution is an issue: even if 
the level of particles has decreased in recent years, PM10 pollution continues 
to be above EU limits.

Moment in history 

On 10 August 1913, Giovanni Zenatello, a tenor from Verona, and a theatre 
manager, Ottone Rovato, decided to commemorate the 100th anniversary of 
Giuseppe Verdi’s birth, by presenting Verdi’s Aida opera inside the Roman 
amphitheatre in the heart of the city. That was the beginning of the famous
Arena Opera Festival 
<http://www.arena.it/arena/en/season/performances-of-the-arena-opera-festival.html>
, which continues to takes place every summer in our city.

What does your city does better than anywhere else?

Wine. The countryside around Verona is cultivated primarily with vineyards and 
the range of wines is incredibly diverse: from homemade Valpolicella Classico 
to the award-winning Amarone, from Custoza (a white wine perfect with lake 
fish) to the sweet red Recioto dessert wine. The list is so long that in the 
city it’s normal to drink only wine from Verona.Vinitaly 
<http://www.vinitaly.com/en/> – the world’s largest fair for winemakers and 
sellers – takes place here each spring.

Best Instagram

Best local artist

Luca Trevisani <http://www.lucatrevisani.eu> was born in Verona in 1979 and 
lives between Italy and Berlin. His art crosses disciplines like sculpture, 
graphics, design and video. Trevisani has exhibited in some of the most 
important spaces dedicated to contemporary art, from the Venice Biennale to the 
Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo.

Top insider tips 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2da933e3d6e807a29b15646e279bd9bbec09202%2F0_0_1024_683%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Verona%3A%20fine%20wines%2C%20opera%20and%20mountain%20psych-folk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Verona%3A%20fine%20wines%2C%20opera%20and%20mountain%20psych-folk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2da933e3d6e807a29b15646e279bd9bbec09202%2F0_0_1024_683%2F1024.jpg>
 Cantine de l’Arena. Photograph: Cantine de l'Arena 
Cantine de l’Arena, an old wine cellar turned into a cosy and charming space, 
is where people go to listen to excellent jazz and blues while sipping a good 
glass of local wine.

Five to follow


Salmon Magazine <https://www.facebook.com/SalmonMagazine/?fref=ts>

Film Festival Lessina <http://www.ffdl.it/it/>


Amici dei Musei di Verona <http://www.amicideimuseidiverona.it>

Path Festival <http://www.pathfestival.it/lineup/>

Tocatí <https://tocati.it>

From me
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f37a0a21c16853416ca28d53c54037940825ccc%2F0_544_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Verona%3A%20fine%20wines%2C%20opera%20and%20mountain%20psych-folk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Verona%3A%20fine%20wines%2C%20opera%20and%20mountain%20psych-folk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsider-guide-verona-fine-wine-opera-mountain-psych-folk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f37a0a21c16853416ca28d53c54037940825ccc%2F0_544_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Giovanna Girardi. Photograph: Claudia De Leo 
Giovanna Girardi is a freelance journalist. She writes mostly about culture, 
has worked as video reporter and runs a radio programme called Hula Night Show 
with a friend. Check out herblog <http://epicocinema.weebly.com/> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GirardiGi>.
 