
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> 
rounded off their impressive 2016 on a losing note as a depleted Croatia became 
the first visiting side to win at Windsor Park in three years.

Since Cristiano Ronaldo scored a hat‑trick in a 4-2 win for Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/06/northern-ireland-portugal-matchreport>
, Michael O’Neill’s men had recorded eight wins and two draws in their previous 
10 fixtures in Belfast, but they were undone by a Croatia team missing Luka 
Modric, Ivan Rakitic and Dejan Lovren among others in a 3-0 defeat. Mario 
Mandzukic opened the scoring by bundling home in the ninth minute – his 29th 
international goal and the first goal Northern Ireland had conceded at Windsor 
Park in 463 minutes. Duje Cop doubled their lead 10 minutes before the break 
with Andrej Kramaric adding a third after 67 minutes.

Jamie Vardy leads the way but England held by second-string Spain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
It was the heaviest defeat since a 6-0 loss against Holland in June 2012, 
though it did little to detract from a calendar year during which Northern 
Ireland featured at a finals for the first time in three decades, having also 
put together a record-breaking 12-match unbeaten run en route to Euro 2016.

Italy and Germany had to settle for a goalless draw from their friendly at the 
San Siro in Milan. TheAzzurri, who romped to a 4-0 win against Liechtenstein in 
their World Cup qualifier on Saturday, handed a start to the veteran 
Internazionale forward Eder in a three-man attack whileGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> gave a debut to the Wolfsburg 
youngster Yannick Gerhardt.

Neither side, whose Euro 2016 quarter-final in Bordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/02/germany-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
 was settled after a lengthy penalty shootout, could make a breakthrough. The 
Bayer Leverkusen forward Kevin Volland saw a second-half effort disallowed for 
a marginal offside call, before with eight minutes left, the Italy forward 
Andrea Belotti watched a shot come back off the inside of the post.

There were also no goals between France and Ivory Coast at the Stade Felix 
Bollaert-Delelis in Lens. France included Paul Pogba, Chelsea’s N’Golo Kanté 
and Dimitri Payet of West Ham United in their lineup along with the Borussia 
Dortmund prospect Ousmane Dembélé. But Didier Deschamps’s side could not find a 
way through against the Elephants, who are top of their CAF qualifying group 
following a goalless draw away against Morocco last weekend.

Julen Lopetegui’s Spain leave it late but depart with reputations intact | Sid 
Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/julen-lopetegui-spain-new-manager-england-wembley-draw-friendly>
The 2018 World Cup hosts Russia defeated Romania 1-0 with a stoppage-time goal 
from Magomed Ozdoev in the first international game to be played in Chechnya.
Iceland won 2-0 away in Malta with goals from Arnor Traustason and Sverrir Ingi 
Ingason.

Sweden ran out 2-0 winners against Hungary at Ferenc Puskas Stadion, where 
debutant Sam Larsson opened the scoring with a free-kick after 30 minutes and 
Isaac Kiese Thelin added another in the 67th minute.

A goal from Evgen Shakhov late in the first half was enough to secure Ukraine 
a 1-0 win againstSerbia in Kiev.

The Czech Republic and Denmark drew 1-1 in Mlada Boleslav. The hosts went 
ahead after eight minutes through Antonin Barak for his first senior goal 
before Nicolai Jorgensen equalised half an hour later. It finished goalless 
betweenAustria and Slovakia at the Ernst Happel Stadion in Vienna.
 