
Internal records show how Centrelink’s flawed debt recovery system is sending 
letters to old addresses, getting earnings figures wildly wrong, duplicating 
employers and inaccurately averaging out yearly income.

Guardian Australia has obtained a series of staff logs relating to a $14,000 
welfare debt imposed on a nurse, who asked for anonymity, late last year.

The woman says the entire debt is false, but, despite lodging a dispute, has 
beenreferred to a debt collector and forced to start paying $140 a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/call-to-suspend-centrelink-system-after-single-mother-receives-24000-debt-notice>
.

Call to suspend Centrelink system after single mother receives $24,000 debt 
notice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/call-to-suspend-centrelink-system-after-single-mother-receives-24000-debt-notice>
The staff logs document the attempts of Centrelink to review the $14,000 debt 
created by the automated system, and furtherhighlight the dangers of removing 
human oversight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
.

The widespread examples of flaws in the system come as the ABC reveals 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-12/centrelink-memo-shows-staff-ordered-not-to-process-debt-disputes/8177652>
 an internal Centrelink memo ordering frontline staff working in branches not 
to process disputes over the flawed debt recovery scheme and instead refer 
people to an online portal.

The memo says staff “should refer customers online to undertake the 
intervention” and “must not process activities in relation to the Online 
Compliance Intervention”.

Centrelink’s initial letter to the nurse was sent to an old address in August, 
and she remained oblivious to any potential debt.

Because she failed to reply, the information held by the Australian taxation 
office was taken to be accurate andCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> created three separate 
debts in early October for supposedly overpaid youth allowance, worth $3,700, 
$4,300, and $6,560.

But staff logs show the automated system had repeatedly duplicated employers, 
failing to identify instances where a business had been named in two different 
ways.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7027cc5bbe511ee67426c8a9e9946a8287d63a23%2F0_0_682_287%2F682.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Internal%20Centrelink%20records%20reveal%20flaws%20behind%20debt%20recovery%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Internal%20Centrelink%20records%20reveal%20flaws%20behind%20debt%20recovery%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7027cc5bbe511ee67426c8a9e9946a8287d63a23%2F0_0_682_287%2F682.jpg>
 Staff logs show Centrelink’s automated system is erroneously duplicating 
employers. Photograph: - 
Centrelink staff, when they reviewed the case in November, quickly discovered 
the problem. “[Name removed] and [name removed] are the exact same employer 
income has been doubled up on this one,” staff logs noted.

And again: “[Name removed] and [name removed] is the same employer as well 
this needs to be corrected so not a double income.”

And again: “Customer has declared earnings under [name removed] for match data 
period. ABN search shows both ABN’s relate [name removed]/[name removed], have 
made the decision to upload match data to current employer on system and update 
ABN.”

Because she had not responded to initial letters, the system also crudely 
averaged out the yearly income for the 12 different employers she had worked 
for on a part-time or casual basis between 2010 and 2014.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fd1121b10ee9ad2effc8ab0d377409b5d20b25a%2F0_0_708_432%2F708.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Internal%20Centrelink%20records%20reveal%20flaws%20behind%20debt%20recovery%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Internal%20Centrelink%20records%20reveal%20flaws%20behind%20debt%20recovery%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fd1121b10ee9ad2effc8ab0d377409b5d20b25a%2F0_0_708_432%2F708.png>
 A screenshot showing how Centrelink’s automated system is crudely averaging 
out an annual income over fortnightly reporting periods. Photograph: - 
Her yearly income for each of those employers was spread out across 
Centrelink’s 26 fortnightly reporting periods, making her ineligible for youth 
allowance and creating debts.

The initial letters, even had they gone to the correct address, contained 
glaring errors. A first letter, sent on 4 August, tells the woman that 
Australian taxation office records suggest she earned a total of $956 from 17 
employers between 2010 and 2014. A second letter, sent a week later, changed 
that figure to $95,613.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed981038ab00df6984bda1e36687e48e50d4439b%2F0_0_1217_853%2F1217.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Internal%20Centrelink%20records%20reveal%20flaws%20behind%20debt%20recovery%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Internal%20Centrelink%20records%20reveal%20flaws%20behind%20debt%20recovery%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Finternal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed981038ab00df6984bda1e36687e48e50d4439b%2F0_0_1217_853%2F1217.jpg>
 Centrelink sent these two letters to the same woman within a week of each 
other – the first showing glaring errors. Photograph: - 
The error was later noted by staff in the logs in mid-September. “The income 
details recorded in the initial PAYG contact letter may differ from the amounts 
advised by the ATO. The customer has been issued with a second PAYG contact 
letter with the correct details on it,” staff noted.

“Customer has been advised by phone that a new contact letter will be issued. 
After speaking to cust [sic] appears we have an old address, so have now 
updated the current address.”

Centrelink debt notices based on 'idiotic' faith in big data, IT expert says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
But, even when staff realised they had sent the initial letters to the wrong 
address, another mistake was made.

Staff took down the woman’s newer address inaccurately, and the three 
subsequent debt notices were sent to someoneelse’s address. The failure to 
respond to those letters saw the woman referred to the debt collection agency, 
Dun & Bradstreet.

She was forced to begin paying the debt, even though she has lodged a dispute. 
The woman placed $500 on a credit card to afford the repayments. She said she 
has also suffered considerable distress.

The nurse has given Centrelink all of her payslips showing that she had 
properly reported her income and was eligible for benefits.
 