
‘I’ll be the first wheelchair user to go to every country on Earth’

After many conversations with fellow travellers (most of whom I’d hosted via 
theCouchsurfing <https://www.couchsurfing.com/> website), I felt that I needed 
a very ambitious challenge to match my rare set of circumstances. I have 
restrictions on all of my joints, and two metal rods screwed into my spine 
(plus spinal fusion). So it seemed a perfect fit to try to become the first 
wheelchair user to visit every country, as I was hellbent on exploring as much 
of the world as I could.I have a gigantically long road ahead, as my current 
tally stands at only 22. I’m adding countries 23, 24 and 25 in the coming days, 
as I travel to Malaysia, then on to Australia and New Zealand. I’ve set myself 
a target of reaching 20 new countries every year, which by my reckoning would 
give me the complete set within a decade. Travelling with a disability throws 
up many interesting challenges – I’ve been chased by savage dogs on Cat Ba, 
Vietnam, while clinging for dear life to the back of my friend’s scooter, all 
the while sitting in my wheelchair. And determined to make it to theGrande 
Dixence Dam in Valais 
<http://www.myswitzerland.com/en-gb/grande-dixence-dam.html> in Switzerland, I 
abandoned my car and my wheelchair due to impassable roads and crawled through 
three-feet-deep snow. I try to make the most of my time on the road, and in 
Wellington I’ll spend two months working for the World Wildlife Fund as a 
volunteer.
Anthony William

‘We’re visiting all our Facebook friends in person’
 David Hurst is reunited with his best mate, Dane. Photograph: David Hurst 
When, unexpectedly, my wife Debs and I lost two close friends within a few 
months of each other in 2012, we were aghast it had been so long since we’d 
seen them – not just seen them onFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, but actually hugged them.

So we downsized our Devon cottage to afford a motorhome and deferred our two 
boys, Daniel, 5, and Darley, 4, from school – then visited as many Facebook 
friends as possible, in person. Initially for a three-month period from October 
2014, it has so far stretched to more than a year of almost continual travel. 
We’ve now covered 26,000 miles in our trusty motorhome to see more than 300 
friends, not only in Britain but also France, Switzerland, Spain and Morocco.

It’s been an unforgettable challenge. We’ll forever remember the joy on the 
faces of Debs’ four cousins, who she’d not seen for 20 years. And there were 
tears when we saw each others’ children for the first time.

Then there was the hug I’ll always cherish from my old best mate, Dane, after 
we had let three decades slip by without seeing each other.

Next we’d love to see everyone else – the majority in America and Australia. 
We think we have our priorities deliriously spot on.
David Hurst




‘We’re riding a tandem round the world on £10 a day’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fintrepid-adventure-trip-of-lifetime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1779239d5331bb41cae6cfbe34006945a3c6a6%2F37_71_1492_1552%2F1492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Intrepid%20travellers%3A%20three%20trips%20of%20a%20lifetime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fintrepid-adventure-trip-of-lifetime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Intrepid%20travellers%3A%20three%20trips%20of%20a%20lifetime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fintrepid-adventure-trip-of-lifetime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1779239d5331bb41cae6cfbe34006945a3c6a6%2F37_71_1492_1552%2F1492.jpg>
 Chloe White and her husband Will. Photograph: Chloe White 
There will always be someone around who will tell you that going there and 
doing that is madness and will result in certain death. In our travels, one 
challenge for my husband Will and I has been to remain open to advice, while 
not being put off by scare stories.

Our idea is to cycle our tandem east, leaving home in March, first to Spain, 
then by various boats to Greece, and on through Turkey, Georgia, Armenia, Iran, 
Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, China, South Korea and Japan. We’ll then 
fly over to the US, cycle through the southern states and up to New York, and 
fly back to the UK.

We have a budget of £10 a day each for 18 months, which we think will be OK if 
we camp a lot and don’t treat ourselves too often. This is all we know at the 
moment, and we haven’t been training. But one thing we have learned is that 
there’s only so much planning and thinking you can do before you just have to 
go.
Chloe White
 