
More than 800 small investors may have lost up to £8m after the failure of two 
controversial ‘mini-bonds’ that promised interest of up to 8.25%.

Providence Bonds <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bonds> were marketed as 
an investment in a “fast-growing, global commercial and financial services 
group” that had offices across the world. Savers enjoyed multiple levels of 
security, according to the promoter, London-based Independent Portfolio 
Managers.

But last month it emerged that Providence Financial Investments, part of the 
Providence Group, was under investigation in the US by theSecurities and 
Exchange Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/securities-and-exchange-commission>, the 
US regulator. It was accused of offering “ongoing fraudulent and unregistered” 
securities, and ordered to stop trading.


Soon after, the Guernsey-based Providence Global, the holding company for 
Providence’s non-US interests, wascompulsorily wound up 
<http://www.gfsc.gg/The-Commission/News/Pages/Providence-Global-Limited-.aspx>, 
and now Deloitte has stepped in asadministrator to the bonds 
<http://www.deloitte-insolvencies.co.uk/providencebonds>. It is unclear what, 
if any, cash is left in the bonds.

The UK bonds were approved and promoted by IPM, a Financial Conduct 
Authority-regulated company. But mini-bonds are outside of the official 
compensation scheme, so investors are at risk of losing all their money.

It is not the first time that IPM has been at the centre of a collapsed bond. 
The firm acted as a security trustee for Secured EnergyBonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/bonds> (SEB), another issue that failed and 
left investors with losses of more than £7m.

In September 2015, the Guardian’s Money pages warned about the Providence issue
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2015/sep/05/independent-portfolio-managers-ipm-mini-bond-losses>
, advising readers to bin the offer documents.

Investors in the failed SEB bonds were targeted by IPM to also invest in 
Providence Bonds. Many are highly critical of both the role of IPM and the 
financial regulators. One, Paul Donovan, said: “I complained to IPM and the 
ombudsman about the former using the SEB database to promote the Providence 
Bond. Now, guess what, the Providence Bond has gone into administration. IPM 
playing a similar role, while the so-called regulators sit on their hands and 
let more people go to the wall. This really is getting beyond a joke.”

The Guardian tried calling and emailing Providence Bonds. Calls went 
unanswered, while emails are returned with a note saying that the company has 
gone into administration and that all enquiries should be directed to Deloitte 
atprovidencebonds@deloitte.co.uk <mailto:providencebonds@deloitte.co.uk>.

Investors had their first inkling of problems at Providence when a quarterly 
interest payment came late. One investor said: “The June 30 payment was paid 
late on 8 July – we were advised it would be late …due to their moving offshore 
to Guernsey – never a good sign! Next payment is due 30 September – but 
obviously it will not be paid as they are in administration.”

The Guardian put questions to IPM but it had not responded by the time we 
published.

Providence Bonds and Providence Financial Investment are not connected to 
Provident Financial plc, a British financial services group based in Bradford, 
West Yorkshire which specialises in credit cards, personal loans, and consumer 
car finance.

According to a filing by the SEC 
<https://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/2016/lr23567.htm>, Providence 
Financial and Providence Fund raised $64m (£48m) from 400 US investors, 
“through the unregistered sale of promissory notes that pay annual returns 
generally ranging from 12% to 13%”. It told investors the money would be used 
to fund the “factoring” of accounts receivable in Brazil.

“Contrary to these representations, the complaint alleges that Providence 
Financial and Providence Fund spent, at best, less than 68% of their investors’ 
money to finance Brazil factoring transactions, and both companies have been 
unable to account for how they spent the remaining investor proceed,” said the 
SEC.
 