
In the valleys between Damascus and Lebanon, where whole communities had 
abandoned their lives to war, a change is taking place. For the first time 
since the conflict broke out, people are starting to return.

But the people settling in are not the same as those who fled during the past 
six years.

The new arrivals have a different allegiance and faith to the predominantly 
Sunni Muslim families who once lived there. They are, according to those who 
have sent them, the vanguard of a move to repopulate the area with Shia Muslims 
not just from elsewhere inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, but 
also from Lebanon and Iraq.


The population swaps are central to a plan to make demographic changes to 
parts of Syria, realigning the country into zones of influence that backers of 
Bashar al-Assad, led by Iran, can directly control and use to advance broader 
interests.Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> is stepping up its 
efforts as the heat of the conflict starts to dissipate and is pursuing a very 
different vision to Russia, Assad’s other main backer.

Russia, in an alliance with Turkey, is using a nominal ceasefire to push for a 
political consensus between the Assad regime and the exiled opposition. Iran, 
meanwhile, has begun to move on a project that will fundamentally alter the 
social landscape of Syria, as well as reinforcing the Hezbollah stronghold of 
north-eastern Lebanon, and consolidating its influence from Tehran to Israel’s 
northern border.

“Iran and the regime don’t want any Sunnis between Damascus and Homs and the 
Lebanese border,” said one senior Lebanese leader. “This represents a historic 
shift in populations.”

Key for Iran are the rebel-held towns of Zabadani and Madaya, where Damascus 
residents took summer breaks before the war. Since mid-2015 their fate has been 
the subject of prolonged negotiations between senior Iranian officials and 
members of Ahrar al-Sham, the dominant anti-Assad opposition group in the area 
and one of the most powerful in Syria.


Talks in Istanbul have centred on a swap of residents from two Shia villages 
west of Aleppo, Fua and Kefraya, which have both been bitterly contested over 
the past three years. Opposition groups, among them jihadis, had besieged both 
villages throughout the siege of Aleppo, attempting to tie their fate to the 
formerly rebel-held eastern half of the city.


The swap, according to its architects, was to be a litmus test for more 
extensive population shifts, along the southern approaches to Damascus and in 
the Alawite heartland of Syria’s north-west, from where Assad draws much of his 
support.

Map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/syria_pop_swap-zip/giv-3902mm3U5MnGJU0Z/>
Labib al-Nahas, the chief of foreign relations for Ahrar al-Sham, who led 
negotiations in Istanbul, said Tehran was seeking to create areas it could 
control. “Iran was very ready to make a full swap between the north and south. 
They wanted a geographical continuation into Lebanon. Full sectarian 
segregation is at the heart of the Iranian project in Syria. They are looking 
for geographical zones that they can fully dominate and influence. This will 
have repercussions on the entire region.


“[The sieges of] Madaya and Zabadani became the key issue to prevent the 
opposition from retaking Fua and Kefraya, which have exclusive populations of 
Shia. Hezbollah consider this a security zone and a natural extension of their 
territory in Lebanon. They have had very direct orders from the spiritual 
leadership of Iran to protect them at any cost.”

Iran has been especially active around all four towns through its Hezbollah 
proxies. Along the ridgelines between Lebanon’s Bekaa valley and into the 
outskirts of Damascus, Hezbollah has been a dominant presence, laying siege to 
Madaya and Zabadani and reinforcing the Syrian capital. Wadi Barada to the 
north-west, where ongoing fighting is in breach of the Russian-brokered 
ceasefire, is also part of the calculations, sources within the Lebanon-based 
movement have confirmed.

Elsewhere in Syria, demographic swaps are also reshaping the geopolitical 
fabric of communities that, before the war, had coexisted for centuries. In 
Darayya, south-west of Damascus, more than 300 Iraqi Shia families moved into 
neighbourhoods abandoned by rebels last August as part of a surrender deal. Up 
to 700 rebel fighters were relocated to Idlib province and state media 
announced within days that the Iraqis had arrived.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Firans-syria-project-pushing-population-shifts-to-increase-influence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe79f9693e9e71bb06732561165b5473fed139e33%2F0_178_1851_1111%2F1851.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20repopulates%20Syria%20with%20Shia%20Muslims%20to%20help%20tighten%20regime's%20control&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Firans-syria-project-pushing-population-shifts-to-increase-influence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20repopulates%20Syria%20with%20Shia%20Muslims%20to%20help%20tighten%20regime%27s%20control&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Firans-syria-project-pushing-population-shifts-to-increase-influence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe79f9693e9e71bb06732561165b5473fed139e33%2F0_178_1851_1111%2F1851.jpg>
 The Sayeda Zainab mosque has been heavily fortified by Hezbollah. Photograph: 
Kaveh Kazemi/Getty Images 
Shia shrines in Darayya and Damascus have been a raison d’etre for the 
presence of Hezbollah and other Iranian-backed Shia groups. The Sayeda Zainab 
mosque on the capital’s western approach has been heavily fortified by 
Hezbollah and populated by families of the militant group, who have moved in 
since late 2012. Tehran has also bought large numbers of homes near the Zainab 
mosque, and a tract of land, which it is using to create a security buffer – a 
microcosm of its grander project.

Abu Mazen Darkoush, a former FSA commander who fled Zabadani for Wadi Barada 
said Damascus’s largest Islamic shrine, the Umayyad mosque, was now also a 
security zone controlled by Iranian proxies. “There are many Shia who were 
brought into the area around the mosque. It is a Sunni area but they plan for 
it to be secured by Shias, then surrounded by them.”

Senior officials in neighbouring Lebanon have been monitoring what they 
believe has been a systematic torching of Land Registry offices in areas of 
Syria recaptured on behalf of the regime. A lack of records make it difficult 
for residents to prove home ownership. Offices are confirmed to have been 
burned in Zabadani, Darayya, Syria’s fourth city, Homs, and Qusayr on the 
Lebanese border, which was seized by Hezbollah in early 2013.

Darkoush said whole neighbourhoods had been cleansed of their original 
inhabitants in Homs, and that many residents had been denied permission to 
return to their homes, with officials citing lack of proof that they had indeed 
lived there.

“The first step in the plan has been achieved,” he said. “It involved 
expelling the inhabitants of these areas and burning up anything which connects 
them to their land and homes. The second step will be replacing the original 
inhabitants with newcomers from Iraq and Lebanon.”

In Zabadani, Amir Berhan, director of the town’s hospital, said: “The 
displacement from here started in 2012 but increased dramatically in 2015. Now 
most of our people have already been taken to Idlib. There is a clear and 
obvious plan to move Sunnis from between Damascus and Homs. They have burned 
their homes and fields. They are telling people ‘this place is not for you 
anymore’.

“This is leading to the fragmentation of families. The concept of family life 
and ties to the land is being dissolved by all this deportation and exile. It 
is shredding Syrian society.”

At stake in postwar Syria, with the war beginning to ebb, is more than who 
lives where when the fighting finally stops. A sense of identity is also up for 
grabs, as is the bigger question of who gets to define the national character.

“This is not just altering the demographic balance,” said Labib al-Nahas. 
“This is altering the balance of influence in all of these areas and across 
Syria itself. Whole communities will be vulnerable. War with Iran is becoming 
an identity war. They want a country in their likeness, serving their 
interests. The region can’t tolerate that.”

Additional reporting by Suzan Haidamous
 