
In July this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/south-sudan-is-the-renewed-violence-the-restart-of-civil-war>
, nearly every international humanitarian organisation pulled out some staff 
from South Sudan’s capital, Juba, following days of fighting. In the case of my 
organisation (Care International 
<http://www.careinternational.org.uk/emergencies/south-sudan>), we were back in 
the country within five days. But three months on, many institutions continue 
to maintain a minimal presence on the ground and the mood among aid workers has 
dipped following the reports ofrape and murder of humanitarians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/south-sudan-aid-worker-rape-attack-united-nations-un>
 and continuing attacks in parts of the country that seem to be purposefully 
targeting aid workers.

South Sudan has now become one of the most dangerous countries in the world to 
be an aid worker, with a total of67 humanitarians killed 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/south-sudan-humanitarian-bulletin-issue-16-20-october-2016>
 since the outbreak of conflict in 2013.

So what is the threshold for withdrawal? Each NGO will have its own answer, 
but is there a bottom line we all share? Is the need dire enough to justify 
continuing to help the people affected even after the killing of one aid 
worker, maybe two?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fis-it-too-dangerous-for-aid-workers-to-be-in-south-sudan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a7c57001c82816a65a32d7ac10cfe67d41f56b8%2F484_0_2037_1759%2F2037.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20too%20dangerous%20for%20aid%20workers%20to%20be%20in%20South%20Sudan%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fis-it-too-dangerous-for-aid-workers-to-be-in-south-sudan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20too%20dangerous%20for%20aid%20workers%20to%20be%20in%20South%20Sudan%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fis-it-too-dangerous-for-aid-workers-to-be-in-south-sudan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a7c57001c82816a65a32d7ac10cfe67d41f56b8%2F484_0_2037_1759%2F2037.jpg>
 Fred McCray. Photograph: Care International 
Nobody wants to make this kind of cold-blooded calculation and despite what 
some may think, there is rarely a guy squirrelled away in a dusty windowless HQ 
crunching these kinds of numbers and assessing risk. Instead, it often comes 
down to individuals in the country, like me, to make these terrible decisions – 
the bottom line for us right now is thatwe will stay 
<http://www.careinternational.org.uk/stories/south-sudan-we-wont-give-up-on-you>
. With one in five people forced to flee their homes and more than half the 
population needing urgent humanitarian assistance, the need is too great.

While NGOs can’t control all the factors responsible for security, we need to 
look at how programmes can function when staff cannot access them.

Attack on aid workers in South Sudan: 'There was incredible naivety'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/17/attack-on-aid-workers-in-south-sudan-there-was-incredible-naivety>
One way is to empower local communities to take ownership of projects – this 
can be key to keeping programmes alive in some of the most dangerous places. In
Dadaab refugee camp <http://www.careinternational.org.uk/countries/kenya>, 
Kenya, Care International has trained more than 1,500 refugees to support the 
humanitarian operation. During times of heightened security threats this has 
allowed refugees themselves to continue running operations when the camp has 
been inaccessible to non-refugee staff.

Another measure that could be taken to ensure NGOs stay present in South Sudan 
and improve the safety for aid workers is reform of the UN peacekeeping force 
in the country. Around $1bn is spent on peacekeeping forces inSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> who have repeatedly been found 
to have failed in their basic mandate of protecting civilians and aid workers.

As we see a new UN secretary general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/antonio-guterres-next-un-secretary-general>
 about to take office – one with a humanitarian background – anda new head 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=55372#.WBNX_vorKFg> of the UN 
mission in South Sudan, now is the time to make changes. Countries providing 
funds to peacekeeping forces around the world must hold troops accountable to 
higher standards and make sure that their performance is a core focus area for 
António Guterres Guterres in his new office.

If you would like to comment on the unfolding situation for aid workers in 
South Sudan, please email us at Globaldevpros@theguardian.com, putting ‘Aid 
Worker safety’ in the subject field.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.




 