
In previous years, if there was one thing that could put you off having a 
summer holiday inTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, it was the 
crowds. People tell you that spring or autumn are the best times to go – the 
temperature is soothingly balmy, and you can find a spot at the beach/ancient 
ruins/restaurant without too much trouble. But this year, big crowds are 
unlikely to be a problem at any time.

The country has been rocked by terrorist attacks over the past 12 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/ankara-car-bomb-kurdish-militants-claim-responsibility-attacks>
, with several particularlydeadly bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/19/istanbul-hit-by-deadly-bomb-attack>
 this year alone, and unsurprisingly tourism is being affected. According to 
one survey, visitor arrivals in February were more than10% down on the same 
time last year <http:>. Summer is looking worse. Thomas Cook says there has 
been a “marked shift in demand, with significantly lower bookings” to Turkey. 
The travel company Tui reported a40% drop in summer holiday bookings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/09/turkey-holiday-bookings-hit-by-migrant-crisis-tui-says>
. According to the market research company GfK, overall there has been a 32% 
drop in the number of summer bookings to Turkey (last year, bookings to the 
country grew 11%).Cruise liners have cancelled stops in Turkey 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/destinations/europe/turkey/articles/Cruise-lines-avoiding-Turkey-ports-due-to-safety-concerns/>
, tour operators have cut capacity and some, such as Mark Warner,have pulled 
out of the country altogether 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/destinations/europe/turkey/articles/mark-warner-pulls-out-of-turkey-amid-security-fears/>
.

Can Middle East tourism ever recover?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/24/can-middle-east-tourism-ever-recover-terrorist-attacks-egypt-tunisia>
Suicide bombers targeted the capital Ankara in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/ankara-explosion-turkey-injures-large-number-of-people-reports-say>
 andMarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/ankara-car-bomb-kurdish-militants-claim-responsibility-attacks>
 – the attacks were claimed by TAK, a Kurdish nationalist group. Two attacks on 
Istanbul (which tourists are more likely to visit) inJanuary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/12/explosion-istanbul-square-sultanahmet-turkey>
 andMarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/19/istanbul-hit-by-deadly-bomb-attack>
 were blamed on Islamic State. TheForeign Office advises 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/turkey> against travel to the 
south-east of the country, near the borders with Iraq and Syria. It says 
“further attacks are likely”, and acknowledges tourists could be targets, but 
it advises only vigilance, not staying away, for the rest of the country.

“I wouldn’t advise people to stay away, but I would advise them to make 
themselves aware of the reality of the threat,” says Henry Wilkinson, the head 
of intelligence and analysis at theRisk Advisory Group 
<https://www.riskadvisory.net/>. In the past 12 months, his company has 
recorded 258 terrorist attacks in Turkey, “but the vast majority have occurred 
in the south-eastern provinces where there is an active PKK [outlawed Kurdistan 
Workers’ party] insurgency and cross-border activity. So far, we haven’t seen 
tourist resorts targeted as we did in 2006.” Between June and August 2006, five 
bomb attacks on tourist resorts in south-western Turkey killed seven people.

An Isis-inspired attack on tourists at the beach, similar to the atrocity in 
Tunisia last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/25/tourists-tunisia-june-terror-attack-economy-beach-hotel-sousse>
, in which 38 people died, is “certainly possible”, he says. “Islamic State has 
demonstrated that it is willing to target tourist resorts. It recognises that 
tourism is a particularly vulnerable point in the economy.”

Still, it is worth remembering that more than 2.5 million Britons visit Turkey 
every year. Although the bombings in Istanbul were attempts to hit public 
spaces, where foreigners were likely to be present, Wilkinson says: “You would 
have much greater cause for concern [for your safety] if you were in the 
security forces or military, or were in politics.” As a tourist, he says, “the 
likelihood of being caught up in an attack is relatively low”.
 