
It’s the time of year that every gamer loves: the shops are filled with brand 
newPlayStation <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation>, Xbox and 
Nintendo releases and you can’t switch on the television without an advert for 
some blockbusting sci-fi shooter attacking your eyeballs.

But if you’ve resisted the lure of the latest games consoles for the last two 
years, is now the time to dive in?

Here are five reasons why the answer may quite possibly be yes.

Developers are getting to grips with the hardware

Just after the launch of PlayStation 4, the machine’s designer Mark Cerny said 
<http://www.videogamer.com/news/cerny_explains_how_ps4s_graphics_will_evolve_over_time.html>
 it would be three years before we saw studios starting to truly exploit the 
capabilities of the hardware – for example, using the graphics processor for 
other tasks such as collision detection and physics to boost performance. This, 
he said, would hugely increase the depth and accuracy of game worlds.

“It takes a while before the software development kits – the applications that 
developers use to make games – really come into maturity,” says independent 
developer Byron Atkinson-Jones. “It’s even longer before developers fully learn 
how to exploit the hardware. This means less constraints on your imagination – 
I certainly expect to see leaps in artificial intelligence, physics and 
graphical realism”.

Right now, we’re getting the first wave of big titles – Witcher 3, Star Wars: 
Battlefront 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/30/star-wars-battlefront-ea-dice-answers-fan-fears>
,Assassin’s Creed: Syndicate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/12/assassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft]>
 – that are leaving the last-gen machines behind. Coming up, Uncharted 4 is set 
toreally push PS4 
<http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/digitalfoundry-2015-uncharted-4-pushes-ps4-tech-to-the-next-level>
 in its use of physics and graphical shaders, while on Xbox One, Quantum Break 
is promising state-of-the-art rendering tech 
<http://www.gamespot.com/forums/system-wars-314159282/quantum-break-1080p-revealed-at-siggraph-2015-32363441/>
 and Crackdown 3 is using cloud computing to create100% destructible cities 
<http://www.polygon.com/2015/8/11/9132195/crackdown-3-multiplayer-cloud-xbox-one-gamescom-2015>
. We’re also seeing interesting experiments with online multiplayer gaming, 
including hugely ambitious projects like No Man’s Sky on PS4 andElite: Dangerous
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/05/elite-dangerous-review> on 
Xbox One.


There are already lots of great games

 With its vast, detailed environment and seemingly endless narrative, Witcher 
3 typifies current-gen gaming. 
The first year of a console’s life is usually pretty low on truly excellent 
titles. Developers are still getting to grips with the hardware, while the 
manufacturers are busy making desperate tweaks to the user interface and 
operating systems.

Two years after launch, however, things are really picking up for the current 
generation. Xbox One and PS4 have several bona-fide classics including Witcher 
3,Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/metal-gear-solid-v-the-phantom-pain-review-greatest-stealth-game-ever>
,Batman: Arkham Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/25/batman-arkham-knight-review-comic-book-fantasy>
 andBloodborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/24/bloodborne-review-elegant-precise-irresistible>
 (a PS4 exclusive). There are also strong second tier offerings likeDragon Age: 
Inquisition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/10/dragon-age-inquisition-sex-enjoyable>
,Middle Earth: Shadow of Mordor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/07/middle-earth-shadow-of-mordor-review-tolkien>
,Far Cry 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/14/far-cry-4-review-freedom-and-ferocity-in-a-strange-land>
, Until Dawn (PS4 only),Forza Horizon 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/29/forza-horizon-2-review-speed-beauty-tourism>
 (only on Xbox One) andDestiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/24/destiny-one-year-bungie-final-frontier-of-gaming>
.

Both machines also support a large vibrant indie community producing beautiful 
offbeat titles like Shovel Knight,Guacamelee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/may/14/guacamelee-video-game-review>
,Ori and the Blind Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/01/ori-and-the-blind-forest-review-a-challenging-and-beautiful-journey>
, N++, Binding of Isaac: Rebirth, Resogun and Lovers in a Dangerous Space Time. 
So it’s not all shooting serious looking men in the face with licensed firearms.

Nintendo’s latest machine was slow to start but now it has a beautiful 
collection of family-friendly titles likeMario Kart 8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/16/mario-kart-8-review-the-best-drive-ever>
,Splatoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/28/splatoon-review-ink-charm-and-lots-of-ideas>
,Super Mario 3D World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/nov/19/super-mario-3d-world-review>
,Super Smash Bros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/29/super-smash-bros-wii-u-review>
,Super Mario Maker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/15/super-mario-maker-review-nintendo-wii-u-designable-shigeru-miyamoto>
 andPikmin 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/jul/23/pikmin-3-video-game-review>
. There are also choices for older gamers includingBayonetta 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/14/bayonetta-2-review-wii-u-platinum-games>
 and a great update of cult action role-player Darkstalkers II. It’s not a vast 
library that’s for sure, but you’ll get many hours of pleasure out of all of 
these – and you can’t play them anywhere else.

Alternative view: most of the big PS4 and Xbox One releases are also available 
on the PS3 and Xbox 360. They don’t look as good and are missing some of the 
more sophisticated features, but you’re still getting roughly the same game 
experience. Indeed, a lot of well-reviewed Xbox One and PS4 titles – including 
GTA V, Last of Us,Dishonored  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2012/oct/08/dishonored-review>
and Tomb Raider are merely graphically enhanced versions of last-gen titles. If 
none of the new or forthcoming releases interest you and you’re not a big 
online gamer, you could hang on for another year.

This is a pretty good Christmas for new releases – and more are on the way
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuying-new-video-game-console-ps4-xbox-one-wii-u%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F4%2F1443991375411%2Fe49384ae-bddc-4000-ad40-39bc4f7e02fa-1020x612.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20now%20the%20right%20time%20to%20buy%20a%20new%20video%20game%20console%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuying-new-video-game-console-ps4-xbox-one-wii-u%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20now%20the%20right%20time%20to%20buy%20a%20new%20video%20game%20console%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuying-new-video-game-console-ps4-xbox-one-wii-u%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F4%2F1443991375411%2Fe49384ae-bddc-4000-ad40-39bc4f7e02fa-1020x612.png>
 No Man’s Sky simulates an entire galaxy providing players with a multiplayer 
exploration game like no other. 
So far this quarter, we’ve already had Metal Gear Solid 5: Phantom Pain, two 
great football sims (Pro Evolution Soccer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/07/pro-evolution-soccer-2016-football-game>
 andFifa 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/22/fifa-16-review-women-football-ea>
),Forza Motorsport 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/14/forza-motorsport-6-review-microsoft-xbox-one>
 (on Xbox One) and the game-changingDestiny: Taken King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/22/destiny-taken-king-review-finally-good-game>
. Coming up there’s the vast apocalyptic adventureFallout 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/28/fallout-4-todd-howard-post-apocalypse-peter-hines>
, anarchic sandbox stunt ’em up Just Cause 3, Call of Duty: Black Ops III,
Assassin’s Creed Syndicate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/12/assassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft>
,Rise of the Tomb Raider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/14/microsoft-phil-harrison-xbox-tomb-raider-exclusive-deal>
 and the long-awaited online shooter Star Wars Battlefront. As for exclusives, 
Xbox One is getting Halo 5: Guardians, while PS4 owners will need to wait a 
little longer for promising biggies like space exploration sim No Man’s Sky and 
rollicking action adventure Uncharted 4: Thief’s End.

On Wii U, we’ve seen the gorgeous platformer construction kit Super Mario 
Maker and the super cuteYoshi’s Woolly World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/16/yoshis-woolly-world-review-handicraft-nintendo>
 – there’s also a nice version ofSkylanders Super Chargers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/23/skylanders-superchargers-review-most-fully-featured-instalment>
 which adds Donkey Kong and Bowser to the cast.

Things are looking healthy in 2016, too – especially if you like huge sequels. 
New Gears of War, Mirror’s Edge, Dark Souls, Crackdown, Hitman, Doom and XCOM 
are all on the way, with Zelda, Star Wing and Mario Tennis heading back to 
Nintendo’s console.

Alternative view: We’re yet to see any incredibly innovative, vastly 
experimental ideas on the current consoles. These machines are still relying on 
the same familiar franchises and well-worn genres from the last generation. If 
you love sci-fi shooters and open-world action role-playing fantasies, you’re 
going to be fine. If you’re waiting until we get an absolutely pivotal, 
epoch-shattering moment of transcendental genius – erm, keep waiting.

The prices are pretty good


The PlayStation 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> is 
around £300 with a one terabyte hard drive. Xbox One is £280 with a 500GB drive 
or £320 with 1TB. The Wii U is between £180 and £200 for a basic box. There’s 
also a vast range of decent bundle deals which come complete with big new games 
– often for no extra cash. Look out, too, for the nice limited editions and 
exclusives around big games like Halo 5, Destiny: Taken Kings and Metal Gear 
Solid 5. Retailers are really looking to undercut each other this winter so 
check around for good deals.

“Both Xbox One and PS4 are now around 20-30% cheaper than their original 
launch prices on the original specification machines with new, improved models 
on the way,” says Debbie Bestwick, the managing director of Team17. “These 
include the 1TBXbox One <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> with 
a 20% faster boot up time and the new 500GB CUH-1200 series PS4 which uses 25% 
less power, running cooler and quieter, as well as a 1TB model too.”

Alternative view: OK, these things are still not cheap. If you just want to 
play games alone or on the sofa with your family and don’t care about keeping 
up with your friends, the PS3 andXbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> 360 still have plenty to offer – 
and can be picked up used for less than £100 each. You’ll get a Wii and a 
shed-load of games for half that.

There are intriguing new things on the way
 Sony’s PlayStation VR headset, due out next year, works with the previously 
underused Move controllers to provide an unprecedented virtual-reality 
experience. 
Playstation 4 is about to enter the virtual world with its PlayStation VR 
headset, due next year with a large list of supporting titles. There’s no firm 
release date or price yet, but even if it’s £300, it’ll still be one of the 
cheapest ways to get in on the virtual reality craze.


Meanwhile, Microsoft’s incoming Hololens augmented-reality headset will be 
compatible with Xbox One – as is the Windows 10 operating system which
introduces cross-platform play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/29/microsoft-windows-10-pc-xbox-one-gamers>
 between computer and console. Oh, and this winter, the Microsoft’s machine is 
getting a huge update. TheNew Xbox One Experience 
<http://www.xbox.com/en-GB/xbox-one/experience> will update the look and feel 
of the interface and add new features such as backwards compatibility with over 
100 Xbox 360 titles.

Conclusion – or “hey, what about the PC?”

If you have the money to spare, then yes, it’s a good time to buy a console, 
particularly if you enjoy playing online with friends. We have three really 
strong machines that have large varied software back catalogues and plenty of 
intriguing games on the way. Developers are starting to test the hardware, 
especially the PS4 and Xbox One, leading to intriguing advances in areas such 
as physics, visual effects and artificial intelligence (advances that mean the 
PS3 and Xbox 360 are gradually being left out of release plans). There’s also a 
thriving indie community with lots of offbeat unusual titles like Grow Home, 
Beyond Eyes and Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture, which don’t fit into the 
well-worn genres.

“Both the Wii U <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii-u> and the 
PlayStation 4 now have a great selection of games to choose from, and the Xbox 
One has a great Christmas line-up ahead,” says Keza MacDonald, editor of Kotaku 
UK. “Shops are starting to get aggressive about pricing, too, so you’ll 
inevitably get a better deal – and be able to pick up more games for less money 
– than the early adopters.”

If you just can’t afford to spend £300 on a games machine though, there are 
plenty of beautiful, compelling experiences onWii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii>, PS3 and Xbox 360 that will keep 
you and your family entertained for a good while.

And of course, the consoles don’t exist in a gaming vacuum ...

Alternative view: “It’s worth considering making the jump to PC gaming,” says 
Oli Welsh, editor of Eurogamer. “It’s not much more expensive to get a 
console-equivalent machine, the games are cheaper, and you get all the big 
cross-platform releases and much, much more besides. The online service Steam 
–- which has a special mode for use on TVs and with console controllers - has a 
bigger, better library of games than either Xbox or PlayStation will ever have. 
It’s the most exciting platform in games right now.”

Indeed, A new range of “living room” PCs has emerged, specifically intended as 
multimedia machines, which can be hooked up to your television to run all your 
video, live TV and gaming entertainment. They’re also designed to make owning, 
running and occasionally updating a home computer easier than ever. Look out 
for Valve’sSteam Machines <http://store.steampowered.com/universe/machines/>, 
the AcerRevo Build <http://us.acer.com/ac/en/US/press/2015/163825> and Razer’s 
Project Christine <http://www.razerzone.com/christine>. 
 