
It is standing somewhere between the wooden washing machine, the vaginal 
douche and a huge portrait ofErich Honecker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1989/oct/19/germany.fromthearchive> that I 
realise I am in the greatest museum the world has ever known. To reach the DDR 
& Nostalgie Museum in Garzin, you don’t go through a rotating glass door, you 
don’t buy a ticket, nobody scans your bag. A man in a pair of dungarees simply 
pushes a large fluffy cat away from his porch, ushers you into his hallway and 
opens the door to his attic.

What makes the perfect small museum?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2009/mar/16/museums-universityofglasgow>
My god, his attic. Every room, every square inch of floor, every surface, 
shelf and table is heaving with artefacts from the Deutsche Demokratische 
Republik or DDR – the region ofGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> occupied by Soviet forces from 1949 
to 1990. The dungaree-clad man in question – founder, collector, museum 
director and builder Rene Schmidt – grew up in the DDR. His own passport, 
issued in 1990, is stuck to the wall, just above his old food stamps and a 
spoon.

The joy of the DDR & Nostalgie Museum is the sense of ordered chaos. There are 
gas-powered irons sitting below Boney M records of Rasputin; children’s sewing 
machines beside portraits of Lenin; bottles of original DDR booze called things 
like Baltic Vodka and Kirsch mit Whisky beside dress patterns and door chains. 
There are tights, buckets, reel-to-reel tape recorders, swimming costumes, East 
German motorbikes, huge crank-handled calculators, shuttlecocks, unopened glass 
jars of spaghetti in tomato sauce, Rene’s old Free German Youth uniform, face 
creams, and a Communist doily embroidered with the words National People’s Army.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fddr-nostalgie-museum-garzin-germany-attic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7794d2d4ebe38ce09a4202b0a31e3c36bb7b83b7%2F0_0_1632_1156%2F1632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20this%20Europe's%20best%20secret%20museum%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fddr-nostalgie-museum-garzin-germany-attic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20this%20Europe%27s%20best%20secret%20museum%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fddr-nostalgie-museum-garzin-germany-attic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7794d2d4ebe38ce09a4202b0a31e3c36bb7b83b7%2F0_0_1632_1156%2F1632.jpg>
 Unopened food jars from the DDR. Photograph: Nell Frizzell for the Guardian 
I discovered the museum – like many other people, I imagine – while cycling 
along theR1 cycle path 
<https://www.bikemap.net/en/official/1626371-euroroute-r1/#/z12/52.47744,13.94971/terrain>
 from Poland to Berlin. The R1 actually stretches all the way from France to 
Russia, but I will wager you right hereright now there is no greater attraction 
along the route than this small, top-of-a-house museum, signposted from a 
roundabout with the simple words DDR & Nostalgie Museum,eingang frei. 

10 of the best museums in Berlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/aug/17/top-10-museums-berlin-city-guides>
After we ring the bell, Rene all but runs down to the gate to let us in. We 
push our bikes into racks, peel off our rucksacks, stroke the dog and then, 
having no idea what to expect, we follow this enormous man, faintly smelling of 
earth and sweat and coffee, up to his emporium.

Rene shows us round for over an hour, talking enthusiastically and 
passionately, iron by unlikely iron, sewing machine by sewing machine, flag by 
flag. The fact I barely speak a word of German nor he English doesn’t matter a 
jot. At one point, somehow sensing my misspent youth, he sits me down at a 
pedal-powered organ and invites me to play one of my Grade 5 piano pieces; in 
another room, he plugs in a hairdryer that looks like a piece of farming 
equipment involved in the castration of adult rams and blows hot, dusty 
smelling air across my face.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fddr-nostalgie-museum-garzin-germany-attic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb05bc533311e58d0409d1b58353bff0f353a063f%2F0_0_1632_1191%2F1632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20this%20Europe's%20best%20secret%20museum%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fddr-nostalgie-museum-garzin-germany-attic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20this%20Europe%27s%20best%20secret%20museum%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fddr-nostalgie-museum-garzin-germany-attic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb05bc533311e58d0409d1b58353bff0f353a063f%2F0_0_1632_1191%2F1632.jpg>
 Doorchains to stamps … the stuff of life in the DDR. Photograph: Nell Frizzell 
for the Guardian 
He shows us his passport. Issued in 1990, during the last days of the East 
German Republic, it was supposed to be valid until the year 2000. He shows us 
the original menus from the opening of the TV tower in East Berlin and the 
Palast der Republik where, he tells us, you could get a glass of Berliner 
Pilsner for 0.65 marks.

Hoarders or collectors? Our frightened society has forgotten the difference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jul/27/the-keeper-new-york-museum-collecting-hoarding>
There are banknotes of the DDR, illustrated with pictures of serious-looking 
men in neckscarves, and the interim deutsche mark notes issued after the 
reunification of Germany, when the two currencies were being brought into 
accord. He shows us photographs of a tinyTrabant fire engine 
<http://www.fire-engine-photos.com/picture/number17600> in Dresden, a full 
original female police uniform, the original map of the S-Bahn showing the 
border between East and West Berlin, a bed pan, suitcases and more irons than I 
ever thought existed.

After what seems like hours, Rene walks us out of his house, helps me on with 
my rucksack, offers my boyfriend a go on one of his tractors, pretends to use 
the cat as a mop and then holds out his hand to shake. I push it to one side, 
grab him like a tree and give him an enormous hug, returned with full bear-like 
force.

And then we’re off again, to cycle through the fields and farms, over cobbles 
and tarmac, all the way back to Berlin. As we pedal I start to laugh, 
remembering on one tiny shelf by the exit the small Rotary Field Indicator 
named – of all things – Paul Weller. I wonder if Paul knows. I hope so. I hope 
he goes and visits.

 * The DDR & Nostalgie Museum is open Sundays 8am – 6pm. Admission is free. OT 
Garzin, Am Haussee 3, 15345 Garzau-Garzin.  