
A young Syrian refugee sits in front of you. She is in her small, makeshift 
home in a refugee camp, where she has lived since being displaced through war. 
She describes her family and her meagre education; her friends attempt to play 
in the muddy camp – the images are so real you could almost kick the football 
that is being tossed around you.

This is the powerful experience that a ground-breaking virtual reality film 
creates. And it’s an experience that Unicef and the UN have created 
<http://www.unicefstories.org/2015/10/13/how-the-united-nations-is-using-virtual-reality-to-tackle-real-world-problems/>
 to show people the realities of life as a refugee.

They are now taking this virtual reality film – called Clouds Over Sidra 
<http://www.vrse.com/watch/id/21/> – out on to the streets and giving members 
of the public the opportunity to step inside a Syrian refugee camp.

How to become a charity fundraiser – six top tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/oct/08/how-to-become-a-charity-fundraiser-six-top-tips>
“It was kind of like stepping off a plane and being there,” said one 
participant. “Once you see the video it makes you really think about what is 
going on,” said another.

 Describing virtual reality doesn’t really do it justice. As delegates at the 
face-to-face fundraising masterclass held at theResource Alliance’s 
International Fundraising Congress <http://www.resource-alliance.org/learn/> in 
October heard – you have to experience it to really understand how powerful it 
can be.

It’s having an impact. One in six people donated to Unicef New Zealand after 
watching the film <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uslhlXyYJ-M> – twice the 
normal rate of support usually secured on the street. While rates vary across 
different markets, all cases have seen an increase in sign-ups from people who 
have seen the video, often doubling the rate compared with traditional 
face-to-face methods.

However, while tests have proved positive, this is not a cheap tool to use. 
The initial outlay is high – creating virtual reality films requires a complex 
post-production process. Unicef was able to reduce costs by repurposing 
existing content. Post production, however, and the costs reduce – the 
equipment required to view the film can be as expensive as a $200 cyber mask or 
as basic as a $2 cardboard viewer.

This is all so new that it’s impossible to say what the return on investment 
is, says Marcelo Iniarra, co-founder ofwww.frontlinevirtualreality.com 
<http://www.frontlinevirtualreality.com/> and the fundraising consultant who 
was taking delegates through this new technology.

What does virtual reality mean for advertising in 2016?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/dec/03/virtual-reality-in-advertising-2016>
“This isn’t just a cost for the face-to-face fundraising team,” he said. “It 
should be part of an integrated campaign and the cost should be split with the 
communications team, the education team, the major gifts team – imagine how 
effective it could be when pitching to a corporate to show them the film first. 
It really would take them to the place they would be supporting.”

It can also be great for motivating and training fundraisers who can 
experience the situation on the ground through virtual reality, which is much 
more cost-effective than taking them on expensive trips to the field.

However, a word of caution came from David Cravinho, head of regular giving at 
Unicef, who was leading the face-to-face masterclass. “You have to be a bit 
careful with virtual reality,” he said. “You have to be sensitive about taking 
someone who is doing their shopping and putting them in a stressful place, such 
as a war zone or a place of extreme famine.”

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
 