
Israel has announced it is cutting approximately $6m in its annual dues to the 
United Nations this year to protest last month’ssecurity council resolution 
condemning Israeli settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 as “a flagrant violation under international law”.

Israel’s UN mission said the amount represented the portion of Israel’s 
contribution to the UN’s regular budget totalling more than $40m allocated “to 
anti-Israel bodies”.

It named the UN agency for Palestinian refugees known as UNRWA, the Division 
for Palestinian Rights, the committee investigating Israeli practices affecting 
Palestinian human rights, and information programs on “the Question of 
Palestine”.

Republican senators introduce bill to move US embassy in Israel to Jerusalem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/us-embassy-israel-jerusalem-republican-bill>
“It is unreasonable for Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> to 
fund bodies that operate against us at the UN,” Israel’s UN ambassador, Danny 
Danon, said. “The UN must end the absurd reality in which it supports bodies 
whose sole intent is to spread incitement and anti-Israel propaganda.”

UN spokesman Stephane Dujarric, asked to comment, said: “We have not been 
informed.”

Israel’s UN mission said the cut in funding was the first in a series of steps 
under consideration by the foreign ministry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/24/israel-reassess-ties-united-nations-settlement-benjamin-netanyahu>
 and the mission in reaction to the recent security council resolution.

The Obama administration’s decision to abstain and allow the UN security 
council to approve a long-sought resolution condemning Israeli settlements as 
an obstacle to a two-state solution was a sharp rebuke to a longstanding ally 
and marked a striking rupture with past US vetoes.

Israel’s UN mission said it would move forward on additional initiatives 
“aimed at encouraging structural change within the UN with the ultimate goal of 
ending anti-Israel activities” after Donald Trump becomes US president on 20 
January.

The president-elect has criticized Barack Obama’s green light for the security 
council condemnation.

On Thursday, the Republican-controlled US House of Representatives 
overwhelmingly approved a bipartisan resolution rebuking theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> for criticizing Israeli 
settlements and declaring unwavering support for Israel. The non-binding 
resolution insists that the United States reject any future UN actions that are 
similarly “one-sided and anti-Israel”.
 