
Butting into the Istanbul skyline like a trio of stumpy minarets, three luxury 
apartment towers loom above the city’s historic peninsula, destroying a 
majestic silhouette of domes and spires that has remained unchanged for 
centuries. But now, in an unprecedented ruling, an order from the highest court 
in Turkey hasordered the buildings to be pulled down 
<http://www.todayszaman.com/national_skyscrapers-damaging-istanbul-skyline-to-be-demolished_356196.html>
.

The OnaltiDokuz Residence <http://www.onaltidokuzistanbul.com/>, which 
comprises three graceless shafts of 27, 32 and 37 storeys in the western 
district of Zeytinburnu, claimed to “redefine what it means to be a citizen”, 
offering its wealthy residents “a new perspective with breathtaking panoramic 
views”. Its million-pound penthouses were to provide a “unique living 
philosophy”, a vantage point from which “the city surrounds you in all its 
magnificence”. But the city itself wasn’t so keen. The development sparked 
widespread outrage, lumbering into view like an uninvited guest, photobombing 
cherished vistas of the 400-year-old Blue Mosque, Topkapi Palace and Hagia 
Sophia.

Now the Turkish Council of State has weighed in, approving an earlier ruling 
<http://www.todayszaman.com/news-332865-court-orders-demolition-of-floors-in-169-towers-in-zeytinburnu.html>
 by an Istanbul court in May that ordered the buildings’ demolition. It ruled 
that the structures were illegal, as they “negatively affected the world 
heritage site that the Turkish government was obliged to protect”. The decision 
follows earliermurmurings from Unesco 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-11095638>, that the city might be 
placed on its endangered list if the rampant construction continues to press 
ahead unabated. It is a landmark ruling, but not one that helps to clarify the 
legal situation of Istanbul’s unstoppable building boom in the slightest.

While the debate was raging earlier this year, the country’s crane-loving 
prime minister (now president-elect) Recep Tayyip Erdoganclaimed ignorance 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/ru/originals/2014/01/construction-disfigures-istanbul-skyline.html>
. “I didn’t know,” he said. “I cannot count the buildings going up every time I 
come. Can you count stars?” He said he had spoken with the project’s developer, 
his good friend Mesut Toprak ofAstay real estate <http://www.astayyatirim.com/>
, and “asked him to give [the towers] a haircut. He didn’t do it. I was very 
offended. I haven’t spoken to him for five years.”

Erdogan’s critics aren’t convinced, suggesting crocodile tears. Former culture 
minister Ertugrul Günay spoke out after leaving his ministerial post in 
December. “The prime minister has never given up being the mayor of Istanbul,” 
he said. “He is personally keeping track of giant construction projects all 
over the country. High-rises in Istanbul can only be done with his permission.”

A closer look at the development’s history suggests further irregularities. In 
2007, the government sold the land to Toprak for 270m lira (about £75m). At the 
time, the city zoning plan marked these plots as commercial areas that would 
allow a maximum of five floors of construction. Yet immediately after the sale, 
the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality modified the zoning plan, making the 
development site worth 10 times its previous value overnight.

Such cases are not uncommon, with recent policy changes further lubricating 
the path for historic neighbourhoods to be trampled and towers to rise ever 
higher. The government’s critics claim that the laws regulating the 
construction sector have been repeatedly watered down since Erdogan’s ruling AK 
party came to power. Turkey’s Public Tender Act has been amended 31 times since 
then,according to Oya Ozarslan 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/01/08/us-turkey-corruption-construction-insigh-idUSBREA070OS20140108>
, head of the local chapter of anti-corruption watchdog Transparency 
International, creating loopholes that developers are all too ready to exploit.

While planning law is relentlessly bored into a Swiss cheese, Erdogan 
continues to pronounce on architectural matters, like an Ottoman-flavoured 
Prince Charles. “I side with a form of architecture that accords with our 
culture,” he declared back in April. “In Istanbul and Ankara, there are 
structures that have gone against the characters of both cities. I don’t 
approve of vertical structures; I rather favour horizontal ones.” His solution? 
Mega-basements for every building: “Four storeys should be above the ground, 
while the other four should be built underground.”

While Erdogan might publicly denounce the high-rise craze, his ground-scrapers 
can be just as damaging. His penchant for reviving ancient forms came to a head 
in Taksim Square, when hispreposterous proposal 
<http://archrecord.construction.com/news/2013/06/130603-Taksim-Istanbul-Occupy-Gezi.asp>
 to bulldoze Gezi Park for a new shopping mall, modelled as a steroidal 
reincarnation of a neo-Ottoman barracks,sparked national protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/31/istanbul-protesters-violent-clashes-police>
 that escalated into a violent struggle and worldwide condemnation.

Not that it has dissuaded him from pressing ahead. He has vowed to continue 
with his 150bn lira (£42bn) construction mania that includes a third Istanbul 
airport, planned to be one of the world’s biggest, a new bridge over the 
Bosphorus, a high-speed train line to Ankara and a giant shipping canal. “We 
have a saying in Turkish: the rocks and earth of Istanbul are gold,” said 
Günay. “They truly are. Some people have been working Istanbul like a gold 
mine.”

As for the Zeytinburnu demolition ruling, it leaves the city open to a 
stratospheric compensation claim, given that it granted the construction permit 
and merrily cheered the building on – as well as the fact that all the 
apartments have now been sold.

Lawyer Cihat Gökdemir, who first brought the case, has a novel solution. He 
says the municipal council approved the scheme with the votes of all parties. 
“I will divide the compensation to be paid pro rata to a number of council 
members and ask each of them to pay their share,” he said. “I will sue them for 
squandering public funds.”

 