
Just two miles north along the Golden Horn from Eminönü – the quarter known 
for Topkapi Palace, tour groups and Hagia Sophia – lies another Istanbul 
altogether. In the side-by-side quarters of Fener and Balat, lines of drying 
laundry stretch across steep, winding streets. Century-old Ottoman houses lean 
against each other in a kaleidoscope of reds, blues and greens. And art 
galleries and design shops dot the area along the water.

Like the rest of Istanbul, Fener-Balat is changing. Unlike much of the rest of 
the city, though, the changes don’t – yet – involve condominiums and shopping 
malls. Nor have rents skyrocketed as much as in other areas that have retained 
an Ottoman flavour. This is why the quarter has become a cool hangout and a 
recognised design district; last autumn, tours of the area were a main event at 
the Istanbul Design Biennial 
<http://tasarimbienali.iksv.org/en/archive/newsarchive/p/1/1023>.

The insider's cultural guide to Istanbul: 'This city is steeped in music'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/16/istanbul-turkey-cultural-guide-music-art>
Kenan Sari has seen these changes at first hand. All his close relatives were 
born in the 160-year-old building where he now runsCafe Fener, a 
hole-in-the-wall he opened in 2013, where locals and travellers come to sip 
frothing Turkish coffee and tap into the Wi-Fi. When he was growing up here, 
all of his friends were Greek: Fener is home to the Greek Orthodox cathedral, 
and Fener Rum Lisesi, the world’s oldest Greek school, founded in 1454. But 
most of the area’s Greek families fled after the Cyprus dispute of the 1960s 
and 70s. “I lost all of my childhood friends,” Sari says. “Now, people have 
started coming back.”

The same is happening just to the north in Balat, Istanbul’s Jewish quarter 
since the Byzantine era. Many people left in the mid-20th century and many 
Ottoman homes fell into disrepair. And then, from 2003, the city and European 
Union instituted a renovation programme for Balat and Fener, repairing many of 
the dilapidated buildings.

Artists and designers followed other residents back to the area. One of these 
is Mine Atalar of design studioMinush <http://www.minush.net/#here>, which 
creates unusual handmade leather shoes and handbags. Another, contemporary 
glassmaker Yasemin Aslan Bakiri, runs a gallery and workshops in a restored 
Byzantine mansion calledCamhane <http://www.camhane.com/>.

Elsewhere Küçük Mustafa Paşa Hamam 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/alparslan-akku/contemporary-art_b_3578401.html?>
, one of Istanbul’s oldest bathhouses, has been restored and turned into a 
gallery and, last year, photographer Dilek Keles openedKaranlik Isler Atolyesi 
<http://www.karanlikisleratolyesi.com/>, a photography and film exhibition 
space.

Places to eat are changing, too. Café Vodina, an initiative by the NGO Balat 
Kültür Evi, is entirely run and staffed by local women, and offers both cooking 
classes and traditional Turkish plates. Or try Balat’sAgora Meyhane 
<http://agorameyhanesi.com/>, a 125-year-old restaurant reopened by Istanbul 
film director Ezel Akay last year. Serving meze and meals from Anatolia, the 
Balkans and the Middle East, it was listed by Travel+Leisure in January as one 
of the world’s best new restaurants.

Although tourists are still only trickling into the area, Sari says his 
customers are mostly foreign. And his staff hail from Greece, Italy and 
Holland. “It’s a little bit international,” says Sari – just like the new 
Fener-Balat.
 