
Well hot dog dickety damn, what is it about this film that makes people love 
it so much? Is it the bit where the black maid gets spanked back into her 
kitchen? The bit where the little people of Bedford Falls joyously tip out 
their entire life savings to rescue the bungling banker? Is it the snappy 
dialogue? “You’re 18!” our heroGeorge Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/24/usa.film1>, played by James 
Stewart, exclaims at one point. “Why, it was only last year you were 17!”

I don’t, by the way, think It’s a Wonderful Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2007/dec/17/1> is terrible. I just 
think it’s frequently wrongheaded and desperately overlong, with more suburban 
prejudice thanMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/shortcuts/2014/dec/15/hilary-mantel-assassination-mrs-thatcher-other-literary-takedowns>
 at a Grantham fete. Nowhere is this better illustrated than the key section 
when George, facing ruin over misplaced money, contemplates leaping to his 
death off a bridge.

A guardian angel talks the boozed-up savings-and-loans man out of it, then 
decides to show him what life in Bedford Falls would have been like had he 
never lived. We are then led through Pottersville, as this alternative town is 
called – a nightmarish den of vice and depravity, full of stumbling people, 
blaring sirens and flashing neon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419253840780%2Fdf3b0a41-55d6-4b88-8658-5ac6e6e0d014-1020x766.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20a%20Wonderful%20Life%3A%20my%20most%20overrated%20Christmas%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20a%20Wonderful%20Life%3A%20my%20most%20overrated%20Christmas%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419253840780%2Fdf3b0a41-55d6-4b88-8658-5ac6e6e0d014-1020x766.jpeg>
 On the brink … James Stewart contemplates suicide in It’s a Wonderful Life. 
Photograph: PR 
And it looks absolutely magic. It’s certainly a million miles away from 
soporific Bedford Falls, with its bow-tied early risers saying hee-haw to each 
other on street corners. To the sound of swinging Dixieland jazz, the camera 
follows an increasingly horrified George through this vision of hell. There’s 
the (shock!) Dime-a-Dance Club welcoming jitterbuggers. There’s the (horror!) 
Blue Moon bowling alley. There’s the (shriek!) Bamboo Rooms cocktail lounge.

The terrors don’t stop there. When George and Clarence, as his angel is 
called, stop off for a drink at a Pottersville bar, there are people smoking. 
There is raucous laughter and a black guy playing boogie-woogie piano. There is 
even a grumpy barman – with stubble. When Clarence orders a mulled wine heavy 
on the cinnamon and light on the cloves, he is told: “Look mister, we serve 
hard drinks in here for men who want to get drunk fast.” The two are tossed out 
face-first into the snow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418925381270%2Fdadc8a95-c89d-42f4-a1a0-7a2ef526aad5-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20a%20Wonderful%20Life%3A%20my%20most%20overrated%20Christmas%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20a%20Wonderful%20Life%3A%20my%20most%20overrated%20Christmas%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418925381270%2Fdadc8a95-c89d-42f4-a1a0-7a2ef526aad5-1020x765.jpeg>
 Martini’s bar, before the descent into Pottersville. Mind you, that guy on 
George’s left is about to deck him 
It’s the sort of bar I dream about, the sort of bar bars are meant to be. It 
reminds me of a long-gone dive in Glasgow that used to serve whisky or double 
whisky – and if you wanted Coke or lemonade you could go to the chip shop, pal. 
But then George goes and ruins everyone’s fun, deciding to live and finding 
himself transported back to Bedford Falls for a victory dash down its high 
street, now restored to its boring state. Jubilant and cheering, he jogs past a 
school uniform shop (I’m not making this up), a gown store, and the Bijou 
cinema showing The Bells of St Mary’s, a film about a priest and a nun trying 
to save a school.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418926023041%2Fbdb730d8-5734-4f85-b8fc-97dcc2f89b03-2060x1627.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20a%20Wonderful%20Life%3A%20my%20most%20overrated%20Christmas%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20a%20Wonderful%20Life%3A%20my%20most%20overrated%20Christmas%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmost-overrated-christmas-movie-its-a-wonderful-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418926023041%2Fbdb730d8-5734-4f85-b8fc-97dcc2f89b03-2060x1627.jpeg>
 ‘Nauseatingly wholesome’ … Clarence and George Bailey. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/RKO 
It’s a picket fence of a film, nauseatingly wholesome as it trundles through 
1940s America like a station wagon on its way back from the mall, a celebration 
of everything that later directors – fromTodd Haynes with Far from Heaven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/mar/09/features.review1> to David Lynch 
with Blue Velvet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/feb/10/david-lynch-blue-velvet-bfi>
 – would come to mock.

And then there’s that misplaced money. Uncle Billy, who works with George, 
takes $8,000 in cash along to the bank. That’s the equivalent of about $130,000 
today. And he just sort of dodderingly counts it out and then accidentally puts 
it inside a newspaper and then accidentally puts that newspaper on baddie Mr 
Potter’s lap.

I mean really? How would you be with $130,000 in cash? Maybe slightly careful. 
Maybe very careful. Maybe totally paranoid actually. It’s a scene that is as 
staggeringly unconvincing as it is badly shot, about as believable as George 
lasso-ing the moon. And the whole film hinges on it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLJfZaT8ncYk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLJfZaT8ncYk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLJfZaT8ncYk&media=>
True, up until that point, the fact that Uncle Billy is one loan short of a 
portfolio has been Very Loudly Telegraphed, but this only makes it worse, 
transferring the blame to George for trusting such a glaring buffoon with a 
fortune in cash.

Weighing in at 135 minutes, Wonderful Life isn’t the longest film ever made 
but it sometimes feels like it. Single shot scenes – like the one in which the 
Baileys chat at the dinner table, or George and Mary meander home from the 
dance – stretch on for what feels like days. Maybe directorFrank Capra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/frank-capra> just fell asleep behind the 
lens. Presumably, these weren’t the scenes scripted by an uncredited Dorothy 
Parker.

Apparently Seneca Falls, a town in upstate New York, holds an It’s a Wonderful 
Life festival every year. It claims to have been the inspiration for Bedford 
Falls, Capra having visited there in 1945. Remind me never to go.

Hee-haw! And Merry Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> everybody!
 