
Is there any feeling on earth quite like that of a child on the first day of 
thesummer holidays <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/summer-holidays>? The 
giddying sense of freedom and potential, after hours spent gazing longingly at 
browning grass and cloudless skies through classroom windows. At the beginning 
of the summer holidays, your gauzy days stretch out before you like chewing 
gum, waiting to be filled with adventure. If you were anything like me, most of 
them will have been spent outside; your life a procession of doing words: 
running, climbing, building (and wrecking), swimming, playing and paddling.

Nearly one in four British children overweight or obese, claims study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/07/one-quarter-british-children-overweight-obese-study>
The doing words of today’s children are somewhat different. There’s gaming, 
and sitting, and eating. Indeed, areport has found 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/08/03/childrens-fitness-levels-wiped-out-by-lazy-summer-holidays-study/>
 that children’s lazy summer holidays are responsible for wiping out children’s 
fitness levels. The study of 400 children in 14 schools found that fitness 
levels improved over the course of the academic year, only to be undone by the 
long summer holidays spent hunched over gadgets. In terms of physical activity, 
the bare minimum for children should be 60 minutes a day. This report indicates 
that children are failing to achieve even that.

Much of this can be blamed on the technology that was simply unavailable 
before now. As a society, we specialise in timewasting;another report released 
today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/04/more-than-a-third-of-uk-internet-users-have-tried-digital-detox-ofcom>
 found that we are now spending 25 hours a week on the internet, and most of 
that will be indoors. Many children I meet seem to have their time rigidly 
planned out in activity blocks – school, after-school activities, homework, bed 
– so slumping in front of a screen must seem like cosy respite in comparison. 
But you wonder if they’ll ever know the exquisite boredom of an empty summer 
day, where you’re booted out in the morning after your friends come to call, to 
return only at dusk when it’s time for tea?

While acknowledging the wonder of my summer holidays, I’m mindful of indulging 
in that blinkered editing that we are so prone to when reminiscing about our 
childhoods. The idealisation of Britain’s supposed golden days – which we are 
told were beacons of comfort, safety and liberty – has been an unpleasant 
undercurrent throughout the referendum debate and can be most adequately summed 
up in the peculiar form what I call “Daily Mail slum nostalgia 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3202723/Who-needs-PlayStation-Incredible-pictures-1960s-capture-days-slums-era-health-safety-ruled-children.html>
”, wherein childhood suffering, whether through poverty, safeguarding failures 
or poor housing, is conveniently ignored.

A survey earlier this year found that three-quarters of children spend less 
time outside than US prison inmates

But we all indulge in the temptation to glorify bygone childhoods from time to 
time. I would read Enid Blyton’sFamous Five stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/aug/04/enid-blyton-famous-five-holiday-activity-tips>
 and marvel that these kids were allowed to ride bicycles freely across the 
whole of England, despite constantly bumping into dodgy blokes with criminal 
intentions. I was only allowed out from morning until twilight. Still, I 
realise how privileged that lifestyle was and, when I look back, it does have 
to be said that very few of my classmates were fat.

Britain’s childhood obesity epidemic 
<http://www.noo.org.uk/NOO_about_obesity/child_obesity> renders children’s lazy 
summer holidays all the more concerning. 9.1% of children in year 6 (aged 10 to 
11) are obese and a further 14.2% are overweight. Of children in reception 
(aged four to five), 9.1% are obese and another 12.8% are overweight. This 
means a third of 10- to 11-year-olds and over a fifth of four- to 
five-year-olds are overweight or obese, according to Public Health England. And 
this isn’t just about physical health; it’s estimated that in every school 
classroom in the UK, at leastthree children are suffering from a mental health 
issue 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/new-child-mental-health-support-service-launched-to-encourage-early-intervention-a6993506.html>
. There’s no doubt that less time spent outdoors will likely compound this 
crisis.

A survey earlier this year found that three-quarters of children spend less 
time outside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/25/three-quarters-of-uk-children-spend-less-time-outdoors-than-prison-inmates-survey>
 than US prison inmates. The National Trust has long spoken of “nature deficit 
disorder 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/documents/read-our-natural-childhood-report.pdf>
” as screen time increases and the so-called “radius of activity” shrinks (the 
area around a child’s home where they are allowed to roam unsupervised has 
shrunk by over 90% since 1970). There is a mental health epidemic in adults 
that stems partly from the health system’s failure to adequately deal with 
issues in childhood. We are constantly being hawkedmindfulness apps and 
techniques 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/23/should-we-be-mindful-of-mindfulness-nhs-depression>
 as a way of supposedly dealing with this.

Why? Because many of us have forgotten how to exist in the moment, as this sad 
news about school breaks demonstrates. There is no one more mindful than a 
child on their summer holidays, when the return to school is a distant concept. 
In the moment, all that matters is the rock pool you’re in, the squidge of sand 
between your toes, the crumble of bark beneath your fingernails, the echoing 
bounce of the ball on tarmac or the brittle crackle of the bracken you’re 
tunnelling in. Are you ever more connected with your senses that when you are 
in nature? Even if that nature is a patch of grass at the end of your street, 
in your imagination it can become a jungle.

I’m not saying that kicking children out of the house each summer will solve a 
public health crisis that is the result of a complex combination of factors, or 
that my childhood was flawless. But I can say that I spent much of it doing 
what our bodies have evolved to do: moving. And I’m all the better for it.
 