
As a jobcentre adviser I was once told to call in a “customer” to get them on 
tothe Work Programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/29/work-programme-bullying-job-searches>
. I explained that he was about to be admitted to hospital for major surgery, 
but I was told he must be called, otherwise he would face a sanction that could 
stop his benefits for four weeks.

After a year in the job, in Braintree, Essex, a demonstrable shift had taken 
place once the coalition government had settled in. Advisers were encouraged to 
see every interview as an opportunity to begin the process of sanctions that 
might suspend or cancel claims, thereby reducing the number of claimants. We 
were repeatedly told that such extreme measures were used as a benign 
incentive, to remind people of an alternative to life dependent on benefits. 
But we weren’t given any evidence that they actually worked.

No evidence welfare sanctions work, says National Audit Office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/no-evidence-welfare-sanctions-work-says-national-audit-office>
And according to Tuesday’s National Audit Office report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/no-evidence-welfare-sanctions-work-says-national-audit-office>
, that’s because the Department for Work and Pensions never had any evidence. 
So it’s been dishonest all along about the reasons for enforcing sanctions. 
Moreover, it has failed to monitor the devastating effect on thousands of 
people whose benefits have been withheld. My primary experience was with people 
on health-related benefits, so I was expected to apply aggressive targets to 
some of the most vulnerable people in society if they were five minutes late 
for an interview or failed to apply for enough jobs. Some were literally 
without food and couldn’t afford heating. Whereas I used to feel I was doing 
something for clients, I increasingly felt I was getting “brownie points” for 
cruelty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/04/jobcentre-adviser-play-benefit-sanctions-angela-neville>
.

The bureaucracy itself seemed deliberately contrived to confuse and distress 
claimants. This didn’t just affect those dealing with literacy or mental health 
issues. Many clients, often high-achieving professionals, or people who’d 
worked all their life – like the eponymous hero in Ken Loach’s filmI, Daniel 
Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/23/i-daniel-blake-ken-loach-review-mark-kermode>
, who suddenly through redundancy or injury for the first time in their lives 
were forced to claim benefits – found the process just as daunting and 
humiliating.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20the%20trailer%20for%20Ken%20Loach's%20Palme%20d'Or-winner%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20the%20trailer%20for%20Ken%20Loach%27s%20Palme%20d%27Or-winner%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video&media=>
I, Daniel Blake: the trailer for Ken Loach’s Palme d’Or-winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/15/i-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video>
Pressure on staff to achieve targets was intense. Team meetings often left 
colleagues in tears. As sickness absence also contributed to office statistics, 
this increased the stress on staff performance. I was managing a caseload of 
about 200 customers. However, rather than supporting them into work or 
training, I was forced to concentrate on trying to find resourceful ways of 
meeting targets. One colleague was so distressed by the work that she spoke of 
suicide as a means of protest. I have worked in many stressful jobs, including 
in education and the NHS, but I had never heard a colleague openly say they had 
been driven to contemplate suicide. When I was made redundant three years ago 
due to my own health issues, I was relieved to be out of such a callous system.

I felt compelled to provide an honest account of issues consistently 
sensationalised by the popular media. I worked with my friend Angela Howard and 
writer Jackie Bartletton a play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/04/jobcentre-adviser-play-benefit-sanctions-angela-neville>
, about our experiences of the welfare system, calledCan This Be England? 
<http://www.beechleaf.net/show_tell/company.html> We wanted it to show how 
tendencies in wider society and the media to stigmatise and vilify benefits 
claimants needed to be challenged. The title of the play alluded to our 
disbelief at how people on benefits were being treated.

Why sanction benefits when there’s no proof the harsh approach works? | Anne 
Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/benefits-sanctions-imposed-proof-work-welfare-nao-jobcentres>
It opens with a scene where nosy neighbours spot someone on sickness benefits 
in the street and assume they must be skiving. Sometimes I think we are turning 
into a really mean, spying-on-our-neighbourhood, type of society.

We performed the play several times last year, and each performance was 
followed by a discussion when the audience could ask questions about the issues 
involved and, importantly, to share their own experiences. We’ve sincerecorded 
a radio adaptation <http://www.beechleaf.net/index.html> so more people will be 
able to hear the characters and their stories. Can This Be England? seems to 
have affected people by reflecting their own lives, or by making them much more 
aware of the impact of benefit sanctions.

I have recently spoken to former colleagues who remain working for the 
jobcentre and I am in no doubt that the system of earning brownie points 
towards targets still exists. The reality is that sanctions are used as 
one-size-fits-all in a system driven by financial and political targets 
regardless of entitlement and eligibility.

We can’t easily stop this, but we can do all we can to bring this inhumanity 
to light.
 