
Matteo Renzi has been mocked for his personal fashion foibles in the past, but 
the Italian prime minister will nevertheless brave the tough crowd ofMilan 
fashion week <http://milanfashionweeklive.com/> later this month, becoming the 
first premier to open the event.

While Renzi is not expected to take a spin down the runway, the move is seen 
as an important show of support for the beleaguered industry, which has been 
hit by a slowdown in the Middle East and Russia and a drop-off in the Chinese 
market.

Renzi’s decision also reflects the image he consistently seeks to portray of 
himself: that he is a dynamic leader and the face of a modernising Italy. 
Indeed, he has often used fashion to try to make a statement – from theleather 
jacket he donned 
<http://www.corriere.it/politica/foto/05-2013/renzi/fonzie/renzi-posa-come-fonzie-chi_edb2d1a8-c21b-11e2-a4cd-35489c3421dc.shtml#1>
for Chi magazine while he was mayor of Florence (some said he was channelling 
the Fonz) to the “jeans and no-tie” look that became a symbol of his desire to 
shake-up the political establishment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fitalian-pm-matteo-renzi-to-open-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7201087cb244f033f493ec3a54745b132b87c880%2F0_215_3280_4713%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italian%20PM%20Matteo%20Renzi%20to%20open%20Milan%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fitalian-pm-matteo-renzi-to-open-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italian%20PM%20Matteo%20Renzi%20to%20open%20Milan%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fitalian-pm-matteo-renzi-to-open-milan-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7201087cb244f033f493ec3a54745b132b87c880%2F0_215_3280_4713%2F3280.jpg>
 Matteo Renzi exposing his blue socks as he waits for the President of 
Philippines in Rome. Photograph: Gabriel Bouys/AFP/Getty Images 
Last year Renzi was criticised by the Corriere della Sera newspaper for 
wearing trousers that were far too short,exposing nearly two inches of his blue 
socks 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/matteo-renzi-italy-in-shock-as-politician-is-caught-with-his-trousers-up-a6761111.html>
, at a meeting with the president of the Philippines. In 2014 he was given some 
fashion advice by fellow Italian Giorgio Armani, who reportedly said Renzi – 
whom he described as “adorable” – ought to wear ties and control his hand 
gestures, given his status.

Italy’s economic development minister Carlo Calenda criticised Italian 
politicians last year for their snobbish attitude toward the fashion industry, 
which he said was often ignored by the political class despite its cultural 
importance.

Carlo Alberto Carnevale Maffè, a business professor at the Bocconi school of 
management in Milan, said on Wednesday: “Matteo Renzi needs a bit of 
refurbishment as far as his personal style. But his personal presence at the 
event helps a lot in terms of bringing visibility to a national industry. The 
fault is on those who never did it before.”

He added: “He is also borrowing something aesthetically. Being associated with 
fashion gives a sense of youth, modernity, of a certain sensibility, which 
other prime ministers – think of [Romano] Prodi or Mario Monti with his coat 
from the 70s – [did not have]. They were the anti-fashion figures. It wouldn’t 
fit their personality.”

Milan fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week> 
begins on 24 February. Renzi’s office declined to reveal what he would wear to 
the event.
 