
J.W. Anderson and Versus were just two of the labels showing their 
spring/summer 2017 collections at fashion week in London.

The idea of gender and clothes, specifically the norms of how a woman or man 
should dress, is central to designer Jonathan Anderson’s work. In both his 
womenswear and menswear he undercuts societal conventions by suggesting an 
alternate dress code.

His autumn/winter 2013 menswear collection famously put dresses firmly back 
into focus, while last season’s womenswear show took apart the staid and formal 
idea of the 1960s cocktail dress, adding sportswear silk zip-up tops and 
superhero capes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjw-anderson-and-versaces-versus-play-with-femininity-at-lfw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dd84ca0312925833baa15109e7196e0e24f4c94%2F319_82_1702_3297%2F1702.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=J.W.%20Anderson%20and%20Versace's%20Versus%20play%20with%20femininity%20at%20LFW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjw-anderson-and-versaces-versus-play-with-femininity-at-lfw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=J.W.%20Anderson%20and%20Versace%27s%20Versus%20play%20with%20femininity%20at%20LFW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjw-anderson-and-versaces-versus-play-with-femininity-at-lfw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dd84ca0312925833baa15109e7196e0e24f4c94%2F319_82_1702_3297%2F1702.jpg>
 One of Anderson’s Tudor-inspired looks. Photograph: Jeff Spicer/Getty Images 
For spring/summer 2017, Anderson continued the theme, citing Henry VIII, that 
symbol of brattish masculinity as an inspiration for his womenswear collection. 
One top, which was divided into four sections with slashed ribboned arms and 
unfastened belt detail, recalled the classic brocaded Tudor waistcoat in the 
king’s most famous portrait. Another, in grey, with a more robust ribbon 
detailing on the sleeves and a stiffness in the chest, suggested the Stay Puft 
Marshmallow Man from Ghostbusters.

“I like the idea of a woman wearing something that is so masculine. The shape 
is very empowering,” Anderson said backstage, thinking about the word “armour” 
before backtracking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjw-anderson-and-versaces-versus-play-with-femininity-at-lfw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1da8cfec907e11737d6085bf5564d1fbba7d642%2F133_0_2122_3392%2F2122.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=J.W.%20Anderson%20and%20Versace's%20Versus%20play%20with%20femininity%20at%20LFW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjw-anderson-and-versaces-versus-play-with-femininity-at-lfw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=J.W.%20Anderson%20and%20Versace%27s%20Versus%20play%20with%20femininity%20at%20LFW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjw-anderson-and-versaces-versus-play-with-femininity-at-lfw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1da8cfec907e11737d6085bf5564d1fbba7d642%2F133_0_2122_3392%2F2122.jpg>
 A model waits backstage for the JW Anderson show to begin. Photograph: 
Dabrowski/WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
If those pieces boldly questioned gendered silhouettes, there were also pieces 
in the collection that wrestled with the idea of femininity in a more subtle 
way. There were the androgynous conical-shaped tops with exaggerated donut 
sleeves and necklines, and the Christmas tree-like tops and dresses made from a 
bounty of floating Irish linen. They were bunched together in pastel shades of 
sea blue, pale canary yellow and pale pink, which floated like waves when the 
models walked in them and the effect was akin to watching an ice-cream slowly 
melting in the midday sun.

J.W.Anderson: 'provocative' new exhibition to reveal his inspirations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/05/jwanderson-provocative-new-exhibition-to-reveal-his-inspirations>
Later in the day Donatella Versace, a fashion icon who represents a 
ultra-feminine European fabulousness, debuted her latest collection from 
Versus, theVersace <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/versace> spin-off label 
that is 20-years-old this year.

Like Anderson, Versace was interested in giving a persona to her collection. 
This was for the “bad girl who breaks the rules,” she said earlier in the day; 
the Versus girl eschews conventional beauty and shares a wardrobe with her 
boyfriend.

Taking her cue from the street style trends which have dictated the fashion 
conversation for the last few seasons, the designer created a full-throttle 
take on the military, utility and athleisure trends.


There was a mango-coloured belt bra, lots of slashed materials and a metal 
mesh dress that was constructed with no stitching, like a sneaker. While the 
materials used – neoprene and parachute fabric – suggested a futuristic, bionic 
woman who not only knew her own mind but knew how to protect herself. Like 
Anderson, Versace’s collection was about re-imagining the modern woman as 
autonomous and powerful.
 