
Powered by Natalie Portman’s fascinatingly mannered performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/26/jackie-kennedy-biopic-natalie-portman-jfk>
 in the title role, Pablo Larraín’s Jackie feels like a film without precedent. 
How is it, for starters, that Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis – irrefutably the most 
glamorous and independently famous first lady ever to take up residence in the 
White House – has never been the subject of her own big-screen biopic? We’ve 
seen plenty of her on television, but it’s taken over half a century for the 
cinema to single out her story from the heavily pored-over mythos of Camelot – 
something Larraín’s film does with a wry, caustic awareness of how political 
and celebrity legacies are constructed.

Jackie review – Natalie Portman astonishes in remarkably intimate portrait
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
“Objects and artefacts survive for far longer than people,” Portman’s Jackie 
says through a stiff smile on screen, in a re-enactment of Kennedy’s 1961 
televised tour of the White House. The film, jaggedly covering the immediate 
internal aftermath of John F Kennedy’s assassination, shows how Jackie was 
sealed in the public imagination as both person and object – the glittering 
exception that nonetheless proved the limitations of how presidents’ wives have 
long been presented to, and viewed by, the American people. Following a bitter 
election season in which former first ladyHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> fell afoul of the same 
restrictions at a more executive level, the defiantly exclusive focus of 
Larraín’s portrait – in which JFK himself makes only the most fleeting of 
flashback appearances – carries a piquantly gendered subtext.


After all, on screen as in life, first ladies have mostly been made to stand 
modestly to one side. Even the cinema’s most vivid portrayals of White House 
wives, fictional or biographical, have largely been in service of a more 
dominant male characterisation: Joan Allen’s Pat Nixon to Anthony Hopkins’ 
Tricky Dicky, Sally Field’s Mary Todd Lincoln to Daniel Day-Lewis’s Honest Abe, 
or even Emma Thompson’s Hillary proxy to John Travolta’s thinly veiled Bill 
Clinton in Primary Colors. But rarely has one made it to title-role status. A 
forerunner toJackie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jackie>, in that sense if 
no other, is Magnificent Doll, a frothy 1946 vehicle for a non-dancing Ginger 
Rogers as Dolley Madison, wife of founding father and fourth president James, 
which framed her life principally as a love triangle between her, her eventual 
husband and future American veep Aaron Burr.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjackie-pablo-larrain-first-ladies-in-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa53f00593a52d1e621b49e99f76b9324521dd651%2F0_185_2331_2912%2F2331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%20finally%20puts%20first%20ladies%20front%20and%20center%20on%20the%20big%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjackie-pablo-larrain-first-ladies-in-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%20finally%20puts%20first%20ladies%20front%20and%20center%20on%20the%20big%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjackie-pablo-larrain-first-ladies-in-films%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa53f00593a52d1e621b49e99f76b9324521dd651%2F0_185_2331_2912%2F2331.jpg>
 Minka Kelly and James Marsden as the Kennedys in The Butler. Photograph: 
Allstar/The Weinstein Company 
The title alone should be a giveaway that Magnificent Doll isn’t the most 
enlightened of studies, though it does at least offer us perhaps the most 
cheerful first lady in film history. Flirty, funny and fabulously behatted, 
Rogers’ Madison certainly stands out in a gallery of portrayals that range from 
the tastefully demure – take Elizabeth Banks, who perfectly channelled Laura 
Bush’s carefully pitched blandness in Oliver Stone’s otherwise careering Dubya 
biopic W – to veritable Lady Macbeth in woolen skirt suits.

It’s certainly hard to think of a first lady much fiercer than Joan Allen’s 
aforementioned Mrs Nixon. She’s in just over half an hour of Oliver Stone’s 
sprawling, sometimes scorching 195-minute Nixon, but her steely-sympathetic 
aura, clouded in stale cigarette smoke, permeates the entire film. Allen plays 
Pat partly as a resentful, long-suffering afterthought in her husband’s life, 
and partly as a ruthless, invaluable abettor of his worst impulses; Stone’s 
film may be riddled with crossing narrative byways about political process, but 
Allen makes it most memorably the story of an adoringly toxic marriage.

Allen scored a supporting Oscar nomination for her pains, as did Sally Field 
in Lincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/24/lincoln-review>, 
though she has a harder time escaping her onscreen husband’s imposing shadow – 
even the scenes of marital dispute in Tony Kushner’s densely woven script find 
Day-Lewis’s noble leader wrestling with his own dueling philosophies while his 
wife objects in the background. That seems deliberate and poignant: after one 
key argument, Field plaintively collapses to the floor in a sea of crinoline, 
exasperated by the great man’s verbiage. Between the lines, you sense an 
actor’s frustration at being given the defeated end of the scene. Is it 
possible to outplay Abraham Lincoln, or his thespian impersonator? Greer 
Garson’s Oscar-nominated Eleanor Roosevelt gets a little more rhetorical 
purchase in the little-remembered but still-sturdy stage adaptation Sunrise at 
Campobello, as she and a bedridden Franklin D Roosevelt clash with family and 
advisers over his political future following his paralysis in 1921 – though 
Roosevelt, like Jackie Kennedy, remains a celebrated first lady more generously 
documented on TV than on film.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdO2LWKpeyI8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdO2LWKpeyI8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdO2LWKpeyI8&media=>
Still, spare a thought for poor Mamie Eisenhower, played by Melissa Leo in Lee 
Daniels’ The Butler, a 2013 waxworks parade of 20th-century life in the White 
House as seen through the eyes of a long-serving butler.Minka Kelly puts in a 
brief turn as Jackie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-butler>, while Jane 
Fonda is a fearsomely shoulder-padded Nancy Reagan – but Leo’s Mamie, despite 
an individual credit in the film’s trailer, remains mysteriously Awol from the 
final film. First ladies have received the short shrift on screen before, but 
never quite so brusquely.

Melania Trump wants to be a 'traditional' first lady like Betty Ford. Good 
luck with that
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/28/melania-trump-betty-ford-first-lady-feminist-liberal>
Also cut from Daniels’ film was an actorly facsimile of Barack Obama, though 
the departing president – and crucially, Michelle – got an evenly matched 
tribute in this year’s Southside With You, a winsomely low-key romance 
dramatising the future first couple’s first date, a good-humoured occasion 
nonetheless marked by breezy intellectual and political sparring, quietly 
mapping out the ideological path the law-firm colleagues would eventually take 
together to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. Tika Sumpter takes a suitably smart, 
alert approach to playing history’s most modern first lady to date; one wonders 
if her successor, Melania Trump, will ever be personified quite so coolly (or 
lit quite so glowingly) on screen. Perhaps a solo portrait as rigorously 
dedicated as Jackie is in the next first lady’s future – paging Kristen Wiig, 
please – though it’s awfully hard to imagine: Larraín’s slyly feminist film 
looks to be an anomaly for some time to come.

 