
Jack Dee, Harry Hill, Romesh Ranganathan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/15/romesh-ranganathan-funniest-thing>
 and Michelle Collins are to star for free in a new crowdfunded sitcom about 
“small-minded middle England” that was turned down by the BBC.

In a move designed to “cut out the middleman”, the team behind comedy The 
Mayoress is looking toraise £75,000 on Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/themayoress/the-mayoress-the-sitcom?ref=newest>
 to make the show.

Con Air director takes Salty path to a crowdfunding record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/14/simon-west-salty-crowdfunding-con-air-tomb-raider>
Cast and crew, including director, David Schneider, of The Day Today and I’m 
Alan Partridge, and script editor, David Quantick, who has written for Brass 
Eye, are dedicating their time for free.

Written by Harry Hill’s TV Burp co-writer, Brenda Gilhooly – best known for 
playingfictional Page 3 girl Gayle Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/06/living-first-uk-comedy> – The 
Mayoress looked set to be made by the BBC after executives said they liked the 
idea and Gilhooley wrote a script. However, the corporation then decided not to 
go ahead with the project and Gilhooley, encouraged by the success of streaming 
services such as Netflix, decided to take matters into her own hands and fund 
the first episode to distribute free online.



Dee told The Guardian: “This is probably something we’re going to see a lot 
more of in the future. The whole thing is going to change. In fairness a 
commissioner could see it as a good script but not have the money to make it – 
that’s increasingly happening.”

Dee, who is hosting three EU referendum specials of Jack Dee’s Helpdesk on 
BBC2 next month, said he and the others working on the show were “all in the 
same boat”. He said: “We like it and why shouldn’t it be made just because 
there isn’t a channel there to make it?”

He added: “It’s also intriguing to see how far you can get with a project like 
this in terms ofKickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter>
 and to what extent the power to make the decision can be shifted from the 
conventional channels back to the people who are going to be directly involved 
in it.”

Gilhooly said it was absolutely amazing that the cast, Quantick and Schneider 
said they would waive their fees. “I thought with viewing habits changing and a 
social media revolution going on, things are really changing so there’s no 
reason I can’t try and make this happen myself. It just started gathering 
momentum, which would never have happened if it had stayed sitting on someone’s 
desk.”

She said the show, based around a seemingly unsuitable woman becoming 
mayoress, is “really mainstream as an idea”. Gilhooley said: “There’s so much 
comedy that comes out of middle England that no one seems to be tapping into, 
all the small silly stuff like pot hole disasters or wheelie bins. You’re 
getting the comedies about politics at Westminster but nobody’s tapping into 
that small-minded thing that goes right across England.”
 