
It was a surprisingly meteoric rise for James McAvoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesmcavoy>, who seemed to go from foppish 
love interest to action hero to superhero in what felt like weeks.

X-Men: Apocalypse review – lots of bangs for your bucks but loopiness is lost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/09/x-men-apocalypse-review-marvel-jennifer-lawrence-oscar-isaac>
McAvoy has been quiet of late (if you forget last year’s execrable franchise 
non-starterVictor Frankenstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/03/victor-frankenstein-review-film-james-mcavoy-daniel-radcliffe>
), but he’s got a busy year or so ahead. He’ll star alongside Charlize Theron 
in the spy thriller The Coldest City, lead M Night Shyamalan’s mystery Split 
and romanceAlicia Vikander <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alicia-vikander> 
in Wim Wenders’ ambitious Submergence.

First up, however, McAvoy is returning this week as Professor X in the X-Men: 
Apocalypse <https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-apocalypse>. It’s the third 
time he’s taken on the role, and because reviews suggest this is the weakest of 
the franchise, we’re here to remind you of happier times …

The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyAJLaFjpDJo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyAJLaFjpDJo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyAJLaFjpDJo&media=>
After roles on the small screen (from Shameless to State of Play) and a failed 
Brit-com vehicle (Inside I’m Dancing), McAvoy secured a role in his first 
blockbuster. It was a small part, but he displayed the requisite charm, and 
didn’t need to return for any of the lesser sequels. Job well done.

The Last King of Scotland
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJRU1SrdXEZc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJRU1SrdXEZc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJRU1SrdXEZc&media=>
Acting opposite an Oscar-winning Forest Whitaker, McAvoy more than held his 
own inKevin Macdonald’s true-ish thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/12/thriller.jamesmcavoy> about Idi 
Amin, adapted from the novel by Giles Foden. His character – an amalgamation of 
sorts – is arguably the more interesting of the two, as he becomes aware of 
just what his new friend is capable of.

Starter for 10
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9yKamXPh6pY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9yKamXPh6pY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9yKamXPh6pY&media=>
It’s far from a perfect film, but there is a pleasant ease to this adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/nov/10/romance.comedy> of David 
Nicholls’ comedy novel. Here McAvoy is the lead, giving him an opportunity to 
showcase his comic credentials. Starter for 10 was also a strange hotbed for 
talent: Rebecca Hall, Alice Eve and Benedict Cumberbatch co-starred.

Atonement
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA8jCHw44oD4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA8jCHw44oD4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA8jCHw44oD4&media=>
Despite the period trappings, Joe Wright’s adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/07/romance.keiraknightley> of the 
wartime book by Ian McEwan was a welcome antidote to its more conventional 
peers when it came out in 2007. McAvoy skilfully handled both the harrowing war 
scenes and his flirtation with Keira Knightley.

Filth
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrDpimaf_Fqo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrDpimaf_Fqo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrDpimaf_Fqo&media=>
After some less convincing roles in action films, McAvoy proudly took a piss 
all over his heartthrob image with his role in thisfoul-mouthed Irvine Welsh 
adaptation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/03/filth-review>. He’s 
surprisingly convincing as a hard-drinking, drug-taking, morally vacuous cop, 
and he also helps to deliver a sucker punch of an ending that brings real 
poignancy.
 