
The clock was showing 94 minutes and 55 seconds when England’s 
manager-in-waiting was reminded that trying to bring some sense and order to 
the national team is going to be anything but straightforward. The paradox is 
this was probably the finest performance of Gareth Southgate’s brief stint in 
charge, but even on the nights whenEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> play well there is still the 
capacity for disappointment and what a way to finish 2016, a year they would 
probably rather forget.

It was certainly an extraordinary finale bearing in mind, with less than two 
minutes of normal play to go,Adam Lallana’s penalty and Jamie Vardy’s header 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/15/england-v-spain-international-friendly-live>
 had left the firm impression of a team who had removed the straightjacket 
England have worn on many of their assignments this year. Iago Aspas’s 
89th-minute goal changed everything. Suddenly it seemed to dawn on Spain they 
were supposed to be the better team and then, finally, there was the moment 
when England’s defence was exposed again. Isco, another of Spain’s substitutes, 
had peeled away from Eric Dier. The shot went through Tom Heaton’s legs and the 
crowd stared in disbelief. There was barely time to restart the match.

England’s Eric Dier furious with Ander Herrera after alleged elbow incident
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/england-eric-dier-ander-herrera>
For Southgate, it was a grievous blow even if, ultimately, it will make little 
difference to his chances of going from caretaker manager to full-time 
occupant. For long spells, there was the clear sense that Spain were simply 
going through the motions. Their list of injured included, among others, Diego 
Costa, Andrés Iniesta, Gerard Piqué and Sergio Ramos. David de Gea had been 
given the night off and, missing the spine of their team,Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> took an awfully long time to 
remind Wembley of their lofty reputation. They left it so late, in fact, large 
parts of the crowd had already headed into the night, satisfied with what they 
had seen and unaware of the drama that was to follow.

Until those jarring late blows, England had played with a level of authority 
that was seldom evident in Southgate’s previous three matches. Raheem Sterling 
could be seen showboating at one point.Lallana’s through ball for the penalty 
was the game’s outstanding moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/15/adam-lallana-england-draw-with-spain-at-wembley>
 – a reminder that there is nothing, in football, more satisfying than the 
perfect pass – and there were passages when England used the ball as 
effectively as they had done for a long time. To have done that against a team 
with Spain’s refinement must be encouraging for Southgate even if the body 
language of the players at the end was more in keeping with a defeat. “We have 
a long way to go until we are a top team,” Southgate noted.

The disappointment was exacerbated by the fact Lallana, having started the 
game so impressively, was injured midway through the first half, but mostly 
because this was a subdued performance from Spain on a night when they looked 
ripe to be beaten. There were spells when the visiting team hogged the ball 
but, at 2-0, with little sign of a recovery, the crowd appeared to have given 
up on the game as a contest and started going through several Mexican waves, as 
if they wanted to create their own entertainment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fengland-spain-international-friendly-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7acb46d1d0311e0c75b5e3c4fa095fca71082a47%2F2_0_3104_1863%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20Vardy%20leads%20the%20way%20but%20England%20held%20by%20second-string%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fengland-spain-international-friendly-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20Vardy%20leads%20the%20way%20but%20England%20held%20by%20second-string%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fengland-spain-international-friendly-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7acb46d1d0311e0c75b5e3c4fa095fca71082a47%2F2_0_3104_1863%2F3104.jpg>
 Jamie Vardy heads home England’s second goal. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the 
Guardian 
Soon afterwards, Wembley was lit up by thousands of mobile phones being 
illuminated and held to the skies. England looked in full control, playing with 
width and penetration, with Vardy, Sterling and Jesse Lingard all troubling 
their opponents and little to endanger Heaton, the half-time replacement for 
Joe Hart.

England’s players also looked absolutely committed to the idea of making sure 
it was obvious they were taking the game seriously. Sometimes they seemed to 
forget entirely it was a friendly. Vardy’s scything follow-through early on 
against César Azpilicueta was one example and Sterling was also lucky not to be 
punished after his studs-up challenge on Aritz Aduriz. Inside the opening half 
an hour, Wembley had witnessed two tackles considerably worse than anything 
seen in the England-Scotland World Cup qualifier last Friday.

England 2-2 Spain: five talking points from Wembley | Dominic Fifield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/gareth-southgate-adam-lallana-england-raheem-sterling>
England had gone ahead after nine minutes when Vardy ran on to the kind of 
pass from Lallana that would ordinarily be expected from one of Spain’s 
soft-touch specialists and Pepe Reina brought him down for a clear penalty. 
Lallana directed it to the left of Spain’s goalkeeper and England seemed to be 
comfortable three minutes into the second half when Jordan Henderson crossed 
for Vardy to score with a determined header. Iñigo Martínez had been caught 
napping, not reacting at all as Vardy threw himself at the ball, and that 
moment felt like a reflection of the game as a whole to that point.

Yet Southgate felt his team started to tire from the 70-minute mark and, 
slowly but surely, Spain seemed to recognise that there was a way back into the 
match. Aspas’s goal was a beauty, a rising, curling left-foot shot that went in 
off the far post and even before Isco delivered the final blow, another chance 
fell to the Real Madrid player inside the penalty area. That one deflected wide 
but Isco found the bottom corner with his next effort and Southgate could be 
seen screaming his frustration.
 