
JD Sports is to launch an investigation into conditions at its Kingsway 
warehouse near Rochdale after a Channel 4 documentary found workers claiming it 
was “worse than a prison”.

The retailer denied the claims, saying in a stock exchange statement 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/jd-sports-fashion--jd--/rns/response-to-media-reports/201612150700108960R/>
 it was “deeply disappointed and concerned by the footage broadcast by Channel 
4”.

“Whilst we do not believe it to be an accurate reflection of our culture, the 
vast majority of our people or our standards of practice and procedures, we 
will be launching an investigation into the implementation of our policies at 
our Kingsway facility,” it added.

Sports Direct chairman criticises 'extreme campaign' as profits fall 57%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
“While we maintain that the policies and procedures in place are robust and 
fair, it is clear that we need to do better in their implementation. In the 
short term, we intend to retrain all supervisory and security employees at the 
facility, as a matter of urgency, to ensure that those policies are correctly 
reflected across the workplace.”


A five-week undercover investigation by Channel 4 
<https://www.channel4.com/news/ive-sacked-people-for-sitting-down-undercover-inside-jd-sports>
, broadcast on Wednesday night, claimed there were harsh practices at the 
warehouse, including a “three strikes and you’re out” policy, intense 
surveillance and heightened job insecurity among agency workers. About 1,500 
people work at the distribution centre, including hundreds of agency staff, 
while others are directly employed by JD Sports.

The investigation comes a year after Guardian undercover reporters found that 
rival Sports Direct paid warehouse workers at Shirebrook less than the minimum 
wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 and operated punitive disciplinary procedures, such as a six-strikes policy.

The Channel 4 investigation into JB included video footage apparently showing 
a team leader at the warehouse saying to an undercover reporter: “No sitting 
down, no, you get fired. I’ve sacked people for sitting down.”


One worker said in the film: “It’s more worse than a prison. Prisons get more 
frigging respect.”

JD Sports denied the claims, saying it did not operate a “strike” policy and 
workers could not be fired on the spot.

After watching the footage, Iain Wright MP, chair of the Commons business, 
energy and industrial energy committee, said workers were “treated like scum”. 
He said the alleged three-strikes policy was “twice as bad as what we found at 
Sports Direct”.

TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady said it was “increasingly clear that 
Sports Direct wasn’t just one bad apple, and that terrible working practices 
are taking place across the UK.

“The government needs to look seriously at how this sort of behaviour 
continues to take place in today’s Britain.”

JD Sports reported record first-half profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/jd-sports-66-percent-profits> 
of £77.4m in September, up 66%, whileSports Direct’s profits fell 57% to £71.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
.
 