
Jess Varnish admitted she was “shocked and upset” and would appeal against the 
findings of an internal investigation carried out byBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> after it emerged only one 
of the nine charges she made against the former technical director Shane Sutton 
was upheld.

In October British Cycling upheld the claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
 made by Varnish that Sutton had used “inappropriate and discriminatory 
language” towards her, without going into the finer details of their 
investigation. However, the full report, which was leaked on Wednesday night, 
shows that only one allegation – that Sutton used the word “bitches” – was 
upheld.

Shane Sutton: tough-talking Australian for whom conflict was never far away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/shane-sutton-resigned-australian-coach-cycling>
The more serious charges against the Australian – including that he told 
Varnish to “get on with having a baby”, discriminated against women riders by 
not distributing equipment equally among the squad and hindered the careers of 
female riders after they had left the programme – were not upheld. Sutton was 
also ruled not to have used the “C-word” or “sheilas”, by the internal 
investigation.

The 59-year-old resigned in April so the judgment of the internal 
investigation had no bearing on his job, but he has since claimed to have 
suffered reputational damage after being accused of bullying and sexism. The 
leaked report was greeted with dismay by Varnish, a talented sprinter who spoke 
out about the culture in BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> after missing out on selection for 
the Rio Olympics. She said: “I am shocked and upset by this latest news and 
have asked my solicitor to appeal the findings of the internal investigation on 
my behalf. Having provided substantial evidence to back up my complaints, to 
now learn that the majority were not upheld is heartbreaking.

“I have requested from British Cycling the full investigation report to 
understand why the weight of evidence provided by me and others wasn’t 
sufficient for the board to uphold my complaints.”

A separate independent review into British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/25/stuart-lancaster-named-independent-panel-investigate-british-cycling-uk-sport-announce>
 is being carried out after other riders, including Victoria Pendleton and 
Nicole Cooke, claimed there was a culture of sexism and bullying in the 
organisation while Sutton was in charge. He has also been accused of calling 
paracyclists “wobblies” and “gimps” and the Malaysian cyclist Josiah Ng 
“Boatie”, It is understood that none of these remarks,which Sutton continues to 
deny, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/15/shane-sutton-expects-to-be-totally-exonerated-by-independent-review-british-cycling>
 were considered by the internal investigation.

The leaking of the report will put further pressure on British Cycling. It is 
expected to face strong questions about the use of therapeutic use exemptions 
in the sport in the wake of the leaking of Sir Bradley Wiggins’s medical 
records when several of its senior members appear in front of the culture, 
media and sport select committee on 19 December.
 