
Jess Varnish has dramatically raised the stakes in her long-running battle with
British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> by making a 
formal request to see every text and email message sent about her by the former 
technical director Shane Sutton and fellow coaches Iain Dyer, Justin Grace and 
Jan van Eijden.

Varnish, who accused British Cycling of allowing a culture of bullying and 
discrimination after leaving its Olympic Podium Programme in controversial 
circumstances in March, also wants to see all her performance data as well as 
the full report of an internal investigation thatupheld only one of nine 
accusations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/shane-sutton-jess-varnish-british-cycling-review>
she had previously made against Sutton.

British Cycling must come clean over Shane Sutton and Jess Varnish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/british-cycling-jess-varnish-shane-sutton>
In a formal letter sent to the British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> president, Bob Howden, on Wednesday 
, her lawyer Simon Fenton said he was making a “general request that relates to 
any data processed on behalf of British Cycling” under the data protection act. 
“To help you comply with the request,” he added, “you should know that it is 
likely that personal data is held relating to the following matters:

• Performance data and other records relating to her training and competition

• Any emails or other documents in which she was referred to

• The decision to remove her from the Olympic Podium Programme and to 
terminate her relationship with British Cycling

• A copy of any personnel records held on or about her

• The investigation and report about Ms Varnish’s complaints about Shane Sutton
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-sutton>, the summary findings of 
which were sent to her on 5 December 2016

• Text messages to or from Shane Sutton, Iain Dyer, Justin Grace and Jan van 
Eijden

• All medical records”.

It is understood that Varnish’s legal team is preparing to challenge British 
Cycling’s behaviour on several fronts.

The most direct is over the findings of its internal investigation, which 
upheld her claims that Suttonhad used “inappropriate and discriminatory 
language” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
 – including the word “bitches” – but, when its conclusions were leaked last 
week, rejected her other claims.

By demanding a copy of the full report it hopes to find out the precise 
evidence that led to British Cycling’s decisions, which could then lead to an 
appeal and even a legal challenge. In particular, it believes there is strong 
evidence that Sutton did use the phrase “Sheilas” about women riders – a claim 
that was not upheld by the independent investigation.

Other, more serious charges, against Sutton – including that he told Varnish 
to “get on with having a baby” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/23/jess-varnish-british-cyling-shane-sutton-go-and-have-a-baby>
, discriminated against women riders by not distributing equipment equally 
among the squad, and hindered the careers of female riders after they had left 
the programme – were also not upheld.

The request for Varnish’s performance data also suggests that she is 
considering challenging British Cycling’s decision to release her from its 
Olympic Podium Programme in March after she finished fifth in the team sprint 
at the world championships. Sutton, a key figure in the British team that won 
seven track gold medals at both the 2008 and 2012 Olympics, has not spoken to 
the media in recent weeks but has always insisted that the decision to release 
Varnish was based purely on performance.

Sutton resigned in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/british-cycling-team-chaos-shane-sutton-rio-olympics-2016>
 but has since claimed to have suffered reputational damage after being accused 
of bullying and sexism.

A separate independent review into British Cycling is being carried out after 
other riders, including the Olympic champions Victoria Pendleton and Nicole 
Cooke, claimed there was a culture of sexism and bullying in the organisation 
while Sutton was in charge. He has also been accused of calling paracyclists 
“wobblies” and “gimps”. None of these remarks, which Sutton continues to deny, 
was considered by the internal investigation.

Next Monday British Cycling’s national governing body is also expected to face 
strong questions about the use of therapeutic use exemptions in the sport in 
the wake of the leaking ofSir Bradley Wiggins’s medical records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues>
 when senior members appear in front of the culture, media and sport select 
committee.
 