
New band of the day (Jessy Lanza 1,547)
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/05/jessy-lanza> 
Jessy Lanza is too shy to turn the webcam on for our interview, so she tells 
me what she can see instead: there’s her two rescue cats, Stoow and Woots, her 
partner of five years, Junior Boys’ Jeremy Greenspan, and acres of vinyl, all 
piled into her place in Hamilton, Canada, which she affectionately describes as 
a “weird town full of weird people”. A typical day sees her rooting through 
records for ideas, and she’s sitting among stacks of them: Dynamix II, a 
Moodymann mix of DJ Rick Wilhite’s Drum Patterns & Memories, and the new album 
from Vince Staples are her current favourites. She reviewed this last one in a 
rare tweet using the fire emoji.

Then again, Lanza’s voice has always been enough. You may have heard it 
fluttering over Second Chance, a standout track on Caribou’s Our Love album 
last year. No doubt he was taken with Lanza’s own album, her 2013 debut Pull My 
Hair Back, a collection of coolly soulful pop tracks that reveal a deep 
affection for R&B.Caribou <https://www.theguardian.com/music/caribou> was so 
impressed by her style that he asked her to write for, sing on and tour his 
record with him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGkGZr50rXqc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGkGZr50rXqc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGkGZr50rXqc&media=>
At the time of Pull My Hair Back’s release, Lanza was swept into the recent 
so-called wave of female artists making “alternative” R&B. Like her 
contemporaries FKA twigs and Kelela, she disagrees with such niche 
categorisation; instead she sees her music as a continuation of the genre. 
“It’s weird when people use the name ‘R&B revival’,” she says. “It’s probably 
the biggest genre other than hip-hop in the world.” She is signed to London 
club label Hyperdub but in truth she’s answering/following a more mainstream 
calling. “One of my dreams is to have a song on top 40 hip-hop R&B radio,” she 
admits. “That’s my favourite type of music, and anything I can do to be part of 
it…”

Lanza comes from a musical family and has spent her life in Hamilton. She was 
a piano scholar and studied jazz at university, but dropped out when the calls 
of Mariah and Missy were louder than Mozart and Miles. Her love for R&B music 
has a nostalgic element: Timbaland, she says, was the soundtrack to her school 
years and in his music she found a unusual quality she admired. “Even though 
it’s really poppy, top 40 radio R&B can be a little bit weird,” she says. 
“Timbaland’s a good example of that, using all sorts of weird sounds that make 
the music sound different or not typical.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjessy-lanza-r-and-b-singer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437577555518%2F06d69709-9809-4aff-b1c3-f8200287d0aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jessy%20Lanza%3A%20%20%E2%80%98The%20public%20is%20largely%20misogynistic'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjessy-lanza-r-and-b-singer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jessy%20Lanza%3A%20%20%E2%80%98The%20public%20is%20largely%20misogynistic%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fjessy-lanza-r-and-b-singer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437577555518%2F06d69709-9809-4aff-b1c3-f8200287d0aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tech mate: Jessy Lanza performs live. Burak Cingi Photograph: Redferns via 
Getty Images 
Beyond Timbaland: the future stars of experimental R&amp;B
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/15/timbaland-future-stars-experimental-cassie>
When she met Greenspan they bonded over shared influences and he encouraged 
her to write songs. When Lanza describes their working relationship it sounds 
like a musical tag team, passing beats and samples back and forth, and working 
from each other’s sound libraries and equipment.

Lanza comes alive when talking about their adventures in sampling. “Jeremy and 
I had a great idea of doing field recordings at the mall. You never know where 
you’re going to get things that could be useful in the studio,” she explains. “
Worldstarhiphop.com <http://www.worldstarhiphop.com/videos/> is really good for 
soundbites because everyone can submit a video and that’s lots of stuff that 
you can pull little bits from. Some of the soundbites I use are of people 
fighting. I’m terrified of somebody suing me for something!”

Although she’s established herself as an electronic everythingist, a solo 
artist who writes and then sings and performs all her own music, that hasn’t 
stopped the supposition that she’s a singer-songwriter and Greenspan does all 
the techy production. This, obviously, remains a source of annoyance. She comes 
across as shy and self-deprecating but expresses strong opinions on the sexism 
she has experienced in interviews. “Having to explain [our roles] in the first 
place is silly,” says Lanza. “I feel like the public in general is largely 
misogynistic and I resent having to lay it out for people, as if that question 
would ever be asked of any of the many male duos working.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdhvjL98MJEU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdhvjL98MJEU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdhvjL98MJEU&media=>
It’s because of these assumptions that she ran a free electronic workshop for 
teenage girls. I ask her what needs to change to improve visibility for female 
producers. “People suck,” she replies. “Lots of people are just fucking 
assholes. I think that would need to change. Society in general needs to 
change.”

For someone who covets pop hits, Jessy’s next move is decidedly in-keeping 
with the leftfield. While she finishes the followup to Pull My Hair Back – “I 
think it’s done,” she says – she’s releasing the You Never Show Your Love EP 
with footwork pioneers and Hyperdub labelmates DJ Spinn and Taso. Her silky 
vocals meet their skittering beats, yet another example of how she likes to 
keep R&B weird. Timbaland hasn’t made his way to Hamilton yet, but something 
tells me he might come knocking.

You Never Show Your Love EP is out now on Hyperdub
 