
The British women’s team pursuit squad will have to live without its most 
experienced member, Joanna Rowsell-Shand, until next season as the 27-year-old 
double Olympic gold medallist prepares for an extended break that will mean she 
misses all this winter’s World Cup rounds and probably April’s world 
championship in Hong Kong, barring a last-minute change of heart in the new 
year.

There is a dearth of Olympic champions in Glasgow here for the World Cup 
opener, and the absence of such big names as therecently married Laura and 
Jason Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/olympic-cyclists-jason-kenny-laura-trott-marry>
 is particularly glaring. However, their need to take a break is also entirely 
understandable, given that as Rowsell-Shand explains, pretty much anything 
non-essential is put on hold for up to 12 months before an Olympic Games.

GB strike double gold in team pursuit at Track World Cup in Glasgow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/04/gb-double-gold-team-pursuit-track-world-cup-glasgow-cycling>
“I was probably the only one with the foresight to do this four years ago,” 
said Rowsell-Shand in between signing autographs here, where she is working as 
a pundit for the BBC. “Plus the [team pursuit] was changing to 4km, and I felt 
there was nothing more I could do with 3km. In general, [in 2012] a lot of 
people carried on with the momentum from London and kept racing, but after this 
Games everyone has gone: ‘Phew, that was good but let’s take a bit of time to 
gather ourselves, enjoy the success then move on to the next thing’.”

She is, however, something of an exception when it comes to taking such an 
extended break. Of her fellow Rio medallists,Ed Clancy is likely to be focusing 
on his road racing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/british-coach-admits-ed-clancy-hype-may-have-robbed-pursuit-team-of-gold>
 until the end of next year, while Jason Kenny and Becky James are weighing up 
their options, as is Laura Kenny, although, according to thehead coach, Iain 
Dyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/british-cycling-head-coach-hits-back-rivals>
, she could be back on the track soon. The rest of the squad should soon be 
available, apart from retirees such as Sir Bradley Wiggins and those focusing 
on the road such as Owain Doull.

Although Rowsell-Shand offering to pay her way into the velodrome suggests she 
is not the most hardened blagger in the pack, she will spend her break doing 
“anything and everything”, from attending the premiere of thenew Bridget Jones 
film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/18/bridget-jones-baby-soothing-formula>
 to the ultimate non-singleton activity, a belated honeymoon, postponed since 
her wedding in July 2015 when she and her husband, Daniel, will visit the 
United States. She expects the highlight of the trip to be a visit to Harry 
Potter World.

She has also ventured into her first mini-triathlon – “I’ve always wanted to 
do that but it’s a no-no, even going in the swimming pool because of the risk 
of germs, running is definitely not allowed” – and, on holiday in La Santa in 
September, “tried to do every sport available – windsurfing, kayaking, dance 
class, zumba class, tennis, a table tennis tournament. It was nice not worrying 
about how much my legs hurt.”

Rowsell-Shand was quickly on the scene to congratulate the youthful British 
women’s team pursuit squad whenthey won gold here on Friday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/04/gb-double-gold-team-pursuit-track-world-cup-glasgow-cycling>
, stepping in quickly to make sure she had a photograph of them after their 
medal ceremony. The presence of a bevy of young, talented women snapping at her 
heels is something she relishes.

“It really excites me because four years ago we didn’t have that. The academy 
started two years after London. Two years before London they had 12 in the 
squad, then they whittled it down, and after London Elinor [Barker] came in, 
but otherwise there was a bit of a gap, which may have meant some of the squad 
didn’t all have the break they wanted.”

“If I want to be in Tokyo, a step back now is exactly what I need. My plans 
are based on thinking long-term, what’s right for me. Other riders should be 
developing, they should be pushing for my spot in the team. That in itself will 
bring me on, that competition.”

“You need the pressure from beneath – that’s what has made us so successful at 
three Olympic Games in a row. You can see that across the team – for example, 
there have always been young sprinters coming through: Jason was brand new in 
2008, Philip Hindes in 2012, Callum Skinner in 2016. If that wasn’t happening 
someone wouldn’t be doing their job properly.”

In the afternoon session here, one of those youngsters, Emily Nelson, was the 
best British performer, taking fourth in the individual pursuit. Nelson 
qualified fourth fastest but was unable to match the experienced Tatiana 
Sharakova of Belarus in the ride-off for bronze.
 