
Joe Hart <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joe-hart> has admitted he was 
so pumped up for matches at Euro 2016 that his performances may have suffered 
and is reassessing how he channels his passion.

Wayne Rooney pulls out of England squad with knee injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/wayne-rooney-injury-doubt-england-spain-friendly>
The Torino goalkeeper, yet to concede a goal in the World Cup qualifying 
campaign, will start Tuesday’s friendly against Spain as Gareth Southgate 
completes his four-match interim stewardship of the senior side. Wayne Rooney 
withdrew from the squad on Monday night with aminor knee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/wayne-rooney-injury-doubt-england-spain-friendly>
, with Jamie Vardy expected to play a part up front and Jordan Henderson taking 
the captaincy.

Hart is braced to be busier on the occasion of his 68th cap than he was 
against Scotland last Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
, but has insisted he is a calmer character than in France. His pre-match 
histrionics at the tournament, screaming at players and himself, fell flat with 
high-profile errors against Walesand Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/joe-hart-england-iceland-blunder-euro-2016>
.

The 29-year-old spoke about his approach at length with Southgate before last 
month’s qualifiers against Malta and Slovenia, when he was outstanding. “I’m 
always trying to learn and adapt, and obviously the European Championship 
wasn’t my finest hour,” said Hart. “I needed to have a think and pick apart how 
I played and what I did, and maybe change a few things speaking to the people 
who count. Seeking advice. Even with Gareth, we spoke about it.

“I’ve got a lot of energy, a lot of passion. Questionably, it could have been 
too much. But there are ways of channelling that. I’m constantly changing and 
evolving, trying to be the best I can be, and learning from things that didn’t 
go too well is definitely a way of doing that. There’s nothing wrong with 
[being] positive. Being passionate and proud of your country is definitely a 
positive. But there are just different ways of channelling it. I’ve looked into 
that, and hopefully it will help.”

Gareth Southgate presses home his long-term vision for England side
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/gareth-southgate-long-term-vision-england-spain>
The goalkeeper, who is learning Italian to help his adjustment to life at 
Torino during his loan spell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/26/serie-a-torino-roma-joe-hart-andrea-belotti>
 from Manchester City, sought advice from friends, family and others close to 
him when deciding to change his approach. “I’ve got plenty of people I can turn 
to, a core of people around me,” he said. “Everyone does it as you get older: 
you have people you trust, people you listen to. I’m really grateful to the 
people I’ve got. I’ve always said I might be wrong or I might be right to trust 
in these people, but I do. And as a team we try and grow. And that includes 
managers and coaches and players and friends.”

Vardy, who came on for the last 15 minutes against Scotland but has not scored 
for Leicester City since September, is set to start for the first time since the
frustrating draw with Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/england-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
 in Saint-Étienne in June. There may be a role, too, for Jesse Lingard as part 
of the attacking trio at the striker’s back, with Nathaniel Clyne recalled at 
right-back but Ryan Bertrand unlikely to be risked having sat out training, 
along with Rooney, after suffering a minor injury. Aaron Cresswell of West Ham 
United and Burnley’s Michael Keane will expect to gain their first caps but 
neither will start.

Southgate, the overwhelming favourite to be appointed England’s manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/13/gareth-southgate-quick-decision-england-manager-job>
 on a permanent basis, will ask his players to express themselves against Spain 
rather than merely “go solid, soak up pressure, hit them on the break and play 
all our experienced players”. He is prepared for his charges to take risks in 
possession and make the occasional mistake as part of a long-term development 
of the team’s style.

Joe Hart: ‘Some people probably do think I’m absolutely useless’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/joe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition>
“I’m 100% committed to my team and I believe 100% in the players in front of 
me,” said Hart, who watched John Stones in particular risk surrendering the 
ball in dangerous areas against Scotland. “The way we play and the way we build 
up does carry an element of risk, but there are a lot of benefits to it. And 
even when we did lose the ball in certain situations on Friday, the power and 
athleticism and desire to get back …

“If we didn’t have that then maybe I’d be thinking: ‘We need to be careful 
here’ but I know people are going to commit. Scotland didn’t have any free 
shots, even when we lost the ball 20 yards out and there was potentially a shot 
on goal. There were three people hunting them down.”

England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> (4-2-3-1; probable): 
Hart; Clyne, Cahill, Stones, Rose; Dier, Henderson; Sterling, Lallana, Lingard; 
Vardy.
 