
John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell> has laid 
out Labour’s economic plans, announcing a “radically fairer” programme that 
includes an independently set national living wage likely to be above £10 an 
hour by 2020.

The shadow chancellor said the party’s tax strategy would shift the burden 
away from wages and towards those who hold wealth, and promised aLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government that would actively 
intervene to assist business.

What are Jeremy Corbyn's most urgent priorities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/26/issues-jeremy-corbyn-should-prioritise-from-his-very-challenging-in-tray>
McDonnell’s speech won a standing ovation from delegates at the Labour 
conference <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labourconference>, as he 
concluded with the rallying cry: “That’s our vision to rebuild and transform 
Britain. In this party you no longer have to whisper it: it’s called socialism.”

The most striking new policy in his speech to the party’s annual conference in 
Liverpool was the proposal for a national living wage with the amount set by a 
review body “at the level needed for a decent life”.

“Independent forecasts suggest that this will be over £10 an hour. This will 
be a fundamental part of our new bargain in the workplace,” McDonnell said, 
prompting cheers and clapping.

Last year, George Osborne introduced plans for a living wage for those over 
25, which would rise to £9 an hour by 2020. McDonnell haspreviously called for 
a £10 an hour minimum wage 
<http://labourlist.org/2015/09/shadow-chancellor-mcdonnell-calls-for-10-a-hour-minimum-wage/>
, but Monday’s speech was the first formal outlining of the plan.

Len McCluskey, general secretary of the Unite union, said McDonnell’s living 
wage plan was “music to the ears of the millions of low-paid workers who are 
getting poorer under this government”.

But Carolyn Fairbairn, the CBI director general, said businesses would be wary 
of McDonnell’s “combative” tone and focus on “extensive intervention”.

“The best way to increase pay and living standards across the UK is to support 
firms to improve productivity,” she said. “We already have an expert 
independent Low Pay Commission, which should have responsibility for setting 
statutory wages levels.”

Labour’s new economic vision offers a chance to win votes. It must be seized | 
Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/john-mcdonnell-economic-vision-chance-labour-win-votes>
There would be proposals in the scheme to help businesses implement the living 
wage, McDonnell said, to make sure there was no negative effect on jobs or 
hours.

He also unveiled measures to crack down on tax avoidance, including more 
resources for HMRC inspectors, measures against tax havens and a commitment 
that companies found to dodge tax would not be awarded public contracts.

McDonnell said the tax burden was currently too heavy on those less able to 
pay. “In this coming period we will be developing the policies that will shift 
the tax burden more fairly, away from those who earn wages and salaries and on 
to those who hold wealth,” he said.

In a section of the speech trailed heavily in advance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/26/labour-will-offer-interventionist-government-john-mcdonnell>
, McDonnell said a Labour government would be more interventionist in the 
economy, both in terms of direct investment and protecting industries as needed.

“The winds of globalisation are blowing in a different direction,” he said. 
“They are blowing against the belief in the free market and in favour of 
intervention.

“Good business doesn’t need no government. Good business needs good 
government. And the best governments today, right across the world, recognise 
that they need to support their economies because the way the world works is 
changing.”

Interviewed before his conference speech on Sky News, McDonnell said the 
support would involve a national investment bank borrowing £100bn, which would 
in turn “lever in” £150bn more in private funding to invest in infrastructure 
and skills.

McDonnell defends calling Tory MP 'stain of inhumanity'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/25/mcdonnell-defends-calling-female-mp-stain-of-inhumanity-esther-mcvey>
Addressing Brexit, McDonnell argued that, while Labour must respect the result 
of the EU referendum, that “doesn’t mean we have to accept what the Tories 
serve up for our future relationship with Europe”.

It was vital, he said, to protect jobs. “So we will seek to preserve access to 
the single market for goods and services,” he said. “Today, access to the 
single market requires freedom of movement of labour. But we will address the 
concerns that people have raised in the undercutting of wages and conditions, 
and the pressure on local public services.”

With Jeremy Corbyn re-elected as leader, Labour had to stop bickering and 
become “a government-in-waiting”, McDonnell said, making a point of praising 
the defeated leadership candidate, Owen Smith, for campaigning against cuts to 
disability benefits.

In a very personal end to his speech, McDonnell recalled his upbringing, and 
the council home and state education that helped his family.

“Our generation always thought that from here on there would always be a 
steady improvement in people’s living standards,” he said. “We expected the 
lives of each generation would improve upon the last. Successive Tory 
governments put an end to that.

“Under Jeremy’s leadership, I believe that we can restore that optimism, 
people’s faith in the future. In the birthplace of John Lennon, it falls to us 
to inspire people to imagine.”
 