
The annual bonus for John Lewis and Waitrose staff has fallen for the third 
year in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/john-lewis-cuts-staff-bonus-to-lowest-level-for-12-years>
, as profits at their parent group declined owing to higher pension charges.

The pool from which the bonuses are paid reduced from £156.2m to £145m, which 
worked out at an average payment of £1,585 for each of its 91,500 staff.

The John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> Partnership, 
whose corporate structure means staff own the company through a trust and take 
a share of its profits, said on Thursday the annual bonus would be 10% of 
salary.

The payout is down from 11% last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/john-lewis-cuts-staff-bonus-to-lowest-level-for-12-years>
, itself a cut on the 15% in 2014. However, it was higher than expectations, 
with many analysts predicting 9%.

It follows a difficult year in which profits were hit by fierce competition 
among grocers and hefty pension costs.

John Lewis is expected to take action this year to cut overheads as it 
navigates a difficult trading environment. The firm isconsidering plans to 
close staff canteens and introduce longer shifts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/09/john-lewis-to-shut-canteens-and-introduce-longer-shifts-for-drivers>
 for hundreds of delivery drivers.


John Lewis to shut canteens and introduce longer shifts for drivers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/09/john-lewis-to-shut-canteens-and-introduce-longer-shifts-for-drivers>
Underlying pre-tax profit for 2015 fell 10.9% to £305.5m on revenues that were 
2.2% higher at £9.7bn. The chairman, Sir Charlie Mayfield, said the fall in 
profit was down to high pension charges and lower property earnings, without 
which profit was up 7%.

He added that the rise was actually 9% because last year’s results were for a 
53-week period, rather than a standard 52-week year.

Pre-tax profit rose 24% to £434.8m when including £129.3m from the sale of a 
property.


While operating profits for John Lewis department stores were unchanged at 
£250m, earnings atWaitrose <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> fell 
2% to £232.6m as discount supermarkets forced down prices.


But the comparison with last year was brighter when excluding one-off property 
profits from last year and the fact that last year’s figures included an extra 
week of trading.

Stripping out those effects, Waitrose’s operating profit was up 3.9% and John 
Lewis’s was 0.7% higher.

Despite the fall in their customary bonus, staff at John Lewis’s flagship 
store on Oxford Street, London, whooped and cheered when the payment was 
announced on Thursday morning.

Frances O’Neill, a kitchen planner who has worked at John Lewis for five 
years, said: “Bonuses are quite rare unless you work in finance and whatever we 
get is fantastic. How many other retailers do a profit share?

“It’s great if you have a credit card bill to pay or something. This year I’m 
saving for a holiday with the family.”

Most of the decline in the partnership’s profits was because of the operating 
cost of its pension scheme, which increased by £54m to £245.4m owing to a 
change in the rates used for accounting purposes.

The trading performance of Waitrose and John Lewis held up well, with both 
increasing their market share.


Waitrose’s operating profit was £232.6m, down 0.8% when compared with the 
52-week period last year but up 3.9% when excluding £10.5m of profit the 
supermarket chain made last year on its property portfolio.

The supermarket’s managing director, Mark Price, was presiding over his last 
set of results before leaving to become a trade minister at the Foreign Office, 
a position that will see him become a peer.

He said that despite Waitrose’s upmarket clientele, it had not been immune to 
the rise of discounters such as Aldi and Lidl, owing to a “ripple effect” 
throughout the market caused by fierce competition.

He predicted that the supermarket would fare better than its rivals this year. 
“I expect this year that Waitrose will be one of the very few food retailers 
that will improve profitability,” he said. But the partnership warned that 
conditions this year were likely to be “challenging, especially in grocery”.

Overall sales across the John Lewis Partnership were up 4.2% in the first five 
weeks of the year.

Most of this growth has come from the department stores, where gross sales 
were 5.5% higher than last year, compared with 0.4% growth for Waitrose.

Price said customers can expect to see more in-store hospitality, such as its 
eat-in bakeries, sushi bars and wine bars, as Waitrose looks to burnish its 
high-end credentials.
 