
John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> has promoted Paula 
Nickolds, who joined the company as a graduate trainee, to be the first female 
managing director in the department store group’s 152-year history.

Nickolds, 43, will take over from Andy Street in January. She has worked for 
the retail group for 22 years,, joining as a graduate trainee in the 
haberdashery of the Oxford Street store in London.

Heading one of the UK’s biggest and most respected retail brands, Nickolds 
will be one of only a handful of female bosses in an industry in which more 
than half of employees are women. Only Véronique Laury, head of B&Q owner 
Kingfisher, and Katie Bickerstaffe, head of Dixons Carphone’s UK and Irish 
business, hold comparable roles.

After working her way up through the ranks, Nickolds joined the John Lewis 
management board as buying and brand director in 2013. She is currently 
commercial director with responsibility for rejuvenating John Lewis’s product 
ranges and the look and feel of its shops as well as its international 
partnerships.


Nickolds takes over at a tricky period for the department store, where profits 
slumped 31% to £32m in the first half of this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/john-lewis-profits-fall-nearly-15-percent>
 as it struggled to adapt to the shift to online shopping.

She will have to help increase morale and find a way to maintain the group’s 
quality and service credentials while cutting costs, particularly in stores 
where sales are falling. Nickolds may also have to consider pruning new store 
developments and finding new uses for store space that is no longer needed.

Sir Charlie Mayfield, chairman of the John Lewis Partnership, the department 
store’s parent group, which also owns Waitrose, said: “At a time of 
transformation in the retail sector, Paula’s progressive and dynamic leadership 
is just what’s needed for the next phase of modern retailing.”


Nickolds said: “As a partner with 22 years’ service, I know just how special 
the John Lewis Partnership is. Driven by our unique business model, and with 
innovation in our DNA, I am immensely excited to lead John Lewis on the next 
stage of our journey.”

Former and current John Lewis staff, known as partners because they jointly 
own the business and take a share in its profits, said Nickolds was 
“inspirational” and a “role model”.

“Paula has got the partnership in her DNA. She is ferociously bright and a 
very good people person. She is hugely respected and a woman with outstanding 
taste,” said one person who knows Nickolds well.

John Lewis warns of steady reduction in staff as profits tumble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/john-lewis-profits-fall-nearly-15-percent>
Richard Hyman, the veteran retail analyst, said Nickolds was a great pick to 
lead the next phase of development at John Lewis because she was an “old 
fashioned retailer” who was in touch with what customers wanted and would help 
keep the brand relevant in a tough economic climate.


“Anybody can reduce costs if they compromise on quality or service. It would 
be a big mistake for John Lewis to jeopardise the single strongest competitive 
advantage it has which is customer service,” Hyman said.

“The next 18 months are going to be real tough, much tougher than now, and we 
are really going to see who’s got the vision and financial strength to invest 
in building sales. John Lewis will need to understand what are the fundamental 
pillars of its DNA and reinforce those in the marketplace.”

Peter Ruis, the boss of the Jigsaw fashion brand who previously worked with 
Nickolds at John Lewis, said: “Paula intuitively understands what the customers 
wants and she’ll want to keep innovating without burning the foundations down - 
keeping the best of the old with the best of the new.”

Street, another former John Lewis graduate trainee, leaves at the end of this 
week after nine years as managing director to pursue his campaign to be mayor 
of the West Midlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/29/tories-choose-john-lewis-boss-as-west-midlands-mayoral-candidate>
. Dino Rocos, operations director, will lead the department store group until 
Nickolds moves to her new role.

Although most of the plans are already in place, Rocos will have to shepherd 
the business through the all-important Christmas period when the vast majority 
of John Lewis’s profits are made.
 