
Paula Nickolds, the new managing director of John Lewis, will take the helm in 
January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/john-lewis-paula-nickolds-chief-executive-first-female>
. The John Lewis lifer will have to address a number of major strategic 
questions, not least the existential threat facing department stores in an 
internet age.

John Lewis appoints Paula Nickolds as first female managing director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/john-lewis-paula-nickolds-chief-executive-first-female>
1. Department store 2.0 

Sales are falling in John Lewis’s physical stores as the internet sucks 
purchases out of the high street. Like other department store chains, the 
retailer is having to worker harder than ever to get shoppers through the door 
amid cautious consumer spending and weak high street footfall. Its newest 
branch in Leeds boasts an upmarket spa and Benugo cafe but Nickolds will have 
to come up with other ways to reinvent its stores.

2. Rebuild profits

There are lots of other moving parts affecting the employee-owned retailer’s 
financial performance. Profits collapsed in the first six months of this year, 
slumping 31.2% to £32.4m as it invested heavily in the back end of its online 
business and its Never Knowingly Undersold promise forced it to match rivals 
promotions. Nickolds could face an uphill struggle in this area as she battles 
any Brexit related hit to consumer spending.

3. Bricks v clicks 


More than a third of John Lewis’s sales are online and Nickolds’ predecessor, 
Andy Street, predicted they would hit 50% by 2020. This will present the 
business with a fresh set of challenges as each item sold online generates less 
profit because of the behind-the-scenes effort involved in fulfilling orders 
while the company simultaneously services the huge fixed costs associated with 
running large department stores. Nickolds will have to figure out how to 
balance the needs of both sides of the business.

4. Partners

The John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> Partnership’s 
USP is that it is owned by its staff, but at its last update in September, the 
chairman, Sir Charlie Mayfield, signalled tough times were ahead as it grappled 
with a rising wage bill and the need to become more efficient. It cut 1,500 
jobs last year and Mayfield anticipated “we will have fewer partners over time 
compared with today”. The prized annual staff bonus has fallen for the past 
three years and Nickolds will somehow have to boost morale on the shopfloor 
while getting staff to work harder.

5. Growth channels

John Lewis has a small pipeline of stores in prospect but opening acres of new 
space is unlikely to appeal to Nickolds, who will have to make the 48 she has 
inherited pay their way. Her Waitrose counterpart, Rob Collins, has put the 
brakes on further supermarket openings in a tough market and she will have to 
look for ways to win market share from rivals in what promises to be an 
unforgiving retail landscape in 2017.
 