
London-based fashion designer Jonathan Saunders is to become chief creative 
officer at New York labelDiane von Furstenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jul/01/diane-von-furstenburg-stuido-54-google-wrap-dress-oprah-warhol-anna-wintour>
. The announcement comes five months after the Scottish designerclosed the 
eponymous label 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/dec/08/jonathan-saunders-label-to-close-due-to-personal-reasons>
 he set up in 2003, citing personal reasons.

The appointment, which is effective immediately, makes creative sense. Both 
the designer and the label champion colour and print and have an aesthetic that 
speaks directly to grownup women with cash, and sometimes curves. Von 
Furstenberg, who remains as chair of the brand, was effusive in a statement 
released on Monday: “Jonathan’s extraordinary passion for colours and prints, 
his effortless designs and his desire to make women feel beautiful make him the 
perfect creative force to lead DVF into the future.” She went on to say: “I 
could not have found a cooler, more intelligent designer.” Saunders, meanwhile, 
said he was “thrilled”, and noted that “the spirit with which this brand was 
founded is incredibly relevant today”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fjonathan-saunders-diane-von-furstenberg-creative-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22b8024d12a9edb3e8f368fb13f69e4d042d60d2%2F0_0_1990_3000%2F1990.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Saunders%20to%20become%20creative%20director%20of%20Diane%20von%20Furstenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fjonathan-saunders-diane-von-furstenberg-creative-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Saunders%20to%20become%20creative%20director%20of%20Diane%20von%20Furstenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fjonathan-saunders-diane-von-furstenberg-creative-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22b8024d12a9edb3e8f368fb13f69e4d042d60d2%2F0_0_1990_3000%2F1990.jpg>
 A model on the Diane Von Furstenberg spring/summer 2016 catwalk. Photograph: 
JP Yim/Getty Images 
In recent years, critics of the DVF brand have not been entirely in agreement 
with Saunders’ assessment of the brand’s relevance. The label’s catwalk 
collections have occasionally championed exuberance above a fresh contribution 
to the fashion conversation. Moreover, having the inimitable Von Furstenberg as 
the figurehead of the brand could be a hindrance as well as an asset: her 
Studio 54wrap-dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jan/17/forty-years-diane-von-furstenberg-wrap-dress-fashion>
 vibes provide powerful, and sometimes insurmountable, iconography. At her last 
show in New York, the designer opened up her Manhattan apartment and hosted a 
fashion “experience” where social-media supermodels danced around in vignettes 
wearing sequinned wrap dresses. It evoked the lifestyle that the designer is 
known for, but perhaps missed the mark in terms of trends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fjonathan-saunders-diane-von-furstenberg-creative-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45503bd12503a5132b6d45e4c620b5177a26f813%2F0_0_2669_3600%2F2669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Saunders%20to%20become%20creative%20director%20of%20Diane%20von%20Furstenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fjonathan-saunders-diane-von-furstenberg-creative-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Saunders%20to%20become%20creative%20director%20of%20Diane%20von%20Furstenberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fjonathan-saunders-diane-von-furstenberg-creative-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45503bd12503a5132b6d45e4c620b5177a26f813%2F0_0_2669_3600%2F2669.jpg>
 Diane von Furstenberg in New York, 2011. Photograph: Sipa Press / Rex Features 
Backstage at her shows, Von Furstenberg often purrs her soundbite of her brand 
being “a woman’s best friend” – and it is true that it puts women front and 
centre of what it sells. The challenge for Saunders will be to harness this 
commercially compelling and laudable narrative at DVF, while re-engaging the 
label with more timely catwalk preoccupations. Perhaps a little more wonk, a 
little less wrap dress among the vibrant prints.
 