
After 4.30pm, the chances of hailing a taxi in Amman’s Shmeisani neighbourhood 
are slim. Cars inch forwards on gridlocked streets, slowing to a standstill to 
wait through a fifth or sixth light change before joining the queue beyond. 
Elsewhere in the Jordanian capital, similar lines choke roads, roundabouts and 
intersections ill-equipped to deal with the enormous traffic load in a city 
that has long outgrown its transport infrastructure.

Strategic avoidance of traffic jams is just one of the tactics taxi drivers 
here employ to offset the costs of their trade. Switching off the meter, 
charging extra in congested areas and refusing certain destinations are 
practices that have earned them little popularity among passengers, who add 
speeding and smoking in the car to a long list of complaints.

The arrival of ride-hailing platforms Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> and Dubai-based competitor Careem 
last year offered commuters an alternative to Amman’s traditional yellow taxis 
and poor public transport services. But they haven’t been welcomed with open 
arms by the existing taxi industry or the government.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F066fcc94db63db9f9621ba5ca7ec34d96b73c951%2F0_0_4826_3217%2F4826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20cracks%20down%20on%20Uber%20and%20Careem%20as%20congestion%20clogs%20its%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20cracks%20down%20on%20Uber%20and%20Careem%20as%20congestion%20clogs%20its%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F066fcc94db63db9f9621ba5ca7ec34d96b73c951%2F0_0_4826_3217%2F4826.jpg>
 Careem ride-hailing app Photograph: Careem 
Crackdown on apps

“It’s illegal to use private cars for public transport,” says Nourhan Shuqman, 
an advisor at Jordan’s Ministry of Transport. While the apps provide a “great 
service”, she says, the taxis are “a big sector that we cannot neglect.”

At the end of last year, a government crack down 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/08/jordan-cracks-down-uber-no-registration.html>
 on ride-hailing apps saw cars impounded and drivers fined, accused of 
violating Jordan’s Public Transport law, which states that only licensed cars 
can provide public transport services for a fee.

Regulations 
<http://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/new-regulations-restrict-use-ride-hailing-apps-licensed-taxis%E2%80%99>
 are being drawn up that would limit Uber and Careem to operating through 
licensed cabs, limos and hotel taxis. This would be a disappointing outcome 
says Ibrahim Al Manna, general manager of Careem in Jordan, adding that the 
company’s app helps address transport shortfalls in Amman while offering work 
to unemployed Jordanians.

“We see great value in having Careem here … but the government needs to put 
the right regulations in place by giving people the freedom to decide their 
mode of transport, whether that’s by private car or yellow taxi,” he says. And 
despite the crackdown Careem says its has increased the number of drivers it 
works with.

“The situation in the Middle East is very different from other parts of the 
world,” an Uber spokesperson says, “Jordan offers huge potential but we need to 
make sure we comply with the laws.” Uber says it is “is 100% legal as we only 
work with licensed drivers.”

Both Uber and Careem have encountered similar challenges entering other Middle 
East markets, where protectionist policies have complicated their expansion 
across the region. But commuters in Amman have quickly grown accustomed to the 
high-standard service offered by the apps.

“They made life a lot easier, particularly for women,” says Amman resident 
Nada Qaddoura, pointing to safety assurances offered by the apps’ 
driver-tracking functions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa278fc7ed43b8a885d9881e3ed5e53aeaf886db%2F0_0_4912_3264%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20cracks%20down%20on%20Uber%20and%20Careem%20as%20congestion%20clogs%20its%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20cracks%20down%20on%20Uber%20and%20Careem%20as%20congestion%20clogs%20its%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa278fc7ed43b8a885d9881e3ed5e53aeaf886db%2F0_0_4912_3264%2F4912.jpg>
 Women getting into an Easy Taxi Photograph: EasyTaxi 
“There’s no denying the growing demand and global trend towards [services 
using] private cars,” says Mahmoud Fouz, Middle East CEO of Easy, a 
ride-hailing app that operates through Amman’s existing yellow taxi fleet. “We 
are also open to exploiting this demand, but it has to happen in a structured 
way that doesn’t destroy the existing players.”

The backlash from Amman’s yellow taxis

Last Tuesday, more than 1,200 taxi drivers took part in a protest that called 
on the government to ban Uber and Careem, citing an80% 
<http://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/taxi-drivers-protest-unfair’-competition-ride-hailing-apps>
 decline in business since the arrival of the apps in Amman. “The situation is 
unfair for taxis. What the apps are doing is illegal,” says Ayman Zain, a taxi 
driver who helped organise the protest.

Drivers also voiced longstanding demands for an increase in fares. “We’ve 
asked many times for the rates to be raised,” says taxi driver Fayez Hassan 
Hijazi. “I have another source of income but other drivers can’t manage if they 
live only on the taxi.”

Many of the problems boil down to the meter, explains Hamzah Nassif, 
co-founder of iMena Group, an operator of online businesses in the region, 
including Easy. Every time the speedometer drops below 20 km/h, the meter 
switches to waiting mode, which charges less than 0.019 Jordanian dinar (2p) a 
minute. This encourages taxi drivers, who often pay up to JOD45 (£51) a day for 
cab hire and fuel, to haggle with passengers or refuse congested routes as they 
try to offset their costs for the day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81ec7e314aed78d3b66b86bd24fe5d5fb9133799%2F0_0_960_1280%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20cracks%20down%20on%20Uber%20and%20Careem%20as%20congestion%20clogs%20its%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20cracks%20down%20on%20Uber%20and%20Careem%20as%20congestion%20clogs%20its%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Famman-congestion-crisis-uber-careem-jordan-ride-sharing-apps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81ec7e314aed78d3b66b86bd24fe5d5fb9133799%2F0_0_960_1280%2F960.jpg>
 Taxi drivers protesting in Amman Photograph: EasyTaxi 
Easy has addressed this by implementing an in-app pricing mechanism that’s 
“more aligned with the realities of Amman’s busy roads,” says Nassif. It 
calculates the price according to both distance travelled and time taken, 
producing a higher rate all-round than the standard metere, particularly for 
the slow-moving mode.

It’s fairer than the standard meter system, he says, where prices, “have been 
kept low in order to compensate for the lack of transportation infrastructure 
in the city.”

Amman’s urban mobility crisis

Uber and Careem may pitch themselves as an answer to the capital’s mounting 
urban mobility crisis, but the government is not convinced. It’s takingsteps 
<http://jordantimes.com/news/local/not-easy-job-amman%E2%80%99s-traffic-headache-curable-%E2%80%94-experts>
 to address the problem through the Amman bus rapid transit system, due for 
completion in 2018.

At present, just 350 large buses cater for a city of more than four million 
people and account for fewer than 5% of journeys in Amman each day, according 
to transport consultant Hazem Zureiqat. “Public transport has not kept up with 
the pace of growth in Amman,” he says. “We’ve reached the point where it has 
become critical to invest in it.”

Instead, huge funds have been channelled into bolstering the city’s road 
network and facilitating the movement of private cars. Ayman Smadi, who until 
recently served as director of transportation and traffic management at the 
Greater Amman Municipality (GAM), fears the consequences. “We already have 1.2m 
registered cars in Amman and let me tell you, our streets are not made for 1.2m 
cars,” he says.

“Traffic jams aren’t the only issue here,” he adds, referring to a 2014 
government study on youth unemployment (currently around29% 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.1524.ZS> in Jordan), in which 
approximately 55% of respondents cited transportation barriers as a primary 
reason for failing to keep or find a job. These are “captive users” with no 
alternative, says Zureiqat, who is part of the team behind a proposed new law 
that includes subsidising public transport to facilitate a regular and reliable 
service.

Careem, has plans to create 10,000 jobs in the country over the next two 
years. Wa’el Abd Al Rahman, who uses the platform to supplement his income as a 
computer engineer, is one of almost 2,000 drivers, or “captains”, on the 
company’s books. “All of my relatives do this,” he says. “If you have a new 
car, are polite and qualified, then it’s a way of making money easily.”
 