
He’s the first to win both womenswear and menswear designer of the year at the 
British fashion awards, and has a reputation for the unexpected.

JW Anderson’s autumn/winter 2016 collection, shown on Sunday morning as part 
of London Collections: Men, did not disappoint on that score, with a 
live-streaming of the show on gay dating app Grindr.

The show included his gender-fluid trademark style – chokers for men, satin 
pyjamas in pastel colours and a cropped floral bed jacket worn with a pair of 
knitted trousers – in keeping with previous designs that have put blouses and 
bustiers on male models.

This signalled two things. First, that Anderson, who pioneered androgynous 
trends, is still leading the way when it comes to all things gender and 
sexuality. And second, that he is in possession of the supreme confidence that 
allows someone to do unexpected things, such as showcase the rarified world of 
a high fashion show on a dating platform, where it will play on loop for 24 
hours.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fjw-anderson-mixes-mundane-and-strange-in-fashion-show-streamed-on-grindr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc05efbfaf694b9b2de857b4ba9ed069fef8174c1%2F112_77_4356_2615%2F4356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JW%20Anderson%20mixes%20mundane%20and%20strange%20in%20fashion%20show%20streamed%20on%20Grindr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fjw-anderson-mixes-mundane-and-strange-in-fashion-show-streamed-on-grindr%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JW%20Anderson%20mixes%20mundane%20and%20strange%20in%20fashion%20show%20streamed%20on%20Grindr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fjw-anderson-mixes-mundane-and-strange-in-fashion-show-streamed-on-grindr%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc05efbfaf694b9b2de857b4ba9ed069fef8174c1%2F112_77_4356_2615%2F4356.jpg>
 A model on the catwalk at JW Anderson’s show. Photograph: Jonathan 
Hordle/Rex/Shutterstock 
In this show, there was a mix of the mundane and the strange, contemporary and 
historical. Models wore knee-length fur gilets with patterns that gave them the 
feel of royal ermine, paired with leather tracksuit trousers and chic leather 
versions of 5p plastic bags. A snail appeared as a motif throughout – as 
embroidery on sporty shapes and oversized on the hem of jackets. The cartoon 
element increased with prints of characters that recalled Tex Avery cartoons – 
all to a soundtrack of pounding techno.

As always with Anderson, the headliners were underscored with clothes that 
will grow in appeal, that work beyond the catwalk bubble and give that crucial 
commercial edge. Something like that cropped floral bed jacket was contrasted 
with beautifully cut outerwear including a camel coat with studded collar and 
oversized puffa jacket, as well as tracksuits with pockets shaped as clouds and 
slouchy Kurt Cobain-ish cardigans.

Backstage, Anderson spoke about the storytelling aspect of fashion. He said 
the collection was about “telling an urban tale that may or may not exist, with 
characters that fall into one room then fall into another room. We were playing 
with a fantasy character and thinking if we made a cartoon for now, what would 
it be?”

The designer was effusive about Grindr, Tinder and Instagram as ways of 
communicating beyond fashion’s usual channels. “We’re reaching seven million 
people [the number of Grindr users] at one time,” he said. “Fashion is at the 
speed it should be; media drives that so we have to keep pace.”

London Collections: Men, now in its eighth season, concludes on Monday. The 
focus will move from the buzz of an individual designer to the might of a 
mega-brand. Burberry will show their collection, streamed on their website, in 
the afternoon.
 