
In the lead-up to his Yeezy Season 4 show, Kanye West ruffled some fashion 
feathers. The casting call for“multiracial women only” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/05/was-kanye-west-wrong-cast-multiracial-women-only>
 was branded controversial, and the last-minute announcement that the show 
would be streaming via Tidal had many thinking it would follow the 
non-traditional model of February’sSeason 3 show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/kanye-west-new-album-the-life-of-pablo-launch>
 (an album playback-cum-art installation). And in an interview withVogue  
<http://www.vogue.com/13473191/kanye-west-spring-2017-interview/?mbid=social_twitter_vr>
posted hours prior to the show, West made a point of being anti-elitist. He 
said his garments were “apparel”, not fashion, with a purposefully limited 
colour palette to give them a timeless appeal.

Despite these purist intentions, initial reports about the show, which took 
place in Four Freedoms Park on Roosevelt Island, sounded more Zoolander than 
utilitarian. There was a time delay, modelsfell 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3778732/Off-shoes-Tyga-s-former-flame-Amina-Blue-stumbles-Yeezy-runway-rips-plastic-heels-walks-BAREFOOT-catwalk-ex-Kylie-Jenner-watch.html>
,collapsed in the heat  
<https://twitter.com/stellabugbee/status/773620675944865792?ref_src=twsrc^tfw> 
and many thought that model Jasmine Sanders was, in fact, Malia Obama.
Kylie (@SXPAHS) 
I thought this was Malia Obama on glance lol pic.twitter.com/igZ48iWwSK 
<https://t.co/igZ48iWwSK>
 <https://twitter.com/SXPAHS/status/773626259347681280> September 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SXPAHS/status/773626259347681280> 
But what about the clothes? We’d already seen West’s wife Kim Kardashian in 
perspex, over-the-knee boots, and this collection focused on close-fitting 
styles: athleisure unitards, knitted cut-out tops, oversize hoodies and 
jackets, and elasticated separates.

The colour scheme was toned down from the earth tones of red, sand and orange 
that dominated Season 3. Instead, the palette was creme, beige, nude, brown and 
muted pistachio. Its had quite a mass appeal and honed Yeezy’s aesthetic: terra 
firma bodycon. Like Season 3, it was also a statement about black female beauty 
and style, which is a victory in itself.
@Booth (@Booth) 
Twirling and posing: style of @TOMFORD <https://twitter.com/TOMFORD> show very 
old school runway#NYFW <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NYFW?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/2bzbzqLyC9 <https://t.co/2bzbzqLyC9>
 <https://twitter.com/Booth/status/773697586507214848> September 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Booth/status/773697586507214848> 
If West was experimenting with what fashion means now, Tom Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford>, who showed later in the day, 
went for old-school glamour. Fresh from promoting his film Nocturnal Animal in 
Venice, he showed at the legendary Four Seasons hotel with a frow that was very 
Hollywood (Tom Hanks, Jon Hamm and Julianne Moore). The clothes were equally 
luxurious: shimmering sequins and ombre feathers met leather and velvet in 
pencil-thin silhouettes evoking classic Tinseltown glamour and elegance.
 