
Other designers at this season’s Paris fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/paris-fashion-week> are miffed that the 
clothes on the catwalk have struggled for airtime, overshadowed by the drama 
happening in the wings. Karl Lagerfeld, however, demonstrated how Chanel 
retains its position as the biggest show in Paris by turning the off-catwalk 
commotion into spotlighting for Chanel.

The two big stories of fashion week are the blogger backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/03/reason-vogue-declared-war-fashion-bloggers-susie-bubble-fashion-shows>
, a row which is a microcosm of how the digital era has disrupted fashion, and 
thenew “model-free” issue of British Vogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/03/british-vogue-latest-issue-model-free-zone-real-women-emily-blunt>
, featuring “real” people.

Chanel’s theme for Tuesday’s show, staged at the Grand Palais, was the digital 
world – hardly lightbulb moment stuff, since it doesn’t take much insight to 
clock its impact on fashion, in the season ofsee now, buy now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/sep/23/tech-fashion-week-burberry-tommy-hilfiger-virtual-reality>
. But what was interesting was that Lagerfeld, who owns four iPhones and about 
30 iPads – including one used byhis cat, Choupette 
<http://www.marieclaire.com/celebrity/news/a13983/karl-lagerfeld-cat-choupette/>
 – focused not on our intimate relationship with the friendly screens in our 
pockets, but on the slightly sinister, unknowable might of data centres and 
server racks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdac31b7a4e8c3bcd4e64e75300b02d4f978591c5%2F0_63_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Lagerfeld%20electrifies%20Chanel%20by%20embracing%20digital%20disruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Lagerfeld%20electrifies%20Chanel%20by%20embracing%20digital%20disruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdac31b7a4e8c3bcd4e64e75300b02d4f978591c5%2F0_63_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A model wearing a white plastic robot mask opened the Chanel show. Photograph: 
Etienne Laurent/EPA 
And he opened the collection, pointedly, not with a supermodel with millions 
of Instagram followers, but with an anonymous woman in a white plastic robot 
mask, gloves and boots, who appeared to have based her look on a cross between 
a stormtrooper and Thomas Bangalter from Daft Punk.


The invitation to the show featured the brand’s double C logo made from 
colourful modem cables, twisted together until they frayed like the bouclé wool 
of Chanel’s famous skirt suits, and the grand Beaux Arts interior of the Grand 
Palais was given a Silicon Valley makeover: all brushed steel, smooth white 
surfaces, snaking coils of cables and flickering screens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bfd74142e1284cc1b5d6b5bc48e8e4d9e7ecaef%2F216_1318_3236_4045%2F3236.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Lagerfeld%20electrifies%20Chanel%20by%20embracing%20digital%20disruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Lagerfeld%20electrifies%20Chanel%20by%20embracing%20digital%20disruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bfd74142e1284cc1b5d6b5bc48e8e4d9e7ecaef%2F216_1318_3236_4045%2F3236.jpg>
 Handbags resembled Star Wars robots. Photograph: Patrick Kovarik/AFP/Getty 
Images 
The scale of the set, and the sense of computing as something alien rather 
than native and everyday, made the catwalk feel more retro than futuristic. The 
soundtrack wasI Feel Love by Donna Summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/may/18/donna-summer-i-feel-love>
, the Giorgio Moroder game changer that set music on a new path in 1977. That 
was six years before Lagerfeld joined Chanel, and the song still sounds 
relevant today, which was perhaps his point.


The retro mood was overt in the styling. Models in skewed baseball caps and 
side ponytails wore medallions around their necks in the style of the Beastie 
Boys’ Licensed to Ill era. (That the medallions could be reconfigured as modern 
office-pass lanyards added a layer of modern, e-surveillance paranoia.) 
Handbags were modelled on robots of a Star Wars vintage. But the clothes were 
classic Chanel: bouclé tweed suits worn shoulder-robed with flat boots, and 
silk tea dresses slit to the hip for this season’s on-trend flying panels, in 
circuit board prints.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F467dc3e0ce8e66664c3e326a00b788f074b48244%2F0_72_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Lagerfeld%20electrifies%20Chanel%20by%20embracing%20digital%20disruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Lagerfeld%20electrifies%20Chanel%20by%20embracing%20digital%20disruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fkarl-lagerfeld-electrifies-chanel-embracing-digital-disruption%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F467dc3e0ce8e66664c3e326a00b788f074b48244%2F0_72_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Beastie Boys-style skewed baseball caps, side ponytails and medallions added 
to the retro mood. Photograph: Patrick Kovarik/AFP/Getty Images  