
Forget the Spice Girls reuniting – the return of Kate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss> to the stable of Calvin Klein 
is a moment of true 90s nostalgia.

Her appearance in the new Calvin Klein adverts, alongside a frow-worthy line 
up that includes Bella Hadid, Grace Coddington and Frank Ocean, sees her 
proclaiming: “I look back in #mycalvins.” In the context of CK, Kate getting 
nostalgic about her Calvin Klein underwear seems highly appropriate.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkate-moss-returns-to-calvin-klein-stylewatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc45d07277b0a3d9784729f329238d5e4b3b0e1d1%2F0_0_800_1120%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kate%20Moss%20returns%20to%20Calvin%20Klein%20%E2%80%93%20stylewatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkate-moss-returns-to-calvin-klein-stylewatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kate%20Moss%20returns%20to%20Calvin%20Klein%20%E2%80%93%20stylewatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fkate-moss-returns-to-calvin-klein-stylewatch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc45d07277b0a3d9784729f329238d5e4b3b0e1d1%2F0_0_800_1120%2F800.jpg>
 Calvin Klein’s new Kate Moss advert 
Looking back at her first campaign, in1992, where she played Jane to Marky 
Mark’s Tarzan, Moss looks awkward and unnatural. That’s because she was. “It 
didn’t feel like me at all,” she told Vanity Fair in 2012. “I felt really bad 
about straddling this buff guy. I didn’t like it.”
 Calvin Klein’s Obsession advert from 1993 
It was her 1993 ads for the Obsession fragrance that proved more visually 
significant. Moss and the brand managed to bottle something unique and pivotal 
in those pictures. In one, there was Moss laying naked on a couch looking 
directly at the camera. It was an intoxicating mix of untethered sexuality, 
innocence with a whisper of danger. Questions about exploitation seemed to melt 
into the ether until she opened up about the shoot, years later. It was shot by 
her then boyfriend, photographer Mario Sorrenti, and Moss said he would take 
endless snaps of her. “Calvin saw Mario’s book and it was all pictures of me on 
holiday, and he was like, ‘Great, I can see it’s an obsession,’ and he saw it, 
and it was an obsession,” she told SHOWstudio in 2015. “I would wake up in the 
morning and he would be like taking pictures of me, and I’d be like, ‘Fuck 
off.’” VeryAnna May Wong 
<http://img.picturequotes.com/2/151/150187/every-time-your-picture-is-taken-you-lose-a-part-of-your-soul-quote-1.jpg>
.

As the decade progressed, Moss’s fame grew and her Calvin Klein persona became 
three dimensional. By 1994, Moss was playing herself in a crowd of hip, young 
things for the CK One ad. In the photos she looked as if she was filled with 
Cobain-ish ennui while the multicultural models around her played their parts 
(hot-tempered skinhead, thoughtful stoner, bored wallflower). Significantly, 
she was wearing more clothes than some of her counterparts. 1996’s CK campaign 
even saw her smiling, a cheeky nod to Corinne Day’s iconic shoot for the the 
Face in 1990.

Moss catalyzed Calvin Klein’s proto gender neutral idea of “ambisexuality”. 
With her androgynous look, she became his visual muse. “She has this childlike, 
womanlike thing that I haven’t seen in a long time,” Klein said at the time. 
“It’s a new kind of beauty.” In 2016, it’s an iconic beauty that makes a 
welcome return to the Calvin Klein home.
 