
Inherent Vice star Katherine Waterston will board Ridley Scott’s film Alien: 
Covenant,according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/katherine-waterston-star-new-alien-850045>
.

Waterston will join Michael Fassbender, her co-star in Danny Boyle’s Steve Jobs
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/steve-jobs-review-apple-co-founder-danny-boyle-michael-fassbender-aaron-sorkin>
 biopic, in the sequel to the poorly received Alien prequel,Prometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/30/prometheus-review>. Fassbender 
will return as David, a hyper-intelligent android with a chilly disdain for his 
human masters. Waterston’s role and the film’s plot are yet to be announced.

Waterston was a regular on HBO TV show Boardwalk Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/04/-sp-atlantic-city-boardwalk-empire-casino-resort>
 and film bit-part player before her role inInherent Vice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/29/inherent-vice-review-paul-thomas-anderson>
, in which she played Shasta Fay Hepworth, a skewed take on the femme fatale, 
opposite Joaquin Phoenix in Paul Thomas Anderson’s stoner detective story. In 
Steve Jobs she portrayed Chrisann Brennan, an ex-girlfriend of the Apple 
co-founder and the mother of his child, Lisa. She’ll soon appear in the 2016 
Harry Potter spin-off,Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/16/katherine-waterston-jk-rowlings-fantastic-beasts-harry-potter>
, which is JK Rowling’s first screenplay. Waterston stars as Porpentina 
Goldstein, a witch living in 1920s New York who teams up with Newt Scamander 
(Eddie Redmayne) in an effort the recapture magical creatures that have escaped 
into the city.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F01%2Fprometheus-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prometheus%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F01%2Fprometheus-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prometheus%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F01%2Fprometheus-video-review&media=>
 Prometheus - video review 
Alien: Convenant will be the second prequel to Ridley Scott’s classic 1979 
space horror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/13/derek-malcolm-alien-review>. 
Scott, who is a likely contender for a best director Oscar nomination for his 
work on space survival thriller The Martian, has said that there will be two 
further films before events catch up with the original film.

“I was amazed that in the three that followed [Alien], no one asked the 
question: ‘Why the Alien, who made it and why?’ he said during a Novemberpress 
conference 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/ridley-scott-alien-covenant-is-844051>
 on the set of Alien: Covenant in Sydney. “Very basic questions. So I came up 
with the notion of Prometheus 1, which starts to indicate who might have made 
it and where it came from … why was this space jockey there and why did he have 
an Alien inside him? And those questions will be answered.”
 