
Ken Wyatt will be the first Indigenous person to be appointed to the 
commonwealth ministry when he becomes the minister for aged care and Indigenous 
healthin a reshuffle announced on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/18/malcolm-turnbull-names-greg-hunt-to-become-health-and-sport-minister>
.

Wyatt, now assistant minister for health and aged care, was the first 
Indigenous Australian to be elected to the House of Representatives in 2010 and 
thefirst to be appointed to the executive of the commonwealth government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/01/its-surreal-australias-first-indigenous-minister-ken-wyatt-on-his-promotion>
.

Announcing the reshuffle, Malcolm Turnbull said Wyatt’s “extensive knowledge 
and experience as a senior public servant in Indigenous health, coupled with 
his work as an assistant minister in this portfolio, makes him an ideal 
minister for this area”.

Wyatt later tweeted that he was “deeply honoured” by the appointment.

In earlier comments describing his appointment to assistant minister, Wyatt 
told Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/01/its-surreal-australias-first-indigenous-minister-ken-wyatt-on-his-promotion>
 in October 2015 that it was “surreal” and “a privilege”.

Related: Malcolm Turnbull names Greg Hunt to become health and sport minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/18/malcolm-turnbull-names-greg-hunt-to-become-health-and-sport-minister>

“Any Indigenous Australian has the capacity and capability of achieving their 
aspirations,” he said. “There are a whole lot of barriers that impact on each 
of us individually, but you work to rise above those. And so the symbolism of 
being on the frontbench is a tremendous one.”

Wyatt, a Liberal MP from Western Australia, represents the seat of Hasluck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/12/election-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat>
 after being re-elected in 2013 and 2016. He is one of five Indigenous 
Australians in the federal parliament, along with Labor’s Linda Burney, Pat 
Dodson and Malarndirri McCarthy, and the independent senator Jacqui Lambie.

Before entering parliament Wyatt had a 15-year career in public health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/01/its-surreal-australias-first-indigenous-minister-ken-wyatt-on-his-promotion>
 and Aboriginal education and worked for 13 years as a primary school teacher.

In parliament he has been an opponent of amending section 18C of the Racial 
Discrimination Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/tony-abbott-faces-internal-backlash-over-racial-discrimination-law-change>
 but softened his stance on a review of the law that prohibits speech that 
offends, insults, humiliates or intimidates a person based on their race.

In November Wyatt told Guardian Australia he was open to a review of the law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/ken-wyatt-leaning-towards-supporting-a-review-of-section-18c>
 “if it is creating a sore within free speech”. He said he was “probably 
leaning towards” reviewing the words in 18C, perhaps removing the words 
“insult” and “offend” and replacing them with a prohibition on vilification 
instead.

Wyatt supports recognition of Indigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> in the 
constitution but has publicly opposed including a non-discrimination clause, 
warning it would act as a de facto bill of rights and was “highly unlikely to 
be supported”.
 