
Ken Wyatt’s campaign team is discussing spare pants. “We should make sure that 
everyone has jeans and casual shoes in the office to go with the T-shirts, 
because a suit pant can look incongruous,” a staffer notes. It’s week one of an 
eight-week election campaign and, in Wyatt’s electorate office in Forrestfield 
shopping centre, 23km east of Perth,Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>, the details are 
still being mapped out.

It will be a fight. Hasluck <http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/wa/hasluck.htm>, 
the outer metropolitan seat Wyatt has held since 2010, is being targeted by the 
Labor party as one of its potential gains in the west. Internal Liberal party 
polling of the neighbouring seat ofBurt 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/wa/burt.htm>, leaked to the West Australian 
newspaper this week 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/wa/a/31557895/liberal-poll-finds-new-seat-of-burt-is-50-50/>
, showed a notional swing of 6% toward Labor. Wyatt currently holds Hasluck on 
a margin of 6%.

Even without a national swing against the Turnbull government, Hasluck is 
notoriously difficult to hold. Wyatt was the first representative in its 
15-year history to win a second term. A Yamatji and Noongar man, he was also 
the first Indigenous person to sit in the House of Representatives and wore a 
booka, a kangaroo skin cloak bestowed upon him by Noongar elders, when he made 
his maiden speech. He has since becomethe first Indigenous person appointed to 
the frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/01/its-surreal-australias-first-indigenous-minister-ken-wyatt-on-his-promotion>
, taking on the role of assistant minister for health in September. Before the 
boundaries shifted last year, his electorate was home to a quarter of Perth’s 
Indigenous population. Now it stretches from the older eastern suburbs of 
Guilford and Midland to take in most of the Darling Scarp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3bb0d87335a54af997f8230b4e74e8cb3e8a760%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Wyatt's%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Wyatt%27s%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3bb0d87335a54af997f8230b4e74e8cb3e8a760%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
 Ken Wyatt speaks to members of The Green Army, a volunteer conservation group. 
Photograph: Will Russell for the Guardian 
The Labor candidate in the seat is Bill Leadbetter, a local historian who 
frequently appears on ABC radio talking about heritage issues. He is a 
well-known community identity but Wyatt has worked at becoming better known, 
holding drop-in sessions at local cafes and pubs and attracting a small band of 
well-wishers. These include Roger, the man who comes to all his community 
events “in case you had no one to talk to”, and an elderly lady from the suburb 
of Lesmurdie, who attends public events just to say a prayer over him.

Emeritus professor David Black, a political expert at Curtin University, says 
Wyatt’s personal vote could be as high as 2-3%, which could buffer him from 
national swings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71506bc80d0976fc084d1b48925983856b043449%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Wyatt's%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Wyatt%27s%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71506bc80d0976fc084d1b48925983856b043449%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Ken Wyatt delivers his maiden speech to the House of Representatives in 
Canberra in 2010 wearing a kangaroo skin bestowed upon him by Indigenous 
elders. Photograph: Alan Porritt/AAP 
“An Indigenous candidate with moderate views is a good a choice as the 
government could have at this moment,” Black says. “If he can’t win it’s 
because of the overwhelming national mood, not because of him.”

One of the areas drafted in during the Hasluck boundary change is Beckenham, a 
suburb under the flight path. After the morning strategy meeting Wyatt heads to 
a street to door-knock residents about their experience signing up to the 
national broadband network, which was switched on in the area last month. Two 
staffers, who divvy up the electoral roll and prepare to tackle the 
odd-numbered side of the street, slip their Team Wyatt T-shirts over their 
collared shirts and suit pants. It does indeed look incongruous.


It is not a resounding success. “Sometimes you get houses with people in them 
but they pretend not to be home,” Wyatt says, after a third house elicits no 
response. Of the four people who do open the door to chat, two have no interest 
in the NBN, while a third requests more street lights.

Beckenham is a focus of Wyatt’s pre-election door-knocking schedule. He 
allocates three minutes per house.

“You get the incredible privilege of being able to intrude but you must never 
abuse that,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84ac1862657cf438253486b74b3044e4e6ae1203%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Wyatt's%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Wyatt%27s%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84ac1862657cf438253486b74b3044e4e6ae1203%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
 Ken Wyatt allocates three minutes per house when door-knocking in his 
electorate.
 Photograph: Will Russell for the Guardian 
In the car on the way to Kalamunda community radio station, Wyatt talks about 
his family history. His mother, Mona Abdullah, was a member of the stolen 
generations and grew up on Roelands Mission but his grandmother, Maisy, lived 
at Guilford near the banks of the Swan River.

The narrow margins of the far west: Labor gears up for epic struggle in Perth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/labors-battle-decisive-western-australia-seats-election-2016>
“I got hold of her native welfare files a few years ago, because I got my 
native welfare files, and my mother’s,” he says. “She lived there for some time 
and every now and then you’d see an entry that says ‘Maisey Deekie: drunk and 
disorderly’. It was like revisiting the past when I was elected because it took 
in that area, and I remember as a kid staying at the old Guildford hotel and my 
grandmother being in the area, so it’s got special meaning.”

Wyatt says his Aboriginality created a dual constituency: voters in Hasluck, 
and the broader Indigenous community who expect him to represent their views.

“You can have pressure brought on you that competes against what people expect 
of you and also what is possible to deliver,” he says. “And then you have got 
your own party priorities within that.”

He wore the booka to show “we should never be embarrassed about the qualities 
of our heritage”, butsays he does not want to be overlooked because of that 
heritage.

“I do have a concern though that I am ‘stereotypified’ as only being able to 
cope with Indigenous issues,” he says, adding that was why he was pleased to be 
given the job of assistant minister for health and aged care. “In working in 
those areas I’m demonstrating that my capabilities are not just channelled into 
the affairs of our people but to broader Australian society, and I am relishing 
that opportunity,” he says, adding that he won’t resile from the things he 
needs to do to champion Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander causes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7798e1a7236b906ae8c3d1daab564e9301a061e%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Wyatt's%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Wyatt%27s%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7798e1a7236b906ae8c3d1daab564e9301a061e%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
 Ken Wyatt chats with Environment Minister Greg Hunt during a visit to 
Lesmurdie. Photograph: Will Russell for the Guardian 
The Labor party is running four Indigenous candidates in lower house seats 
this election:former state MP Linda Burney in New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/05/outgoing-mp-linda-burney-decries-paternalistic-approach-to-aboriginal-affairs>
; and former WA state MP Carol Martin, human rights lawyer Tammy Solonec, and 
Aboriginal employment mentor Barry Winmar in WA.

“It’s going to be good for Indigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> with the 
number of candidates standing because it means we have got a lot of people who 
have confidence, who believe in their abilities and capacity, but they have 
also been able to be supported by a party and I think that’s important,” Wyatt 
says.

The Kalamunda community radio station is temporarily located in the Gooseberry 
Hill community hall after its former home was, like so many unattended 
buildings in WA, converted to a Dome coffee shop. The curtains, faded in bright 
sunlight, are patterned with dancing elephants. Between the elephants and the 
microphone sits Wyatt, who is talking with the station’s president, Monica 
Martinovich.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f714d6cb1172a97ee820321899fee1073dc8d74%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Wyatt's%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Wyatt%27s%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f714d6cb1172a97ee820321899fee1073dc8d74%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
 Ken Wyatt speaks to Kalamunda community radio president, Monica Martinovich. 
Photograph: Will Russell for the Guardian 
They talk about the federal budget and the proposed youth unemployment plan, 
which would see young jobseekers paid $200 a fortnight on top of the ordinary 
welfare payment to do an internship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/businesses-to-be-paid-to-take-on-young-unemployed-people-as-interns-under-budget>
.

It has been labelled exploitative by Labor and the Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/04/youth-intern-scheme-will-exploit-workers-and-replace-real-jobs-say-unions>
 andprompted a backlash from young voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/malcolm-turnbulls-budget-turns-younger-voters-off-coalition-poll-shows>
.

But 7km down the road, at Lesmurdie Falls, a group of young Green Army 
volunteers – who are paid $16 an hour – are supportive.

The volunteers are lined up under broad-brimmed hats waiting for the 
environment minister, Greg Hunt, who announced funding for an additional Green 
Army team as well as $150,000 to allow local conservation volunteer group Men 
of the Trees to plant 50,000 trees.

The Green Army, part of the Coalition’s Direct Action climate change policy, 
has been downsized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/tony-abbotts-green-army-under-attack-as-coalition-cuts-budget-by-nearly-half>
 since its birth as the former Abbott government’s centrepiece environmental 
policy, but is still a favourite of both Wyatt and Hunt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d183c27726acdd044919732116ae69127220480%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Wyatt's%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Wyatt%27s%20battle%20in%20Hasluck%3A%20can%20the%20first%20federal%20Indigenous%20frontbencher%20hold%20his%20seat%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Felection-2016-can-ken-wyatt-hasluck-first-federal-indigenous-frontbencher-hold-his-seat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d183c27726acdd044919732116ae69127220480%2F0_0_2400_1600%2F2400.jpg>
 Ken Wyatt and environment minister, Greg Hung, talk with Green Army volunteers 
in Western Australia. Photograph: Will Russell for the Guardian 
“I don’t want to get too emotional about it, but we are really proud of you,” 
Hunt says.

A 21-year-old volunteer Liam Smith, who endeared himself to Hunt’s media 
adviser by talking about the sense of purpose working as a conservation 
volunteer had given him, replies earnestly: “We’re proud of us, too.”

He later tells Guardian Australia: “Everything that you don’t get paid you get 
in self-satisfaction ... I would rather get paid less and feel good about what 
I’m doing than work on an oil rig and get paid heaps and feel like crap because 
one day we had an oil spill and 1,000 gallons of oil fell into the water and 
started messing with our environment.”

Both Smith and Patrick Moody, another volunteer, say they support the Direct 
Action policy ahead of an emissions trading scheme, because it’s “doing 
something real”, foreshadowing a comment by Hunt, who defends Direct Action a 
short time later on the basis that it is “real and physical”.

Wyatt’s environmentalism is, like his politics, hyper-local. It is better to 
do something that will have a positive impact now than do something which could 
change things later, he says.

Cowan's curious contest: how a changing electorate could help decide the 
election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/11/cowan-wa-liberal-labor-changing-electorate-could-decide-australian-election>
Wyatt’s office has become known as a place people go when caught in the 
bureaucratic tangles of government policy that he, more broadly, supports.

One of those tangles is waiting to talk to him in the Perth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/perth-news> suburb of Wattle Grove. 
Pouriya Naderi is an Iranian refugee who came to Australia by boat in 2001 and 
is now an Australian citizen with an Australian wife and two children. Since 
the government tightened security protocols he has been unable to get a 
visitor’s visa for his brother, who still lives in Tehran.

“One week, two week, doesn’t matter,” he told Wyatt. “Just so he can come and 
see my family, see my life here.”

Wyatt nods; it’s a complaint he hears a lot. He tells Naderi to come see him 
again after the election.

“I never make a promise to anybody, I always say: look, let me have a go at 
it, and if we can get it fixed then that will be a plus for you,” he told 
Guardian Australia. “I do enjoy engaging.”

Bill Leadbetter was contacted for comment.
 