
Liberal frontbencher Ken Wyatt says he is open to reviewing the current 
protections in section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act “if it is creating 
a sore within free speech”.


Wyatt, the only Indigenous Liberal MP in the parliament, has given cautious 
backing to a new inquiry by parliament’s human rights committee – but while 
backing the renewed political debate, he has cautioned against “emotive 
debates” around 18C and instead called for calm “statesmanship”.

Wyatt, the assistant minister for health and aged care, said he was “probably 
leaning towards” reviewing the words in 18C, perhaps removing the words 
“insult” and “offend” and replacing them with a prohibition on vilification 
instead.

Section 18C explainer: what is it, and why do some politicians want it changed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/section-18c-explainer-what-is-it-and-why-do-some-politicians-want-it-changed>
“I think the way forward on this is a parliamentary inquiry,” Wyatt told 
Guardian Australia on Monday.

Wyatt’s public support for the inquiry will be seized on by conservatives 
inside the government who are pushing for an overhaul of 18C. The Indigenous MP 
took a strong public stand against overhauling 18C during the period of the 
Abbott government, which was one of the reasons the then prime minister dumped 
the proposal.

But Wyatt says he’s now prepared to countenance reform because the Australian 
Human Rights Commission mishandled the recent case involving three students 
from the Queensland University of Technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/malcolm-turnbull-says-qut-case-hurt-human-rights-commissions-credibility-on-18c>
. “I think there could have been more rigour [with that case],” he said.

He said it was a “pity” the trajectory of that case – thrown out last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/qut-computer-lab-racial-discrimination-lawsuit-thrown-out>
 when federal circuit court judge Michael Jarrett ruled the lawsuit by 
Indigenous staff member Cindy Prior should not proceed against Alex Wood, Calum 
Thwaites and Jackson Powell – had promoted a community discussion about 
“frivolous” 18C cases.

Wyatt also said the parliamentary inquiry needed to consider not only changing 
the RDA, but whether there was a step back from that involving measures to 
prevent frivolous cases.

Wyatt’s comments came as the News Corp cartoonist Bill Leak met Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> MPs in Canberra on 
Monday to lobby for changes to the RDA.

The caroonist was chaperoned through Parliament House by the executive 
director of the Menzies Research Centre, Nick Cater. Leak is currently being
investigated by the Human Rights Commission for breaching 18C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/bill-leaks-lawyers-say-triggs-playing-politics-with-childrens-welfare>
for a cartoon he drew for the Australian newspaper.

While the parliamentary inquiry now appears to be an inevitability, given the 
prime minister,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, has lent public 
backing to the idea on a couple of occasions over the past fortnight, some 
Liberal MPs on Monday argued strongly against a rush to change the legislation.

Sydney MPs Julian Leeser and Jason Falinski, and the Victorian Liberal MP 
Russell Broadbent, all argued there was no real case to change the current 
provision.

The MPs suggested the government should look instead to procedural changes 
allowing the Human Rights Commission to stymie cases without sufficient legal 
merit to proceed to the courts.

Falinski told Guardian Australia it was important if the parliamentary inquiry 
into 18C proceeded it be broad-ranging, looking at curbs on free speech such as 
defamation, not just the RDA provisions.

“We’ve got to look at this systematically,” Falinski said.

Section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act says 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18c.html> it is 
unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private, which is 
“reasonably likely, in all the circumstances to offend, insult, humiliate or 
intimidate” another person or a group of people.

Section 18D makes 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18d.html> 
exceptions for artistic works, discussions, debates, event reports in the 
public interest and fair comment if it is in “expression of a genuine belief” 
held by the person making the comment.

Malcolm Turnbull says QUT case hurt Human Rights Commission's credibility on 
18C
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/malcolm-turnbull-says-qut-case-hurt-human-rights-commissions-credibility-on-18c>
On Monday morning, ahead of cabinet consideration of whether or not to move to 
an inquiry,Turnbull said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/malcolm-turnbull-says-qut-case-hurt-human-rights-commissions-credibility-on-18c>
 the commission had done a “great deal of harm” to its credibility by bringing 
the Queensland case – and it should think carefully about whether it has 
undermined respect for the act.

He said the commission ought to now reflect on whether it has been managing 
the administration of the act properly and must “urgently review” the way it 
manages cases.

“This was not a case that was determined on the margin, it was not a close 
case, it was not a well-argued case that fell down on the balance of 
probabilities,” he said. “This is a case where a judge has said, ‘You’ve got no 
prospect of success. Out you go”,” Turnbull told ABC radio.

“It is a time for the Human Rights Commission to reflect on whether they have 
been managing the administration of the act in a way that is likely to 
encourage support for its objectives.”

But the commission hit back, pointing out it had no role in the lawsuit 
brought against the students.


In a strongly worded press release 
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/news/media-releases/racial-discrimination-complaints>
 on Monday, the commission said it never initiated or prosecuted complaints in 
courts, despite assertions that it did.

Beyond 18C: six barriers to freedom of speech in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/beyond-18c-six-barriers-to-freedom-of-speech-in-australia>
“If the commission receives a complaint in writing alleging a discriminatory 
act, the act provides that the commission must investigate the facts and 
attempt to conciliate the matter,” the commission’s statement said.

“The commission’s focus is on resolving disputes so parties can avoid court 
proceedings. Of complaints where conciliation was attempted, 76% were 
successfully resolved in 2015-16. Only 3% of complaints finalised by the 
commission were lodged in court.

“The commission has no judicial powers, and it makes no legally binding 
determinations as to whether unlawful acts have occurred. The commission has no 
statutory power to prevent a complainant proceeding to court once the 
commission terminates the complaint.”

HRC president, Gillian Triggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gillian-triggs>, told ABC’s 7:30 on 
Monday night that the Queensland case “had a level of substance” so the 
commission had not thrown it out as frivolous or vexatious.

Triggs said the commission could advise complainants their action was likely 
to fail in court, but she said she was not sure that advice was given in the
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> case.

When asked about Leak, Triggs said she could not comment on the particular 
case but the commission would also advise that section 18D of the act protects 
expression, including cartoons.

Triggs said the Queensland case was “very unusual” both in its length and the 
way it had played out in the public arena. In most cases complainants and those 
complained of kept the cases confidential, she said.
 