
A Kenyan crowdsourcing platform used to monitor violence during the country’s 
2007 election will be deployed on voting day in the US to allow citizens to 
report cases of “voter intimidation, misdirection, or any other attempts to 
keep someone from voting”.


Voters witnessing any such problems will be invited to report the violations 
via text message, Twitter or email toUshahidi <https://www.ushahidi.com/> 
(Swahili for “testimony”), which will create a database of incidents.

“This is an exciting development because we are more used to seeing tech ideas 
flowing from the west toAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>,” 
said Bitange Ndemo, an associate professor at the University of Nairobi 
Business School.

“Africa has the youngest population in the world and most disruptive 
developments or apps that can be scaled up come from young people, so it is 
good to see African developers taking their place on the global scene.”

During the election campaign the Republican candidate, Donald Trump, has 
called the American electoral system“rigged” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/citizens-for-donald-trump-exit-poll-roger-stone-rigged-election-claim>
 andrefused to say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-refuse-concede-election-electoral-college>
 whether he would accept the outcome if he loses. Some Trump supporters have 
threatened totake up arms 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/28/us/politics/donald-trump-voters.html?_r=0> 
if Trump is deemed to have lost unfairly, and Ushahidi will map any incidents 
of violence that occur.

Ushahidi gained prominence in December 2007 when a disputed presidential 
election inKenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> was followed by 
weeks of unrest in which more than 1,000 people died and hundreds of thousands 
were forced from their homes.

Ushahidi collected and recorded eyewitness reports of violence using text 
messages andGoogle Maps <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Maps>, and the 
technology has since been used to monitor elections in other countries.

“Elections in general are close to Ushahidi because of our history,” Daudi 
Were, the executive director,told the news website Quartz 
<http://qz.com/825442/kenyas-crisis-mapping-startup-ushahidi-will-monitor-the-us-presidential-election/>
. “Our motto is ‘raise your voice’. Your voice is important. If you see 
something, positive or negative, then you can share that with us.”

Another company director, Nat Manning, wrote in a blogpost 
<https://www.ushahidi.com/blog> that the effort would not replace trained 
monitors from state legislatures and the Republican and Democratic campaigns 
and independent third-party monitors.

He said the idea was prompted by the “unprecedented” conversation leading up 
to the election about issues with the voting process, and fears of violence on 
election day.

“While there is no evidence of voter fraud in America 
<http://istheelectionrigged.com/>, there are instances of voter suppression and 
voting issues on election day. As citizens, let’s raise our voices and help to 
report any issues on election day as well as celebrate all those who run a 
tight ship and bring trust to the underpinning of our democratic systems,” 
Manning said.

Ushahidi’s open-source software has been widely used around the world, 
including to documentsexual harassment in Egypt 
<https://www.ushahidi.com/blog/2015/03/11/harassmaps-research-effectiveness-of-crowdsourced-data>
, provide a record of attacks on civilians in Syria and to map areas in need of 
aid after theHaiti earthquake 
<http://voices.nationalgeographic.com/2012/07/02/crisis-mapping-haiti/> in 2012.
 