
Kenya’s government said on Wednesday it had agreed to delay the closure of a 
Somali refugee camp that it sees as asecurity risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/02/kenya-attack-survivors-garissa-al-shabaab>
, afterinternational pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/17/dadaab-refugee-camp-closure-risk-350000-somali-lives-amnesty>
 to give residents more time to find new homes.

Nairobi had vowed to shut Dadaab camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/11/kenya-close-worlds-biggest-refugee-camp-dadaab>
 this month, saying it was being used by Islamist militants from neighbouring 
Somalia who have launched a string of attacks on Kenyan soil.

Fear forces refugees in world’s largest camp to return to conflict zones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/15/fear-forces-refugees-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-camp-return-conflict-zones-human-rights-watch-warns>
But rights groups criticised the decision over the camp, saying it would hurt 
Somalis fleeing violence and poverty, and accused Nairobi of forcibly sending 
people back to a war zone. The government dismisses that allegation.

“The government has accepted the request to extend the deadline for the 
completion of repatriation of Somali refugees, and this is essential to the 
closure of the Dadaab refugee complex, [in] six months,” said interior minister 
Joseph Ole Nkaissery.

“However, the ongoing voluntary repatriation will continue uninterrupted,” he 
said.

This week, a ministry official had said that the November deadline would be 
missed, although he did not give a new timetable. He also dismissed accusations 
from Amnesty International and others about forcible repatriations.

The official said the camp was now home to about 250,000 people, while UN 
officials had put the figure at about 350,000 at the start of the year.

More than half a million people lived there a few years ago. 

“Kenya should end its threats to close the Dadaab camps,” said Gerry Simpson, 
senior refugee researcher for New York-based Human Rights Watch.

“The UN refugee agency and donors should press Kenya to publicly reassure 
Somalia’s refugees they are welcome inKenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> until it safe for them to return,” he 
added.

Somalia’s western-backed government is battling an Islamist insurgency as it 
oversees a fragile reconstruction effort after decades of conflict. Swathes of 
the country do not have basic services.
 