
Kenya has made the greatest strides in improving the conditions of young 
people over the past five years, according toa new index of global youth 
development <https://we.tl/QowrsAPcwj>.

Together with four other sub-Saharan countries – South Africa, Niger, Togo and 
Malawi – Kenya made the largest gains globally across a range of criteria, from 
health to political participation. However, sub-SaharanAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> still trailed all other regions in 
the global youth development index, produced by the Commonwealth and covering 
183 countries.

Young people in Pakistan, Angola and Haiti experienced the greatest decline in 
conditions over the past five years according to the list, which is based on the
UN’s human development index 
<http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-index-hdi> but focuses 
exclusively on people aged 15 to 29.
Global youth development index 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/youth-developmentindex/giv-1406XzvI949tvdRO/>
The index, published at a time when the number of young people in the world 
stands at an unprecedented 1.8 billion – nearly 87% of whom live in poor 
countries – gives civic and political participation equal weighting with 
health, education and employment.

Designed to fill a gap in global development studies, the list offers a 
message of optimism as well as a warning. A “youth bulge” in poor countries 
presents an opportunity, in the form of potential socio-economic gains from 
labour and savings, but there is also a risk of missed opportunities.


Five steps to put young people at the heart of development | Carla Kweifio-Okai
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/29/five-steps-young-people-heart-of-development-global-goals>
“A failure to capitalise on this ‘demographic dividend’ … could bring untold 
misery to families, communities and entire countries as the youth cohort 
instead becomes disenfranchised and disillusioned,” said the compilers of the 
index, who warn that many countries have limited time to make the most of the 
youth bulge.

The 10 countries with the lowest youth development scores were all in 
sub-Saharan Africa, which the UN has identified as the only global region that 
will have amore youthful population 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjQjdytxenPAhVGchQKHQSyBYQQFggjMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.un.org%2Fen%2Fdevelopment%2Fdesa%2Fpopulation%2Fpublications%2Fpdf%2Fpopfacts%2FPopFacts_2016-1.pdf&usg=AFQjCNG6EwdtOKsoB6nr8ReJVEcA1YGIaw&sig2=ot2KIlHJH6hFmMZb3tTGgA>
 in 2050 than it does today.

But while falling youth mortality rates have been key to sub-Saharan Africa 
making a 12% improvement on health and wellbeing – worldwide, the greatest 
improvement in those areas – the region continues to trail significantly. It 
scored below the global average in four of the five areas covered by the index, 
but was a fraction above the global average on political participation.

Hopes that the region’s youth might drive future economic growth are likely to 
be further dampened by the revelation that they fared much worse than others 
over the course of the global financial crisis. A deterioration in the 
youth-to-adult unemployment ratio worldwide had a disproportionate impact on 
sub-Saharan Africa.

Regionally, youth development apparently worsened most markedly in Angola 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiEm8DtxOnPAhXH6RQKHVteDS0QFggcMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fangola&usg=AFQjCNE5R-Fk6B3msXl2zsQ1mi9I00JWwQ&sig2=Ss_lOCOyqW85S5Y0Oy574A&bvm=bv.136499718,d.bGs>
 andChad 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiCjt33xOnPAhVMVxQKHaRpCLEQFggcMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fchad&usg=AFQjCNFXzwiMCwtKaDOBwfH1ivKz817Erw&sig2=53U8MP46s_NsNneZEM8Rdg&bvm=bv.136499718,d.bGs>
, which respectively declined by 11% and 7%. Central African Republic recorded 
the world’s lowest score.

At the other end of the scale, Germany ranked top for youth development, 
followed by Denmark, Australia, Switzerland and the UK. The only country in the 
top 30 that was not a high-income economy was Costa Rica, which scored 
particularly well then it came to health and wellbeing and political 
participation.


The Middle East was the only region to show a decline in political 
participation in the period between 2010 and 2015, despite theArab spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arab-and-middle-east-protests>. However, the 
region performed particularly strongly in areas such as health.

Israel was ranked highest in the Middle East for health and wellbeing, while 
Bahrain, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia – none of which are democracies – also scored 
very highly overall.

Russia and Eurasia made the worst progress in youth development between 2010 
and 2015, although what was described as an “impressive” rate of improvement in 
Kazakhstan was linked to a reduction in mental health rates and improvements in 
youth policy.

Joseph Muscat, prime minister of Malta and chair-in-office of the 
Commonwealth, said youth development could be achieved, even in low-income 
countries, by providing quality education and training.


“Health and wellbeing are also factors that weigh heavily in youth 
development, and world leaders need to focus more on promoting mental and 
sexual health, as well as education and nutrition,” said Muscat.

Deep inequalities in youth development persist in many countries, the report 
warned. The largest gaps were identified in education and health and wellbeing.

For example, the proportion of youth infected with HIV was, on average, eight 
times higher in countries with low index scores than countries that scored 
highly, such as European states where the issue has become less of a priority 
in recent times. Youth mortality rates were on average five times higher in 
countries that performed poorly in the index than in those that came very high.

Young women continued to make up the overwhelming majority of illiterate youth 
in the world. Female literacy rates among young women were as low as 15% in 
some countries, while the lowest male literacy rate was 35%. However, the 
report identified concerns about data limitations that made it difficult to 
disaggregate statistics by gender.
 