
A Kickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> campaign 
has been launched for the world’s first feature-length film that will be 
co-written by artificial intelligence.

This is what happens when an AI-written screenplay is made into a film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/10/artificial-intelligence-screenplay-sunspring-silicon-valley-thomas-middleditch-ai>
The horror film Impossible Things will be partly written by software that has 
analysed successes in the genre. The software uses that data to formulate a 
script that utilises successful plot points . The goal: engineer a hit film.

Jack Zhang, who founded the Canadian data analysis company Greenlight 
Essentials, is seeking CA$30,000 (£17,300) to make the project 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/970954017/impossible-things-worlds-first-ai-co-written-featu>
, which has been in development for five years. “A little over 85% of movies 
made today don’t make a profit [at the] box office, which is the result of a 
mismatch between the movies being produced and audiences’ tastes,” said Zhang 
in a press release. “We used [artificial intelligence] to generate the premise 
and the key plot points of the film. Before a single word was written, our AI 
told us that if we wanted to match audience taste, we needed to make a horror 
film that featured both ghost and family relationships, and that a piano scene 
and a bathtub scene would need to be used in the movie trailer to increase the 
likelihood that our target audience would like it.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fkickstarter-campaign-for-worlds-first-artificial-intelligence-film-impossible-things-horror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31cd60c74451552468d90c713731aba5cdc31ea0%2F0_52_648_907%2F648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kickstarter%20campaign%20launched%20for%20world's%20first%20AI-written%20feature%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fkickstarter-campaign-for-worlds-first-artificial-intelligence-film-impossible-things-horror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kickstarter%20campaign%20launched%20for%20world%27s%20first%20AI-written%20feature%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fkickstarter-campaign-for-worlds-first-artificial-intelligence-film-impossible-things-horror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31cd60c74451552468d90c713731aba5cdc31ea0%2F0_52_648_907%2F648.jpg>
The script and trailer have been constructed to appeal to women under the age 
of 25, a key demographic for the horror film genre. The plot follows a family 
who move to a remote country house to recover from the death of a child. But 
the mother and daughter soon start to experience terrifying visions that pit 
them against each other.


Artificial intelligence has already been used to create a short film,  
Sunspring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/10/artificial-intelligence-screenplay-sunspring-silicon-valley-thomas-middleditch-ai>
. Critical response to the sci-fi drama was mixed, however.CNet’s Amanda Kooser 
<http://www.cnet.com/news/ai-written-film-sunspring-a-surreal-delight-upchucked-eyeball-included/>
 responded: “Some day, neural networks may get better at imitating the art of 
coherent storytelling, but we’re not there yet.”
 