
Smartwatch maker Pebble has sold to Fitbit in a deal that leaves it shutting 
down all manufacturing, refundingKickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> backers, and warning 
current owners that their watches may stop working at some point in the future.

The deal, according to a report from Bloomberg 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-12-07/pebble-said-to-discuss-selling-software-assets-to-fitbit>
, values the smartwatch startup at less than $40m. If true, that is a massive 
drop from earlier reported acquisition attempts.Techcruch says 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/11/30/fitbit-pebble/> Pebble was first offered 
$740m by watchmaker Citizen in 2015, and then $70m by Intel in early 2016. 
Pebble’s chief executive, Eric Migicovsky, reportedly refused both offers.

After the purchase, Fitbit will incorporate Pebble’s software engineering team 
into its own company, but the majority of Pebble’s employees, including 
Migicovsky, have not been offered jobs by the new owner.

In a statement, Fitbit co-founder and chief executive James Park said Fitbit 
“sees an opportunity to build on our strengths and extend our leadership 
position in the wearables category.

“With this acquisition, we’re well positioned to accelerate the expansion of 
our platform and ecosystem to make Fitbit a vital part of daily life for a 
wider set of consumers.”

Pebble’s own statement was less upbeat. The company said that it “is no longer 
promoting, manufacturing, or selling any devices, and that while “Pebble 
devices will continue to work as normal … Pebble functionality or service 
quality may be reduced in the future.”

Pebble had gained a reputation for swimming against the tide of the wider 
smartwatch industry, eschewing powerful devices and high-resolution screens for 
simpler watches with e-ink screens and a focus on long battery life.

But that wasn’t enough to help the company make its mark on the wider market, 
and Pebble was hurt further by the consolidation of the smartwatch market 
around platforms with strong links to pre-existing smartphone operating 
systems, such as Android Wear and the Apple Watch.

Other smartwatch and wearable manufacturers have found themselves in similar 
straits. Microsoft’s Band, a hybrid fitness tracker and smartwatch, was 
discontinued in October this year, while Fitbit itself has struggled to break 
into the market withits Blaze smartwatch <https://www.fitbit.com/uk/blaze>. The 
company cut its Christmas sales forecast in early November this year.

The acquisition comes less than six months after Pebble ended its last 
Kickstarter campaign, raising $12m to produce and sell three new devices: the 
Pebble 2, Pebble Time 2, and Pebble Core. The companyhad become a recurring 
feature on the crowdfounding site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/24/kickstarter-why-brands-like-pebble-smartwatch-come-back-for-more>
, using it to sell pre-orders and tighten links with customers long after 
similar businesses would have moved to a more conventional shop.

Now, Pebble is refunding backers who haven’t received their watches, which 
includes everyone who tried to buy a Time 2 or Core, and says they will receive 
a full refund by 16 December.

“It’s a bittersweet time, no doubt,” Pebble said in a message to backers 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/597507018/pebble-2-time-2-and-core-an-entirely-new-3g-ultra/posts/1752929>
. “We’ll miss what we’re leaving behind, but are excited for what the future 
holds. It will be important for Pebblers to extend a warm welcome to Fitbit – 
as fans and customers – sharing what they love about Pebble and what they’d 
like to see next.”

Pebble backers were, by and large, less hopeful. Comments included one user 
saying it was the 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/597507018/pebble-2-time-2-and-core-an-entirely-new-3g-ultra/posts/1752929?cursor=15301782#comment-15301781>
 “Last time ever I will use Kickstarter and will advise everyone I know to 
avoid!” andanother noting that 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/597507018/pebble-2-time-2-and-core-an-entirely-new-3g-ultra/posts/1752929?cursor=15304302#comment-15304301>
 “My Round should have shipped in September, but it didn’t. When I asked for an 
update I was told delays. Now I know that was a bit of a fallacy and it was 
never going to be produced, and you want to possibly not even refund the 
monetary value you got from me.”
 