
A White House initiative on behalf of Syrian refugees has brought together the 
crowdfunding websiteKickstarter <https://www.kickstarter.com/aidrefugees> and 
the United Nations refugee agency for a weeklong fundraising push that all 
sides hope could represent a breakthrough in charitable giving for Syria.

Syrian refugee crisis: why has it become so bad?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/04/syrian-refugee-crisis-why-has-it-become-so-bad>
A specially dedicated Kickstarter page 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/aidrefugees> launched on Tuesday morning invites 
donors to make tax-deductible contributions to help Syrian refugees, with all 
proceeds going to the US Association of the UNHCR (United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees).

The fundraising site will feature video reportage by the Guardian on the 
refugees’ plight.


The project took off after the White House contacted Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/aidrefugees>, known for crowdfunding creative 
projects, two weeks ago to talk about new ways to get the US public involved in 
the Syrian relief effort, said Kickstarter’s CEO, Yancey Strickler.

“I immediately said yes,” Strickler said. “This is not something that we have 
ever done before. We have always kept the platform focused strictly on creative 
projects.

“But in this instance, it’s a call from the White House. And feeling, like a 
lot of people, overwhelmed by the immensity of this situation, we felt 
compelled to act, and felt like if our product could provide any path forward 
for the people, we should do that.”

The UN refugee agency welcomed the partnership as a potentially powerful new 
tool in providing relief to hundreds of thousands of refugees making their way 
into Europe fromSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and in 
intermediary refugee camps. The Syrian conflict has displaced an estimated 11.6 
million people in under five years.

“This is the first time we’ve had the opportunity to partner with a group like 
Kickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter>,” said 
Anne-Marie Grey, executive director of USA for UNHCR. “This is a terrific 
opportunity, and it’s a very different group of people than would normally 
raise their hands to support refugee causes, so it’s really quite exciting.”

Donations will go toward the purchase and distribution of life-saving 
equipment including tents; emergency rescue kits including water, food and warm 
clothing; sleeping bags, thermal mattresses, sleeping mats and other lifesaving 
essentials; and foster care and counselling.

The material will be delivered to refugee camps and communities around Syria, 
and to refugees traveling from various points into Europe. An estimated half a 
million refugees from the Syrian conflict have arrived in Europe this year, and 
800,000 or more are expected by year’s end.

About 51% of the refugees are women and children, Grey said. “These are people 
like you and me,” she said. “The statistics are huge, but we’ve got to remember 
that these are individual human beings, and this is about humanity.”


Unlike other Kickstarter projects, the project to help Syrian refugees does 
not have an all-or-nothing funding goal. All donations in any amount will be 
accepted. Backers will be charged as soon as they donate. Kickstarter plans to 
donate its usual 5% fee to the refugee agency.

In its six-plus years in business, Kickstarter has raised nearly $2bn for 
creative projects from some 10 million unique backers. About a third of those 
are repeat donors.

'My body is in America but my soul is in Syria': a refugee family's journey to 
US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/30/syria-refugees-texas-dallas> 
Last month, President Obama directed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/10/syrian-refugees-obama-us-admit-more-fiscal-2016>
 his administration to prepare to accept 10,000 new refugees from Syria in the 
next fiscal year. The effort faces significant logistical barriers, including 
delays from mandatory background checks and from a backlog of cases.

By the end of September, the United States was expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/10/syrian-refugees-obama-us-admit-more-fiscal-2016>
 to have admitted 1,800 Syrian refugees total, in almost five years of 
fighting, out of about 70,000 refugees the United States accepts for 
resettlement each year. The United States had spent $4bn on security and fresh 
water and food for Syrian refugees living in camps outside the country.
 