
“Was Kim Kardashian chased through Paris in a mystery Fiat?” asks a report 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3821375/Kim-Kardashian-TAILED-two-men-posed-police-officer-photographer-days-terrifying-8-5-million-heist-Paris-THREE-bodyguards-missed-them.html>
 on the jewellery heist rocking the worlds of both reality television and 
Parisian crime. To the French capital, then, wherethe old mystery Fiat 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/conspiracy_files/6162121.stm> strikes 
again, lending its nutty kitemark to a story hardly short of dramatics. Already 
a mirthless 9,000-word think piece waiting to happen, the Kardashian burglary 
is establishing itself as a key cultural event of 2016, rich with meanings and 
takeouts and significances for a culture struggling to work out what it thinks 
about aggravated burglary.

Where you position yourself to it matters – matters absolutely – and I’m 
afraid some of you may find yourself already in a position from which you 
simply cannot now recover. For instance, those of you who failed to make some 
sort of social media post in the immediate aftermath of the news breaking, in 
which you said something about it being “no secret” how you felt about the 
Kardashians, but that Kim deserved “nothing but sympathy” for being the victim 
of such an ordeal. Anyone who sent a tweet like that is a decent individual who 
not only apparentlythinks about whether violent crime is justified, but feels 
moved to temper their conclusion that it isn’t with a reminder that the 
Kardashians are basically beneath them. These sort of tweeters have to take 
themselves seriously, because God knows no one else possibly could.

Anyway, as part of its peerless commitment to service journalism, Lost in 
Showbiz is pleased to offer you a full primer on the emerging key dramatis 
personae of this developing crime story, in order that you can keep up with the 
caper.

First and foremost, poor Kim is back in the United States and in seclusion, as 
yet unwilling to discuss the matter on any platform. All that has formally 
emerged is a communique from her makeup artist, who announces that the 
cosmetics masterclass the pair were due to host in Dubai 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3824313/Kim-Kardashian-postpones-makeup-event-Dubai-armed-robbery-ordeal.html>
 has been cancelled in the circumstances.

But, in Kim’s absence – and fighting her for the lead role – we have the 
scenery-chewing ham that is Inspector Karl Lagerfeld. The most adorably 
clueless detective since Clouseau, Chanel commandant Karl was almost instantly 
on the metaphorical crime scene in his trademark trenchcoat and highnecked 
blouse, dispensing quotable quotes on how vulgar the victim is. Think of him as
A Shit in the Dark <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8K1e2hxqs4>. But also be 
aware that Karl is a Proper Celebrity, whose willingness to say ordinarily 
unspeakable things marks him out as someone who adds to the gaiety of the 
nations. Listen: he’s the head designer of the most prestigious and 
self-regarding fashion house in the world. Also: look at him. What do you 
honestly want to hear from Karl? Some boring off-the-peg worthiness about body 
image, or how only ethically sourced style slaves fluff hisbouclé 
<http://www.karl.com/us/jacket_cod41649169ff.html> for him?

Course you don’t. Karl instinctively understands this, which is why he mused 
unwonderingly of L’affaire Kardashian: “I don’t understand why she was in a 
hotel with no security. If you’re that famous and you put all your jewellery on 
the internet, then you go to a hotel where nobody can come near to the room. 
You cannot display your wealth and then be surprised that some people want to 
share it with you.”

Oh Karl! What a knowingly incendiary use of the word “share” that is. On the 
one hand, it’s a bit rich from someone whose place of work relies particularly 
on revenues from flogging instantly recognisable handbags that can only 
be filed under the category “obvious display”. On the other, Kim got away 
lightly in the parvenue stakes. Even Marcel Proust was recentlywritten off by 
Karl 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/t-magazine/karl-lagerfeld-interview.html> as 
“the son of a concierge looking at society people”.

Such a crime could never happen to Inspector Lagerfeld himself, of course; he 
keeps a manservant highly trained in martial arts in his apartment, who is 
required to attack him <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m1HklglWVZs> the minute 
he struts in via his haunted mirror but always ends up submitting to Karl 
eventually. His master is simplytoo masterful.

Anyway, our next stop in the cast of characters must surely be the French 
police, who also felt moved to cast aspersions on the victim. “It was 
really the celebrity who was targeted,” pointed out a police spokeswoman, “with 
possessions that had been seen and noticed via social media, and it was these 
goods that the attackers targeted.” Mmm. Do they do this in rape cases, or is 
it just aggravated burglary? Either way, madame had more to add: “This kind of 
incident is extremely rare in Paris. This is a star that is famous worldwide. 
Do not confuse what happened to Ms Kardashian, and probably was the result of 
an organised team who had planned their action, with the assault of a tourist 
in front of Notre Dame or another tourist spot inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>.”

Well, I’m sure we’ll hear plenty more from them in due course. Finally, 
though, we must make special mention of the gang being fingered for the job, 
who are called –mais oui! – the Pink Panthers. Furthermore, these are the 
Serbian Pink Panthers, and someone who thinks of himself as one of their 
ex-members has been on to the Daily Beast todiscuss their modus operandi 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/04/an-ex-pink-panther-on-his-old-crew-blamed-for-robbing-kim-kardashian.html>
. “The ones that did this, do you think you’ll find them?” he inquires 
rhetorically. “No way, they’re probably in Ibiza with Paris Hilton.” (Need a 
bit more on that “with”, to be honest. Is Paris the moll or the mark? Inquiring 
minds want to know.)

In the meantime, this amusing chap seems to be suggesting that the Pink 
Panthers are a bit like al-Qaida, and lack a conventional command structure. 
“They think it’s one organisation with 400 members and one boss.” Not so, 
apparently. “These people were a part of the [Yugoslav] military and, when the 
country broke up, they becamerōnin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R%C5%8Dnin>, 
like the samurai. They don’t have a master. No leader. No head and no tail. All 
they do is they go by their intelligence.”

Go on: “They travel with the fashion show or the tennis players or the 
athletes. This is a very prestigious affair. All the Pink Panthers have college 
educations. They speak multiple languages fluently. They all play soccer. 
They’re athletes.”

Well, how fitting. These are not vulgar armed robbers, you understand. These 
are classy, prestigious armed robbers, as at home in the frow of Yves Saint 
Laurent as they are playing as a classic No 10. We are not quite – but very 
nearly – at the point where being gagged, tied up and thrown in the bath by 
them is a privilege. In fact, the entire tale is rapidly emerging as the film
Zoolander 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/zoolander-2-ben-stiller-owen-wilson-penelope-cruz-review-mark-kermode>
 could have been, and we must look forward to its next instalment as soon as 
any of the players cares to share it.
 