
Michael Bay was in Oxfordshire recently to shoot The Last Knight, the final 
instalment of the mighty Transformers franchise. The maker of the highest 
grossing movie of 2014 –Transformers: Age of Extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/transformers-age-of-extinction-review-michael-bay>
, which took over $1bn – was up to his old tricks, stomping on British 
sensibilities by converting beautiful Blenheim Palace into a Nazi HQ.

But, in another wing of the franchise, the shape-changing robots have been 
venturing into much less likely territory, exploring such weighty issues as 
social mobility, personal identity and various corrosive ideologies – while 
also establishing the world of Transformers as a homonormative society. Fans of 
Chromedome and Rewind may be touched to learn that the two are now in a 
romantic relationship.

Launched in 2012, the comic-book series Transformers: More Than Meets the Eye 
<https://www.idwpublishing.com/product-category/transformers/more-than-meets-the-eye/>
 tells the story of a group of robots journeying across the universe on a quest 
to find the mythical Knights of Cybertron (the original children ofPrimus 
<http://tfwiki.net/wiki/Primus> and the other four gods of the Guiding Hand 
<http://tfwiki.net/wiki/Guiding_Hand>, in case you didn’t know). The series is 
written by Guernsey-based James Roberts, whose background is in the civil 
service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftransformers-lost-light-comic-same-sex-partnerships%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225453bd97ab1ba119b3d7a6d17b438d1360c75f%2F0_0_2063_3129%2F2063.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kiss%20me%2C%20Chromedome%3A%20how%20the%20Transformers%20found%20peace%20and%20same-sex%20partnership&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftransformers-lost-light-comic-same-sex-partnerships%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kiss%20me%2C%20Chromedome%3A%20how%20the%20Transformers%20found%20peace%20and%20same-sex%20partnership&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftransformers-lost-light-comic-same-sex-partnerships%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225453bd97ab1ba119b3d7a6d17b438d1360c75f%2F0_0_2063_3129%2F2063.jpg>
 The cover of new comic. Photograph: IDW Generation 
But, such is the churn of the comics industry, the title was wound down in 
September at issue 57, the plan being to relaunch it this month asTransformers: 
Lost Light 
<https://www.idwpublishing.com/product-category/transformers/lost-light/>. The 
hope is to create a jumping on point for new readers, though Roberts’s radical 
take on the30-year-old toy brand <http://transformers.hasbro.com/en-us> will 
continue apace. “I always wanted to give the franchise as much depth and weight 
as possible,” he says. “One of the easiest ways to do that is to politicise it.”

As a fan of the clunky robots since childhood, Roberts has always had a sense 
of entitlement when it comes to messing with their core concept – specifically, 
the act of transformation. “In More Than Meets the Eye, I explored the idea 
that, millions of years ago, the Transformers existed in a system with a 
‘functionist’ doctrine – meaning the thing you turn into determines your 
status. The more commonplace a device you became, the fewer privileges you had.”

In a move that would doubtless intrigue Bay, Roberts brought in the concept of 
“municipal eugenics”: a type of Transformer could literally be made redundant, 
because there’s no longer a use for its newly shifted shape. “Maybe,” says 
Roberts, “there’s an analogy here in terms of how disabled people are treated 
in some quarters by governments. If they’re not producing, they’re not making 
the necessary contributions to society, and so they’re devalued.”


After fighting a four-million-year war, Megatron has renounced violence

Roberts has even dared to rehabilitate the classic Transformers bogeyman 
Megatron, going back to his early days and depicting him as a young radical. 
“Originally, Megatron was an incredible thinker who advocated non-violent 
resistance. He was in theTony Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/mar/14/tony-benn-obituary> mould, an 
international socialist. He campaigned for emancipation and equality, but 
eventually concluded the system had been engineered to withstand any form of 
dissent – other than force.

“As is the case with grand tragedies, he travelled away from the goals he had 
in the beginning and walked that well-trodden path from communism to 
totalitarianism.”

But Megatron’s journey didn’t stop there. Recent issues saw him teaming up 
with the Autobots, against whom he once waged a four-million-year war. “He’s 
been tested,” says Roberts of the one-time leader of the villainous 
Decepticons, able to change into three different types of gun. “And now he’s 
renounced violence.”

Some may doubt the Transformers concept can bear such weight. But Roberts 
believes the line’s longevity and the success of the Bay movies have encouraged 
Hasbro to give him his head. “It’s a mature franchise and it’s doing very well 
in various iterations. So Transformers can encompass different types of 
stories, in the same way a property like Batman does.”


Surprisingly perhaps, one strand of the story has met no resistance: the 
portrayal of same-sex relationships as the norm for this robot society. “When 
they were created, Transformers were exclusively male. They used the male 
pronoun and, in the 1980s cartoon series, they had male voices. I wanted to 
tell romantic stories. If two characters were in a relationship, the 
probability was they were both going to be men.”
 Lovers’ tiff … Rewind and Chromedome in Transformers: More than Meets the Eye 
#12. Photograph: IDW Generation 
Step forward Chromedome and Rewind, both from the original toy line. “They 
were close,” says Roberts. “You could have read it as them being best friends. 
Had there been any pushback, that’s how it would have stayed. But about a year 
into the series, I became more overt, depicting them as essentially husbands, 
giving them a storyline where the emotional highpoint was one saying to the 
other, ‘I love you.’


“It wasn’t a big deal to them or those around them. There’s never been any 
scene – nor will there be – where other Transformers remark upon them being 
together.”


Transformers: everything you need to know in one place
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/picture/2014/jul/04/transformers-infographic> 
Nonetheless, says Roberts, “it felt like a big deal to me” – so much so that 
he drafted a letter toHasbro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/surge-in-sales-of-girls-toys-drives-revenue-increase-for-hasbro>
 justifying its inclusion. But there was no opposition, despite the current 
polarisation in comics between a loud conservative sector of the readership and 
the so-called “social justice warriors” promoting a more liberal ideology.

In October, Marvel writer Chelsea Cain quit Twitter following harassment 
<http://www.dailydot.com/parsec/chelsea-cain-mockingbird-marvel-sexist-harassment/>
 about her decision to depict Shield agent Mockingbird in a T-shirt bearing the 
slogan: “Ask me about my feminist agenda.” The fuss left Roberts staggered. 
“People say there’s no place for politics in comics, but comics have been 
political from the start. If you don’t think X-Men has been telling a story 
about marginalisation and ostracisation for the past 50 years, you’ve been 
reading a different title to me.”

His work seems to be going a lot further than T-shirt slogans. Does he ever 
worry it will catch fire in a similar way? “I do, but anything that sparks a 
bigger conversation about progressive politics is good.”


• Transformers: Lost Light is published by IDW on 14 December 
<https://www.idwpublishing.com/product-category/transformers/lost-light/>.
 