
There is so much warmth, beauty and nostalgia in video games at the moment. 
We’re seeing a whole generation of designers who may once have once worked on 
huge projects, but who have now taken leave of the mainstream industry to 
explore personal experiences and memories. We see it in Firewatch, influenced 
by the co-designer’s own knowledge of the Wyoming wilderness; we see it in 
Unravel, a game all about creator Martin Sahlin’s love of rural Northern 
Sweden; and we’ll soon see it in Knights and Bikes, a co-operative exploration 
game set on a fictitious Cornish island.

In this case, the memories belong to hugely talented artist Rex Crowle, once 
of Media Molecule, where he worked on LittleBigPlanet and its follow-up 
Tearaway. As a child in Cornwall he grew up amid the county’s tiny fishing 
villages, enjoying their wonky, cluttered architecture. As he recalls: “There 
were little cottages with impossible perspectives, tumbling out of each other 
with doors in the roofs, and all kinds of details and history nailed to their 
exterior walls.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d8334d0e79af67fa34d98117b23395d14eb0e86%2F53_0_901_540%2F901.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Knights%20and%20Bikes%3A%20a%20game%20that%20combines%20The%20Goonies%20with%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Knights%20and%20Bikes%3A%20a%20game%20that%20combines%20The%20Goonies%20with%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d8334d0e79af67fa34d98117b23395d14eb0e86%2F53_0_901_540%2F901.jpg>
 The location is inspired by the villages Crowle explored while growing up in 
Cornwall: “By developing the game systems from a child’s perspective, we can 
hopefully capture that age when you have endless energy and an imaginative way 
of interpreting your surroundings.” Photograph: Foam Sword 
Last year, he teamed up with fellow LittleBigPlanet graduate Moo Yu, and the 
two conjured an idea for a project that utilised Crowle’s memories but also 
brought in other influences, including the movie The Goonies and Yu’s favourite 
role-playing game, The Secret of Mana. Knights and Bikes is set in 1987, and 
the tourist isle of Penfurzy is in trouble; one of its most famous myths has 
been exposed as a fake, and young native Demelza is devestated. But then an 
orphaned mainlander named Nessa arrives. Hoping to trace her family history, 
the two embark on a quest to discover the truth about the isle’s folk history 
and their own identities. And they do this on their bikes.

The game supports local two-player co-op, but can also be played alone with an 
AI helper. Importantly, though, as the characters explore the strange and 
evocative landscape, they must combine their different abilities. Demelza has a 
stomp which fells nearby enemies – and if she’s able to stomp in a puddle, the 
effect is more powerful; Nessa has the ability to make and throw water 
balloons, thereby creating the puddles.

According to Crowle and Yu, however, this interactivity depends on how the 
girls are feeling about each other at the time. Their relationship goes through 
peaks and troughs, and if they fall out, the nature of their interaction 
changes. “We want to tell personal stories through Knights and Bikes, and we 
want people to feel the tension and messiness of human relationships,” says Yu. 
“When they’re not seeing eye to eye, their abilities should conflict and might 
even cause arguments in the real world. I think that’s a great thing about game 
design. It’s about choosing the right systems for the experience you’re trying 
to convey.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2818e8ab393cedd6a515e1ec7905bad9688adf62%2F0_0_901_540%2F901.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Knights%20and%20Bikes%3A%20a%20game%20that%20combines%20The%20Goonies%20with%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Knights%20and%20Bikes%3A%20a%20game%20that%20combines%20The%20Goonies%20with%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2818e8ab393cedd6a515e1ec7905bad9688adf62%2F0_0_901_540%2F901.jpg>
 “Something I learned from Tearaway is how important it is to have movement in 
the game world, and not just in the characters, so I’m striving to bring the 
whole screen to life with the kind of ‘line-boil’ you get in hand-drawn 
animation,” says artist Rex Crowle. Photograph: Foam Sword 
While Crowle identifies with island inhabitant Demelza, Yu feels his 
experiences are more reflected in the character of Nessa, who feels weirdly 
displaced on the mainland. “I grew up as an Asian American in southern 
California which resulted in me not really fitting in anywhere,” he says. “I 
wasn’t Taiwanese enough for my parents, but was definitely foreign enough to be 
the weird kid.” As an adult, he ended up fleeing to the UK to create his own 
identity – and he sees that same sort of journey in Nessa.

This is a role-playing adventure game, with some of the trappings of the genre 
– exploration, items, lore, battles (the adult inhabitants of the island have 
been possessed by ancient and malevolent spirits). However, it’s set in the 
80s, with two heroes who travel on bikes and who flit between reality and 
fantasy – they need to muster their own weapons and armour through what they 
find, and apparently they’ll be accompanied on the adventure by Demelza’s pet 
goose and the pickled severed head of a fallen knight. “It’s about how the kids 
improvise in that environment,” says Crowle. “They might not have swords and 
shields, but they have ingenuity and imagination in a way that the adults 
around them do not. Some of that ingenuity is passed on to the players, to work 
out how to deal with situations together.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74d75272ace2c4ad2fea85fdac2238f879df6858%2F66_0_1802_1080%2F1802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Knights%20and%20Bikes%3A%20a%20game%20that%20combines%20The%20Goonies%20with%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Knights%20and%20Bikes%3A%20a%20game%20that%20combines%20The%20Goonies%20with%20Cornwall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fknights-bikes-game-combines-goonies-littlebigplanet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74d75272ace2c4ad2fea85fdac2238f879df6858%2F66_0_1802_1080%2F1802.jpg>
 The heroes traverse the island on bikes, which they need to upgrade in order 
to reach new areas. Photograph: Foam Sword 
The duo have launched a Kickstarter campaign 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/foamsword/1491229889?token=ed629697> to 
fund development, and are hoping to bring in Kenny Young, Media Molecule’s 
brilliant audio designer, as well as film soundtrack composer Daniel Pemberton. 
Although there’s still much to be done, the game already looks gorgeous, with 
Crowle’s environments and character design influenced by Ronald Searle, Mary 
Blair and the production design of Paranorman.

While the game will draw plaudits for its singular looks, for Yu, the most 
important element is the collaborative gameplay, which is as much about the 
relationship between the players, as it is about the abilities of the 
characters.

“When I was a teenager, I spent a lot of time playing long single-player 
games,” he says. “Now that I have a fiancée, I often find that I have to make a 
decision between playing video games and spending time with the ones I love. I 
want Knights and Bikes to be a game that brings people together rather than 
pushing people apart.”

Knights and Bikes is in development for PC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc>, Mac and Linux. Release date TBC
 