
As a kid growing up in Leeds, I was a Germanophile. I was entranced by the 
football team and, as a seven-year-old, I even cheered on West Germany in the 
1970 World Cup, when they beat England 3-2. I was mesmerised by the wail of air 
horns at European Cup games on TV – my first experience of European avant garde 
noise. HearingKraftwerk <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kraftwerk>’s single 
Autobahn in 1975 impressed on me an idea of German superiority.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f731deddaba64da93862c5fd48dc21d10499e1%2F131_237_2357_2211%2F2357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Krautrock%20author%20David%20Stubbs%20on%20the%20pioneering%20music%20of%20Cologne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Krautrock%20author%20David%20Stubbs%20on%20the%20pioneering%20music%20of%20Cologne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f731deddaba64da93862c5fd48dc21d10499e1%2F131_237_2357_2211%2F2357.jpg>
 Author David Stubbs 
I first visited Cologne in August 1998, and I wasn’t immediately enchanted. I 
was interviewing the protest-driven UK group Asian Dub Foundation for Uncut 
magazine, and we hung out a lot in the mostly Turkish Mülheim district, on the 
east bank of the Rhine. I was conscious of how excluded and ghettoised 
Germany’s ethnic minorities were. The city felt tense and standoffish, and 
those problems have yet to disperse fully.

I returned in May 2012 to a much happier Cologne, not least because everyone, 
but everyone, was drunk. It was the first of a number of trips to research 
Future Days, my book on the 1970s Krautrock movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/21/future-days-krautrock-modern-germany-review>
, and it was carnival season, when the citizens traditionally pour on to the 
streets in masques, led by a riotous, gold-chained, peacock-tailed creation 
known as His Madness, whose float leads the annual parade.

In Cologne they drink Kölsch beer. It’s served in small (20ml) glasses – but 
lots of them. I recommend Päffgen <http://www.paeffgen-koelsch.de/>, a classic 
Brauhaus in the Altstadt, orLapidarium <http://www.lapi-koeln.de/> on 
Eigelstein, where my contact Professor Podmore and I watched Chelsea beat 
Bayern Munich in the 2012 Champions League final, to our chagrin but to the 
indifferent amusement of anti-Bayern locals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55011771d053a6694b9fca27b947ac438e328580%2F0_166_4992_2995%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Krautrock%20author%20David%20Stubbs%20on%20the%20pioneering%20music%20of%20Cologne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Krautrock%20author%20David%20Stubbs%20on%20the%20pioneering%20music%20of%20Cologne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55011771d053a6694b9fca27b947ac438e328580%2F0_166_4992_2995%2F4992.jpg>
 A barman serves Kolsch at the carnival.
 Photograph: Alamy 
Cologne is twinned with Liverpool and the cities share certain characteristics.
Both are proud, Catholic strongholds with a history of dissent. Cologne was 
relatively, if unsuccessfully, resistant to Nazism. TheEL-DE Haus 
<http://www.museenkoeln.de/NS-DOKUMENTAtionszentrum/pages/315.aspx?s=315>, the 
museum on the site of the old Gestapo HQ, tells the city’s wartime story. For 
light relief, look underneath the statue of Konrad von Hochstaden, 13th-century 
archbishop of Cologne, at City Hall for an extremely rude engraved image, with 
bare buttocks and more.

The city rivals nearby Düsseldorf the way extravagant Liverpool rivals its 
more deadpan neighbour Manchester. Düsseldorf is all straight lines and spare, 
sleek, minimal architecture, and is the city of Kraftwerk. The spirit of 
Cologne is symbolised by its Gothic cathedral – voluptuous, sprawling upwards, 
teeming with tracery and gargoyles – and is the city of 70s Krautrock rivals 
Can, who recorded crazed, looping, jam-driven masterpieces like Tago Mago and 
Ege Bamyasi.

Cologne is a great museum city but has a 21st-century pulse. I’ll head to Zum 
Scheuen Reh, <http://zum-scheuen-reh.de/> where the DJs are students from the 
Hochschule Für Musik, nip next door to techno-orientedGewölbe 
<http://www.gewoelbe.net/>, or funk it up at Club Bahnhof Ehrenfeld 
<http://cbe-cologne.de/>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce730808108bb0391453406e8fe57ad7ab802878%2F0_198_2898_1739%2F2898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Krautrock%20author%20David%20Stubbs%20on%20the%20pioneering%20music%20of%20Cologne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Krautrock%20author%20David%20Stubbs%20on%20the%20pioneering%20music%20of%20Cologne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce730808108bb0391453406e8fe57ad7ab802878%2F0_198_2898_1739%2F2898.jpg>
 German experimental rock group Can. Photograph: Keystone/Getty Images 
Cologne hosted some of the great artistic upheavals of the 20th century. Max 
Ernst was at the forefront of the Dada movement. Examples of his work, such as 
the Elephant Celebes and Young Virgin Spanking the Infant Jesus In Front of 
Three Witnesses, can be seen in theMuseum Ludwig 
<http://www.museum-ludwig.de/en/collection/the-collection/best-of.html>. 
Electronic music pioneer Stockhausen studied at the Hochschule Für Musik. It 
repays multiple visits.

Some of the instruments on which Stockhausen produced the founding electronic 
music of the early 1950s are on display there. Like Can, one of whose members 
studied under him, Stockhausen was moved by the spectacle of war-devastated 
cities like Cologne to conceive a form of music that started from scratch, 
untouched by the dead and tragic past, unencumbered by nostalgia and 
convention, and German in origin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe708937bec13f210f47ca7559cb192e61f14e78f%2F0_390_5197_3118%2F5197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Krautrock%20author%20David%20Stubbs%20on%20the%20pioneering%20music%20of%20Cologne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Krautrock%20author%20David%20Stubbs%20on%20the%20pioneering%20music%20of%20Cologne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkrautrock-electronic-music-cologne-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe708937bec13f210f47ca7559cb192e61f14e78f%2F0_390_5197_3118%2F5197.jpg>
 Beat the autobahn with a ride along the river. Photograph: Westend61/Getty 
Images/Westend61 
The world’s first motorway (autobahn) was built in 1932, between Cologne and 
Bonn. It’s more fun, though, to hire a bike and ride towards Bonn along the 
river. It’s typically German – seemingly infinite forest, suddenly juxtaposed 
with heavy industrial plants such as the vast Bayer chemical works, which is 
awe-inspiring to a visitor from postindustrial Britain.

Can drummer Jaki Liebezeit has influenced generation after generation of 
musicians with his ultra-disciplined, hypnotic percussion. Now in his mid-70s, 
he pootles modestly around the city in a small car, unrecognised. There ought 
to be a statue of him in the town square. Maybe some day there will be.

• David Stubbs’s book Future Days: Krautrock and the Building of Modern 
Germany, is published by Faber, at £20. To buy a copy for £16.40 with free UK 
p&p, visitbookshop.theguardian.com  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/future-days.html>
 