
The Kardashian Klan are used to hairstyles that break the internet – Kim’s 
platinum blonde dye job threatened to overshadow the whole of Paris fashion week
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/05/kim-kardashian-blond-hair-paris-fashion-week-good-look>
 in March. So, when Kylie Jenner, Kim’s younger sister, posted anInstagram 
selfie <https://instagram.com/p/5AWcLYHGty/?taken-by=kyliejenner> on Sunday 
featuring a new hairstyle, a noisy reaction was to be expected.

But Jenner might not have bargained for accusations of cultural appropriation. 
These came from 17-year-old Hunger Games actorAmandla Stenberg 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3964350/>, who posted a comment 
<http://www.justjared.com/2015/07/12/kylie-jenner-gets-called-out-on-instagram-by-amandla-stenberg/>
 that read: “When u appropriate black features and culture but fail to use ur 
position of power to help black Americans by directing attention towards ur 
wigs instead of police brutality or racism #whitegirlsdoitbetter”. By Jenner’s 
next selfie, the braids were gone.

Inspired by celebrities including FKA twigs 
<http://www.vogue.com/13269878/braided-hairstyles-instagram-beyonce-solange-knowles/>
 andZoe Kravitz 
<http://blackgirllonghair.com/2015/05/this-picture-of-willow-smith-braiding-zoe-kravitzs-hair-is-the-sweetes-thing-youll-see-today/>
, braids like Jenner’s are gaining popularity across ethnicities. They have 
been a festival favourite this year, with the back-from-the-forehead cornrow 
particularly popular. I’m white, andI had my hair braided for the Guardian 
earlier this year by Keash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/13/the-rise-of-the-in-store-braiding-bar>
, a braiding service set up by school friends Taiba Akhuetie, 25, and Jessy 
Linton, 24.

Akhuetie, whose mother is Nigerian, said she liked the idea of these styles 
going across races and ethnicities, despite some negative comments from black 
people. While she is frustrated that braiding might be seen as a trend, rather 
than something here to stay, she says: “If other people want to appropriate the 
style, I think that’s a good thing.” She compares white women braiding their 
hair to the now-commonplace fashion for black women to wear weaves to give the 
effect of straight, caucasian hair. “Now no one thinks about that,” she says. 
“Hair is political, definitely, but I hope we get to a point when there’s no 
segregation.”

Stenberg, who posted a video about cultural appropriation of hairstyles on 
YouTube earlier this year entitled Don’t Cash CropOn My Cornrows 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O1KJRRSB_XA>, might have her work cut out 
campaigning against other non-black women having their hair braided. Kenya Hunt 
of Elle UK, who regularly writes about black beauty, praises Stenberg as a 
“really bright young voice”, but says: “I think when it comes to conversations 
about race and cultural appropriation, we need to pick our battles. We’re 
seeing people burn down black churches in America right now, people killing 
young black women and men because of the colour of their skin. Kylie Jenner’s 
cornrows that she wore for hours? That doesn’t strike me as the battle we need 
to have.”
 