
Aiperi Isaeva, 23, travelled to Bishkek from her village in Issyk-Kul to give 
birth to her second child. The distance to theKyrgyzstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kyrgyzstan> capital is about 400km, but 
there is no maternity hospital in her village.

Isaeva, a primary school teacher, experienced no complications during labour 
and gave birth to a healthy baby girl. “The birth went well, everything was 
good, and I had very experienced doctors,” she says, speaking through a 
translator in a small, warm, three-bedded room in maternity hospital no 2.

What are the millennium development goals on child mortality and maternal 
health all about?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/27/millennium-development-goals-child-mortality-maternal-health-explainer>
In the room next door, Elvira Dairbek, 24, is recovering from the birth of her 
son, who arrived the same day. It’s her third child, and the birth went without 
a hitch. Dairbek, who is in the final year of a finance degree, says she will 
be leaving hospital the next day. Her grandmother has arrived to help take care 
of her and her two other young sons. Her husband and parents live and work in 
Moscow.

“The service here is very good,” she says, cuddling her newborn son.

Both women’s experiences are testament to the work being done in Kyrgyzstan to 
improve health services over the past decade, and in particular to decrease 
maternal and child deaths.

The country has successfully reduced under-five mortality from more than 40 
deaths for every 1,000 live births in 1990 to 23 in 2012. But lowering the 
maternal mortality rate is proving considerably harder.

Kyrgyzstan has the highest maternal mortality rates among eastern European and 
central Asian countries, and isway off track to meet the 2015 deadline for the 
millennium development goal 
<http://www.kg.undp.org/content/kyrgyzstan/en/home/mdgoverview.html> (MDG) on 
maternal mortality, which aimed to reduce by three-quarters the number of women 
dying as a result of childbirth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fmaternal-mortality-kyrgyzstan-poor-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432809896756%2F3b6232d0-36e4-4787-b188-a99c76611c61-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kyrgyzstan%20strives%20to%20make%20inroads%20on%20poor%20maternal%20health%20record%20%7C%20Liz%20Ford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fmaternal-mortality-kyrgyzstan-poor-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kyrgyzstan%20strives%20to%20make%20inroads%20on%20poor%20maternal%20health%20record%20%7C%20Liz%20Ford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fmaternal-mortality-kyrgyzstan-poor-record%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432809896756%2F3b6232d0-36e4-4787-b188-a99c76611c61-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Arsen Askerov, president of the Kyrgyz Association of Obstetricians, 
Gynaecologists and Neonatologists, says the country lacks specialists. 
Photograph: Liz Ford/Guardian 
Figures vary, but the latest data from the World Bank 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.MMRT?order=wbapi_data_value_1990%20wbapi_data_value%20wbapi_data_value-first&sort=asc>
 estimates that the number of women dying in childbirth for every 100,000 live 
births in Kyrgyzstan is 75, down only slightly from about 85 in 1990. The 
country’s MDG target is 15.

A 2013 report 
<http://www.kg.undp.org/content/kyrgyzstan/en/home/library/mdg/third-mdg-progress-report-kyrgyzstan.html>
 from the UN development programme found that most maternal fatalities were 
avoidable, with deaths from haemorraghing, acute sepsis, pre-eclampsia and 
eclampsia remaining stubbornly high.

Previous health programmes, including free healthcare for pregnant women and 
improvements to obstetric and gynaecological services, have made some inroads. 
But positive change has been largely dependent on where you live and whether 
you have money.


Women’s lack of economic independence – particularly in rural parts of the 
country, where two-thirds of the population live – has a significant bearing on 
maternal health. In poorer, rural areas, women were less likely to receive 
adequate prenatal care. Fear of being sacked from their jobs made them less 
inclined to take maternity leave, and they also had difficulty affording drugs, 
such as iron tablets for anaemia (which can lead to premature births if left 
untreated). According to the country’s national statistics committee, 64% of 
women in Kyrgyzstan have anaemia, more than twice the number in 1990.

Funding for maternal health services has increased, largely thanks to donor 
funding 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTABOUTUS/IDA/0,,contentMDK:22299459~menuPK:4754051~pagePK:51236175~piPK:437394~theSitePK:73154,00.html>
. Between 2004 and 2011, funding rose from 213.5m soms (more than $3.6m, or 
£2.35m) to 761.1 million soms. But as a percentage of the entire health budget, 
the amount is small, and has fallen over that period from 9.9% to 7.9%.

But a three-year, $11m programme between the World Bank and the ministry of 
health, launched last year, aims to address the disparities and accelerate 
progress on cutting maternal deaths. Bishkek’s maternity hospital no 2 is one 
of more than 40 health centres around the country involved in a pilot, a key 
part of which will involve training to improve staff skills.

“90% [of maternal deaths] were found to be preventable, the result of the 
levels of skills of the staff and the speed of getting medicine to people,” 
says Arsen Askerov, president of the Kyrgyz Association of Obstetricians, 
Gynaecologists and Neonatologists. “We need more skills than resources.”

While international guidelines on antenatal care – which stipulate that women 
should receive at least four visits with a health professional – are widely 
adhered to in the country, the quality of that care is poor, adds Askerov.

“There are not enough competent specialists,” he says. “We have young 
specialists who don’t have a high level of skills. In rural areas there is a 
lack of specialists.”

90% of maternal deaths were found to be preventable
Arsen Askerov, president, KOAGN 
Although the programme is still in its early stages – it ends in 2017 – 
Askerov is optimistic it will produce results. “We hope that improved services 
will reduce deaths. We will be trying over the next three years as much as 
possible to strengthen these services.”

But another element that needs attention is raising awareness around 
reproductive health, not least by ensuring that women know the danger signs of 
pregnancy and, crucially, have access to decent family planning services that – 
as well as reducing the number of teen births and decreasing the number of 
abortions – would allow them to space pregnancies.

Kyrgyzstan is one of the 69 priority countries under the Family Planning 2020 
global partnership, which is working to increase access to modern forms of 
contraception for 120 million more women and girls globally by 2020. The
percentage of women of reproductive age using a modern form of contraception 
<http://www.familyplanning2020.org/entities/119> in Kyrgyzstan is about 24%. 

Sitting on her bed in the maternity hospital, Dairbek, who was married at 18, 
says she didn’t use contraception. “We’re not allowed to take contraceptives in 
our family,” she says. “My mother didn’t use it.” It was not in her plans to 
have children so quickly after marriage – her eldest son is four – and although 
she says she’s “very happy” to have three sons, she adds: “For the next five 
years, no babies.”
 