
When Guliaim Aiylchy opened her cafe-bar in Bishkek two years ago, it wasn’t 
just because she wanted to run her own business or make money. The 31-year-old 
also wanted to support other women in the city.

Sitting at a wooden table in the Chocolate Bar in Erkindik Boulevard 
<https://www.facebook.com/chocolate928> – by day a cafe serving food and 
coffees, by night a cocktail bar – Aiylchy explains why she only employs women.

“Women are better to work with. If women want to work in restaurants, they’re 
only taken on as waitresses, not bar workers, which is seen as man’s work,” she 
says through an interpreter.

“I don’t know why that is. I teach women to make cocktails and work the bar so 
they can take that skill somewhere else. It’s seen as more prestigious working 
in a bar than waitressing.”

She also sells crafts produced by women, who sometimes work from the cafe, and 
allocates a percentage of her profits to support women who want to set up new 
businesses.

“I support women opening businesses. I try to train them to be economically 
independent.”

Her motivation to support women comes from what she sees as a slow erosion of 
women’s rights inKyrgyzstan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kyrgyzstan>. She 
noticed a change five years ago, when she returned from a four-year stint in 
Turkey.

For her, the sign of shifting sands was the increasing number of women in the 
capital wearing hijabs. “There were a lot more women in headscarves when I came 
back,” says Aiylchy, the single mother of a five-year-old daughter.

She sees male influence behind the trend. Although not from a Muslim family, 
two of her sisters began wearing hijabs when they married Muslim men; one of 
them later removed hers when she got a divorce. Aiylchy has seen something 
similar happen with friends, too.

“It feels like things are going backwards,” she says. “In my family, I grew up 
believing that men and women are equal. I was surprised to find other families 
are not like that.”

She worries that, agreeing to wear the headscarf today will have a negative 
impact on women tomorrow. “It will be even easier to take away the rights of 
the next generation. Our daughters and granddaughters will have fewer and fewer 
rights,” says Aiylchy.

A report published by the Forum of Women’s NGOs of Kyrgyzstan 
<http://forumofwomenngos.kg/>, which represents more than 85 organisations, 
said the influence of religious ideology – both Islamic and Christian – 
“substantially contributes to discrimination against women”, especially in 
rural areas. The study suggested such influence had gradually increased in the 
vacuum created by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the country’s 
independence in 1991.


“Islam has a strong influence on women, how to dress and act and it’s now 
being discussed widely, in mosques and on television, that women should live 
moral lives,” says Bermet Stakeeva, programme officer at the forum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkyrgyzstans-cocktail-of-conservatism-and-apathy-a-bitter-draught-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427305329390%2Fe9f7ae15-ff5f-4ab9-b8a6-2303ca5df989-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kyrgyzstan's%20cocktail%20of%20conservatism%20and%20apathy%20a%20bitter%20draught%20for%20women%20%7C%20Liz%20Ford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkyrgyzstans-cocktail-of-conservatism-and-apathy-a-bitter-draught-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kyrgyzstan%27s%20cocktail%20of%20conservatism%20and%20apathy%20a%20bitter%20draught%20for%20women%20%7C%20Liz%20Ford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkyrgyzstans-cocktail-of-conservatism-and-apathy-a-bitter-draught-for-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427305329390%2Fe9f7ae15-ff5f-4ab9-b8a6-2303ca5df989-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kyrgyz women in Bishkek. Photograph: Alamy 
On paper, though, the country looks progressive. Over the past 25 years, 
Kyrgyzstan has ratified more than 30 international conventions upholding 
women’s rights and empowerment. The country also signed up to theBeijing 
platform for action <http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/> to 
advance women’s rights in 1995, and the Cairo agreement a year earlier 
promising to uphold women’s sexual and reproductive health and rights. It 
promised to meet the UN millennium development goals. Gender equality is 
enshrined in the country’s constitution, gender action plans have been drawn 
up, and parliament has 30% quotas for women. Kyrgyzstan also has legislation 
protecting women from domestic violence,liberal abortion laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2014/oct/01/-sp-abortion-rights-around-world-interactive>
, and has set the legal age of marriage at 18.

However, a lack of funds and political will, and religious conservatism that 
casts women as inferior to men, means high ideals have rarely been translated 
into action.

The latest World Bank figures <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.MMRT>
 show that Kyrgyzstan has the highest number of maternal deaths in the region, 
and the country will not meet the millennium development target to reduce 
maternal mortality rates by three-quarters. The number of women who die from 
pregnancy-related causes stands at 75 for every 100,000 live births, which is 
about three times higher than neighbouring Kazakhstan, where the population is 
significantly bigger.

The number of married women using contraception has dropped from 60% in 1997 
to about 36% in 2012, partly because of the influence of religious leaders, 
partly due to the prohibitive cost of modern family planning methods, which is 
pushing some women towards abortion as a cheaper option. The Reproductive 
Health Alliance of Kyrgyzstan (RHAK), a member of the International Planned 
Parenthood Federation, estimates the monthly cost of oral contraception is $5. 
The averagebasic salary 
<http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2014/06/25/000442464_20140625112552/Rendered/PDF/889760ESW0WHIT0Box385256B00PUBLIC0.pdf>
 for a doctor is less than $80 a month.

Sex is still a taboo subject, and sex education in schools is rare or 
non-existent, making the large youth population – more than 30% of people are 
aged 10-24 – particularly vulnerable to sexual transmitted diseases.

Violence against women remains common and is carried out with relative 
impunity. And while the official age of marriage is 18, this can be reduced by 
a year if local authorities deem there to be a “good reason”. Many marriages go 
unregistered, particularly in rural areas, and the practice ofbride kidnapping 
<http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/bride-kidnapping-and-land-rights-in-rural-kyrgyzstan/>
 remains widespread, despite being illegal.

The Kyrgz parliament is also debating an anti-gay propaganda bill 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/03/27/kyrgyzstan-withdraw-draconian-homophobic-bill>
, styled around onepassed in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/05/russia-anti-gay-law-criticism-playing-into-putin-hands>
.

Rising poverty levels <http://data.worldbank.org/country/kyrgyz-republic> over 
the past five years have also complicated the picture for women. Roughly 38% of 
the population still lives below the national poverty line of $1.50 a day.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkyrgyzstans-cocktail-of-conservatism-and-apathy-a-bitter-draught-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427305422982%2F74e5195c-8788-486d-9709-a6073372efb8-2060x1375.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kyrgyzstan's%20cocktail%20of%20conservatism%20and%20apathy%20a%20bitter%20draught%20for%20women%20%7C%20Liz%20Ford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkyrgyzstans-cocktail-of-conservatism-and-apathy-a-bitter-draught-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kyrgyzstan%27s%20cocktail%20of%20conservatism%20and%20apathy%20a%20bitter%20draught%20for%20women%20%7C%20Liz%20Ford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fkyrgyzstans-cocktail-of-conservatism-and-apathy-a-bitter-draught-for-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427305422982%2F74e5195c-8788-486d-9709-a6073372efb8-2060x1375.jpeg>
 Galina Chirkina, executive director of the Reproductive Health Alliance of 
Kyrgyzstan. Photograph: Liz Ford for the Guardian 
Galina Chirkina, executive director of RHAK, said the government’s support for 
women’s rights lacked both funding and clear strategies.

For example, there is provision in law to teach sex education in school but 
it’s not being implemented, she says. “There is no funding or support, and 
teachers don’t have the skills. No one made a programme. There was no specific 
training for teachers, no manuals to teach children in the school system. And 
nobody told them they had to teach it. There are also cultural barriers … and 
the influence of religious groups, who were very aggressive and negative about 
it.”

The RHAK was called before a parliamentary hearing 
<http://www.ippf.org/news/blogs/Sexual-and-reproductive-health-services-trial-Kyrgyzstan>
 in 2013 over complaints that sex education booklets it produced for young 
people ran counter to cultural beliefs. The complaints were made by members of 
the Russian Orthodox church, Muslim leaders and conservative MPs.

But women’s groups are pushing back. 

Earlier this month, Bishkek staged Kyrgyzstan’s first national women’s forum, 
attracting representatives from more than 1,000 groups nationwide, as well as 
politicians and female ministers. Ahead of November’s parliamentary elections, 
there were calls for a specific government ministry to address gender equality 
and for the reproductive health bill currently being debated by parliament to 
be beefed up.

Local women’s groups, supported by the forum of women NGOs, are developing 
their own policies that have women at the centre.

For the moment, Ailychy plans to stay in Bishkek, to support women and fight 
from the inside. “I want to believe it will be good,” she says.
 