
La La Land has taken the top honour at the Toronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival>. The Los Angeles-set 
musical world premiered on the opening night film of the Venice film festival 
and screened in Telluride, before debuting in Toronto. The movie - Damien 
Chazelle’s third - has attracted raves from reviewers, with especial praise for 
Emma Stone’s performance as a struggling actor, whose relationship to her jazz 
pianist boyfriend (Ryan Gosling) becomes strained when his career begins to 
overtake hers. Stone was named best actress at last Saturday’s Venice film 
festival awards.

Why Hollywood musical La La Land will follow Argo and The Artist to the Oscars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/18/why-hollywood-musical-la-la-land-will-follow-argo-and-the-artist-to-the-oscars>
The film is the follow-up by Chazelle, 31, to audience-pleasing drumming drama 
Whiplash, which won three Oscars, including best supporting actor for JK 
Simmons. La La Land is his second musical, followingGuy and Madeline on a Park 
Bench <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJUzALdI--k>, a little-seen micro-budget 
jazz musical, originally planned as his thesis project for Harvard Film School 
(he briefly left Harvard to focus on finishing the film).

“La La Land is about the city I live in, it’s about the music that I grew up 
playing, it’s about movies that I grew up watching,” Chazelle told the Guardian 
in Telluride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/damien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride>
, before screening it in Toronto. “Even the big spectacle of the movie feels 
private to me in that way.”

The People’s Choice Award is a proven indicator for future awards glory: past 
winners which have proceeded to the bag the best picture Oscar include Slumdog 
Millionaire, The King’s Speech and 12 Years a Slave.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&media=>
La La Land trailer: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone star in musical movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
The runner-up for this year’s prize was Garth Davis’s directorial debut, Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/lion-review-dev-patel-and-nicole-kidman-hunt-oscars-in-moving-adoption-drama>
, starring Dev Patel as a young man adopted as a child who uses Google Maps to 
track down the family he left in India. The inspirational and fact-based story 
also stars Nicole Kidman and Rooney Mara. Another real-life drama, Mira Nair’s
Queen of Katwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/queen-of-katwe-review-ugandan-chess-movie-could-be-new-slumdog>
, about a 10-year-old Ugandan girl who trains to become a world chess champion, 
took third place.

La La Land review: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone shine in a sun-drenched musical 
masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
The juried Platform award, established last year to celebrate international 
auteurs, went to Pablo Larraín’sJackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
, starring Natalie Portman as Jacqueline Kennedy, and unfolding shortly before 
and after her husband’s assassination. Brian De Palma, Mahamat-Saleh Haroun and 
Zhang Ziy, who ruled on the prize, said: “Our decision was unanimous. We found 
one film that combined an extraordinary script with precise direction and 
unforgettable acting.” The prize comes with a $25,000 prize – $10,000 more than 
the main winner receives.

Ben Wheatley’s Free Fire, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/09/free-fire-review-ben-wheatleys-shootout-comedy-is-firing-blanks>
 a high-profile shoot-up comedy starring Brie Larson and Armie Hammer, won the 
equivalent of the People’s Choice Award for the Midnight Madness sidebar - a 
lineup comprised of genre films. The second runner up for the award went to 
Julia Ducournau’s cannibal thriller Raw,which caused some audience members to 
faint at its Toronto premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/14/cannibal-horror-film-raw-toronto-film-festival>
.
 