
La Trobe University suspended controversial researcher Roz Ward for calling 
the Australian flag racist despite publishing an opinion piece on its website 
three years ago voicing similar sentiments.

Nicholas Herriman, an anthropologist at the university, wrote an opinion piece 
<http://www.latrobe.edu.au/news/articles/2013/opinion/punch-ups-for-patriots> 
in January 2013 about the violence tied up in Australia Day celebrations, 
saying the flag had come to “represent white racist values”.

Ward, the manager of the Safe Schools program, is being investigated by the 
university for what it claims is potentially serious misconduct over a similar 
sentiment she voiced on her Facebook page last week.

The leftwing activist resigned from 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/safe-schools-coalition-co-founder-roz-ward-resigns-over-facebook-post>
 a Victorian government advisory role and hasbeen suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/australian-academic-roz-ward-suspended-for-calling-countrys-flag-racist>
 from La Trobe after posting a picture of the LBGTI flag over the state’s 
parliament, with the comment: “Now we just need to get rid of the racist 
Australian flag on top of the state parliament and get a red one up there and 
my work is done.”

Australian academic Roz Ward suspended for calling country's flag 'racist'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/australian-academic-roz-ward-suspended-for-calling-countrys-flag-racist>
La Trobe said the post breached Ward’s employment conditions by undermining 
public confidence in Safe Schools, damaging its reputation and had drawn 
colleagues into negative publicity around the program.

It also expressed concern about the impact the Facebook post “could have on 
the good standing of our researchers in this field and the university takes 
this very seriously”.

Ward has been the subject of months of critical coverage over claims the 
anti-bullying initiative exposes children to inappropriate sexual material and 
promotes “cultural Marxism”.



Safe Schools Coalition co-founder Roz Ward resigns over Facebook post
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/safe-schools-coalition-co-founder-roz-ward-resigns-over-facebook-post>
However, Herriman’s piece remains on the university’s website and he continues 
to lecture and produce research at La Trobe.

His article said: “Many Australians might wish that the flag only represented 
unity of the nation, but with Cronulla rioters and Pauline Hanson brandishing 
it, the flag has come to also represent White racist values.”

Matthew Lesh, a research fellow at the free-market Institute of Public 
Affairs, said Ward’s suspension in light of the publication of Herriman’s piece 
laid bare “the absurdity of this whole situation”.

“An academic should not be stood down for making a comment that has been 
voiced by a senior colleague, and literally published on the university’s own 
website,” Lesh said.

“Once we start going after academics for political comments, we lose the 
entire purpose of universities: to debate and discuss ideas, even ones we may 
find reprehensible.”

The federal Greens called on Thursday for Ward to be re-instated. “I am 
outraged at the attacks and vitriol being directed at Roz Ward,” senator Janet 
Rice, the party’s spokesperson on gender identity and intersex issues, said.

“Given this situation has resulted from a personal view expressed on a 
personal social media profile, the reaction is extreme. Roz Ward’s personal 
political views are her own, and are irrelevant to the great work of the Safe 
Schools Coalition and her work as an academic at La Trobe University,” Rice 
said.

La Trobe University has been contacted for comment.
 