
Labor has signalled it could shift on a $1.4bn savings proposal it took to the 
election which would see welfare benefits and pensions for new recipients cut 
courtesy of the abolition of an energy supplement.


The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, and 
the shadow finance minister, Jim Chalmers, have been saying publicly theparty 
would honour savings proposals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/24/shorten-takes-budget-fight-to-coalition-laying-out-81bn-savings-solution>
 it took to the recent poll but, on Thursday, Chalmers qualified that position.

He told Sky News Labor’s position would be “broadly” consistent with the 
position it took to the recent election and he emphasised that budget repair 
needed to be fair. Chalmers added that any savings proposal needed to be 
consistent with Labor values.

The rhetorical shift follows weeks of internal discussion within Labor about 
the fate of the clean energy supplement, with the shadow families minister, 
Jenny Macklin, spearheading a push to reverse Labor’s election position.

Sam Dastyari resignation: Coalition open to Labor calls for donation reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/sam-dastyari-resignation-coalition-open-to-labor-calls-for-donation-reform>
During a recent shadow cabinet meeting, Anthony Albanese argued forcefully 
that Labor cannot reduce Newstart payments for new recipients, given Newstart 
is already too low. He has since made that case publicly.

The decision taken during the election on the energy supplement was not taken 
by the full shadow ministry.

Economic ministers have been working for the past fortnight on a compromise 
proposal but the shadow ministry is yet to take a final decision.

A range of welfare and community groups have also been lobbying Labor 
extensively to shift course on the savings measure.

During the last parliamentary sitting week, there was a boilover in the left 
caucus about abolishing the clean energy supplement and concerns were also 
raised about cuts in funding for the renewable energy agency.

A number of Labor MPs have signalled privately they are prepared to express 
concern about the saving when the issue reaches the full caucus.

That discussion was prevented during the last parliamentary sitting week 
because the “omnibus” savings bill was not ready for presentation to the 
parliament.

When the bill eventually reached the parliament, one of the government’s 
calculations was out by $100m. In the originalexplanatory memorandum 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22legislation%2Fems%2Fr5707_ems_09829908-eec8-4210-b967-aacc6567463c%22>
 accompanying the proposed legislation, item 11 claimed a saving of $405.6m 
from changes to student start-up scholarships – but the sum of the annual 
savings, as reported, only adds to $298m.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, had to go back 
into the House of Representatives to correct the error. The Treasury later 
issued a statement saying a computational error had caused the discrepancy.

Chalmers said on Thursday Labor’s “cautious and careful approach” to the 
omnibus savings proposal had been warranted, given the $100m error.
 