
The champions of the 2016 election are the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, and his economic team.

They treated the electorate with respect by releasing detailed policy choices 
on difficult issues. These choices set the scene for Labor’s overall campaign 
which has been remarkably successful given how far Labor were behind the 
Coalition at the end of 2015.

Bowen prosecuted the case for Labor’s economic policy framework during the 
campaign, even when it meant the proposed tax changesdrew howls of indignation 
from parts of the electorate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/08/labor-negative-gearing-changes-will-crash-economy-says-morrison>
 and allowed the Liberal party to launch scare campaigns about collapsing house 
prices and budget deficits.

Australian election 2016: wait for results leaves independents on centre stage 
– politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jul/04/australian-election-2016-labor-coalition-independents-politics-live>
Without the policy proposals and details outlined by Bowen, Labor would not 
have stood a chance.

It is vital to note that the tax changes on negative gearing and capital gains 
tax provided the revenue needed so the Labor party could fund its commitment for
extra spending on education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/16/education-election-promise-crib-sheet-what-you-need-to-know>
 and health.

At the same time the structural integrity of the budget improved with Labor’s 
budget plan, to the point where the Liberal party found it difficult to strike 
a blow against Labor given its own track record in government where the budget 
deficit has blown out and the level of government debt had risen by over $100bn.

Because of this strategy, there was never the damaging question for Labor of 
“where’s the money coming from”. Labor had this potential problem covered 
because of its bold revenue measures.

Even if Turnbull wins, he loses. And even if Shorten loses, he wins | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/even-if-turnbull-wins-he-loses-and-even-if-shorten-loses-he-wins>
Labor could also point to the fairness of its policies as they targeted 
housing affordability for the young and capital gains tax concessions that 
accrue overwhelmingly to the well off.

It is also important to recall that the blistering attack on Coalition 
policies were led by Bowen. Shortly after Malcolm Turnbull ousted Tony Abbott 
as prime minister, “everything” was on the policy table. Turnbull was giving 
consideration to the goods and services tax being increased and having its base 
broadened and there was a proposal that income taxing powers would be handed to 
the states.

These ideas were undermined by Labor which meant Turnbull had nothing to go on 
during the election campaign other than a company tax cut, which was to be 
phased in over a decade, at a cost of $50bn. The absurd “jobs and growth” 
agenda of Turnbull was without foundation and was open to ridicule, not that 
Turnbull and his team noticed.

“Jobs and growth” was a ruse that the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> was able to demolish. 
Money going to the “big end of town” while health and education were being cut 
was the central theme that helped Labor’s economic attack during the campaign.

Had Turnbull run with a GST hike and not cowered at the prospect of selling a 
significant economic policy change, he would have been seen as a bold reformer, 
it would have freed up many tens of billions of dollars to allow him to 
campaign on cuts to income tax, funding other policies and the return to budget 
surplus would have been enhanced from the GST revenue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20federal%20election%3A%20what%20just%20happened%2C%20and%20what%20comes%20next%3F%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20federal%20election%3A%20what%20just%20happened%2C%20and%20what%20comes%20next%3F%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Faustralian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video&media=>
Australian federal election: what just happened, and what comes next? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/jul/03/australian-federal-election-what-just-happened-and-what-comes-next-video>
To be sure, Labor would have campaigned hard on an anti-GST platform but with 
the budget fragile and revenue needed to fund policies demanded by the 
electorate Turnbull would have had an economic agenda of substance to sell to 
the electorate.

In the end, despite good GDP and labour force data being released during the 
campaign, Labor’s economic policy platform and the absence of any thing 
substantive from the Liberals other than the company tax cut meant they lost 
their advantage in the electorate as “the better economic manager”.

Bowen drove the take-down of each aspect of Liberal economic policy. He drove 
the policy agenda that Labor ran with. Whatever the end result of the election, 
the fact that Labor beat all expectations from its seemingly hopeless position 
at the start of the year owes much to Chris Bowen.

Stephen Koukoulas is a Research Fellow at Per Capita, a progressive thinktank.
 