
The Turnbull government has lost its first votes on the floor of the House of 
Representatives as Labor intensified its political attack on the prime minister 
and theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> using 
the spearhead of the banking royal commission.


Labor moved on Thursday night to bring a motion calling for a banking royal 
commission that had cleared the Senate earlier in the day to the lower house 
for consideration, catching the government entirely flat-footed as the House 
was set to adjourn.

The government lost the initial procedural votes because senior figures, 
including the immigration minister Peter Dutton, and two Western Australians, 
the justice minister Michael Keenan and social services minister Christian 
Porter, were not in the chamber.

Labor wins three last-minute votes to force Coalition to debate banks – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/sep/01/coalition-introduces-company-tax-cut-bills-as-labor-meets-bank-victims-politics-live>
Government sources later claimed Labor MPs had deliberately created the 
impression they were leaving the parliamentary precinct after the sitting week, 
only to return to bring on the procedural bunfight.

As well as the absence of ministers, one Liberal backbencher, Craig Kelly, 
went for a walk outside the building minus his mobile phone.

The lost votes enabled Labor to capture control of the chamber and argue the 
case for the banking royal commission for around three hours on Thursday 
evening. The opposition claimed the last time a majority government lost a vote 
on the floor of the House was 1962.

Over the course of a fractious and heavily contested parliamentary day, the 
government moved to return fire on the opposition,intensifying pressure on the 
Labor senator, Sam Dastyari, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/on-political-donations-canberra-is-sleepwalking-into-its-own-integrity-crisis>
over his decision to ask a Chinese donor to cover a $1,670 expenses bill when 
he overshot his parliamentary entitlements.

In addition to the payment, Dastyari subsequently gave a public assurance that 
he would respect China’s stance on the South China Sea at a press conference 
held during the federal election,according to a report in the Australian 
Financial Review. 
<http://www.afr.com/news/sam-dastyari-pledges-to-support-china-on-south-china-sea-beside-labor-donor-20160831-gr5mwk>

Senior government ministers compared Dastyari’s actions to conduct by the 
Liberal MP Stuart Robert, who lost his spot in the ministry after a fundraising 
controversy.

On political donations, Canberra is sleepwalking into its own integrity crisis 
| Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/on-political-donations-canberra-is-sleepwalking-into-its-own-integrity-crisis>
The trade minister, Steve Ciobo, declared the Labor man, like Robert, had to 
be dumped from the frontbench. The leader of the government in the Senate, 
George Brandis, questioned whether Dastyari had been “compromised”.

Over the course of Thursday in Canberra: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/sep/01/coalition-introduces-company-tax-cut-bills-as-labor-meets-bank-victims-politics-live>

 * Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, moved a motion calling on the government 
to establish a banking royal commission, and for that resolution to be 
communicated to the House of Representatives for concurrence. That motion 
passed despite government opposition, resulting in the government’s first lost 
Senate vote of this term – and then the political fight cascaded into the 
House, with debate stretching into the evening;

 * The government lost a second Senate vote. A motion moved by Labor’s Lisa 
Singh, and opposed by the Coalition, criticising the treatment of asylum 
seekers on Nauru in the wake of the publication of the Nauru files, and calling 
for the establishment of a children’s advocate, passed the Senate;

 * Labor also succeeded in referring to the privileges committee questions 
about whether there had been “improper interference” or “attempted improper 
interference” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/31/nbn-leaks-stephen-conroy-pursues-possibility-contempt-committed-during-police-raids>
 with Labor’s deputy Senate leader Stephen Conroy’s free performance as a 
senator during controversial raids in the election campaign and last week 
related to leaks from the NBN Co.

Labor set up the evening procedural ambush in question time, where the Labor 
leaderBill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> 
made the case for a royal commission after first meeting with a group of 
banking victims in parliament house.

The group also met with Peter Whish-Wilson, the Greens’ treasury spokesman, 
who is a former banker. They did not meet with Malcolm Turnbull despite 
Shorten’sinvitation to the prime minister last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/banking-royal-commission-terms-of-reference-proposed-by-bill-shorten>
.

Naomi Halpern, a spokesperson for the Holt Norman Ashman Baker Action Group 
<http://www.halttosafeguardyourfinances.com/> – said the meetings went well, 
and that Shorten had agreed to meet her again, in Melbourne next week. 
Halpern’s group included members of the Timbercorp financial scandal.

Timeline: banking scandals in Australia since 2009
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/apr/29/timeline-banking-scandals-in-australia-since-2009>
Turnbull criticised Labor for the tactic, reasoning the royal commission would 
only be a forum for the legal profession, cost hundreds of millions of dollars, 
go on for years and deliver no practical improvements.

The prime minister declared “populism” would not help the victims of banking 
industry scandals, but practical action would, and practical action was being 
taken by the government.

“What we have in place are ombudsman services. We have legal services. We have 
Asic,” the prime minister said. “The only beneficiaries from a royal commission 
would be, frankly, the legal profession.”

In the evening debate the treasurer, Scott Morrison, rounded on the 
opposition. He said the motion in the House was “a stunt from an opposition to 
promote their stunt” – meaning the banking royal commission.
 