
Labour’s industrial spokesperson has called for the algorithms used by 
technology firms to be made transparent and subject to regulation, as the party 
prepares the new year launch of its industrial strategy consultation.


German courts should tackle fake news now, says justice minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/german-courts-should-tackle-fake-news-now-says-minister>
Shadow minister Chi Onwurah wants to see greater scrutiny of the mathematical 
formulas that now control everything from the tailored news served toFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> members to the speed at which 
workers are required to move around an Amazon warehouse.

“Algorithms aren’t above the law,” Onwurah warned this weekend. In a telephone 
interview on Sunday, she said: “The outcomes of algorithms are regulated – the 
companies which use them have to meet employment law and competition law. The 
question is, how do we make that regulation effective when we can’t see the 
algorithm?”


Labour’s industrial paper, due to be published after the Christmas break, will 
call for suggestions on how tech firms could be more closely supervised by 
government.

“We expect algorithms and data rights to be considered as part of that 
consultation,” said Onwurah, who was shadow digital economy minister before 
taking on the industrial brief. “Algorithms are part of our world, so they are 
subject to regulation, but because they are not transparent, it’s difficult to 
regulate them effectively.”


The business models of technology firms are increasingly being challenged by 
lawmakers. Google’s shopping and advertising services areunder investigation by 
the European commission <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-2532_en.htm>
, whileUber drivers won a landmark case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
 at a London tribunal this autumn to be considered as employees of the 
ride-hailing app, and therefore entitled to a minimum wage and holiday pay.

The equations behind the operations of digital businesses are a closely 
guarded trade secret. Any suggestion that they might have to hand them over to 
government agencies is likely to trigger a major pushback from silicon valley, 
where many of the biggest names are headquartered. Some commentators have 
compared forcing Google to share its search algorithm toordering Coca-Cola 
disclose the secret recipe 
<https://governancexborders.com/tag/algorithm-regulation/> behind its best 
selling fizzy drink.

But pressure for reform is mounting. Social media platforms are being blamed 
for allowing the spread of misinformation and online abuse, conditions which 
some argue are fueling the resurgence of extreme politics in America and 
western Europe.

There are also signs that Google pages are being distorted by the spread of 
unchecked hate speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/04/google-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook>
. Many search results are now reinforcing extreme views, with articles denying 
the holocaust or disparaging women increasingly appearing at the top of the 
rankings.

Facebook has swung between relying entirely on maths and employing humans as 
well as software to weed out fake news, pornography and extremist propaganda.

“If people were falling very ill after drinking Coca-Cola, the company would 
have some duty to share what could be causing that,” said Onwurah, a chartered 
engineer who built telecoms networks before entering parliament.

“Google and others argue their results are a mirror to society, not their 
responsibility,” she wrote in aletter published Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/dec/18/tech-companies-must-take-responsibility-for-algorithms?CMP=share_btn_link>
. “Google, Facebook and Uber need to take responsibility for the unintended 
consequences of the algorithms and machine learning that drive their profits. 
They can bring huge benefits and great apps, but we need a tech-savvy 
government to minimise the downside by opening up algorithms to regulation as 
well as legislating for greater consumer ownership of data and control of the 
advertising revenue it generates.”

She has raised concerns about Google being given access to NHS patient data. 
Its British subsidiary DeepMind, which specialises in machine learning, has 
signed an agreement with the Royal Free Hospital in north London to develop an 
app that will warn doctors when patients are at risk of acute kidney injury. 
Junior health minister Nicola Blackwood revealed 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-questions-answers/?page=1&max=20&questiontype=AllQuestions&house=commons%2clords&member=4124&keywords=deepmind>
, in response to parliamentary questions, that the government had not been 
shown the details of the agreement or discussed it with the hospital.

“Labour is having to raise the debate because the government is years behind 
on this and refuses to face up to the challenges of the digital era,” Onwurah 
said.


The government says it is introducing greater protection for consumers and in 
particular for children online.The digital economy bill 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-blocking-powers-to-protect-children-online>
, which is awaiting approval from the House of Lords, is designed to ensure 
that websites that allow children to access pornographic content will be 
blocked.
 