
The Labor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> has 
seized on revelations the Coalition received Treasury advice months ago that 
said wealthy people were the biggest beneficiaries of negative gearing, but 
continued to campaign on the issue as bringing benefit to average Australians.

According to a report from ABC News 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-17/treasury-data-undermines-government's-negative-gearing-claims/7521930>
, the Coalition was provided with modelling from Treasury which showed the top 
20% of incomes in Australia shared more than half of the negative gearing tax 
benefits, and the lowest quintile received just 5.2%.

The redacted document, obtained under freedom of information laws, found 
capital gains tax discounts also benefited high-income earners. It said the top 
10% of earners accounted for about 75% of the savings.

Is Australia a fair country? Australian politics live in Sydney podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/jun/16/is-australia-a-fair-country-australian-politics-live-in-sydney-podcast>
It assessed Labor’s proposals to end negative gearing on existing properties 
from July 2017, and for the capital gains tax discount to be halved from 50% to 
25%, finding the combined effect could net the government an extra $6bn a year.

Removing negative gearing alone would be bring in about two thirds of the 
budget windfall, with an increase in revenue in the long run by between $3.4bn 
and $3.9bn, depending on the increase in construction prompted by the new 
housing exemption, the document said.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, accused the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> of “dishonestly” 
trying to keep the advice from the Australian people.

“The negative gearing tax subsidies proportionally favour the well off,” he 
told reporters on Saturday. “Everyone else is missing out.”

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said the treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, had concealed 
information which “destroys his own scare campaign”, and had lost credibility.

“Scott Morrison has been traversing the country over the last few months 
claiming the benefits of negative gearing somehow flow to low and middle income 
earners – but his own department had advice clearly showing the benefits of 
negative gearing overwhelmingly flow to high income earners,” he said.

The prime minister. Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>. and Morrison 
have consistently railed against the Labor proposal, which Turnbull said would 
lead to “a reckless trifecta of lower home values, higher rents and less 
investment”.

Last month Morrison said Labor’s proposal would “crash” confidence in the 
economy.

On Friday he maintained that two thirds of Australians using negative gearing 
had an income – after tax – of less than $80,000, andthe document didn’t change 
that 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-17/treasury-data-undermines-government's-negative-gearing-claims/7521930>
. He told the ABC the numbers were sourced from a university academic, not 
Treasury numbers and not endorsed by Treasury.

The analysis was prepared more than three months ago by a third party and 
provided to Treasury, which included it in briefings for government ministers, 
the ABC report said.

The revelation echoes news from May that Morrison also dismissed advice in an 
internal Reserve Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/scott-morrison-reserve-bank-warning-negative-gearing>
 document which said “any change which discourages negative gearing may be a 
good thing from an [financial security] perspective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/09/rba-limits-on-negative-gearing-would-be-good-for-the-economy>
,”

At a Guardian Live event last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/16/ustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-briefing>
, real estate agent John Knott told the panel: “If most people realised the 
benefits people are getting from negative gearing, it would stop tomorrow.”

The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, accused the government of running a 
“silly little scare campaign” and said the Greens were the first to speak up 
about the “massive tax break” of negative gearing and Labor were now adopting 
some of their policies.

Negative gearing fires up crowd at Guardian Live election event in Sydney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/16/ustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-briefing>
“It makes housing unaffordable for young people across Australia,” he told 
media at the New South Wales Greens campaign launch.

“Malcolm Turnbull needs to ditch the ‘Tony Abbott facts don’t matter’ approach 
to politics and stop this silly little scare campaign around negative gearing. 
The truth is this is an unfair tax break which goes predominantly to people on 
high incomes, and the Greens want to stop it.”

On Thursday the Coalition’s campaign spokesman, Mathias Corrman, said the 
shared policy was indicative of the “anti business agenda of both parties”.

“Their introduction would be only the first tranche of a tax assault that 
would be levied on the Australian businesses by Labor and the Greens to pay for 
their extravagant and uncosted promises.”
 