
Chris Bowen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen> says a Labor 
government would require the Productivity Commission to produce five-yearly 
reports measuring equality of opportunity and social mobility, as part of a 
multi-pronged policy effort to ensure Australia can maintain a genuinely 
egalitarian tradition.

That work would be sequenced with the existing intergenerational reports 
produced by the Treasury, the shadow treasurer will say in a speech he is due 
to give to the Chifley Research Centre on Tuesday.

Bowen will argue that Australia regularly professes to be the land of the fair 
go but governments need to ensure the egalitarian “dream” has substance behind 
it.

Peter Dutton points finger at Muslims of Lebanese background in immigration row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/peter-dutton-most-terrorism-charges-lebanese-muslims>
“We can’t let the well-earned achievements of some mask a cold, hard 
assessment of the situation in the broad,” he will say.

Opportunity “gets a lot of lip service in the rhetoric of politicians”, 
Bowen’s speech says. “All political parties claim to believe that all 
Australians, regardless of their background or their parent’s wealth, can grow 
to their full potential,” he will say. “But is this actually the case?”

The shadow treasurer will argue governments taking practical steps to bring 
about equality of opportunity “is now more important than ever before” and he 
says the proposed data set would form the bedrock of a policy response ensuring 
that people are in a position to improve their circumstances over the course of 
a lifetime.

Bowen says Australia needs to “calmly and soberly” assess whether additional 
steps are needed to ensure the starting line is even. “You can’t improve 
something unless you have the data to measure your progress,” he will say in 
the speech.

He will point to work undertaken by Harvard economists Raj Chetty and 
Nathaniel Hendren, who have found that social mobility in the US relates to the 
neighbourhoods people grow up in, and so social mobility should be tackled on a 
local level.

“In my view, the five-yearly equality of opportunity report would become an 
important part of our national discourse and, in time, hopefully, an important 
document that no future Liberal government would dare abolish,” Bowen’s speech 
says.

“Like productivity and economic growth statistics, this report would help 
enshrine equality of opportunity as a central focus in the national debate 
about Australia’s advancement and economic development.”

Bowen’s speech, to be delivered on Tuesday night, is one of a series of public 
interventions from the shadow treasurermaking the case for an open economy 
<http://www.chrisbowen.net/media-centre/speeches.do?newsId=7209> and advocating 
policies of inclusive growthto bolster the middle class 
<http://www.chrisbowen.net/media-centre/speeches.do?newsId=7216> while 
promoting economic growth.

Developer who paid for 'access' to One Nation calls for end to political 
donations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/developer-who-paid-for-access-to-one-nation-calls-for-end-to-political-donations>
Brexit in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/brexit-disaster-decades-in-the-making>
,the rise of One Nation in the federal election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/04/pauline-hanson-back-and-the-disaffection-genie-is-well-and-truly-out-of-the-bottle>
 and theelection of Donald Trump to the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 have kicked off political debates around the world as politicians attempt to 
grapple with the voter backlash against globalisation, trade liberalisation and 
so-called “establishment” politics.

Bowen will draw on some of his background in the speech, noting his discovery 
during first-year economics at Sydney University that he was the only person in 
his tutorial group from the western suburbs of Sydney and the only student from 
a comprehensive public high school.

He says it became “clearer to me then than ever before that, 20 years after 
Gough Whitlam’s attempts to open up universities for all, we still had a long 
way to go”.

The shadow treasurer will argue that equality of opportunity and social 
mobility have become more urgent concerns because of the underlying conditions 
sitting behind the current political backlash – principally that income 
inequality is rising around the world.

He will say it is fashionable in some quarters to concede that equality of 
opportunity is important but to argue that income equality is not.

Bowen says it is a mistake to argue it is important for governments to help 
people to get to the starting line but then not care about what happens in the 
race.

“Put simply, the more unequal a society, the harder it will be for people to 
be mobile within it,” he will say. “Or, conversely, the less opportunity there 
is for people to reach their potential can make an unequal society even more 
unequal as those at the bottom of the socioeconomic class can’t even get to the 
starting line.”
 