
Eleven health facilities in Sudan, funded by the UN and serving people 
displaced by conflict in the region, have been forced to close due to lack of 
money.

Funding shortfalls also threaten the closure of a further 49 clinics in 
Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile states, with $7m (£5.69m) required to keep 
the facilities open for another year,according to the UN Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/sudan/sudan-humanitarian-bulletin-issue-46-7-13-november-2016-enar>
.

About 1 million people are likely to be affected by the closure of the 
clinics, with poverty deepening amid the country’seconomic crisis 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/global-development/2016/nov/10/sudan-steeled-sharp-price-rises-state-cuts-fuel-electricity-subsidies>
.

Crowdfunding medicine via Facebook is a lifesaver for sick children in Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/12/crowdfunding-medicine-via-facebook-is-a-lifesaver-for-sick-children-in-sudan>
About 4.6 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance in Sudan 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/UNICEF%20Sudan%20Humanitarian%20SitRep%20-%20September%202016.pdf>
, more than half of those children. Food insecurity has been exacerbated by 
unrest in Darfur, which has resulted in the displacement ofan estimated 2.6 
million people 
<https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/Sudan/Reports/OCHA_Sudan_Weekly_Humanitarian_Bulletin_2016/OCHA_Sudan_Weekly_Humanitarian_Bulletin_Issue_38_(12_-_18_September_2016).pdf>
, at a time when the country is also struggling with an influx of nearly 
250,000 refugees fleeing conflict in South Sudan. According to Ocha, more than 
2 million children under the age of five areacutely malnourished 
<http://www.unocha.org/sudan>. 

Ocha Sudan spokeswoman Samantha Newport said the UN appeal for the country is 
almost 50% underfunded 
<http://www.unocha.org/sudan/humanitarian-financing/sudan-hrp-funding>.

“We hear in the news about Syria, Yemen, Libya and South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, and rightly so, and it does 
mean Sudan – not always, but often – just falls off everybody’s radar because 
we are in the 14th year of the Darfur crisis. In the beginning there is a huge 
amount of media interest and by extension often donor interest,” she said.

“The donors are incredibly stretched over the world. Ocha has launched the 
global humanitarian overview for 2017 
<https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/programme-cycle/space/programme-cycle-documents>
 and there are more people and more countries targeted for humanitarian 
assistance than ever,around $22bn 
<https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/system/files/documents/files/humanitarian_funding_update_gho_30dec016.pdf>
.”

The majority of the UN’s humanitarian work in Sudan is funded by the US and 
the EU <http://www.unocha.org/sudan/oct-funding>.

Unicef representative Abdullah A Fadil, former head of office for the UN 
mission in Sudan, said he was looking to alternative donors – including the 
private sector in Sudan – to meet a funding shortfall.

Hunt for food drives South Sudanese back across border to Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/south-sudan-hunt-for-food-drives-back-across-border-to-sudan>
“All the UN is suffering, we only have 40% of the money we need for the year,” 
said Fadil. “We call [on] all the donors to fill the gap, including the 
Sudanese.”

Lack of funds has led to job losses. Naeema al-Gasseer, the World Health 
Organisation’s representative in Sudan, said: “I am stretched because of my 
limited staff. In some of the states we only have two officers; we need at 
least two more in each of our offices in Sudan to be able to work.”

One UN worker, who asked to remain anonymous, said he was told he will be out 
of a job in six months. He said he is worried about money as he has four 
children and supports his parents and younger siblings.

“I wake up around 4am in the morning every day to look for jobs online and to 
learn new skills using digital courses because I was told that [my job will be] 
stopped in six months. The international organisation can no longer afford to 
pay me.”
 