
Lake Street Dive <http://www.lakestreetdive.com/> didn’t plan to be a pop 
sensation. When they formed the band, 10 years ago, the four jazz students who 
met at music college in Boston had rather more avant garde intentions. “We were 
extremely earnest in the beginning, almost detrimentally so,” says Mike Olson – 
known as McDuck to his bandmates, because of his unsociable, grumpy demeanour 
at college. “We started as a ‘free country’ band.”

If that’s not a genre you’ve heard of, it’s because they thought it up. “And 
hopefully,” adds Olson, “it will never be thought of again.” A decade later, 
Lake Street Dive’s first album has indeed invented its own genre – and it’s 
anything but earnest. With pared-back instrumentation of drums, guitar and 
stand-up bass, their joyous, upbeat songs and big, groovy vocals get you up and 
dancing long before you’ve worked out what you’re listening to. They’re also 
creating a considerable buzz in the US, whereRolling Stone named them the best 
new band of the year and appearances on Letterman, Colbert andThe Ellen Show 
have gained them a huge following.

“We want it to sound like the Beatles and Motown had a party together,” says 
drummer Mike Calabrese. “We’re taking the elements of the 60s and 70s music we 
love and applying it to what we’re able to do with the four of us.”

That includes multi-textured harmonies, the vibrant, virtuosic bass-playing of 
Bridget Kearney – and the lungs of the operation, Rachael Price, whose 
show-stopping voice and onstage charisma are crucial to the band’s success.

Those last two qualities are also the reason why it’s taken them so long to 
bring out the album: Price, who has been singing Ella since she was five, was 
signed to her father’s jazz label, and his business partner refused to release 
her from her contract. “My dad was in a really awkward position, and there were 
months when there was no light at the end of the tunnel,” she admits. “There 
were threats to sue, the whole year was a battle.”

It gave the band a new zeal – playing live was all they were legally able to 
do – and eventually they managed to buy Price out of her contract (“Worth every 
penny,” notes Olson).

In the end, it was a homemade YouTube clip that proved their biggest break. A 
recording of their slow, soulful cover of the Jackson 5’s I Want You Back,
filmed on a Boston pavement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6EPwRdVg5Ug>, got 
a million views after an anonymous fan posted it on Reddit.Kevin Bacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kevin-bacon> tweeted about them, T Bone 
Burnett <http://www.tboneburnett.com/> gave them a spot alongside Elvis Costello
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elviscostello>, Marcus Mumford and Justin 
Timberlake <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/justin-timberlake> at a New 
York concert celebrating the filmInside Llewyn Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-llewyn-davis>.

And now a European tour, with sold-out dates in London. “The internet is a 
rocketship to fame!” says Price, then adding: “Well, perhaps it’s more like 
time travel.” It may have taken 10 years to get here, but it still seems to 
have happened overnight.

Lake Street Dive’s UK tour begins in Cheltenham 
<http://www.lakestreetdive.com/tour.html> 

• Lake Street Dive are also performing as part of Sydney festival 2017 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/>
 