
The number of mortgages taken out by landlords buying new properties plummeted 
by 85% in April, following the introduction of a new stamp duty rate on second 
homes.

Figure from the Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) showed 4,200 buy-to-let 
loans were taken out for purchases during the month, worth £600m.

Borrowing by landlords purchasing properties spiked in March as investors 
tried to complete deals before new rules on stamp duty came into effect on 1 
April. Since that date, buyers of any kind of residential property other than 
their main home have had to pay a three percentage point surcharge.

The CML’s data shows that there were 28,700 loans for buy-to-let purchases in 
March. The figures show a 51% year-on-year fall in activity, from 8,600 loans 
in April 2015, suggesting that landlords brought forward activity to beat the 
new tax rate.

The value of buy-to-let purchases loans was also down by 50% year-on-year and 
by 86% month-on-month.

Paul Smee, director general of the CML, said: “There is a sense of calm after 
the storm this month, as lending eased back, following thesignificant rises in 
activity in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/13/buy-to-let-lending-up-stamp-duty-changes-council-mortgage-lenders>
 as borrowers looked to beat the second property stamp duty deadline.

“We expect the market to take several months to return to its previous levels 
after the lending surge.”

The CML said the numbers of first-time buyers and movers taking out mortgages 
had also fallen over the month, although first-time buyer loans were up on 
April 2015’s figure.

Some 25,100 first-time buyer mortgages were advanced during the month, a fall 
of 9.1% on March’s figure, but up 6.8% on the previous April. Movers took out 
22,200 loans, a 46% drop on March and 15% below April 2015.


In total, owner-occupiers borrowed £8.1bn for house purchases, down 40% 
month-on-month and 4% year-on-year.

“The stamp duty change on second properties that came into effect on 1 April 
resulted in activity across the market being brought forward into March causing 
an expected slowdown in April’s lending figures in the aftermath,” the CML said.

Howard Archer said the slowdown in lending “clearly reflected a marked waning 
of interest from the buy-to-let and second home sectors” following the rush to 
beat April’s stamp duty increase, but may also reflected “heightened concerns” 
over the economic outlooks.

“The strong suspicion is that housing market activity will be pressurised in 
the immediate term by a combination of weakened interest from the buy-to-let 
and second home sectors as well as heightened concerns and uncertainties over 
the UK economic outlook, particularly in the run-up to June’s referendum on EU 
membership,” he said.

“Consequently, house prices are likely to be soft for the next few months.” 
 