
Bad news if you want to burn hairs off your face using a laser: Kickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> has pulled the fundraising 
page for the “Skarp” laser razor, despite the project having already raised $4m 
on the crowdfunding platform.

Kickstarter’s reasoning is fairly straightforward, however: the Skarp doesn’t 
actually work.

Specifically, the Skarp is “in violation of our rule requiring working 
prototypes of physical products that are offered as rewards”. That rule was
introduced in 2012 <https://www.kickstarter.com/blog/kickstarter-is-not-a-store>
 after a rash of failed projects that over-promised and under-delivered. Now, a 
company must demonstrate at the very least a working prototype for any object 
which it is actually intending to ship to backers.

Unfortunately, Skarp did not. The company made one video 
<https://d2pq0u4uni88oo.cloudfront.net/assets/004/643/823/b152b93f5a57846bf22b8c3f54b1418e_h264_high.mp4>
 available of what it said was a prototype, showing a device struggling to 
remove more than a couple of hairs on the back of a man’s hand – a far cry from 
the smooth shave the designers promised.

It seems that Kickstarter agreed that the video didn’t fit the definition of 
“working prototype”, and removed the project to prevent disappointment down the 
line (either from the delivery potentially slipping later and later than 
promised, or the device being shipped under par).

Kickstarter aggressively polices its site, and until 2014 the company 
pre-emptively checked every project going up to make sure it fit with the 
stated policies. Now, the volume is too high for that, but it’s still very rare 
for a project to hit the volume the Skarp did, raising $4m in pledges from 
thousands of backers, and then be pulled.

In an email to backers, Kickstarter emphasised that “suspensions cannot be 
undone”, and so whatever happens next, Skarp will have to find another source 
of funding to continue development. Whether that means returning to 
crowdfunding on a different platform, or raising private funding some other 
way, remains to be seen.

Kickstarter told the Guardian that Skarp’s creators “would be welcome to 
resubmit their idea to Kickstarter for review if they developed a working 
prototype. Or they could submit a project that is focused on developing a 
prototype, as long as they didn’t offer the razor itself as a reward.”
 