
Flushed with success after winning her second Rio gold in the omnium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/laura-trott-rio-2016-olympic-omnium-gold-medal>
, Laura Trott made an intriguing admission. “I know the next three years are 
going to be just as hard as after London,” she said. “You step up to the world 
championships the year after and you’re back to your non‑Olympic kit and 
equipment and you get your feet slammed back on the ground, I guess.”

As the golden girl on a British team that had won five gold medals, four 
silver and one bronze in nine out of 10 track cycling events, to go withChris 
Froome’s bronze against the clock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/fabian-cancellara-rio-2016-olympic-time-trial-cycling-gold-chris-froome>
 on the asphalt, her insinuation seemed to be that the success she and her 
colleagues had enjoyed here was as much to do with the machinery and clothes 
with which they were provided, as the talent of the human engines that drive 
and wear them. It is not as preposterous a suggestion as it sounds: in the 
corresponding events contested by British athletes at the world championships 
in March, they came away with a comparatively derisory total of four medals:two 
gold and two bronze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/jason-kenny-sprint-gold-medal-world-track-cycling-championships>
.

This was no freakishly bad performance and tallies with a British Cycling 
cycle of sweeping pretty much all before them at successive Olympics in 
Beijing, London and now Rio, only to hibernate between. Jason Kenny, having won 
gold at all three Games to bring his current Olympic tally to six and one 
silver, remains at a loss to explain his bizarrely pendulum-like swings in form 
and seemed genuinely astonished when he, Callum Skinner and Philip Hindes
cruised to victory in the men’s team sprint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/great-britain-mens-cycling-team-sprint-rio-2016-olympics>
 in Rio. While a budget in the region of £30m plays no small part in Team GB’s 
success, British Cycling’s interim sporting director, Iain Dyer, believes the 
key to Olympic excellence is prioritisation.

Laura Trott makes history with her fourth gold medal – in the women’s omnium
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/laura-trott-rio-2016-olympic-omnium-gold-medal>
“While we peak athletically for the Olympics, we also peak in our research and 
innovation for the Olympics,” he said. “I think if you have a little look 
around, an experienced eye will tell you. The helmets we are using here, for 
example, we used in 2012 but haven’t used them since 2012 until now. The bikes 
obviously are new. And no end of different components and strategies are only 
appearing for the first time. But suits is an obvious one.

“When you look at our opposition, generally once you’ve seen them at the 
Olympics with their new kit, you go to the next World Cup and they are still on 
the same equipment as here. That’s just not the way we approach things. We go 
back to the hard yards. We build our foundation for the next Olympics.”

Moreover Team GB do not use their Olympic kit at the worlds because their 
funding is contingent on Olympic success. They try to match everyone else at 
the worlds using older kit and then roll out the new package for Olympics. As 
well as being technically superior, it gives them a big lift.

Before Rio UK Sport had targeted eight podium finishes in cycling, four fewer 
than at London 2012. They have exceeded their goal, with all but one of their 
11 medals coming from the velodrome and two – men’s BMX and mountain biking – 
still to play for. With so many established stars excelling once again and a 
wealth of fresh young talent emerging, British cycling is clearly in as strong 
a position as ever but Dyer suggests his team’s success could in part be 
attributed to the shortcomings of other nations.

Jason Kenny clicks into gear on cue to clinch world championship sprint title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/jason-kenny-sprint-gold-medal-world-track-cycling-championships>
“If you look at some of the times that have been done here, some of the teams 
simply haven’t shown up,” he said. “That’s the bottom line. I don’t want to 
cite specific examples but you can all trawl through the times for World Cups 
and world championships. Some of the people here are not even performing at the 
level of World Championships.”

Among those considered to have underperformed in Rio are Australia’s Anna 
Meares and Germany’s Katarina Vogel, who left with a bronze and gold 
respectively. Both riders publicly questioned the success of the famous Olympic 
“medal factory”.

“It’s important that every athlete who comes to the Olympics takes 
responsibility for their own performance,” said Dyer, when asked about their 
scepticism. “They have every right to prioritise whichever event they choose to 
focus on in the course of the year or four years. This is our priority. I think 
our performances demonstrate that.

“I think we’ve just tried really, really hard to maximise our medal 
effectiveness in the Olympics. And the staff that we’ve built and the structure 
and the culture that we’ve built has been instrumental to bring us to this 
position. When Shane [Sutton] became technical director he made quite a few 
tweaks to our structure. And it’s that, that’s the heart of our success here.”

Shane Sutton forced out of British Cycling by ‘lynch mob’ – Chris Boardman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/31/shane-sutton-forced-out-of-british-cycling-lynch-mob-chris-boardman>
The elephant in the velodrome, Shane Sutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/31/shane-sutton-forced-out-of-british-cycling-lynch-mob-chris-boardman>
, resigned as technical director in April following allegations of a culture of 
discrimination and bullying in British track cycling. They are allegations he 
denies and currently the subject of an independent review. Sir Bradley Wiggins 
has put many of the accusations levelled at his friend and former coach, to 
whom he still turns for advice, down to sour grapes on the part of athletes who 
did not make the British team and believes the 59-year-old Australian will be 
cleared and should subsequently be reinstated.

It is not the only controversy to have dogged British Cycling in the buildup 
to Rio, withLizzie Armitstead’s unsuccessful tilt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/lizzie-armitstead-falters-rio-olympics-road-race-cycling-glare-suspicion>
 at the women’s road race having been overshadowed by accusations of foul play 
when it emerged she had missed three drug tests under the whereabouts rule and 
should have missed these Games, only to have one of her “strikes” overturned.

For an organisation so famously dedicated to wringing every last drop out of 
that all-important last-margin gain, there is often an air of chaos behind the 
scenes but still the assembly line of Lycra-clad champions keeps rolling.

With big names such as Wiggins, Froome and Mark Cavendish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/16/mark-cavendish-olympic-medal-cycling-omnium-rio-2016>
 unlikely to ascend an Olympic podium again, emerging stars such as Becky 
James, Katy Marchant and Callum Skinner, among others, have done their bit to 
suggest that British Cycling remains in capable hands.
 