
In August 2015 the Aeolian Sun travel agency in Mytilene, Lesbos, became the 
unlikely epicentre of the Greek island’s refugee crisis. “People were sleeping 
outside my shop; these people had no water to drink, no water to wash 
themselves in,” says owner Maria Papageorgiou, who remains “emotionally 
shocked” by the desperation that engulfed the town overnight. From her window, 
Papageorgiou could see the coastguard unloading body bags of the drowned. “You 
might feel you were in Syria yourself! It was like a war zone.”

The people of Lesbos orchestrated a heroic humanitarian effort to support the 
refugees. An 85-year-old grandmother who fed children on the beach and a local 
fisherman who rescued scores of refugees from the waterhave been nominated for 
the Nobel peace prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/24/greek-islanders-to-be-nominated-nobel-peace-prize>
 – as representatives of the island’s collective response. Then in September 
the UN and the NGOs arrived and began stabilising the situation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1eb7aadc8b77892bf5d35893e721a01624296a7%2F0_125_5305_3186%2F5305.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lesbos%3A%20a%20Greek%20island%20in%20limbo%20over%20tourism%2C%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20and%20its%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lesbos%3A%20a%20Greek%20island%20in%20limbo%20over%20tourism%2C%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20and%20its%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1eb7aadc8b77892bf5d35893e721a01624296a7%2F0_125_5305_3186%2F5305.jpg>
 Maria Papageorgiou, owner of Aeolian Sun travel agency. Photograph: Emily Smith
 But around 30,000 refugees from Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan arrived this 
February alone (equivalent to the entire population of Mytilene). Last weekend, 
on day one of anEU deal with Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-deal-turkey-migrants-refugees-q-and-a>
 designed to close the route by which a million people crossed the Aegean Sea 
to Greece in 2015,hundreds more arrived on the island 
<http://www.middleeasteye.net/news/refugees-greece-eu-turkey-deal-1428505633>, 
despite EU warnings of forced removal. At the same time,thousands tried to 
leave the island 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/5b2282c2-eeb7-11e5-9f20-c3a047354386.html#axzz43j0872Sq>
 for Athens in a last-ditch attempt to reach northern Europe.

The island’s tourist-dependent economy is ​currently offset by the arrival of 
both refugees and international aid

The crisis has transformed the island – even Chinese artist Ai Wei-Wei felt 
compelled to open a studio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/01/ai-weiwei-sets-up-studio-on-greek-island-of-lesbos-to-highlight-plight-of-refugees>
 there to highlight the plight of the refugees – but opinion on how, and 
whether, it will recover remains divided. The island’s tourist-dependent 
economy, already stretched by a government debt crisis, is currently offset by 
the arrival of both refugees and international aid.

The long-term economic impact on Lesbos is unclear but one short-term problem 
is that the revenue flows are geographically uneven. The refugee crisis hasn’t 
affected the south and the west of the island, but southern villages such as 
Plomari will have a bad tourism season because of it.

Plomari is a village built into a hillside, where pastel-coloured houses 
compete for a sea view. On the lazy coastal road I pass only a man on a horse. 
Plomari’s mazy streets are tranquil – too narrow for cars mostly – and home to 
plump, docile cats who watch grey-haired Greeks water plants in their front 
yards. In the town square, bearded fishermen drink ouzo and smoke outside a 
bar. It’s this kind of Greek scene that made Lesbos a tourist haven.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42d70122266eb847134f8480ae2a83320779bae8%2F0_108_5291_3178%2F5291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lesbos%3A%20a%20Greek%20island%20in%20limbo%20over%20tourism%2C%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20and%20its%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lesbos%3A%20a%20Greek%20island%20in%20limbo%20over%20tourism%2C%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20and%20its%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42d70122266eb847134f8480ae2a83320779bae8%2F0_108_5291_3178%2F5291.jpg>
 Taverna in Plomari, a village in the south of Lesbos. Photograph: Emily Smith 
Yet the current situation in Lesbos is not unprecedented. The legacy of 
another refugee crisis shaped modern Lesbos decisively. In the 1920s, 1.2 
million Greek Orthodox Christians were expelled from Turkey, with 400,000 
Muslims moving the other way. Around 60% of the 90,000 residents of Lesbos are 
descended from those refugees and many cite it as the cause of their compassion 
for today’s refugees.


Because, in their pain, they helped me. I think I owe something to the other 
person. I’ve heard thousands of thanks
Maria Papageorgiou, Aeolian Sun travel agency 
Decades on, tourists from northern Europe began exploring the island’s 
typically Greek attractions: beaches, fishing villages, tavernas, as well as 
its unique ones, such as thermal spas, a petrified forest and theMuseum of Trash
 <http://www.aegeanmidillitravel.gr/museum-of-trash/>. Tourism today is a vital 
Greek industry, worth 20% of national GDP, and more valuable still to Lesbos.


It sounds counterintuitive but the refugee crisis has helped some tourism 
businesses to boom. Half a million refugees have arrived here since August and 
almost all bought ferry tickets. “We had thousands of people, lines and lines, 
waiting for ferry tickets to Athens,” says Papageorgiou, who responded by 
hiring a multilingual assistant to help her new customers: refugees from Syria, 
Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran and Pakistan.

Papageorgiou, whose great-grandfather was a refugee from Turkey, felt 
compassionate toward these new customers. Slowly and emphatically, she says: 
“Financially, I earned. And this makes me more sentimental. Because, in their 
pain, they helped me. I think I owe something to the other person. I’ve heard 
thousands of thanks.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b7988adbb8c3a0d4a538851c72b4422c1b790b%2F0_64_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lesbos%3A%20a%20Greek%20island%20in%20limbo%20over%20tourism%2C%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20and%20its%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lesbos%3A%20a%20Greek%20island%20in%20limbo%20over%20tourism%2C%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20and%20its%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b7988adbb8c3a0d4a538851c72b4422c1b790b%2F0_64_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
 Syrian refugees walk past life vests after arriving on Mytilene beach. 
Photograph: Alexander Koerner/Getty Images 
 Though she is too modest to admit it, Papageorgiou often goes into her own 
pocket to help those who are a few euros short, her sister-in-law Niki 
Agiomamatis tells me.

Greek tourism professionals are at pains to stress that their crisis-battered 
country remains a premier holiday getaway

Lesbos has seen a rapid influx of migrant workers from Europe: aid workers and 
volunteers keep Mytilene’s bars unseasonably busy while the UN and Frontex are 
block-booking entire hotels. “This year we have had two high seasons,” say 
Periklis Antoniou, the president of the Lesbos Hoteliers Association. “The 
capacity in Mytilene and Molivos is close to fully booked now.”

 This will mitigate the quiet summer ahead as tourists fear encountering last 
year’s scenes. Hotel pre-booking is down 45%-50% and cancellation rates are 
20%. And there are just 25 cruise ships set to dock this year, compared with 46 
in 2015.

Some British tour operators are reporting that bookings to Greece are down 35% 
this year. But,a report in the English-language version of the Athens daily 
Kathimerini 
<http://www.ekathimerini.com/206884/article/ekathimerini/business/greece-tourism-insists-on-sunny-outlook-amid-refugee-crisis>
, says: “There is a silver lining for the tourism sector: some believe Greece’s 
reputation for offering warm hospitality will be bolstered by the crisis.”

The article quotes Taleb Rifai, secretary general of the UN’s World Tourism 
Organisation, who says: “The stories showing villagers hosting refugees, 
providing food and shelter to refugees, are very good opportunities to attract 
tourists.” Greek tourism professionals are at pains to stress that their 
crisis-battered country remains a premier holiday getaway, and the Greek 
government recently announced special measures to boost tourism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c6e883c9a1c616bd48711cc6b2a5df13408cdca%2F135_264_7176_4306%2F7176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lesbos%3A%20a%20Greek%20island%20in%20limbo%20over%20tourism%2C%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20and%20its%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lesbos%3A%20a%20Greek%20island%20in%20limbo%20over%20tourism%2C%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20and%20its%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Flesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c6e883c9a1c616bd48711cc6b2a5df13408cdca%2F135_264_7176_4306%2F7176.jpg>
 Life jackets from refugees and migrants form a small hill on Lesbos. 
Photograph: NurPhoto/Rex/Shutterstock 
 Local opinion is divided on how Lesbos will fare. Katharina Korveuo runs a 
taverna in rural Ntipi and now boils many eggs and piles of rice every morning 
to feed refugees lunch. The food is donated to her and distributed by a Dutch 
NGO. “There is no damage,” she says. “Now the money comes in a different way. 
The volunteers, NGOs are here. The hotels are full.”

But Agiomamatis, who runs a car-hire company, takes a longer, pessimistic 
view. “We are finished,” she says. “We are wiped off the map of tourism. We are 
now the island where the refugees come and drown. When all this is over, and it 
will be over in two or three years, what are we left with?”

She answers her own question: “Tons of rubbish,” she says, referring to the 
“life jacket mountain” in the north, which is growing daily. “The island is 
actually being destroyed ecologically and economically.”

For now, Lesbos appears to be in limbo. While it remains uncertain when the 
tourists will return, the community is doing what it can to help the refugees. 
But as history has already shown, Lesbos will always be defined by the flow of 
people to, and from the island.
 