
For 14-year-old Hopolang Staka, Lesotho’s worst drought in more than four 
decades means fewer meals, a daily two-hour trek for water and an education 
postponed.

At the family’s small holding in Mafeteng, 70km south of the capital Maseru, 
Hopolang, an Aids orphan, supplements the 350 maloti (£15) monthly child 
support grant from the government with income from herding neighbours’ cattle. 
He dropped out of school last year because his street hawking brothers couldn’t 
afford the fees.


A second year of inadequate rains has dried up water sources across the small 
mountain kingdom, killed livestock and may leave as many as one in three 
Basotho requiring food aid until next year, according to local UN officials.
Lesotho <https://www.theguardian.com/world/lesotho> officials say a recent 
downpour greened Lesotho’s valleys, camouflaging a crisis that’s increasing 
malnutrition and disease.


“It’s what they call the ‘green drought’,” says Phole Mpobole, assistant 
administrative officer of Ha Raliemere district in Mafeteng. “The green grass 
is deceptive, the water table is down. There is nothing in those fields, not 
even vegetables.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Flesotho-green-drought-hunger-rain-malnutrition-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e272aebca6d362678345d5f310a8a5ac9d9921%2F0_18_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lesotho%E2%80%99s%20'green%20drought'%20pushes%20thousands%20deeper%20into%20hunger%20%7C%20Godfrey%20Mutizwa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Flesotho-green-drought-hunger-rain-malnutrition-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lesotho%E2%80%99s%20%27green%20drought%27%20pushes%20thousands%20deeper%20into%20hunger%20%7C%20Godfrey%20Mutizwa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Flesotho-green-drought-hunger-rain-malnutrition-disease%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e272aebca6d362678345d5f310a8a5ac9d9921%2F0_18_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
 Hopolang Staka herds cattle in Mafeteng in February 2016. The country’s worst 
drought in more than four decades has decimated the national herd, leading the 
government to declare a national emergency. Photograph: Patricia Nakell/Unicef 
Three UN agencies – Unicef, the World Food Programme and the Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs – are responding to theEl Niño-induced 
drought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/el-nino-leaves-100-million-people-hungry-short-of-water-droughts-floods-worldwide>
 which has also scorched South Africa,Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/05/zimbabwe-declares-state-of-disaster-drought-robert-mugabe>
 and Malawi, forcing them to declare food emergencies.

Lesotho’s prime minister, Pakalitha Mosisili, last week appealed for $28m 
(£19.5m) to help feed people, provide water and protect livestock in a country 
where 80% of the population relies on farming. His government has already set 
aside $10m. Haretsebe Mahosi, the Disaster Management Authority (DMA) chief 
executive, says the disease burden is rising along with hunger, estimating 
650,000 people need food aid now, with the number expected to rise.

 “We don’t have to wait for people to die,” says Tesfaye Shiferaw, the Unicef 
representative in Lesotho. “We are working under a declared emergency. It is 
the duty for all of us to respond.” Unicef is appealing for $3m to augment 
supplies including nutritional supplements for children and water purification 
tablets.

A Lesotho government drought assessment shows up to 56% of communities are 
using unprotected water sources; all 10 districts reported disease outbreaks, 
an increase in gender and sexual violence, a drop in the national herd and 
increasing food prices because of scarcity and demand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Flesotho-green-drought-hunger-rain-malnutrition-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94d6a0dd9544b1d251e116e20b1c3ec53d79eb84%2F0_0_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lesotho%E2%80%99s%20'green%20drought'%20pushes%20thousands%20deeper%20into%20hunger%20%7C%20Godfrey%20Mutizwa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Flesotho-green-drought-hunger-rain-malnutrition-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lesotho%E2%80%99s%20%27green%20drought%27%20pushes%20thousands%20deeper%20into%20hunger%20%7C%20Godfrey%20Mutizwa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Flesotho-green-drought-hunger-rain-malnutrition-disease%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94d6a0dd9544b1d251e116e20b1c3ec53d79eb84%2F0_0_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
 Marentseng Tjamela prepares a meal of vegetables and pap for her orphan 
grandchildren in Mafeteng. Thousands of people have been reduced to less than 
one meal a day as Lesotho endures a second failed farming season. Photograph: 
Patricia Nakell/Unicef 
On a hill a few kilometres east of Hopolang’s home, 74-year-old Marentseng 
Tjamela says she hasn’t seen a worse drought in her life. On her 550 maloti 
pension, Tjamela is struggling to feed five orphan grandchildren. She begs and 
borrows from neighbours after failing to get state child support because of 
inadequate documents. When four of her five cattle died from a lack of water 
and disease, she ate them with neighbours.


“Lebitla la khomo ke molomo (the grave of a cow is the mouth),” she says. 
“There is nothing to give my grandchildren,” she says through an interpreter, 
adding that on most days they survive on one meal.


The drought will stretch government resources at a time when state revenues 
have been hit 
<http://www.lra.org.ls/Downloadable_Docs/Adverts/LESOTHO%20GOVERNMENT%20%20-%202015%20BUDGET%20SPEECH%20-%20MINISTER%20OF%20FINANCE.pdf?FileID=32662>
 (pdf) by lower commodity prices, reduced earnings from the Southern African 
Customs Union and declining remittances from South Africa-based workers.


South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, which surrounds 
Lesotho, is itself in danger of slipping into a recession as companies and 
farmers are retrenching thousands of workers, including Basotho. Unicef says 
Lesotho already spends the equivalent of 9% of its GDP on social services, one 
of the highest rates in the world.


In the countryside, social workers say conflict and malnutrition are on the 
rise, with many people surviving on two meals a day, consisting of porridge and 
the traditional pap meal of thickened maize meal and vegetables. For many 
children, their only proper meal is at school,where the WFP is feeding 250,000 
children countrywide <https://www.wfp.org/countries/lesotho/>.


El Niño is causing global food crisis, UN warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/el-nino-leaves-100-million-people-hungry-short-of-water-droughts-floods-worldwide>
Mary Njoroge, the WFP’s country director, says people are adopting negative 
coping mechanisms such as eating less, reducing the number of meals per day, 
buying food on credit, eating one type of food, selling assets, eating seed 
crop and theft.


“I have never seen anything like it,” says Mabvisa Mabusa, a sub-chief in 
Mafeteng. “There is a lot of crime; men against men, village against village. 
People are stealing even during the day. There is a lot of uneasiness in the 
community.”


At Mafeteng hospital, Matsola Ntlale, the hospital manager, says malnutrition 
cases are increasing. This year, she has also seen more than 100 anthrax cases. 
Officials says anthrax cases are on the rise because poor grazing fields are 
causing cattle to feed on the soil, which sometimes has the disease.

In a country where more than one in four people live with HIV and Aids 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/lesotho>, food shortages 
are causing some to skip taking their antiretroviral drugs, Ntlale says.


“We haven’t seen any direct deaths from the drought yet but malnutrition cases 
are rising,” she says. “We have also had some HIV and Aids patients who have 
stopped taking their medicines saying the drugs make them sick when they don’t 
eat properly.”


Because of water shortages, large parts of the country are now solely reliant 
on water trucks, the DMA’s Mahosi said.Most of the money the government is 
seeking 
<http://www.unlesotho.org/lesotho-prime-minister-pakalitha-mosisilis-declaration-of-a-state-of-emergency-informal-translation/>
 will be used to buy water tankers, medicine, food and other logistics.


He says the government is warily watching accelerating food prices because of 
the 26%drop in the value of the rand 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2016-01-18-how-currency-markets-work-and-why-the-rand-is-falling>
 against the major foreign currencies in the past year. Lesotho imports most of 
its food from South Africa.


“The situation is very tight and we are expecting it to get worse,” Mahosi 
said. “We want the donors to respond yesterday.”

• Godfrey Mutizwa travelled with Unicef

This article was amended on 18 February 2016 to correct the name of the 
hospital.
 