
More than 4.5 million young people in the European Union 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1036> – approximately 20% – are 
unemployed, and long-term youth unemployment is at a record high. Patterns of 
employment are often characterised by temporary, part-time or short-term work, 
and this is certainly the case for young care leavers – if they are employed at 
all.

At the age of 18, care leavers are more likely than other young people to not 
be in employment, education or training, to be socially excluded or homeless 
and make up adisproportionate percentage 
<http://www.thewhocarestrust.org.uk/pages/the-statistics.html> of the prison 
population. It is therefore crucial that public social services meet the needs 
of young care leavers so they have the necessary skills to access employment or 
continue with education and secure housing.

The assessment of support services for young people in care is a key area of 
our work at theEuropean Social Network <http://www.esn-eu.org/home/index.html>, 
an organisation which promotes knowledge exchange among local public social 
services to contribute to effective policy development.

In our recent report, Investing in Children’s Services, Improving Outcomes 
<http://www.esn-eu.org/investing-in-children-services-improving-outcomes/index.html>
, we looked at the legal provisions for young people leaving care at 18 across 
14 European countries. We found that in most EU countries – such as in the UK, 
Germany or France – local councils are required to support young people leaving 
care until at least the age of 21. In Romania, young people can remain in care 
until they are 26, if they continue in education or are considered to be 
vulnerable to marginalisation. In Poland, young care leavers who turn 18 have 
an “empowerment guardian” who drafts an individual empowerment plan with them.

Children with positive care experience outperform at school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/02/children-with-positive-care-experience-outperform-at-school>
A report 
<http://www.kineo.nu/skolfam/moodle/pluginfile.php/35/mod_resource/content/1/Final%20Report%20of%20the%20YiPPEE%20Project%20-%20WP12%20Mar11.pdf>
 (pdf) into educational pathways for care leavers in five European countries – 
England, Denmark, Sweden, Hungary and Spain – found that around 8% access 
higher education – about five times lower than young people overall. When it 
comes to employment in Austria, Croatia, Germany, Hungary and Norway, the gap 
between the estimated unemployment rate for care leavers and other young people 
is close to 20%, according to a recent publication by SOS International.

These poor education and employment prospects are increasing awareness across 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> about the need to 
improve the support provided for young people leaving care. This support may 
take several forms but it should always be part of a coordinated and combined 
effort between social services and housing, mental health, and education and 
employment services.

We have identified some of these support programmes in a series of workshops 
<http://www.esn-eu.org/youth/index.html>. In northern France, Pas de Calais 
county council’sGarantie Jeunes 
<http://www.pas-de-calais.gouv.fr/Actualites/Archives/La-Garantie-Jeunes-vient-d-etre-lancee-dans-le-Pas-de-Calais>
 – the French version of theYouth Guarantee 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1079> EU-funded employment programme 
for young people – has been reinforced with a care guarantee, specifically 
designed for care leavers aged between 18 and 21. In the north-western region 
of Galicia in Spain,the Mentor programme 
<http://www.igaxes.org/?page_id=202&lang=en> – funded by the European Social 
Fund <http://ec.europa.eu/esf/home.jsp> – also includes provisions for young 
offenders aged 16 to 25.

Children in care: it’s not how you live, but where
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/02/children-in-care-its-not-how-you-live-but-where>
But possibly the most comprehensive model is Espai Cabestany 
<http://premsa.gencat.cat/pres_fsvp/AppJava/notapremsavw/28125/ca/lespai-cabestany-converteix-centre-referencia-joves-tutelats-extutelats.do>
, a one-stop shop where care leavers access information, guidance, support and 
services financed by the social affairs department of Catalonia’s regional 
government. Services include a set of apartments managed by non-governmental 
organisations, an education, training and employment project, and an economic 
support allowance for care leavers linked to their personal project funded by a 
bank. The data from the initiative shows that two thirds of those leaving care 
are either in training, preparing to access higher education, or are attending 
university.

The need for young people to have an appointed professional to bring all this 
together is a common denominator across these programmes. It is usually the 
role of the social worker to help the young person assess their situation, 
produce their personal plan, be their first point of contact, and coordinate 
services with other professionals.

In every model, a key element for success is not only to prepare the young 
person for their transition into adulthood, but to support them throughout the 
process. This all shows that with a well-planned and coordinated effort, the 
lives and opportunities of these young people can be transformed.

Alfonso Montero is policy director of the European Social Network 
<http://www.esn-eu.org/home/index.html>


Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 