
Despite the many imponderables transfixing domestic politics, it already seems 
clear thatBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/the-guardian-view-on-the-eu-referendum-the-vote-is-in-now-we-must-face-the-consequences>
 will have a mainly detrimental effect on Britain’s international role, 
certainly in the short term. The UK is likely to have less aid money and less 
influence, while the success of the leave campaign could also signal a more 
inward-looking agenda.

The devil will be in the detail of whatever deal is eventually brokered with 
the EU. But as far as aid money goes, damage has already been done.

Currency traders have hammered sterling: the pound dropped 10% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/23/british-pound-given-boost-by-projected-remain-win-in-eu-referendum>
 after the vote, wiping £1bn off the UK’s nearly£12bn 
<https://commonslibraryblog.com/2015/11/23/what-do-we-know-about-future-aid-spending-uk-overseas-aid-and-the-spending-review/>
 annual aid budget. Many analysts believesterling’s downward trend 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-markets-sterling-idUKKCN0ZL0PN> will 
continue. Currency weakness has an immediate effect on Britian’s prospects for 
growth, and on the value of theUK’s commitment to spend 0.7%  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
of its gross national income on aid.

With aid under attack, let's be honest about how we spend taxpayers' money | 
Simon O'Connell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/06/aid-under-attack-honest-spend-taxpayers-money-dfid-mercy-corps-syria>
“If the UK loses one percentage point a year in growth, which is roughly in 
line with most of the forecasts, that does have implications for the value of 
the 0.7% commitment, which will in turn have a knock-on effect for financing 
for the SDGs [sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
],” said Kevin Watkins, executive director of theOverseas Development Institute 
<https://www.odi.org/>. “If you factor in the likely devaluation of sterling 
against the dollar, the real value of UK transfers to the World Bank and global 
health funds, such asGavi [the Global Alliance <http://www.gavi.org/> for 
Vaccines and Immunisation] and theGlobal Fund <http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/>
, could fall over time.”

So even without any change in policy – which could also conceivably be on the 
cards – the aid budget will take a financial hit, not to mention the economic 
fallout for Britain’s trading partners from anydecline in bilateral trade 
<http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/africa-in-focus/posts/2016/06/21-africa-brexit-trade-aid-economy-sow-sy>
.

Among the countries that could feel the pinch most are Ethiopia – the largest 
country recipient 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/482322/SID2015c.pdf>
 of UK bilateral official development assistance in 2014 –India, Pakistan and 
Sierra Leone. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/482322/SID2015c.pdf>
 TheUK is also the second largest bilateral donor to the Syria crisis 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/syria-refugees-uk-government-response>, 
according to 2014 figures.

If a new government is elected in the coming months, there is some concern 
about whether the 0.7% commitment is sufficiently ringfenced, especially if a 
post-Brexit economic slump piles more pressure on public finances.


The international development secretary, Justine Greening, reiterated the 
government’s commitment to the target in parliament five days after the vote, 
saying: “We legislated for it, and we stand by that.” Asked what effect Brexit 
would have on the€2bn euros of UK aid 
<https://www.devex.com/news/what-would-a-brexit-mean-for-eu-development-assistance-88265>
 that is channelled through the EU, she said: “Part of our work has been 
through theEuropean Development Fund 
<http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/funding/funding-instruments-programming/funding-instruments/european-development-fund_en>
, so work is now under way to understand where the end point of Brexit is and, 
critically, the transition plan in the meantime. That work is under way, but I 
emphasise that overwhelmingly our work is not through the EDF, and that, of 
course, is unaffected.”

The UK makes up  nearly 15% 
<http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/africa-in-focus/posts/2016/06/21-africa-brexit-trade-aid-economy-sow-sy>
 – around $585m (£454m) – of contributions to the EDF, which is one of the 
world’s largest providers of multilateral concessional aid.

The first signs of the Department for International Development 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-international-development>
’s immediate priorities may come in the outcomes of the bilateral and 
multilateral spending reviews 
<https://www.devex.com/news/what-to-expect-from-dfid-s-aid-reviews-87689>, 
which Greening told parliament should be released “in the early summer”.

An EU spokesperson said it was too early to speculate on how Brexit would 
affect Britain’s role in the international aid community. “That will be 
addressed in due course, once negotiations with the UK begin on its withdrawal 
agreement as well as on the agreement concerning its future relationship with 
the EU. For the time being, nothing changes.”

Some in the aid community would disagree. Writing for the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/toby-porter/eu-referendum-ngos_b_10710618.html>
, Toby Porter, CEO ofHelpAge International <http://www.helpage.org/>, said many 
UK-registered charities would no longer be able to apply for the majority of 
the funding they received from the EU. While bigger organisations might be able 
to work around this, using their non-UK European members, smaller charities 
would suffer – but so would the EU.

Aid and national interest needn't be uneasy bedfellows if the balance is right 
| Jonathan Glennie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/02/uk-aid-strategy-national-interest-uneasy-bedfellows>
Aside from questions of the size of Britain’s aid budget and where it will go, 
Brexit has also placeda question mark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/24/brexit-would-harm-efforts-to-tackle-global-poverty-uk-aid-figures-warn>
 over the UK’s global influence. “The opportunities for the UK to position 
itself as a leader will be more constrained so it would take greater effort to 
do the same amount of lifting,” said Andrew Norton, director of the
International Institute for Environment and Development <http://www.iied.org/>, 
adding that lengthy Brexit talks would also be likely to devour government 
resources and bandwidth for other issues.

Watkins says the deeper risk is that British politics becomes more 
inward-looking, with some politicians interpreting the leave vote as a sign 
that the UK should be less engaged with the international community as a whole. 
“On the other side of the equation, there is an awareness, certainly on the 
part of some of the candidates in theConservative leadership race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/05/brexit-live-tory-leadership-tom-watson-unions-jeremy-corbyn>
, that many of the most pressing challenges the UK is facing – whether you are 
talking about security, or climate change, or migration – can’t be credibly 
addressed on an inward-looking, Little England basis … the idea that you can 
tackle the issues posed by the collapse of Syria and mass displacement without 
other European and global donors is fanciful,” he said.

“It is surely not beyond the ingenuity of Brussels and DfID and the FCO 
[Foreign Office] to come up with mechanisms through which the UK can support 
initiatives that are in the national interest and in the European interest,” he 
added, citing peace-building initiatives in Mali and the Sahel and anti-piracy 
action off the coast of Somalia.

Britain’s leadership role in tackling climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/25/eu-out-vote-puts-uk-commitment-to-paris-climate-agreement-in-doubt>
 may also be threatened, with implications for last year’s landmark Paris 
climate change agreement.


“There is again the concern about focus and bandwidth,” said Norton. “There is 
also a degree of disruption to the European arrangements. Obviously, the INDC [
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions 
<http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/indc/Submission%20Pages/submissions.aspx>] 
that was submitted was a Europe-wide one so there is a need to disaggregate 
that and pull the UK out,” he said. “There is no reason in principle [why] the 
UK could not continue to be a leader on climate, and we would very strongly 
urge the UK to do that, but I think it’s going to take a while to see how it 
falls out.”

For Watkins, the question of Britain’s future role in international 
development relates closely to how the country now views itself. “The dust is 
still settling on the referendum and the danger … is it will settle in a way 
that leaves us as a more inward-looking country and actually this isn’t 
necessarily a vote for weaker engagement with Europe or for a withdrawal from 
thinking about Britain’s place in the world and how we manage our 
interdependence. If it were to take that slant, it would be absolutely 
disastrous for security, trade and the economy, and for our role as an 
international leader in development – but it doesn’t have to go that way.”
 