
It’s a good thing I live alone, because I hog the mirror and take a lot of 
time to get ready. I have a shower, then put olive oil on my face. As a black 
man in this country, I have to cream my face, especially in winter, when my 
skin gets very dry and cracks. In summer, when you sweat more, black skin is 
more supple, but in winter we need oil. I like to think of myself as a 
Rastafarian, so my locks are about my inward belief and my path in life, not a 
fashion thing. I haven’t cut my hair for 25 years, but I wash it every two days 
and put in a bit of coconut oil.

As a businessman, I’ve become known for wearing suits, and I’m a sucker for 
Ozwald Boateng <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/ozwald-boateng>, the king 
of Savile Row. I have big feet – size 12 – so I tend to have my shoes made at
Lobb 
<http://www.johnlobb.com/uk/?utm_source=google_UK&utm_medium=ppc_UK&utm_campaign=john-lobb_UK&gclid=CKiR_Izqn8wCFagy0wodpFQAPg>
, the shop where Prince Charles goes. I buy black lace-ups – you can’t go into 
a business meeting in brown shoes, no matter what suit you have on. When I am 
on stageplaying the guitar <http://www.leviroots.com/music/>, I don’t wear a 
suit, I am a stereotypical Rastaman. No one ever saw Bob Marley in a suit.

Andy Bell, musician: 'I first had my eye bags done when I was 40'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/26/how-i-get-ready-andy-bell-erasure>
Whatever I’m wearing, I always have jewellery. I’ve collected it through my 
life, and every piece means a lot to me: it represents places where I’ve 
performed and cooked. I have a bracelet and two rings from South Africa, where 
I followed the Nelson Mandela path, and a silver bracelet from the Mull of 
Kintyre, one of the most remote parts of Scotland. I was filming there and went 
into a store and sawmy sauce <http://www.leviroots.com/products/>. I thought, 
“Of all the places for my sauce to be!” So I bought the jewellery in the shop 
next door, to remind me that no matter who you are, you can be successful.

• Levi Roots is a special guest on YolanDa Brown’s Reggae Love Songs tour; go 
toyolandabrown.co.uk <http://www.yolandabrown.co.uk> for ticket details.
 