
Liberal MP Steve Irons has reportedly paid back $2,000 for flights he claimed 
at taxpayer expense to attend his own wedding.

The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mark-dreyfus>, blasted Irons for 
“more of the same” misuse of travel entitlements.

Irons married Cheryle Street, a real estate agent, at Melbourne’s Crown casino 
in October 2011.

According to the West Australian 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/wa/a/32721765/wa-liberal-mp-steve-irons-put-wedding-flight-on-expenses/#page1>
 Irons billed taxpayers $1,346 to fly from Perth to Melbourne for the wedding 
and $912 to return to Perth.

Bronwyn Bishop expenses row: historic claims reveal another 15 trips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/30/bronwyn-bishop-expenses-row-historic-claims-reveal-another-15-trips>
A spokeswoman for Irons reportedly said his flights were claimed in error and 
repaid.

“These flights were identified during a self-audit and brought to the 
attention of the Department of Finance,” she said. “Voluntary repayment was 
then arranged.”

On 17 September, the West Australian reported that Irons had also used 
taxpayers’ money for flights to a Gold Coast golf tournament 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/wa/a/32640088/irons-in-the-fire-after-mp-charges-for-golf-trip/#page1>
 to learn about “golf tourism opportunities”.

At a press conference on Monday, Dreyfus said: “Breaches of the expense regime 
for MPs should be taken seriously and if Mr Irons has done the wrong thing, 
it’s absolutely right he has repaid the money.”

“We know that the Liberal members of parliament have got form … misusing 
travel entitlements to go to colleagues’ weddings. This is a bit more of the 
same.”

The special minister of state, Scott Ryan, said that Irons had “dealt with 
that both in terms of the media claim and in terms of the substance of the 
claim and that it relates to something several years ago”.

A former Greens senator, Robert Simms, told Sky News the case showed the need 
for an independent audit process on travel entitlements and penalty regime when 
MPs breached rules.

He said it was not good enough for an MP to receive a “slap on the wrist” when 
they are “so flagrantly in breach of standards”.

Guardian Australia has contacted Irons for comment.
 