
Labor has signalled it will move to minimise the potential for double dipping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/22/politicians-double-dipping-property-allowance-deduction-rules-mathias-cormann>
 when politicians own or rent properties in Canberra – and has challenged the 
Coalition to do the same.


The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, told reporters on Monday 
current practices involving MPs claiming travel allowances and pursuing 
deductions were not in line with community standards, so “this needs to change 
going forward”.

The prime minister rebuffed Labor’s overture while campaigning in the marginal 
New South Wales seat of Eden-Monaro – but while campaigning in SydneyScott 
Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> told 
reporters he would be seeking particulars from Labor about what it was 
proposing.

Politicians 'double-dipping' on property claims aren't breaking rules – Cormann
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/22/politicians-double-dipping-property-allowance-deduction-rules-mathias-cormann>
“We’ll be in contact with [Chris Bowen’s] office, that may already have 
occurred so we can see exactly what he is proposing,” the treasurer said. “And 
we’ll have a look at exactly what he is proposing.”

A ruling from the tax office allows MPs who rent in Canberra to also claim 
deductions for a second residence including “lease payments; rent; interest on 
borrowings used for the acquisition of the property; rates; taxes; insurance; 
general maintenance of the building, plant and grounds’’.

The ruling – which applies to federal, state and territory MPs – not only 
allows the interest in the second property to be tax deductible, it also allows 
the sale of the property to be capital gains tax free.

Over the weekend, Labor argued in favour of the staus quo. Various 
frontbenchers said the system for parliamentary entitlements should continue to 
be determined by independent tribunals, not by politicians.

But the opposition has now shifted.

Bowen said the practices, which were the subject of critical media reports 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/mps-perks-include-doubledipping-on-tax-deductions-rent-rates-power-and-mortgages/news-story/09d48b66d2d399731ba2c98c8ddab66b>
 over the weekend, were not in line with community standards, community 
standards were important, and “we will make that change”.

He said the tax office ruling had been in place for many years but it was 
important “going forward that it be reflecting community standards.”

Guardian Live election special event with Lenore Taylor and Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/may/10/guardian-live-election-special>
“Now that this has received the appropriate amount of, if you like, scrutiny, 
it’s clear in Bill’s [Shorten’s] view and in Labor’s view this needs to change 
going forward,” he said. “I invite the government to make the same commitment.”

Labor is looking specifically at the section of the tax office ruling dealing 
with second residences.

It is unclear how Labor could make changes to a system that has been 
determined independently by the tax office. One option could be legislation, 
another could be a request to the tax office by an incoming treasurer for a new 
ruling.

Speaking to reporters on the far south coast of NSW, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> initially 
rebuffed Labor’s overture. “I see Labor has done an overnight backflip on this.”

Turnbull argued that it was very important that politician’s pay and 
entitlements be set by independent tribunals, not by the politicians themselves.

The prime minister confirmed on Monday that he had claimed travel allowance 
while staying in a Canberra apartment he owns during sitting periods. “I’ve 
received the per diem allowance for being in Canberra, yes.”

“I have certainly made those claims, and I have conducted my affairs 
scrupulously in accordance with the rules that apply to all members and 
senators,” Turnbull told reporters.

Nick Xenophon calls for penalties in politician entitlement scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/13/nick-xenophon-calls-for-penalties-in-politician-entitlement-scheme>
But Morrison sounded more open to the proposal. He said the government would 
seek particulars of Labor’s position.

“Yesterday Labor said it should be set by an independent process and I note 
the comments made today by Chris Bowen, and we’ll be in contact with his office 
– that may already have occurred – so we can see exactly what he is proposing,” 
the treasurer said.

“And we’ll have a look at exactly what he is proposing. That’s not clear to us 
yet.”

• Join Lenore Taylor and Katharine Murphy in Sydney and Melbourne as they host 
ourGuardian Live election special event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/may/10/guardian-live-election-special>
 featuring a panel of prominent political guests
 