
When Nobel peace prize laureate Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf was elected 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/12/world/africa/in-first-for-africa-woman-wins-election-as-president-of-liberia.html>
 Africa’s first female head of state in 2005, expectations were high. 
Throughout both her terms as president, she has talked about her firm 
commitment to women’s rights, coming out strongly in favour of the health and 
safety of women and girls.

Last year, at an international event on gender equality 
<http://livestream.com/clintonfoundationus/noceilingsnotthereyet>, President 
Johnson-Sirleaf said: “Too many of our countries have yet to muster the courage 
to ban the irreparable harm inflicted by genital mutilation on young girls in 
traditional societies.” It was a controversial statement, as Liberia is one of 
the states yet to do so –half of Liberian women and girls 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/files/FGMC_2016_brochure_final_UNICEF_SPREAD(2).pdf>
 (pdf) are estimated to have undergone this extreme form of violence.

Following bans last year in Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/29/outlawing-fgm-nigeria-hugely-important-precedent-say-campaigners>
 andThe Gambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/24/the-gambia-bans-female-genital-mutilation>
, Liberia is now one of only three countries in west Africa yet to ban FGM – 
the others areMali <http://www.equalitynow.org/node/517> and Sierra Leone 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-leone-womensrights-fgm-idUSKCN0PH22Y20150707>
.

FGM: a costly, organised crime against women and girls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/blog/2016/apr/13/fgm-costly-organised-crime-africa>
In Sierra Leone and Liberia, the Sande female secret society promotes and 
carries out FGM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/24/sierra-leone-female-genital-mutilation-soweis-secret-societies-fear>
 as part of a rite initiating girls into womanhood. FGM is ataboo subject 
<http://www.refworld.org/pdfid/54bcdf574.pdf> (pdf) and it is forbidden to talk 
about secret societies and their practices with non-initiated people.

Punishment for such violations include physical abuse, forceful initiation and 
death threats – somethingRuth Berry Peal 
<http://news.trust.org/item/?map=kidnappers-jailed-for-forcing-liberian-woman-to-undergo-fgm>
, a woman in northern Liberia who was forced to undergo FGM, and other women 
have faced for years after standing up against it.

Liberia’s media has been silenced on the issue too – and the lives of 
journalists who speak out are put at risk.Mae Azango 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/apr/30/journalist-safety-liberia>
 was forced into hiding in 2012 for writing about the issue inFront Page Africa 
<http://www.frontpageafricaonline.com/>.

Things appeared to be changing last year when, in response to many years of 
international and national pressure, adomestic violence bill 
<http://www.emansion.gov.lr/2press.php?news_id=3433&related=7&pg=sp> was 
finally introduced to strengthen legislation on violence against women and 
girls – including, for the first time, a ban on FGM.

The proposed measures on the latter were, though, extremely weak 
<http://www.liberianobserver.com/news/proposed-bill-against-fgm-%E2%80%98very-weak%E2%80%99>
. The bill regarded FGM as an offence only when performed on a girl under the 
age of 18 – or a person 18 or older without their consent. This would provide a 
loophole for parents or guardians to grant consent on behalf of their 
daughters, leaving those most at risk unprotected. The bill also included 
ineffective penalties for perpetrators, where counselling and fines could be 
arbitrarily determined by a judge.

Equality Now <http://www.equalitynow.org/take_action/fgm_action372> and its 
local partner, theWomen of Liberia Peace Network 
<http://www.soawr.org/content/women-liberia-peace-network-wolpnet>, with 
funding fromComic Relief <http://www.comicrelief.com/>, have been working to 
ensure that a total ban on FGM is included in the bill instead – as required by 
theMaputo protocol <http://www.soawr.org/content/full-text-protocol>, the 
African women’s rights legal framework, which Liberia has ratified.

How the Gambia banned female ​genital ​mutilation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/24/how-the-gambia-banned-female-genital-mutilation>
This week, things seem to have taken a turn for the worse as legislators 
decided to delete the FGM provision entirely. A debate will now be held on 
Thursday on the bill in its current state. As this provision was the most 
controversial measure, the domestic violence bill could pass without any 
mention of FGM.

At a time when the Africa-led momentum to end FGM is growing, it is vital that 
we do not lose the opportunity to protect more girls and women from this huge 
violation of their rights. Unlike neighbouring countries such asGuinea 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-guinea-fgm-idUSKCN0XM1KA> and Sierra Leone, 
Liberia has already managed tosignificantly reduce 
<http://www.childinfo.org/files/FGCM_Lo_res.pdf> (pdf) FGM prevalence from 85% 
for middle-aged women to 44% for girls aged 15 to 19. However, unless tough 
legislation is enacted and properly implemented, it may be difficult to 
accelerate this change and the lives and wellbeing of millions more girls will 
be put at risk.

Johnson-Sirleaf is well positioned to “muster the courage” to do what is 
necessary to ensure thatLiberia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/liberia> 
bans FGM – either as part of the current domestic violence bill, or as a 
standalone bill, as a matter of urgency.

There has been too much discussion and not enough action. Liberia cannot 
afford to keep making statements to make it seem like it is doing something, 
without following through and putting real measures in place, which promote and 
protect the rights of its girls.

 * Mary Wandia is FGM programme manager at Equality Now
 