
The Liberal-National Coalition agreement should not be kept secret because of 
its significant impact on government policy, the opposition leader, Bill 
Shorten, and shadow treasurer,Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, have argued.

Speaking in Melbourne on Monday, Shorten said: “Australians are entitled to 
know what deals are being done to constitute the government of Australia”.

“Not only should there not be a secret agreement, there shouldn’t be secret 
deals full stop.

“How can you get the cooperation of the parliament and Australian people if 
they’re not even told what the deals are all about?”

Shorten said the Coalition agreement had contributed to the government 
retaining the $1.2bn baby bonus at the Nationals’ insistence and the junior
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> partner’s 
defence of the $4bn emissions reduction fund.

Bowen told ABC’s AM on Monday that the previous agreement renegotiated in 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/nationals-negotiate-tougher-coalition-agreement-with-malcolm-turnbull>
 had caused Malcolm Turnbull to “sell out” business with changes to competition 
policy and to block a conscience vote on marriage equality.

After the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, conceded defeat in the federal 
election on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/10/bill-shorten-concedes-defeat-2016-australian-election>
, attention has turned to the Coalition agreement andthe Nationals’ call for a 
greater say in policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/06/nationals-join-liberals-in-criticism-of-coalition-election-campaign>
.

On Sunday the deputy prime minister and Nationals leader, Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, said the junior 
Coalition partner would secure a written agreement so “there’s never any 
arguments later about what’s going on”.

That feeling when you win an election but the elation feels marginal | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/10/australian-election-turnbull-wins-but-elation-marginal>
Joyce said his first aspiration was “that the agreement remains confidential”. 
“That’s aspiration number one, two, three, four, five and six.”

The Nationals are set to gain an extra seat in the ministry after holding all 
their seats outside Queensland and gaining Murray from their Coalition partner. 
The Liberal National partyholds a slim lead 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/results/list/?selector=indoubt&sort=az>
 in two Queensland seats still in doubt, Flynn and Capricornia. In both seats 
the LNP candidate would sit with the Nationals if elected.


Joyce said he was “sure” they would win the seats. Depending on how many 
Liberals were elected, the Nationals’ representation would then be determined 
by the proportion they represented in the party room.

“There’s nothing clandestine, sinister or unremarkable about this,” he said.

Joyce said the Nationals would seek “portfolios that help the people we serve”.

“I think we provide a message for the Coalition but also for the nation. If 
you take dams, we drive issues such as dams, we drive issues such as making 
sure small businesses are looked after.”

Listing the party’s achievements and priorities, Joyce mentioned “looking 
after people in the drought; sealing roads; [and] the Rural Investment 
Corporation, making sure we have the capacity to be partners with people in 
rural areas”.

On Monday, Bowen said “we have to see what the National party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/national-party> will insist on as 
part of their Coalition deal. It should be public, absolutely, it’s a very 
important arrangement.

“We saw Malcolm Turnbull sell out good economic policy to the Nationals when 
he became prime ministerby agreeing to an anti-business effects test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/16/competition-law-malcolm-turnbull-abandons-opposition-to-proposed-changes>
, which is very poor policy indeed.

“[Turnbull] said [the Coalition agreement] was the reason why he won’t have a 
conscience vote in the parliament on marriage equality, so of course it should 
be made public,” Bowen said.

Coalition should stick with 2016 budget and super reforms, Arthur Sinodinos 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/10/coalition-should-stick-with-2016-budget-and-super-reforms-arthur-sinodinos-says>
In March Turnbull embraced a plan to strengthen legal protections for small 
businesses and farmers against abuse of market power by big businesses – a 
change he is believed to have previously opposed – a win for the small business 
lobby and the National party.

Under the government’s proposed changes to section 46 
<https://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-the-competition-effects-test-39424>
 of the Competition and Consumer Act a small business would be required to 
prove that the action of a bigger business had the “effect” of substantially 
lessening competition, instead of being required to prove that the action had 
been done with that “purpose”.

The Coalition agreement renegotiated in September also included financial 
concessions for stay-at-home parents, moving responsibility for water from 
environment to agriculture and new money for regional mobile blackspots.

Bowen also criticised the Coalition for first ruling out changes to 
superannuation then proposing controversial changes including the retrospective 
application of a $500,000 limit on non-concessional superannuation 
contributions.

He said he hoped the Coalition took a “more consistent and coherent approach” 
to policy making but refused to say which budget measures Labor would support 
due to “speculation the government will change policy”.

The superannuation measures have been criticised heavily by the rightwing 
thinktank the Institute of Public Affairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/institute-of-public-affairs-plans-aggressive-superannuation-campaign>
, and Tony Abbott’s former chief of staff, Peta Credlin, haswarned they will 
not pass the party room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/10/coalition-should-stick-with-2016-budget-and-super-reforms-arthur-sinodinos-says>
.
 