
Lidl <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> has become only the second 
grocer to sign up to a 12-month-old scheme to back British farmers by promising 
to buy more of their produce and offer long-term supply deals.

The German discounter joins its close rival Aldi, which almost a year ago 
became thefirst retailer to sign up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/14/aldi-leads-backing-of-uk-farmer-friendly-fruit-and-veg-pledge>
 to the National Farmers Union-backed “fruit and veg pledge”, which aims to 
boost the profitability of British farmers and suppliers.

The code includes a commitment to paying on time and in full, offering more 
certainty on price and production requirements and aiming to reduce waste by 
buying the whole crop and adopting realistic product specifications.

The farmers’ union has called on all retailers to sign up publicly to the 
pledge, which took three years to draw up after the publication of itsCatalyst 
for Change <http://www.nfuonline.com/assets/6106> report. 

The union has previously said it has been involved in negotiations with other 
major UK retailers including Tesco, but only the relatively small-scale 
discounters that together account for about 10% of the UK market have signed up.

Aldi leads backing of UK farmer-friendly 'fruit and veg pledge'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/14/aldi-leads-backing-of-uk-farmer-friendly-fruit-and-veg-pledge>
Catalyst for Change found millions of pounds had been stripped out of the 
fresh produce sector through poor supply chain practices and a short-term 
approach to relationships with growers and intermediaries, damaging farmers’ 
ability to produce fruit and vegetables.

Although there is a code of conduct covering major grocers’ relationships with 
their suppliers, many farmers are not covered because they go through 
wholesalers rather than dealing with supermarkets directly.

Ali Capper, NFU horticulture and potatoes board chair, said: “We are delighted 
that Lidl has publicly committed to our pledge, highlighting its commitment to 
long-term supply relationships, equitable distribution of reward along the 
supply chain, and fair and respectful trading relationships.

“Our goal is to generate integrity, honesty and openness across the market and 
that can only come from the key asks within our pledge – which include price 
certainty, transparent working and strong, long-term relationships that are 
fair for everyone involved.”

 Ryan McDonnell, commercial director for Lidl UK, said: “We’re very keen to 
ensure that our sourcing process supports the growth and development of UK 
growers, which is vital in encouraging more and more people, particularly our 
shoppers, to regularly eat more fruit and veg.”

 