
Lidl <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> is handing out a 2.4% pay 
rise to its lowest-paid staff to put them on the new independently verified 
living wage.

The discounter said 5,500 employees – a quarter of its UK workforce – would 
benefit from the pay rise which puts them on a minimum of £8.45 an hour, or 
£9.75 an hour in London. The workers in England, Scotland and Wales will get 
the pay rise from 1 March next year, making them some of the best paid retail 
staff, although they do not receive paid breaks or extra pay for Sundays.

Lidl first lifted its minimum pay last autumn to the level recommended by the 
Living Wage Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/18/lidl-to-pay-9000-staff-the-full-living-wage>
, which campaigns for companies to pay staff enough to meet the cost of living. 
Last month, the LWF lifted its recommendation for the voluntary rate from £8.25 
to £8.45 outside London and from £9.40 to £9.75 in the capital. Now Lidl has 
followed suit putting its staff on pay rates well above the legal minimum for 
over-25s of £7.20 an hour which is set to rise to £7.50 in March.

Lidl said that offering the living wage rate had led to a 20% increase in job 
applications over the last 12 months. The company is now aiming to recruit over 
630 people for permanent positions before Christmas.

Nan Gibson, Lidl UK HR board director said: “We recognise the contribution of 
each and every colleague within the business and we feel it’s important to 
celebrate our achievements together. So it fills me with pride that our 
colleagues are among the best paid in the supermarket sector.”

Katherine Chapman, director of the LWF said: “Lidl’s commitment to pay their 
staff the new real living wage rates is fantastic news and an acknowledgment of 
what we have always believed and advocated – that it is possible to pay the 
real living wage if you are a supermarket in the UK.

But she said that Lidl should go further and become accredited to the LWF and 
so guarantee that all sub-contracted staff, such as cleaners, are paid the real 
living wage.

“This will also reassure workers that their wages will rise in line with the 
cost of living every year,” Chapman said.

Retailers including Ikea, Oliver Bonas, Burberry and Majestic Wines are 
accredited to the Living Wage Foundation but no supermarket has signed up as 
yet.
 