
In our latest diary entries on life in Rio de Janeiro’s favelas in the run-up 
to the Olympic Games, residents reflect on how the city is divided. Michel 
Silva in Rocinha laments howfavelas are often ignored on official maps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-segregation-of-rio-de-janeiro-is-notorious>
; Thaís Cavalcante in Maré saysthe war on drugs has become a war against the 
poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-violence-here-has-become-trivialised>
; and Daiene Mendes says that in her neighbourhood,Alemão, deaths are not 
investigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-alemao-deaths-not-investigated>
.

At the international Aids conference in Durban, actor Charlize Theron spoke 
out on the racism that she says isan underlying cause of the HIV epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/19/racism-an-underlying-cause-of-hiv-epidemic-aids-says-charlize-theron>
. Theron grew up amid the Aids crisis in South Africa, andstarted a foundation 
in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/19/under-shadow-dirty-hiv-south-african-children-offered-refuge-charlize-theron-whizzkids>
 to help prevent adolescents and young people becoming infected with HIV in 
ever greater numbers.

Elsewhere on the site
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Frio-favelas-charlize-theron-hiv-racism-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e7f4c2de77fc81f2fd5e2faa07027152b0dae07%2F0_0_3800_2280%2F3800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20in%20Rio's%20favelas%2C%20and%20Charlize%20Theron%20on%20racism%20and%20HIV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Frio-favelas-charlize-theron-hiv-racism-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20in%20Rio%27s%20favelas%2C%20and%20Charlize%20Theron%20on%20racism%20and%20HIV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Frio-favelas-charlize-theron-hiv-racism-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e7f4c2de77fc81f2fd5e2faa07027152b0dae07%2F0_0_3800_2280%2F3800.jpg>
Tax on junk food in Kerala leaves bitter taste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/20/tax-on-junk-food-in-kerala-leaves-indians-with-a-bitter-taste>
 – Vidhi Doshi

Tension in Burundi threatens return to violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/14/fake-calm-in-burundi-as-tension-threatens-return-to-violence>
 – Clár Ní Chonghaile

El Salvador plans punitive abortion law change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/14/el-salvador-abortion-law-change-women-facing-50-years-jail>
 – Jonathan Watts

Fear and looting grip South Sudan’s capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/19/south-sudan-violence-fear-looting-juba>
– Simona Foltyn

Cambodia’s garment workers vulnerable to unsafe abortions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/13/cambodias-garment-workers-vulnerable-to-unsafe-abortions>
– Marta Kasztelan

World Bank president: escalation of Ebola crisis was preventable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/18/ebola-escalation-could-have-been-avoided-world-bank-president-jim-young-kim-pandemic-financing-facility>
 – Sarah Boseley

Water on the rise in Mauritania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/25/the-best-solution-move-the-mauritanian-capital-water-on-the-rise-in-nouakchott>
 – Alex Duval Smith

Philippines dilemma over HIV tests for under-18s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/21/philippines-hiv-dilemma-too-young-for-a-test-but-old-enough-for-sex>
– Ana P Santos

In Uganda, Solar Sister lights entrepreneurial spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/15/solar-sister-uganda-women-lights-entrepreneurial-spirit>
 – Alon Mwesigwa


Opinion
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Frio-favelas-charlize-theron-hiv-racism-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa626ce01afc248c1a1ca1b05766cddf335364479%2F0_0_3200_1921%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20in%20Rio's%20favelas%2C%20and%20Charlize%20Theron%20on%20racism%20and%20HIV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Frio-favelas-charlize-theron-hiv-racism-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20in%20Rio%27s%20favelas%2C%20and%20Charlize%20Theron%20on%20racism%20and%20HIV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Frio-favelas-charlize-theron-hiv-racism-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa626ce01afc248c1a1ca1b05766cddf335364479%2F0_0_3200_1921%2F3200.jpg>
What has Obama done for women and girls? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/20/gender-agenda-barack-obama-done-for-women-and-girls-white-house-global-development-summit>
 –Sarah Degnan Kambou

Why we need the international criminal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/17/international-criminal-court-vital-fight-against-impunity-africa-group-for-justice-accountability>
 –Africa Group for Justice and Accountability

A letter to Priti Patel, international development secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/18/letter-priti-patel-international-development-secretary-dfid-trade>
 – Jonathan Glennie

In Nigeria, if we’re diligent, we can conquer polio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/24/only-complacency-can-stop-nigeria-and-africa-from-finally-conquering-polio>
 –Oyewale Tomori

India must find a way out of the woods to save forest people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/22/india-follow-china-saving-forest-people-land-rights>
– Gaurav Madan

The US needs a development agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/16/us-wage-gap-poverty-sustainable-development-goals-vikki-spruill>
– Vikki Spruill

After Brexit, the UK still has a role in preventing conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/22/after-brexit-the-uk-still-has-a-role-to-play-in-preventing-conflict>
 – Phil Vernon

What you said


On Kelly Castagnaro’s comment piece on El Salvador’s plans to increase jail 
sentences for abortions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/14/el-salvador-abortion-law-increase-jail-sentences-more-punitive-compound-injustice-kelly-castagnaro#comment-79053224>
,camilasol wrote:

As a Salvadorean, I am appalled and angry to watch how foundations like “Sí a 
la vida” lobby for draconian measures against women who decide to have 
abortions in my country. I will be very honest and blunt: in El Salvador, if 
you have the money to have an abortion, you can have one in a clinic there, or 
opt to go to the US or anywhere where abortions are permitted. To severely 
punish women who don’t have this option is cruel and unjust.

Highlight from the blogosphere

For the Overseas Development Institute, Veronique Barbelet explains how the 
failed Turkish coup has made life even more uncertain and potentially dangerous 
forSyrian refugees in Turkey 
<https://www.odi.org/comment/10427-how-failed-coup-affects-syrian-refugees-turkey>
.

Slavery in the seafood supply chain event

Join Guardian sustainable business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business> for a panel debate on 15 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/18/slavery-in-the-seafood-supply-chain-what-can-we-do-about-it-event>
 to discuss how supermarkets, restaurants and the wider fish industry can help 
end slavery in the seafood sector.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian> on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 