
Her governess, Marion Crawford, once said of the young queen that “Lilibet 
never cared a fig” for clothes. And insofar as we can deduce anything about a 
public but unknowable person, this still feels true. In63 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2015/sep/09/queen-elizabeth-ii-longest-reigning-british-monarch-live-updates>
 of appearances as a monarch, personal vanity has never seemed to take up much 
bandwidth; what the Queen cares about, instead, is the art and science of being 
Queen. But she understands perfectly how clothes pay a key role in this. As she 
once put it: “I have to be seen to be believed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800680405%2F9c47190c-00d2-422c-8ad9-c168564152a9-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Like%20a%20storybook%20character%20come%20to%20life%3A%20why%20the%20Queen%20is%20a%20style%20icon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Like%20a%20storybook%20character%20come%20to%20life%3A%20why%20the%20Queen%20is%20a%20style%20icon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441800680405%2F9c47190c-00d2-422c-8ad9-c168564152a9-680x1020.jpeg>
 Not amused: the Queen rocks the “August in Balmoral” look. Photograph: 
Jonathan Hordle/Rex 
The Queen is as instantly recognisable as Coco Chanel. Writing about her style 
around the diamond kubilee of 2012,the New York Times noted 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/03/fashion/queen-elizabeth-ii-sets-a-style-standard.html?_r=0>
 that “the pastel rectangle of her customary coat and the bright disk of a 
matching hat, the black oblong of her handbag and the generic low-heeled pumps 
are almost Warholian in their pop simplicity”. She appears on Vanity Fair’s 
international best-dressed list 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2015/08/best-dressed-list-hall-of-fame-2015>. 
In 2008, Dolce & Gabbana created an entire collection inhomage to her 
August-in-Balmoral look 
<http://www.popsugar.co.uk/fashion/DG-collection-inspired-HRH-Queen-Elizabeth-II-1053696>
, complete with kilts and silk headscarves. Donatella Versace calls her a style 
icon; Stella McCartney is on record saying that she would love to design for 
her. (“If she would have me, absolutely, I’d love to.”)

Her silhouette is Lego-brick boxy, rather than willowy or elegant; the rainbow 
palette is too matchy-matchy for true sophistication. Sir Hardy Amies, her 
dressmaker for many years, was known to despise the Launer handbags she 
insisted on carrying, which he felt ruined the flow of the outfits he had 
designed. (He had a point.) Yet the Queen’s wardrobe works, because it is less 
about fashion than it is about theatre. There is a particular shade of eggy 
yellow that she often chooses for special occasions – Prince William’s wedding, 
for instance – which is too sunny to be chic, but has a crayon-brightness that 
makes her look a little like a storybook character come to life. The Easter 
bunny, say, or a minor superhero from a forgotten comic; someone you hadn’t 
quite believed was real.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0076358a0f3b3f9b669c0baf384a4a847b2e193%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Like%20a%20storybook%20character%20come%20to%20life%3A%20why%20the%20Queen%20is%20a%20style%20icon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Like%20a%20storybook%20character%20come%20to%20life%3A%20why%20the%20Queen%20is%20a%20style%20icon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0076358a0f3b3f9b669c0baf384a4a847b2e193%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 The Queen in eggy yellow at William and Kate’s wedding. Photograph: Carl de 
Souza/AFP/Getty Images 
Other star characters around her on the royal stage – Princess Diana, the 
Duchess of Cambridge, and before them, Princess Margaret – have made their own 
physical beauty, personal glamour and fashionable status a key part of their 
public image.The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen>, by contrast, 
uses clothes, hats and colour to make rather formal public statements, instead 
of using fashion or feminine wiles to make an emotional impression. (There is 
an echo here of the sweet, feminine public image of her mother, the late Queen 
Mother, an image that was adopted at least in part in opposition to the skinny, 
feline, racy fashionability of Wallis Simpson.) The strategy behind the Queen’s 
wardrobe is effective because it is simple and unencumbered by vanity: 
head-to-toe colour to ensure she stands out in a crowd. She must provide a 
ceremonial focal point, like the star on a Christmas tree.

Her clothes are constructed like stage outfits. The armholes are cut extra 
deep, so that the royal wave does not cause her coat or jacket to ride up and 
spoil the line. Weights are sewn into the hems of dresses if a wayward breeze 
is even a remote possibility. (In 63 years, the Queen has never had a wardrobe 
malfunction.) Backdrop is taken into account, by the team led by longtime royal 
dresser Angela Kelly: if an occasion is to take place on a lawn, she will wear 
a colour that contrasts with green. If she is visiting a school or children’s 
centre, the hat will feature flowers or stiffened silk twirls, as these help 
keep the children’s attention.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74ea04424f02f76697482c009ce27c508640de25%2F0_0_4591_2756%2F4591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Like%20a%20storybook%20character%20come%20to%20life%3A%20why%20the%20Queen%20is%20a%20style%20icon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Like%20a%20storybook%20character%20come%20to%20life%3A%20why%20the%20Queen%20is%20a%20style%20icon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74ea04424f02f76697482c009ce27c508640de25%2F0_0_4591_2756%2F4591.jpg>
 The Queen on the day she became Britain’s longest-serving monarch, dressed to 
stand out. Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA 
“I don’t think she feels chic clothes are friendly,” Amies once said. “There 
is something cold and cruel about chic clothes, that she wants to avoid.” The 
handbags which he so hated serve no apparent practical purpose, for a woman 
never more than a few paces from a lackey. Any handbag bigger than an iPhone 6 
is a glam-killer of the first order, and would never, ever be spotted on the 
red carpet. By carrying one, the Queen adds a tiny hint of ordinary-Nana to her 
image. (Royals have always done this, specifically in order to mess with our 
heads. One minute they are special, the next they are just like us. It’s a 
time-honoured anti-republican strategy.) The handbag and those comfy low pumps 
remind us that being Queen is, in its own way, a job, and that it is hard work.

Elizabeth II is unlikely ever to match up to the best of queenly image-makers, 
Elizabeth I. Her image, as captured in portraits and poetry, was almost 
magical, a queen as semi-divine. Elizabeth’s sensuous, Botticelli Venus 
colouring was grandly wrapped in velvet, her pale skin given the gleam of a 
pearl or a unicorn. That school of image-management is impractical, in the era 
of the cameraphone, so Elizabeth II has devised a more practical image with 
just the right amount of theatre, and a shrewdly upbeat tone. (She may have 
only just shaded her on length of reign, but Elizabeth surpassed Queen Victoria 
on the style front some time ago. Despite the success and expansion over which 
she presided, our lasting images of Victoria express just a sombre power, and 
very little of the glory. We picture Victoria in profile, as if stamped on a 
coin; a bleak forcefield of sadness emanates even through the grain of late 
19th-century photography.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31bbf3f319e5740221979e7e18328479dc3af234%2F0_921_4292_2575%2F4292.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Like%20a%20storybook%20character%20come%20to%20life%3A%20why%20the%20Queen%20is%20a%20style%20icon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Like%20a%20storybook%20character%20come%20to%20life%3A%20why%20the%20Queen%20is%20a%20style%20icon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Flike-a-storybook-character-come-to-life-why-the-queen-is-a-style-icon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31bbf3f319e5740221979e7e18328479dc3af234%2F0_921_4292_2575%2F4292.jpg>
 Carry on reigning: the Queen in 1975 sporting an unlikely polka-dot turban. 
Photograph: Serge Lemoine/Getty Images 
The look that Elizabeth II has forged during the past three decades is so 
indelibly inked on our minds that it is easy to forget the years in which she 
was something of a fashion plate. Ata visit to Liverpool Street station in 1958 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/queen-elizabeth-style-through-the-ages/queen-wardrobe-1958/>
, a chartreuse coat with matching hat and leopard print stole is positively Mad 
Men. In the 1960s, she was fond of hats made up entirely of tiny silk blooms 
that sat snugly over her hair, a style also favoured by Liz Taylor at the time. 
A state visit to Mexico in 1975 saw her in astartling yellow polka-dot turban 
<http://www.gettyimages.co.uk/detail/news-photo/queen-elizabeth-ii-with-a-group-of-local-children-during-news-photo/138533707>
.

As she matured into the role of monarch, her outfits for public appearances 
became more formulaic. These days, the occasions on which the Queen looks most 
glamorous are the ceremonial ones. A white cashmere, fur-trimmed throw, huge 
pearl earrings, bracelet and glittering tiara at the state opening of 
parliament, for instance: this is an outfit to remind those in the audience who 
might think themselves powerful what true grandeur looks like. When on display 
to the ordinary people, by contrast, she dresses with deliberate modesty. 
Compare her clothes at the Order of the Garter – velvet and feathers, navy and 
scarlet – with the simple pastel coat and dress (and handbag) she chose for 
William and Kate’s wedding, and it is clear the image of the cheery, working 
queen is an entirely deliberate one.
 