
Fifteen years ago, Yann Tiersen’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/feb/08/artsfeatures5>
platinum-selling, Bafta-award winning score forAmélie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/dec/04/news> elevated the French 
composer to cult status among those enamoured of the romance and charm of his 
wistful accordion and piano-driven music.

He is, however, not a composer of soundtracks, but a musician in his own 
right. Having spent the intervening years touring, collaborating and recording 
studio albums, he now returns with a book of sheet music with a conceptual 
backstory.

Eusa Book of Sheet Music will be released on 18 December, with each piece 
related to a his home on the island of Ushant, off the coast of Brittany – also 
known as Eusa in Breton.


“Ushant is more than just a home – it’s a part of me. The idea was to make a 
map of the island and, by extension, a map of who I am. To begin with I chose 
10 locations on the island and made a series of field recordings at each of 
them,” Tiersen explains. “The pieces of piano music I then went on to write are 
named after these locations, and the sheet music for each piece is accompanied 
by a GPS coordinate and a photograph of the site taken by Emilie Quinquis.”

Ahead of its release, listen to the world exclusive of his new composition, 
Porz Goret.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKwwwWz6Ef3I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKwwwWz6Ef3I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKwwwWz6Ef3I&media=>
 * The book of sheet music’s accompanying a website is eusasound.bzh 
<http://eusasound.bzh/>. Tiersen will embark on a series  
<http://www.yanntiersen.bzh/>of live dates in May, during which he will play a 
selection of solo piano and violin works. He is coming to Australia in January 
2017 forSydney festival <http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/> and a concert 
in Melbourne 
<https://www.artscentremelbourne.com.au/whats-on/2017/classical-music/an-evening-with-yann-tiersen-solo-in-concert> 