
On Facebook, Malcolm Turnbull‚Äôs announcement 
<https://www.facebook.com/malcolmturnbull/posts/10154914233616579> of 
Treasury‚Äôs mid-year economic and fiscal outlook began with this flawed 
statement:

The Turnbull Government understands that like a household budget, when you are 
trying to pay off debt, you can‚Äôt spend more than you save.

Let‚Äôs be generous and assume that Turnbull meant ‚Äúyou can‚Äôt spend more than you
earn‚Äù as the literal meaning of his sentence is obviously ridiculous. A quick 
look at the period directly after the second world war, when Australia‚Äôs public 
debt was at its highest, makes a mockery of Turnbull‚Äôs excuse for budget 
austerity.
 Photograph: A Owen/Philo Capital 
As shown in the chart above, governments during the second world war ran 
massive deficits to fund the war effort and built up government debts totalling 
over 120% of GDP. The post war period saw that level of public debt steadily 
decline to about 10% by the end of the 1960s.

How was that mountain of debt paid off? It wasn‚Äôt. If it had been paid off 
Australia would have been an economic basket case during the 1950s and 60s. 
Menzies was prime minister for most of those years and his governments ran 
modest fiscal deficits every year.

To make sense of a shrinking debt burden during a time when government is 
spending more than it is taxing we need to understand that, despite what Scott 
Morrison and Malcolm Turnbull say, government financesbear absolutely no 
resemblance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/09/repeat-after-me-the-australian-economy-is-not-like-a-household-budget>
 to household or business finances.

Repeat after me: the Australian economy is not like a household budget | 
Warwick Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/09/repeat-after-me-the-australian-economy-is-not-like-a-household-budget>
Government spending is such a significant part of the economy that it can 
determine national economic outcomes. By deficit spending in the 50s and 60s, 
the Menzies government stimulated economic growth and built up non-government 
financial assets. This growth increased government tax receipts and reduced the 
size of the debt burden without paying off the debt.

Add inflation to the equation, which reduces the real value of the debt, and 
you can understand how the debt-to-GDP ratio can fall so dramatically while the 
government continues to run deficits.

This clearly makes a mockery of Morrison and Turnbull‚Äôs stated reasons for 
cutting government expenditure. Recurring modest government deficits are 
sustainable in the long term. Government surpluses, by contrast, are not 
sustainable in the long term.

To demonstrate this, there is one basic accounting concept that needs to be 
explained. Somebody‚Äôs surplus isalways somebody else‚Äôs deficit 
<http://www.billmitchell.org/publications/journals/J51_2006.pdf>. This includes 
the federal government.
Stephanie Kelton (@StephanieKelton) 
To guard against irrational üò°, replace the words "government deficit" with 
"non-government surplus" in every article, CBO report, etc.
 <https://twitter.com/StephanieKelton/status/807995032070459398> December 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/StephanieKelton/status/807995032070459398> 
For a moment, imagine that Australia is the only country in the world. Imagine 
that the non-government sector in Australia has $100 in net financial wealth. 
That year, the federal government spends $45 on goods and services and taxes 
$50. That‚Äôs a federal budget surplus of $5. At the end of this period the 
non-government sector in Australia has $95 (the government spent $45 into the 
private economy and took $50 out in taxes). This is a non-government deficit 
precisely equal to the government surplus of $5. This is a simple accounting 
identity; it must be true. There is nowhere else for that government surplus to 
come from.

Adding the foreign sector and trade back in doesn‚Äôt change this picture, it 
just complicates it a bit. Imagine the government continues with the same 
budget the following year. The non-government sector now has $90 ‚Äì and the year 
after $85. I presume you‚Äôre starting to see the problem if this continues.

So, the first key thing to understand is that a federal government surplus 
must be accompanied by a non-government deficit.

Let‚Äôs look at Scott Morrison‚Äôs fiscal strategy spelled out in Myefo:

The government‚Äôs medium-term fiscal strategy is to achieve budget surpluses, 
on average, over the course of the economic cycle.

What Scott Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>
 is really telling you is:

‚ÄúThe government‚Äôs medium-term fiscal strategy is to achieve non-government 
deficits, on average, over the course of the economic cycle.

In the absence of persistent trade surpluses (we mostly run deficits), the 
only possible outcome of this is increased private sector debt (that‚Äôs 
Australian businesses and households) and, if sustained, eventual private 
sector bankruptcy.

Private sector debt in Australia is currently about 210% of GDP, compared to 
government debt of about 30%. What Scott Morrison needs to explain to the 
Australian people is why he‚Äôs so keen to increase the private debt they hold 
over their homes and businesses when it‚Äôs already so high.

Scott Morrison prepares ground for budget deterioration, blaming Labor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/scott-morrison-prepares-ground-for-budget-deterioration-blaming-labor>
With a background of massive government debt incurred during the second world 
war, the 1950s and 60s are often referred to as the ‚Äúgolden years‚Äù, when 
unemployment was around 2%, economic growth was high, wages grew strongly and 
inequality was falling. This was not despite persistent government deficits but 
partly because of them.

Recent decades have seen the quest for budget surpluses become a kind of 
fetish. It‚Äôs important to understand that this is relatively new and that it 
has no sound basis in monetary economics.

If Scott Morrison and Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> get their way and 
run budget surpluses over the business cycle they will cause a recession ‚Äì 
simple accounting tells us that, short of some sort of export miracle, there is 
no other possible outcome.

Warwick Smith is a research economist at progressive think tank Per Capita 
<http://percapita.org.au/>. 

 