
It is almost midnight on Monday evening and Woody Harrelson <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/film/woody-harrelson> is showing me around the set 
for his directorial debut,Lost in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/15/woody-harrelson-lost-in-london-live-cinema-owen-wilson>
. An unused building in the centre of the capital has been commandeered to 
house assorted locations including a club with burlesque trimmings where gold 
statues dangle from the ceiling and a police station complete with cells and 
interview rooms.


There’s just one problem: Harrelson doesn’t seem to know where he is. “Hold 
on,” he mumbles. “I lost track of what floor we’re on. Where’s the …?” His 
bleariness has always been a considerable part of his charm: that sleepy Texan 
drawl, that quizzical gaze, half-amazed and half-sceptical. But padding around 
in tracksuit bottoms and a fleece, his eyes faintly bloodshot, the 55-year-old 
actor looks positively somnambulant. He smiles as he recognises his 
cinematographer, Nigel Willoughby. “Nigel, where’s the room where I get booked 
by the cops?” An affectionate chuckle: “Next floor up, Woody.”

No wonder Harrelson is dazed. In making Lost in London, he has taken on the 
biggest challenge of a 32-year career that has stretched from the sitcomCheers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/31/cable-girl-television-cheers> 
toNatural Born Killers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/dec/20/artsfeatures1>, from True 
Detective <http:// https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective> to 
theHunger Games <http:// https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hunger-games> 
series. Shortly before we meet, it is announced that he will playHan Solo’s 
mentor <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/03/woody-harrelson-han-solo-prequel-star-wars>
 in a new Star Wars spin-off due next year. But tonight he can’t think about 
anything except why he decided to write, direct and star in a movie about the 
worst night of his life and then shoot it all in one unbroken 100-minute take 
in 14 locations across London, complete with chase sequences on foot and by car.


So far, so Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/10/victoria-review-one-shot-two-hours-total-triumph>
. But, while Harrelson was inspired by that German hit, which used the 
one-take, single-camera approach to tell the tale of a frantic night in Berlin, 
he also needed to go one better. “That film is genius,” he says. “It’s an 
inspiring work of art. Ours is a different animal.” Willoughby explains: “It 
was me who told Woody we had to do it all with one camera. He said, ‘Victoria 
did that. How can we improve?’” Harrelson then came up with the idea of 
combining elements of theatre and film by live streaming Lost in London to 
cinemas as it is being shot. “I’m an adrenaline junkie,” he grins. “There’s 
something about the terror of it that I love. It’s keeping me up at night.”


Though the movie can’t claim to be the first to be broadcast as it is being 
shot – that honour goes toMy One Demand by the interactive-art trio Blast Theory
 <http://www.blasttheory.co.uk/projects/my-one-demand/>, which was transmitted 
online and to a single cinema in Toronto last year – it is certainly the 
largest-scale project of its kind; it will hit more than 500 screens in the US 
on Thursday evening and one in central London in the early hours of Friday 
morning.
 ‘I was a freaking idiot’ … Harrelson in rehearsals. Photograph: Alex 
MacNaughton 
The film has its origins in a long, disastrous evening that Harrelson spent in 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/jun/07/news>in 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/jun/07/news>. It began with a spat with 
his wife before progressing to a raucous evening at the West End nightclub 
Chinawhite. “It was hellish,” he says ruefully. “I’m never going to that club 
again.” By the time it was over, he had smashed up a taxi and fled the scene of 
the crime to hail another cab, hotly pursued by his first driver as well as the 
police, who eventually arrested him on suspicion of causing criminal damage. “I 
was a freaking idiot,” he told newspapers at the time.


I shouldn’t be confronted with these temptations considering all that’s gone 
on with the wifey-poo

But that was 15 years ago. As a self-professed anarchist notorious for 
hell-raising, he must have had other, messier nights in his life. Why did this 
one stay with him? “I guess it really was one of those nights that I would have 
gone to quite a lot of trouble to erase from my life. I wish to God I could 
excise it. But I thought about it a lot. It stuck with me. I’ve been to jail 
many times, but this one … well, it wasn’t just going to jail. It was the 
overall night. There wasn’t a speck of humour in it. It was a complete bummer. 
But later I thought, ‘Hey, this could be pretty funny.’” A case of tragedy plus 
time? “That’s it! You’ve got comedy.” Though he doesn’t want audiences to dwell 
too much on its factual basis, the film nevertheless begins with a cheeky title 
card that reads: “Too much of what follows is true.”


The 30-strong cast is predominantly British but also includes two of 
Harrelson’s friends, the actorOwen Wilson <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/film/owenwilson> and the singer Willie Nelson 
<http:// https://www.theguardian.com/music/willie-nelson>, playing themselves. 
Wilson was instrumental in keeping the film loyal to the live-streaming idea. 
“There was one point when the obstacles seemed insurmountable,” Harrelson 
recalls. “I decided we wouldn’t go live after all but it was Owen who said, 
‘Duuude, why wouldn’t you? It was a great idea! Get back to that.’” His mimicry 
of Wilson’s slow-mo surfer-speak is uncannily exact.


We stroll through the club, past a statue of Christ brandishing a neon 
“toilets” sign, and Harrelson maps out the movie for me between yawns. “The 
band will be playing here, there’ll be a flamenco dancer over there and this is 
where I meet my buddy Owen. I’ve had this upsetting thing with my wife and the 
last place I wanna be is in this Sodom and Gomorrah.” He gestures to the vast 
frescos of pre-Raphaelite nudes. “I shouldn’t be confronted with these 
temptations considering all that’s gone on with the wifey-poo.”

We retreat upstairs to the production office where Laura, wifey-poo herself, 
is waiting with their eldest daughter, Deni, who has a small part in the film. 
An actor dressed as Christ is enjoying a snack from the nearby all-vegan craft 
services table. “Oh, this is Jesus,” says Harrelson casually, then waves at 
another Jesus in the doorway. “More Jesuses.” He thinks for a second. “Jesii?”

 ‘Duuude!’ … co-star Owen Wilson at a read-through for Lost in London. 
Photograph: Alex MacNaughton 
Two full, filmed run-throughs of Lost in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lost-in-london> were completed last week. The 
first went like a dream; the second was a nightmare, with batteries running out 
on some of the lights and screeching feedback ruining parts of the soundtrack. 
“If that happens on the night, we’ve got problems. There are 24 people just on 
the sound and they’ve done the Olympics, marathons, all kinds of stuff. Every 
one of them agrees this is the most complicated thing they’ve ever done.”

Matt Adams of Blast Theory believes the cast and crew of Lost in London should 
see any problems as positives. “I would advise Woody Harrelson to embrace the 
chaos,” he tells me. “The adrenaline is intense for everyone including, 
hopefully, the audience.” Willoughby’s main concern, though, is extreme cold. 
“Lenses have a tendency to mist up if you go from cold into warm,” he says, out 
of his director’s earshot. It’s all a long way from his best-known work as 
director of photography onDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/downton-abbey-episode-by-episode>
. “As much as he loved Victoria, Woody doesn’t want that grittiness. He wants 
it to look polished like Downton.”

During the live run-through that I watch from the control room, there is a 
genuine frisson of danger and excitement. In the first 20 minutes alone, the 
camera tracks Harrelson from the stage of a theatre during the curtain call and 
into his dressing room before accompanying him to the stage door where he signs 
programmes for fans. “I miss Cheers,” says one, to which Harrelson replies 
gloomily: “Me too.” Then it’s on to a daringly complicated sequence following 
the comings and goings of several characters in a restaurant before the crew 
joins Harrelson and other cast members in a van and zooms over to the main club 
set to continue the action there.

I make it out on to the pavement just in time to see Harrelson’s vehicle 
screech up to the curb, followed by two police motorcyclists who place “road 
closed” signs in their wake to prevent other traffic from cluttering up the 
shot. As night buses drift woozily by, Harrelson starts singing the Cheers 
theme song to a bouncer in front of a giant Banksy canvas while a clubber in 
chunky, colourful beads scrolls through pictures on Jesus’s mobile phone and 
something Willoughby had said earlier in the evening suddenly starts to make 
perfect sense: “What’s Woody like? He’s a natural born nutter.”

• Lost in London is in US cinemas on 19 January and at Picturehouse Central 
<https://www.picturehouses.com/cinema/Picturehouse_Central/film/lost-in-london> 
on 20 January. Tickets fromfathomevents.com 
<http://fathomevents.com/event/lost-in-london>.
 