
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> venue The Kazimier has 
announced that it will close next year. Considered one of the city’s most 
vibrant venues, the owners said that a huge redevelopment of the surrounding 
area meant The Kazimier must shut its doors for the last time on News Years Day 
2016.

“After discussions with Elliot Group, the developer of Wolstenholme Square, we 
would like to make it public today that The Kazimier Club will be closing its 
doors as a venue for the last time on New Years Day 2016,”reads a statement 
from the venue <https://www.facebook.com/The.Kazimier?fref=ts>. “This gives us 
nine months of events to celebrate the life of the venue and provide it with a 
fitting end.”

However, the future of the team behind the venue is not yet over. The 
statement suggests that the “original artistic core and the wider Kazimier 
team” are planning a variety of “new projects in various new spaces” and its 
owners have reportedly been offered a new site within these new development 
plans.

Since its opening seven years ago, its owners have transformed it from a 
footballer’s hangout into a hub of creativity.

Top 10 music venues in Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/28/top-10-music-venues-gigs-liverpool>
“The Kazimier club began as an artistic project. From the explosive theatrical 
parties of its early years to its current standing it has grown to infinitely 
more than a building - it’s home to a brilliant team of staff, collaborators, 
promoters and the community in Liverpool and beyond that have contributed to 
the club in so many ways. We would also like to thank the recent public support 
that has helped extend its life-span,” the statement continues.

Kazimier is the latest independent UK venue to announce its closure in recent 
months, following the news that Manchester’s Roadhouse venue 
<http://www.nme.com/news/various-artists/83898> will shut its doors at the end 
of this year.


Super club Cream will find a new home with the Wolstenholme Square 
redevelopment, and will be included in £40m plans for the area.
 