
Traditionally, the environment and the development sectors have worked 
separately, but the era of the sustainable development goals (SDGs) and the 
Paris Agreement on climate change calls for a shift in approach.

In ratifying the Paris Agreement, countries have pledged to limit the increase 
in average global temperature to below two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial 
levels. Meanwhile, protection of the environment features heavily in the SDGs: 
countries commit to creating sustainable cities and communities, promoting 
responsible consumption and promotion, and taking climate action – all measures 
that could help fulfil the Cop21 agreement.

“What’s exciting about the SDGs is the interconnectedness,” said Archana 
Patkar, networking and knowledge management programme manager for WSSCC,at an 
event organised by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/23/paradigm-shift-needed-governments-fight-poverty-inequality>
 alongside the UN General Assembly in September.

So how can the development and environment sectors collaborate and align their 
efforts in achieving these interconnected goals? Where can parallels be found 
between the two sectors? How can efforts to improve economic growth be made 
without harming the environment? And which “dynamic new ways of working” can 
environment and development professionals adopt to achieve the SDGs?

Join an expert panel on Thursday 27 October, from 2pm to 3.30pm BST, to 
discuss these questions and more.

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). Want to recommend someone for the panel or ask a 
question in advance? Get in touch viaglobaldevpros@theguardian.com <mailto: 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com> or @GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP>
 on Twitter. Follow the discussion using the hashtag#globaldevlive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23globaldevlive&src=typd>.

Panel

Mike Webster, director, WasteAid UK <http://Www.wasteaid.org.uk>, 
@michaelgwebster <https://twitter.com/michaelgwebster> @WasteAidUK 
<https://twitter.com/WasteAidUK>
Mike is the co-founder and director of WasteAid UK, a charity dedicated to 
improving global waste management.

Livia Bizikova, director – SDG Knowledge Programme, IISD 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiNpaG2qvjPAhXDQBQKHTCdB4sQFggeMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.iisd.org%2F&usg=AFQjCNG5r9tSp8QbfnNpicITaugJ1X1PFA&sig2=ARn2Nxyb6klOMHR7SktxsA>
,@LiviaBizik <https://twitter.com/LiviaBizik>, @IISD_news 
<https://twitter.com/IISD_news>
Livia’s links knowledge and experiences to develop approaches to sustainable 
development, climate change adaptation and resilience.

Tim Daw, researcher – ecosystem services and poverty, Stockholm Resilience 
Centre <http://www.stockholmresilience.org>, @sthlmresilience 
<https://twitter.com/sthlmresilience>
Tim studies the interaction between coastal communities and the environment, 
particularly in East Africa.

Sue Riddlestone, CEO and co-founder, Bioregional <http://www.bioregional.com>, 
@sueriddlestone <https://twitter.com/SueRiddlestone> @bioregional 
<https://twitter.com/Bioregional>
Sue led Bioregional’s efforts to lobby for the inclusion of sustainable 
consumption and production in the SDGs and is working to develop a flagship 
project on sustainable social housing.

Robert Bisset, head of communications, Global Environment Facility 
<http://thegef.org>, @robbiebisset <https://twitter.com/RobbieBisset> @theGEF 
<https://twitter.com/theGEF>
Robert has 20 years experience in environment and development communications 
at the World Bank and UNEP.

Jacqueline McGlade, chief scientist, UN Environment, @UNEP 
<https://twitter.com/UNEP>
Jacqueline works to keep the state of the environment under review through 
live open data monitoring with a focus on air pollution, climate change, health 
and the SDGs environmental indicators.

Oren Ahoobim, associate partner, Dalberg <http://www.dalberg.com>, @orenahoobim
 <https://twitter.com/orenahoobim>, @DalbergTweet 
<https://twitter.com/DalbergTweet>
Oren is an associate partner in Dalberg’s New York office and leads the firm’s 
environmental practice.

Adam Connaker, program associate - innovative finance, Rockefeller Foundation 
<http://www.rockefellerfoundation.org>, @RockefellerFdn 
<https://twitter.com/RockefellerFdn>
Adam works as an associate identifying and supporting the development of new 
financing mechanisms for environmental and development objectives.

Lina Barrera, senior director - international policy, Conservation 
International <http://www.conservation.org>, @ConservationOrg 
<https://twitter.com/ConservationOrg>
Lina has been working at the nexus of environment and development for nearly 
fifteen years.

More panellists to be announced. 

 