
Rarely can such a thing be said about pre-season games but Liverpool will 
remember theirperformance against Barcelona on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/liverpool-barcelona-pre-season-friendly>
 for some time. It is a common mistake to get giddy in early August yet the 
manner of their 4-0 beating of Barcelona – who were, it should be noted, not 
overly fussed – in front of the second biggest congregation at Wembley since it 
reopened, 89,845, will no doubt raise expectations.

The challenge now for Jürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> and his players will be to 
implement this fast and furious intensity in a competitive environment. And who 
better to test it against than Arsenal in their Premier League opener on Sunday?

Liverpool yet to receive improved bids for striker Christian Benteke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/liverpool-christian-benteke-no-offers>
Klopp was coy about his starting lineup for that game at the Emirates but the 
XI he began with against Barça looked close to what should be expected, a 
couple of injuries excepting.

He was also keen to play down the impact of what must still be classed as a 
notable scalp. “It’s not about overestimating or underestimating friendly 
games,” Klopp said, who saw his sideslip to a 4-0 defeat against German club 
Mainz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/arsenal-beat-manchester-city-gabriel-jurgen-klopp-liverpool-mainz>
 on Sunday. “We won’t start dreaming after winning against Barça. We were the 
better team and the game was obviously more important for us than them. 
Motivation in football is a really important thing and we were at 100%.

“I’m always ready, that’s how it is. We could have played no pre-season games 
but we’ve played very good, less good or bad. You need to work and that’s what 
we are doing. We will be ready for the first game but if Arsenal was to be the 
best game all season, there would be something wrong with the season. We can’t 
change or decide the season in one game, but we will be ready.”

At the same time there was a sense that such vaunted opposition and a crowd 
pushing 90,000 could act as a motivation for a team solely occupied by domestic 
competitions this season.

“If only motivation would be that easy, the whole year I’d come with the 
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> game,” Klopp said 
when asked about using this as an example of what his team could be 
experiencing on a regular basis. “We know that, but we don’t need to worry 
about our motivation or how ambitious we are.”

Winning did come at a price. James Milner is awaiting the results of a heel 
scan having been injured in the first half, while Dejan Lovren was limping 
after the game. Klopp also has “no idea” if Daniel Sturridge will remain absent 
for the trip to Arsenal.

Still, there were unmistakable hints that, with a pre-season behind them, this 
is now a Klopp team. Three of the four goals came from high-intensity pressing: 
the impressive Sadio Mané’s opener, an own goal from the formerLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> player Javier Mascherano that 
doubled the lead, and Divock Origi’s effort. The young Marko Grujic finished 
things off.

Premier League fans’ previews part 1: Arsenal to Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/premier-league-fans-previews-arsenal-manchester-city>
Yet the manager remains uncomfortable with his side being labelled solely as a 
high pressing team. “It’s about organisation, it’s about the formation. We 
don’t always talk about pressing – sometimes only. We want to play to create 
spaces but if you always play you have problems. If you always shoot long balls 
you have problems. It needs to be a mixture.”

Ultimately, though, it was a day to focus on the positives. A brief period 
midway through the first half aside, when Lionel Messi hit a post and Arda 
Turan missed a sitter, Liverpool dealt with the Spanish champions comfortably.

“I don’t have a silly team, I don’t have to tell them that’s how it works. 
With the experience of the game and where we had solutions and didn’t have 
solutions, that’s more important than knowing it’s Barcelona. A lot of things 
in life you notice under the biggest pressure. It’s pretty cool we were brave 
enough to show our skills and to defend in a good way.”
 