
Donnie Johnson has spent nearly half of his life waiting to die. In 1985, the 
Memphis camping equipment center staffer was found guilty of suffocating his 
wife, Connie, with a plastic garbage bag. Since his conviction, he’s maintained 
his innocence; insisting that a work‐release inmate murdered his wife, and that 
he only helped dispose of the body at a nearby shopping center out of fear for 
his life.


The 64‐year‐old death row inmate, who stays at Riverbend Maximum Security 
Institution on the western outskirts ofNashville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nashville>, has twice been scheduled to 
die. Johnson received his first stay of execution in 2006, which later led to 
an unexpected meeting in 2012 with his stepdaughter, Cynthia Vaughn. The 
meeting gave the Southaven, Mississippi, resident, who was seven years old when 
her mother was killed, a chance to forgive her stepfather. The two have since 
met another four times, exchanged letters and chat on the phone every Saturday.

“It changed my life totally,” Vaughn says. After spending most of her life 
hating her stepfather, she says she’s learned more about the mother she hardly 
knew and has commemorated each visit with a tattoo of a bird. “I can’t even 
think of a word to say how much it changed my life.”

Their fragile relationship, slowly on the mend, hinges on the uncertain future 
of Tennessee’s death penalty. Johnson, whose latest execution date on 24 March 
was indefinitely postponed, is one of 69 inmates currently locked up on 
Tennessee’s death row. The inmates’ lives now hang in the balance of a pair of 
lawsuits contesting whether the state’s two execution methods, lethal injection 
and the electric chair, illegally subject them to cruel and unusual punishment 
in violation of their constitutional rights. A courtlast week halted all 
executions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/13/tennessee-executions-halted-while-courts-weigh-legality-killing-methods>
 until the current legal challenges are resolved.

Tennessee’s courtrooms have become one of the latest battlegrounds over how 
prisoners sentenced to death are executed. Those challenges – which gained 
national attention last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/30/clayton-lockett-oklahoma-execution-witness>
 after severalbotched executions  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/23/arizona-killer-still-alive-an-hour-after-execution-begins>
ahead of the US supreme court’s landmark lethal injection case later this month 
– come at a time when some residents of the conservative southern state are 
showing signs of shifting their views on the death penalty.

Since Tennessee’s last execution in 2009, lawyers have argued over numerous 
parts of the capital punishment process. Following a series of court rulings, 
the state has switched up the deadly drug used in its executions, concealed the 
identities of people administering lethal injection drugs to inmates, and 
brought back the electric chair as a backup execution method in case its 
dwindling supply of lethal injection drugs runs out. Those legal fights, 
largely taking place over the past two years, occurred as former Democratic 
attorney general Robert Cooper embarked on an unprecedented effort to schedule 
executions in a state that has only killed six inmates since the turn of the 
century.

Thirty‐four Tennessee death‐row inmates are now challenging whether the 
state’s procedures for both execution methods are unnecessarily cruel. Kelly 
Henry, a capital habeas unit supervisor with the Tennessee federal public 
defender’s office, on Friday presented oral arguments contesting the state’s 
use of lethal injection in Davidson County chancery court ahead of a trial 
scheduled later this summer. A separate lawsuit related to the electric chair 
will be taken up in theTennessee <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee>
 supreme court in May, Henry says.

Citing the ongoing lawsuits, Tennessee department of correction spokeswoman 
Alison Randgaard declined to discuss the department’s ability to perform 
executions, the status of lethal injection drugs currently in its possession, 
and other death penalty protocols. The state’s supreme court last month 
overturned a pair of lower‐court rulings that would have forced DoC officials 
to hand over the identities of executioners and pharmacists to death‐row inmate 
attorneys to determine their qualifications. Henry says it’s still unclear 
whether the state can keep secret other details about the process of obtaining 
lethal injection drugs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F19%2Ftennessee-death-penalty-lawsuits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429299553395%2Ff124e2df-5861-412d-8d79-e4d5bb665f19-763x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Living%20on%20death%20row%20in%20Tennessee%3A%20'The%20rollercoaster%20is%20exhausting'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F19%2Ftennessee-death-penalty-lawsuits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Living%20on%20death%20row%20in%20Tennessee%3A%20%27The%20rollercoaster%20is%20exhausting%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F19%2Ftennessee-death-penalty-lawsuits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429299553395%2Ff124e2df-5861-412d-8d79-e4d5bb665f19-763x1020.jpeg>
 Steve Henley’s execution in 2009 was one of only six in the last 15 years. 
Photograph: Tennessee department of corrections/AP 
Tennessee attorney general’s office spokesman Harlow Sumerford said he was 
unable to respond to multiple requests comment about its stance toward the 
death penalty, citing time constraints.

“The Department of Correction stands ready to carry out the will of the 
court,” Randgaard wrote in a statement.

As those executioners remain on call, Henry questions the broader use of the 
death penalty in Tennessee. She says the process, particularly when execution 
dates are delayed, can trigger post‐traumatic stress disorder due to the 
psychological torture involved. Case in point: one of her past clients had four 
stays of execution before which he washed down his cell for the next inmate, 
packed up his belongings and divided them up for his family members.Three days 
before an execution <http://www.tn.gov/correction/media/deathwatch.html>, Henry 
says, inmates are moved to an 8ft‐by‐10ft cell, placed under 24‐hour 
observation, and strip‐searched before all visitations.

“It’s surreal,” Henry says. “All this complete dehumanization of themselves to 
make sure they don’t kill themselves before they kill them.”

Despite the state’s continued push to carry out executions, traditionally 
progressive death penalty opponents have forged an unlikely partnership with 
some conservative residents on the issue. State representative Jeremy Faison 
recently co‐ sponsored a bill with a longtime death penalty opponent, state 
representative Johnnie Turner which could gain traction inside the Tennessee 
statehouse in 2016.

Knoxville resident Kenny Collins, who helped launch Tennessee Conservatives 
Concerned About the Death Penalty, says his stance toward the death penalty 
changed when he learned about the higher costs of incarceration for death‐row 
inmates, the potential risk of killing a wrongfully convicted person, and the 
amount of power given to the government over a person’s life.

“I can’t say if [a wider shift in opinion] is going to happen overnight,” says 
Collins, whose own opinions on the issue shifted just three years ago after 
doing some research. “I can’t say if it’s going to happen next week. The 
conversation around the death penalty has changed so much within a year. More 
conservatives are voicing their opposition to the death penalty.”

Vaughn was once also a staunch supporter of the death penalty, actively 
posting on online forums and demanding that convicts like her stepfather be 
held accountable for their actions. But her views have slowly changed. Without 
an all‐but‐unlikely moratorium, she realizes the inevitability of Johnson’s 
death and is asking him every last question about her mom, jotting down every 
last detail, and has even made him promise to choose lethal injection over 
electrocution – an option he still holds due to the length of time he’s served 
in prison. Johnson, who she says has come to terms with his eventual death, 
agreed her request.

“The window of opportunity could close in five minutes or five years,” Vaughn 
says. “The rollercoaster that the state puts everybody through is exhausting … 
If you’re going to execute him, execute him. If you’re not, don’t execute him. 
Stop messing with the families of both the inmates and the victims.”
 