
The worst fears about the impact of the national living wage 
<http://%20https//www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
 on social care businesses have been confounded by research suggesting it has 
had a remarkably positive effect on pay rates in the traditionally low-wage 
sector.

When the statutory minimum of £7.20 an hour for all workers aged 25 or over 
was announced – an increase of 50p on the previous floor –employers in social 
care warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/29/national-living-wage-services-breaking-point-funding-crisis-elderly-disabled-people>
 that they would struggle to pay it on profit margins that were already low.

What will the new 'national living wage' mean for independent care providers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/04/national-living-wage-social-care-providers>
Care England, the umbrella body for the bigger companies in the sector, which 
employs 1.6 million people in England alone, forecast on the eve of the new 
rate taking effect in April that the added cost would be the “the final straw 
<http://www.careengland.org.uk/threatening-stability-national-living-wage>” for 
some businesses teetering on the brink of viability.

But a study published on Tuesday by the Resolution Foundation 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/> thinktank indicates that the move has 
had a favourable effect not only on care workers directly benefiting but also – 
and unexpectedly – on younger workers and on wage rates across the sector. The 
overall pay bill has risen by more than twice that needed to meet the new 
minimum alone.

Laura Gardiner, senior research and policy analyst at the foundation, said: 
“It is great news that the national living wage has had a large, positive 
impact on low pay in social care, giving hundreds of thousands of frontline 
care workers a pay rise, with no evidence of hours being cut to foot the bill.”

The study, based on pay data for 80,000 employees of more than 2,000 care 
providers, suggests that 57% of frontline workers (54% of all) have benefited 
directly from the £7.20 minimum with an average pay rise of 9.2%. This includes 
83% of those aged under 25 who are now receiving £7.20 or more, even though it 
is not required by law.

Noting that the overall pay bill has risen 6.9%, the study concludes that 
introduction of the national living wage is “undoubtedly correlated with an 
immediate and profound increase in pay in the sector”.

The Guardian view on social care and the NHS: can’t pay, won’t pay | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/31/the-guardian-view-on-social-care-and-the-nhs-cant-pay-wont-pay>
The foundation admits that its analysis does not cover any job losses or 
non-compliance with the new minimum. It also expresses concern at workers’ 
potential to progress up the pay ladder, pointing out that 32% of the sample 
studied were now “bunched” at £7.20.

A previous survey <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/04/1bn-further-cuts-to-social-care-will-hit-tens-of-thousands-say-experts>
 of local councils that commission social care found that 82% of them raised 
fees paid to care providers from April – almost half by more than 3% – after 
ministers allowed councils to add a 2% social care precept to council tax bills.
 