
Londoners, Labour politicians and left-leaning journalists often blame rich 
foreigners for high housing prices in the capital. This has provided 
opportunities for people likeBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> to teasingly suggest that they are 
being xenophobic and, more importantly, has demonstrated a regrettable 
readiness to seek easy culprits for complicated problems. A BBC TV report on 
the combined effects of Brexit and changes in property tax on London’s housing 
market may give this tendency fresh impetus. But it has also underlined its 
flaws.

In the report, investors from Hong Kong are shown purchasing homes that are 
still under construction in Zone 4Colindale 
<https://www.barnet.gov.uk/citizen-home/libraries/local-studies-and-archives/pocket-histories/hendon-and-golders-green/colindale-hendon-nw9.html>
. The fall in the value of the pound since the EU referendum has given wealthy 
global shoppers like them a further incentive to buy future London bricks and 
mortar “off-plan”, and changes in stamp duty and levies on second homes have 
made purchasing handfuls of units of half-built suburban housing more 
profitable than buying fewer of them in Kensington.

Outrage! Are those archetypal “rich foreign investors” now buying up the 
suburbs too at the expense of native Brits? Shouldn’t they be stopped? What 
would happen if they were? “Be careful what you wish for,” warns one house 
builder. “Because in the UK, and inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> in particular, they play a very vital 
role in underpinning every [housing] development.” And those developments 
include much of the affordable housing supplied for Londoners on low and middle 
incomes as part of the planning deals struck with boroughs.

Here, once again, is the uncomfortable truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/london-luxury-property-versace-aykon-tower-housing-crisis>
 about the relationship between big foreign money and Londoners on ordinary 
incomes looking for homes they can afford to rent or buy. It is that in the 
absence of enough public money, the former have long provided a lot of the cash 
that pays for the building of the latter. If they stop investing, the provision 
of “affordable” housing starts getting more difficult. This shouldn’t come as a 
surprise: “Red” Ken Livingstone worked it out 15 years ago.


Another heresy to take on board is that the Honk Kongers featured in the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> piece have no intention of leaving 
their new properties empty. “Buy to leave” certainly occurs, but the extent of 
it is contested and hard to quantify. And why would you simply leave a brand 
new flat gathering dust when you can profit from letting it? London needs a 
growing stock of professionally-run new homes for private rent. Should we 
oppose foreigners supplying it?

There’s something quite familiar about all this; something reminiscent of the 
early days of Mayor Johnson, when the economic downturn kicked in, the credit 
crunch bit and overall housing supply in London became increasingly dependent 
on hot money seeking safe havens from abroad. The other recurring theme is its
complete absurdity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/london-luxury-property-versace-aykon-tower-housing-crisis>
 as a mechanism for addressing the UK capital’s housing needs - one of its most 
fundamental infrastructure problems. The problem is a shortage of alternatives.

Johnson’s successor, Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, intends to try to alter the 
housing finance equation in London, believing this will generate better 
results. His plans include restrictions on off plan sales overseas in the hope 
of holding down prices and giving Londoners a better chance of buying new 
housing as it comes on stream. The worry is that fewer homes of every kind will 
end up getting built, although there have been hints that he might seek to 
channel more foreign finance into the kinds of housing London most needs more 
of.

Wish him well with such endeavours. But don’t pretend that foreign investors 
are the cause of every problem or that, like it or not, they aren’t going to 
remain part of the solution.

Watch the BBC’s report from Colindale here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-uk-leaves-the-eu-37260267>. 

 