
Many Londoners take it as read 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2014/04/10/londoners-blame-rich-foreigners-housing-boom/>
 that the high cost of housing in the capital is the fault of wealthy 
foreigners. Assigning blame to speculators from distant lands said to purchase 
job lots of posh flats in skyline-wrecking towers then coolly leave them empty 
as their value goes through the roof reveals aUkip streak 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/pa/article-3615420/Sadiq-Khan-vows-crack-London-property-sales-foreign-buyers.html>
 in a Remain-voting city where37% of people were born abroad 
<https://londondatastore-upload.s3.amazonaws.com/o7o%3D2011-census-londoners-born-overseas.pdf>
 and over300 languages 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/arts-and-culture/vision-and-strategy/20-facts-about-london%E2%80%99s-culture>
 are spoken.

Everybody wants a piece of this populist narrative, including voices on the 
left. Mayor Sadiq Khan himself has cheerfully cranked out those crowd-pleasing 
lines about luxury housing units being stacked up like gold bricks both before 
andsince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/sadiq-khan-developers-housing-plan-london-mayor-affordable>
 he got elected back in May. How interesting, then, to report that hisrecently 
announced inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/london-mayor-sadiq-khan-inquiry-foreign-property-ownership>
 into the impact of foreign property investment in London recognises that 
reality might not bear out the rhetoric.

“We welcome investment from around the world in building new homes,” reads the 
first paragraph of a ten-page briefing document sent out by City Hall’shousing 
and land directorate <https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/housing-and-land> to 
universities and other bodies that might be interested in bidding for the 
£40,000 research job. Paragraph two acknowledges “public concerns about the 
role that overseas money plays in London’s property market,” but goes on: “The 
GLA wants to ensure any discussion of policy responses is underpinned by clear 
evidence and understanding.”

Evidence and understanding? Whatever next? The document explains that “set 
against concerns over empty homes and a predominance of overseas buyers in 
local markets are reports of the positive role that overseas buyers play in 
enabling developments to go ahead”. A “positive role”? Good grief! It 
continues: “Off-plan sales are an important part of development viability. 
Industry bodies report that development finance can be difficult to obtain 
until 40% of units have been reserved and that most developers will not start 
construction on a development until a third of its units have been pre-sold.”

In other words, without the filthy rich from Russia and Hong Kong buying 
non-existent flats on the strength of CGI images of towers yet to be put up, 
fewer actual homes might get built in a city already delivering barely half the 
absolute number it needs. Surreal? Yes. Ideal? No. But it’s worth stressing at 
this point that a considerable amount of London’s new “affordable” homes aimed 
at people on low and middle incomes are built as a condition of permission 
being granted for large,foreigner-financed housing schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/london-luxury-property-versace-aykon-tower-housing-crisis>
 to go ahead.

Yes, there are big concerns that developers use funny viability numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/oct/16/earls-court-questions-of-viability>
 to get away with delivering fewer such homes than they could. Even so, the 
fact remains that with no “rich foreign investors” sinking spare millions into 
future bricks and mortar, “affordable” supply in London, notably in expensive 
neighbourhoods, would be even more inadequate than it is.

The GLA briefing document says the research it wants done must address four 
broad questions: one, what proportion of new homes is sold to buyers who are 
resident overseas?; two, what proportion of new homes is kept empty and how 
many of these are owned by foreign buyers?; three, how reliant is development 
viability on sales to overseas buyers?; four, how does overseas financing of 
development contribute to housing supply?

Elaborating on these, it identifies problems of definition. For example, what 
is an “overseas buyer”, exactly? Is it someone from overseas who buys, or 
someone who buys from overseas? The document answers this itself: “The 
intention of the research is not simply to map the nationality of property 
ownership in London. Rather, it is to assess the extent to which homes bought in
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> are owned by people not normally 
resident in the city. Therefore, for the purposes of this research, ‘overseas 
buyers’ would ideally be defined as people whose principal residence is outside 
of the UK. This will therefore include UK nationals living abroad for a period 
of time but exclude foreign nationals who are normally resident in London”.

So, rich Britons who’ve settled abroad but purchase property in the British 
capital might be categorised as “overseas buyers”, while investors from other 
countries who’ve made London their home will not.

City Hall also wants a clearer picture of “the intentions behind the 
purchases” of overseas buyers. How many of the dwellings they buy really are 
just left empty as opposed to, say, used intermittently by family members or 
rented out? Answering this will involve addressing what exactly qualifies as 
“empty”. How frequently should a unit be unoccupied before that word applies? 
The document points out that information in this area is limited. Existing data 
have shown large falls in the numbers of empty homes in London in recent years, 
though these mostly record properties that have become derelict rather than new 
ones that aren’t much lived in. There is “no comprehensive assessment” of the 
extent of the latter phenomenon, the document says. The researchers’ job will 
be to provide one.

Khan wants the research to be the most thorough yet undertaken on the issue. 
His wish to go beyond the mix of vivid anecdote, emotive assertion and 
imperfect estimate that inform widespread beliefs about foreign property 
investment in London is welcome. It also shines a telling sidelight on the 
impact of Brexit: a “clear understanding” of “the role overseas investment 
plays in development viability” is deemed “vital” to any policy that “seeks to 
support Londoners’ access to new homes”. It may be that in these unsteady 
nationalistic times, London is going to need those much-derided rich foreign 
investors more and more.
 