
Within minutes of the end of Sanzaa’s catwalk show, there was a swarm of women 
flicking through rails of clothing and flashing their credit cards at the 
fashion label’s exhibition stall.

Sanya and Zahra, a pair of friends who have grown their “modest fashion” 
business <https://www.sanzaa.co.uk> from a small market stall in Bradford over 
the past six years, were frantically wrapping long tunics and dresses in black 
tissue paper while advising customers on purchases.


Among them was Amara Sadeeq, a London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
law graduate and full-time mother to three small children, who had chosen a 
dusty pink abaya. “I usually wear black, but I thought I’d try something a bit 
different,” she said. “Some members of my family always wear black, and don’t 
approve of makeup. But I think women need to look beautiful and feel confident.”


Muslim Lifestyle Expo in London highlights largely untapped market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/muslim-lifestyle-expo-london-global-brands-spending-power>
Sadeeq had come to the Saverah Women Expo <http://saverahwomenexpo.co.uk>, at 
the Intercontinental hotel next to London’s O2 Arena, along with about 5,000 
others. The event was to showcase Muslim businesses aimed at women: modest 
fashion, halal cosmetics, jewellery, greetings cards and chocolates for 
Ramadan. Muslim charities, banks and solicitors were present, and motivational 
talks were on the schedule.


The expo was also about “empowering Muslim women. We have a voice and a 
lifestyle, we start businesses, we don’t fit the stereotype,” said Shazia 
Ramzan, a spokeswoman for Saverah.


About 90 businesses were exhibiting at the event, including dozens of 
international and UK fashion designers. “Modest fashion has been a phenomenon 
elsewhere, especially in the Gulf, for a while, and now it’s becoming more of a 
statement here,” said Ramzan.


The global Muslim clothing market is forecast to be worth $327bn by 2020, 
according to the latestGlobal Islamic Economy report 
<http://www.dinarstandard.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Fashion-SGIE-Report-2015.png>
. International retailers such asMarks and Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/31/if-i-want-to-buy-a-burkini-from-ms-i-bloody-well-will>
 andUniqlo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/01/uniqlo-hana-tajima-modest-wear-fashion-hijabs>
 have launched ranges aimed at Muslim women.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Flondon-show-reflects-global-boom-in-islamic-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79e1773c29747d661cb55d04e049a840e195b57d%2F0_0_7360_4418%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20show%20reflects%20global%20boom%20in%20Islamic%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Flondon-show-reflects-global-boom-in-islamic-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20show%20reflects%20global%20boom%20in%20Islamic%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Flondon-show-reflects-global-boom-in-islamic-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79e1773c29747d661cb55d04e049a840e195b57d%2F0_0_7360_4418%2F7360.jpg>
 The catwalk at Saverah Women 2016. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi for the 
Guardian 
Farheen Rahman, a designer based in Kolkata who trained at the London College 
of Fashion, had returned to the UK to show her range of modest clothing for the 
first time.


“This is my debut show. Only in the past year have I been thinking about 
Islamic clothing,” she said. “I see girls and young women wanting to be 
fashionable but also wanting to be modest. Until recently they had to 
compromise on one or the other.”


Another factor in the growth of modest fashion was rising disposable incomes 
among young Muslims, Rahman added. “You see this very clearly in India, where 
spending power used to be the preserve of the elite, but now the middle class 
has risen up.”


Twins Ranna and Rasha Ahmed, who launched their label Hijab Star less than a 
year ago, also pointed to a generational shift. “Young Muslim women of our 
generation are much more interested in fashion than our mothers,” said Ranna.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Flondon-show-reflects-global-boom-in-islamic-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a5229fda59bd535222fd28173a79fba60730793%2F0_173_7002_4203%2F7002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20show%20reflects%20global%20boom%20in%20Islamic%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Flondon-show-reflects-global-boom-in-islamic-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20show%20reflects%20global%20boom%20in%20Islamic%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Flondon-show-reflects-global-boom-in-islamic-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a5229fda59bd535222fd28173a79fba60730793%2F0_173_7002_4203%2F7002.jpg>
 90 businesses exhibited at the event. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi for the 
Guardian 
On the catwalk, elegant models showed off outfits ranging from skinny trousers 
paired with close-fitting tunics and minimal hijabs to stunning 
all-encompassing black abayas with elaborate veils.


Watching the show, Nadia Amdanee said: “I’m French and I like to be 
fashionable, but I also know the limits my religion imposes. Now it’s possible 
to be really distinctive and stylish while being true to your faith.”


Not everyone at the expo was set on modesty. Zahra Pederson, who runs a 
personal training service calledthe Healthy Hijab 
<http://www.thehealthyhijab.com>, was gathering signatures in support of a 
campaign, Faces of Muslimah, to be launched after Ramadan to celebrate 
diversity among Muslim women.


“My religion is in my heart, not how I look,” she said, wearing an outfit 
considerably more revealing than most at the show. “If you look at me, you 
wouldn’t know I’m a Muslim. But I pray five times a day, and I’ll fast over 
Ramadan. You can’t judge my actions on what I look like.”

 