
With growing unease I read the story about fellow EU citizen Monique Hawkins, 
whose application for a document certifying permanent residency was rejected by 
the Home Office even though she seems to have fully complied with the rules 
when submitting her application (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/dutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years>
, 29 December). I am German, 61 years old, married to a British husband and 16 
years in the UK. Throughout these years I did my best to integrate. I worked, 
never claimed any benefit and participated in community life through voluntary 
work. The people around me never let me feel “foreign” or unwelcome and 
genuinely treat me like a fellow citizen. Like Mrs Hawkins, I never thought it 
was necessary to have my immigration status certified. This changed after the 
Brexit vote, because the life my husband and I have built together entirely 
depends on my right to remain in the UK. Consequently, I also decided to apply 
for British citizenship, which requires certification of permanent residency.

Brexit: Dutch woman who was told to leave UK now allowed to stay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/06/brexit-dutch-woman-told-leave-uk-monique-hawkins-stay>
Like Mrs Hawkins, we discovered that our marriage is treated differently to 
non-EU/UK marriages and that it is discounted as a reason for certifying my 
status because I am an EU national. So I ploughed through the 85 pages of the 
application form and submitted it, together with the required evidence as 
advised in the guidance notes, feeling confident that I had done everything 
right. But after reading Mrs Hawkins’ story, I began to think that decisions 
made by the Home Office involve more unspoken rules and processes than can 
possibly be foreseen by applicants. My application is still being processed and 
I will let you how I get on.
Regina Erich
Stonehaven, Aberdeenshire

• My wife is Swedish and has lived in the UK for 60 years, while proudly 
retaining her Swedish citizenship. She has been married to me for 57 years, is 
as English in her social and cultural experience as any English person and 
probably speaks our language more correctly than most native English speakers. 
She now suffers from dementia and is physically more or less immobile. She 
would be unable to conduct the defence of her right to be here herself, but if 
I were to write to the Home Office on her behalf would we receive a similarly 
disgraceful and insensitive letter as others, whose experiences you have 
reported, have done? Or maybe, even, immigration officers would turn up on our 
doorstep at 5am and cart my wife off to the nearest detention centre.
Name and address supplied

• The case of the Dutch mother of English children being advised by the Home 
Office to leave Britain after living here for 24 years perfectly legally, is 
not going to be an isolated one. Either in the UK or the rest ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Significant numbers of 
internal refugees will be created because people are resident by virtue of EU 
citizenship while not necessarily meeting local residency rules. Many of these 
people will also fail to qualify for services, such as health, if they return 
to their country of origin.

A typical example would be a UK citizen who has spent modest life savings on 
an apartment in the Spanish Costas and has been surviving there on the British 
state pension for a year or two. Registering for Spanish residence can be 
daunting without the language skills and resources to pay for advice. Some like 
the Dutch mum would not be eligible and, should they be asked to leave once the 
protection of EU citizenship is removed, would arrive in Britain without the 
right to use theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and would also be 
ineligible for the house benefits needed to secure accommodation. The number of 
people displaced across Britain and Europe could run into millions. HMG and the 
EU negotiators will have to find a way of preventing what could become a 
significant internal refugee crisis among their own citizenship.
Olly Cooper
Cambridge and Algarrobo, Spain

• Re EU citizens applying for British citizenship and the long processing 
times, the Home Office’s pathetic response was to say that they had launched an 
express passport check-in service. They failed to say that the cost of 
nationalisation is over £1,000 plus all the add-ons, eg biometric residences 
permit, medical checks etc, and the process takes six months or more. A super 
premium service is £8,750.
Margaret King
Polegate, East Sussex

• It would seem that some EU citizens when applying for permanent residence in 
the UK are being subjected to requirements concerning comprehensive health 
insurance that the NHS clearly states they do not need to have (Call to scrap 
rule barring some EU citizens from the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/30/spanish-uk-resident-fears-insurance-loophole-will-force-her-to-leave>
, 31 December). If a person from the EU, EEA or Switzerland is moving to 
England,a quick check of the NHS website reveals that 
<http://www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/AboutNHSservices/uk-visitors/moving-to-england/Pages/moving-to-england-from-the-eea.aspx>
: “Provision of free NHS treatment is on the basis of being ordinarily resident 
and is not dependent upon nationality, payment of UK taxes, national insurance 
(NI) contributions, being registered with a GP, having an NHS number or owning 
property in the UK.” Furthermore, “ordinarily resident means, broadly speaking, 
living in the UK on a lawful and properly settled basis for the time being.”

Is the Home Office trying to take away the rights of some EU citizens that the 
Department ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> states that 
they are entitled to?
Paul Tattam
High Peak, Derbyshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 