
Cycling needs a good news story now more than ever. If you are looking for one 
about a British cycling team that fans can support without any ethical 
misgivings – a team that has consistently delivered great results, including a 
winner on the iconic Champs-Élysées – look no further thanWiggle 
<http://www.wiggle.co.uk/> High5.

Women’s cycling still lacks a Grand Tour to equal the big three of men’s 
cycling and its major showcases remain the Olympics and the one-day criterium 
races staged at the end of the Tour de France and the Vuelta. But anyone who 
has joined the masses on the roadside for theWomen’s Tour 
<http://www.womenstour.co.uk/> or the RideLondon Classique 
<https://www.prudentialridelondon.co.uk/events/classique/> will tell you that 
women’s cycling offers as much bang for your buck as the men’s sport. And it’s 
flourishing at all levels in the UK, from amateur leagues across the country to 
the elite level.

Wiggle <http://www.wiggle.co.uk/> Honda (as they were known until 2015) were 
launched three years ago with support from British Cycling to serve as a 
showcase for the cream of British women’s talent and a crucial stepping stone 
from the track to the road.Laura Kenny <https://twitter.com/LauraTrott31>, now 
riding forMatrix Fitness-Vulpine 
<http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/latest-news/laura-trott-signs-matrix-fitness-vulpine-team-2015-134608>
, started her transition to the road with the team and her British Cycling 
team-mate,Dani King <https://twitter.com/DaniKing1>, has been with Wiggle High5 
<https://twitter.com/WiggleHigh5> since the beginning. King wasn’t selected for 
Team GB at Rio, but Wiggle High5 manager and owner Rochelle Gilmore has nothing 
but praise for the way King has taken to road racing, calling her “an 
inspiration” and lauding her passion for the sport and her rapid transition 
into a road cyclist of great potential.

The team have hovered around the No1 spot in the UCI world rankings all season 
– they’re currentlythe third best team in the world 
<http://www.uci.ch/road/ranking/> with two riders in the top five individual 
rankings <http://www.uci.ch/road/ranking/> – and have had an incredible season. 
Gilmore puts the team’s phenomenal success this season down to the 
extraordinary camaraderie among riders from around the globe. “The thing that 
amazes me about the team spirit is that our athletes are all really close 
friends,” says Gilmore. “They care about each other so much, so much that at 
times that they want the best for their team-mates rather than the best for 
themselves. This is what makes Wiggle High5 unique and so strong as a unit.”

That view is reinforced by Amy Pieters 
<http://www.wigglehighfive.com/amy-pieters-2/>, the Dutch rider who arrived 
from German team Giant-Alpecin for the 2016 season . “We have a good and 
relaxed atmosphere and it doesn’t matter who is winning from the team,” says 
Pieters.Amy Roberts 
<http://www.wigglehighfive.com/amy-roberts-gbr-rider-profile/>, a British track 
champion, agrees: “The team spirit is really something special. It’s very rare 
to have such a big bunch of girls that all get on so well and keep each other 
going through highs and lows. Our ambitions as a team are to win as much races 
as possible and be the No1 team in the world.”

The team secured victories in two of the biggest races of the 2016 season, 
with Belgian’sJolien d’Hoore <https://twitter.com/joliendhoore?lang=en> – the 
most prolific winner in the women’s peloton in 2015 – takingLa Madrid Challenge 
by La Vuelta 
<http://www.cyclingnews.com/races/la-madrid-challenge-by-la-vuelta-2016/> and 
Chloe Hosking <https://chloehosking.wordpress.com/>, who was second in Madrid, 
winningLa Course by Le Tour de France 
<http://www.letour.com/la-course-by-le-tour-de-france/2016/us/> on the 
Champs-Elysees in July.

Hosking still can’t get over her storming win in Paris. The Australian says: 
“When I won La Course I just honestly couldn’t believe it. I had started my 
sprint super early so I half expected to get swamped from behind. As the line 
kept getting closer I just kept waiting but I had got such a jump when I first 
kicked they couldn’t catch me. It’s still hard to verbalise exactly what I was 
feeling, but shell-shocked comes pretty close.”

Hosking has high hopes of becoming Wiggle High5’s first road world champion at 
theRoad World Championships in Doha 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_UCI_Road_World_Championships>, which begin 
next week. “Some would say I have lofty goals for 2016, but I’ve never been 
quiet about my goal to win the world championships in Doha,” she says. “I know 
it won’t be easy, but it’s the most sprinter-friendly course we have had since 
Copenhagen in 2011 and I have done well in Qatar [she won stage four of the
Ladies Tour of Qatar <http://www.letour.fr/ladies-tour-of-qatar/> in February, 
securing her spot on the long list for World’s selection] over the last few 
years when we have raced there so why not set my sights high?”

Hosking has the right to feel confident. She is coming off a bunch sprint win 
at theGP Beghelli 
<http://www.cyclingnews.com/races/gran-premio-bruno-beghelli-internazionale-donne-elite-2016/results/>
 in Italy, where she beat Marianne Vos into second to complete a great 
weekend’s racing for the team –Elisa Longo Borghini 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elisa_Longo_Borghini> climbed to back-to-back 
victories in the Giro dell’Emilia the day before. But Hosking’s toughest 
competition at the world championships may come from her team-mate Giorgia 
Bronzini. At 33, Bronzini is eight years older than Hosking but the Italian has 
the experience of having been double world champion – in 2010 in Australia and 
in 2011 on that flat, fast Danish course.

Doha is a dream of a course for any sprinter – the kind that might only come 
along once in a rider’s career. Hosking has ridden strongly all season, from 
top tens in the Classics to a string of wins in World Cup events, and she 
starts as one of the favourites for the pan-flat course that winds its way 
through a long technical section on desert roads before finishing on what most 
pundits believe will be a hotly contested bunch sprint finish.

With four national champion time trialists in the team – Audrey Cordon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audrey_Cordon> (France), Anna Sanchis 
<https://twitter.com/annitasanchis?lang=en> (Spain), Elisa Longo Borghini 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elisa_Longo_Borghini> (Italy) and Emma Johansson 
<http://www.emmajohansson.com/> (Sweden) – Wiggle High5 might even have a 
decent chance of toppling the acknowledged experts in the world trade team time 
trial. Johansson has already tasted success in the event, taking bronze and 
silver with her last team, Orica-AIS.

But perhaps the strongest showing for the team this season came in Rio, amid 
the carnage of the women’s road race, when Emma Johansson and Elisa Longo 
Borghini tooksilver and bronze 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cycling_at_the_2016_Summer_Olympics_%E2%80%93_Women%27s_individual_road_race>
 after a thrilling chase to catch American team-mate Mara Abbott over the 
closing kilometres after Annamiek van Vleuten’s horrifying crash. It was a 
display of strength in depth unmatched by any other trade team, even though 
each rider was carrying her national colours in the race. At the time Gilmore 
said “We supported them for the Olympics, not just for the season and it’s been 
challenging and demanding but the results have been just incredible.”

The camaraderie, the strength, the sheer volume of results say Gilmore’s 
approach to supporting her riders throughout the season pays massive dividends. 
If you’re looking to back a British team that does things the right way, you 
could do worse than Wiggle High5.

• This article is from 100 Tours 100 Tales 
<http://100tours100tales.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Suze Clemitson on Twitter <https://twitter.com/festinagirl>
 