
He stood for centuries at the very edge of ancient Egypt, gazing down 
imperiously upon the trading ships as they blew in from the Mediterranean. His 
name wasHapy <http://www.egyptianmyths.net/hapi.htm>: god of fertility, lord of 
the river, life-giving steward of its floods. And, on his plinth at the western 
mouth of the Nile, a massive red granite gatekeeper to one of the greatest port 
cities on earth.

Until one day, probably towards the end of the second century BC, there was a 
tremor and the ground began to churn and liquefy at Hapy’s feet. He wobbled, 
lurched, and then six tonnes of intricately carved stonework crashed into the 
sea.

In time, the rest of the settlement that Hapy guarded followed suit. A place 
written into the legends of antiquity – the site of the divine heroHeracles 
<http://www.greekmythology.com/Myths/Heroes/Heracles/heracles.html>’ first 
footsteps in Africa, and where Sparta’sHelen 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helen_of_Troy> famously sought refuge with her 
abductor,Paris of Troy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris_(mythology)> – 
disappeared completely under water and was buried, seemingly forever, by layer 
upon layer of sand and silt.
Thonis-Heracleion map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/aug/2016-08-12T14:06:48.html> 
In the early 2000s, however, a group of divers working off the Egyptian coast 
found a large fragment of rock under the seabed, and brought it up to land. It 
was a piece of Hapy, salt-encrusted but intact. They continued searching, and 
eventually unearthed six more. Around these pieces lay other treasures: the 
ruins of temples, shards of pottery, precious jewellery, coins, oil lamps, 
processional barges and busts.

“As an archaeologist, discovering a tomb is exciting, but it’s the tomb of one 
individual,” says Aurélia Masson-Berghoff, curator of theSunken Cities 
exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/15/drowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities>
 at the British Museum. “Discovering a whole city, which was home to thousands 
and thousands of people over more than a thousand years … Well, that’s 
something else.”

The home in question was Thonis-Heracleion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heracleion>. And now, more than a millennium 
after it was first submerged, Hapy’s city is returning to the surface once 
again.

‘Part marshland, part urban sprawl’

Unlike Babylon, Pompeii or mystical Atlantis, few people today have heard of 
Thonis-Heracleion. Indeed, until theremarkable finds 
<http://www.franckgoddio.org/projects/sunken-civilizations/heracleion.html> of 
recent years, there was a danger that the waves of the Mediterranean would 
consign to history not only the city’s physical remnants, but even its memory 
as well.


And yet if you were a European merchant in the fifth century BC – an importer 
of grain, perfume or papyrus perhaps, or an exporter of silver, copper, wine or 
oil – then Thonis-Heracleion loomed large on your horizon. The same was true if 
you were aCarian <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caria> mercenary, an educated 
Greek, a professional sailor, or a member of the Pharaonic court.Scattered 
<http://www.franckgoddio.org/projects/sunken-civilizations/heracleion/interactive-map.html>
 across a series of interlinked islands, sand and mudbanks, Thonis-Heracleion – 
part aquatic marshland, part urban sprawl – was ancient Egypt’s bustling, 
cosmopolitan gateway to the Mediterranean, and thus its nexus with the western 
world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63ec0adc4718e80dcbfcf8efee07f82ad64f0b75%2F0_89_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63ec0adc4718e80dcbfcf8efee07f82ad64f0b75%2F0_89_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The British Museum exhibition opens with the reassembled Hapy. Photograph: 
Stefan Rousseau/PA 
Founded around 2,700 years ago on the site of present-day Abu Qir bay 
<https://www.britannica.com/place/Abu-Qir-Bay>, 15 miles north-east of 
Alexandria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/14/story-cities-day-1-alexandria-egypt-history-urbanisation-foundations-modern-world>
, Thonis-Heracleion predated its better-known neighbour as the mainemporion 
(trading port) for the region by several centuries and was a hub for 
international commerce.

Criss-crossed by a network of canals and dotted with harbours, wharves, 
temples and tower-houses – all joined together by a network of ferries, 
bridges, and pontoons – the city controlled most of the maritime traffic coming 
into Egypt from the Mediterranean. Goods would be inspected and taxed at the 
customs administration centre, and then carried on for distribution further 
inland, either atNaukratis 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/research_projects/all_current_projects/naukratis_the_greeks_in_egypt.aspx>
 – another trading port that lay almost 50 miles further up the Nile – or via 
the Western Lake, which was connected by a water channel to the nearby town of
Canopus <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canopus,_Egypt> and offered access to 
many other parts of the country.


Although Thonis-Heracleion and Canopus are mentioned by many of the great 
chroniclers of antiquity, fromHerodotus 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herodotus> to Strabo 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strabo> and Diodorus 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diodorus_Siculus>, most detailed knowledge of 
their existence was feared to have been permanently lost.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e652bf224efe3126eb05db7788d8ad2a46a549a%2F0_0_5102_3260%2F5102.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e652bf224efe3126eb05db7788d8ad2a46a549a%2F0_0_5102_3260%2F5102.jpg>
 A recreation of what the city may have looked like. Photograph: Yann Bernard © 
Franck Goddio / Hilti Foundation. 
Before 1933, when an RAF commander flying over Abu Qir 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RAF_Aboukir> glimpsed ruins in the water, most 
historians believed Thonis and Heracleion to have been two separate 
conurbations, both of which were situated on the current Egyptian mainland. The 
pilot’s sighting, however, kicked off a whole new era of offshore research. By 
the turn of the century a team from theEuropean Institute for Underwater 
Archaeology <http://www.ieasm.org/> – originally attracted to the bay by the 
presence of French warships thatsunk in the late 18th century 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Nile> – had created a series of 
maps sketching out the ancient topography of the region.

These charts – and the painstaking work of underwater excavation that has 
followed – relied upon hi-tech survey techniques and tireless human effort. The 
waters here are murky and visibility is low; in the aftermath of storms, “the 
sea is all stirred up, and charged with floating sand and mud that makes it 
difficult for us divers to see what is going on,”explained 
<http://www.franckgoddio.org/service/news-newsletter/detail/article/underwater-visibility.html>
 one researcher.

Archaeologists had to begin with side-scan sonar 
<http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/education/seafloor-mapping/how_sidescansonar.html>
, directing pulses of sound energy at the seabed and then analysing the echo to 
establish the changing depth of the ocean floor. Anuclear magnetic resonance 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_magnetic_resonance> magnetometer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetometer>, which can detect localised 
anomalies in the earth’s magnetic fields, was then used to identify geological 
faultlines caused by the weight of long-submerged buildings pressing down upon 
and fracturing layers of sediment, and to pinpoint the presence of large 
objects.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0db669ef2a2755f1b1a2c2f345a6629486b9b2c6%2F0_195_5392_6736%2F5392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0db669ef2a2755f1b1a2c2f345a6629486b9b2c6%2F0_195_5392_6736%2F5392.jpg>
 The 5.4 metres tall statue of the god Hapy. Photograph: Christoph 
Gerigk/Franck Goddio/Hilti Foundation 
With the most promising excavation spots now fixed, scuba divers were sent in. 
They carried water-dredges: huge underwater vacuum-cleaners that hoover away 
overlying blankets of sand and expose the archaeological layers beneath. The 
biggest items, such as building fragments and colossal statues – aPtolemaic 
king and queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/26/egyptian-statues-lost-city-tall-order-british-museum>
, each five metres high, among them – were the easiest to find and resurrect 
from the seabed, but smaller and more eclectic gems soon followed, including 
goblets, figurines, ritual pails, and 13 limestone animal sarcophagi.


One by one, each artefact was catalogued, photographed 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/exhibitions/sunken_cities/underwater_filming.aspx>
, and then – if safe to do so – winched up to the deck of the Princess Duda 
research boat before being subjected to further analysis back on land. 
Together, they have transformed our understanding not just of 
Thonis-Heracleion, but of the nature of Egypt and its interactions with the 
Hellenic world at the time. “Some of these objects are completely unique, of 
great historical or artistic importance,” Masson-Berghoff told the Guardian. 
“They push us to think anew.”


The Decree of Sais <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decree_of_Nectanebo_I>, for 
example – a magnificent black stele that stands two metres high and is carved 
with perfectly preserved hieroglyphics from the early fourth century BC – was 
unearthed on the site of a temple to supreme god of the Egyptians, Amun-Gereb, 
at Thonis-Heracleion. The stele reveals some of the intricacies of contemporary 
taxation in Egypt: “His Majesty [Pharaoh Nectanebo I] decreed: Let there be 
given one-tenth of the gold, of the silver, of the timber, of the processed 
wood and of all things coming from the sea of the Hau-Nebut [the Mediterranean] 
… to become divine offerings to my mother Neith,” reads its edict.

But the stele has done more than flesh out our understanding of ancient 
Egyptian tariffs. Its discovery has also helped solve a long-running mystery: 
by comparing it to other inscribed monuments, experts were able to determine 
that Thonis and Heracleion were not, as previously believed, two different 
towns, but rather one single city known by both its Egyptian and Greek name 
respectively.

The interplay between Pharaonic and Greek societies in Thonis-Heracleion is a 
constant feature of the city’s remnants: Hellenic helmets were nestled in the 
seabed alongside their Egyptian counterparts, as were Cypriot statuettes and 
incense burners, Athenian perfume bottles, and ancient anchors from Greek ships.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e3960e1779d4fdb05deb2d9d2108665e49e4f50%2F0_169_5906_3545%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e3960e1779d4fdb05deb2d9d2108665e49e4f50%2F0_169_5906_3545%2F5906.jpg>
 This stele reveals that Thonis (Egyptian) and Heracleion (Greek) were the same 
city. Photograph: Christoph Gerigk/Franck Goddio/Hilti Foundation 
Nowhere was this cross-cultural pollination more evident than in the realm of 
religion, particularly during the rise of the Ptolemaic dynasty inEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, where a succession of foreign-born 
rulers sought to justify their power in the eyes of the Egyptian people by 
demonstrating their affinity with Pharaonic traditions.

One object recovered from the water is a 2,000-year-old stone figurine of 
Cleopatra III <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleopatra_III_of_Egypt>: a 
Ptolemaic queen, but depicted as the Egyptian goddessIsis 
<https://www.britannica.com/topic/Isis-Egyptian-goddess> and sculpted in a 
style that combines both local and Hellenic aesthetics.

Drowned worlds: Egypt's lost cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/15/drowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities>
Among the most beguiling of Thonis-Heracleion’s remains are the artefacts 
associated with the city at play. The annual celebration of the Mysteries of 
Osiris, marked all over ancient Egypt, involved the preparation – in the 
secrecy of the temples – of two figures of Osiris, god of the underworld and 
resurrection: one made of soil and barley, the other of expensive materials 
including ground-up semi-precious stones.

In Thonis-Heracleion, the former was placed in a granite tank and nurtured 
with Nile water until it germinated. It was then placed in a papyrus barge 
alongside 33 other vessels; the whole flotilla was illuminated by 365 oil lamps 
– one for each day of the year – and eventually sailed down to the nearby 
settlement of Canopus. As well as an 11-metre sycamore vessel that would have 
been used in this procession, archaeologists have unearthed several small lead 
replicas of the papyrus boats, thrown into the water as votive offerings by 
onlookers.


These finds offer a rare glimpse into the practice of ancient ritual, rather 
than just the liturgical representation of it. In Masson-Berghoff’s words, they 
provide a connection to the “materiality” of religion in Thonis-Heracleion. 
That’s important because, while the items dredged up so far from the bottom of 
Abu Qir bay tell a remarkable story of a city that could have vanished 
completely from our consciousness, it is, for now at least, very much a 
selective story. Those working on it today are well aware of its holes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F263abca10bb3877191573df0b675049eb10dac3d%2F0_491_7368_4421%2F7368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lost%20cities%20%236%3A%20how%20Thonis-Heracleion%20resurfaced%20after%201%2C000%20years%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Flost-cities-6-thonis-heracleion-egypt-sunken-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F263abca10bb3877191573df0b675049eb10dac3d%2F0_491_7368_4421%2F7368.jpg>
 Archaeologists have so far only discovered a fraction of the city. Photograph: 
Christoph Gerigk © Franck Goddio / Hilti Foundation 
“My hope is that future discoveries will enable us to shed more light on the 
lives of ordinary people,” says Masson-Berghoff, who points out that while we 
know more than ever about Thonis-Heracleion’s rulers and priests, it is much 
harder to picture the mudbrick homes and daily lives of those who served them 
and kept the busy port operating smoothly.

Today, 95% of the area’s urban footprint remains to be explored; perhaps there 
are objects yet to be found that can enrich our understanding of how cargo 
unloaders, cleaners and cloth-sewers experienced their city. “What we know now 
is just a fraction,” observesFranck Goddio 
<http://www.franckgoddio.org/projects/sunken-civilizations/heracleion.html>, 
director of the ongoing excavations. “We are still at the very beginning of our 
search.”


By the second century BC, Thonis-Heracleion’s era of pomp and prestige was 
already fading. Further along the coast, the new metropolis of Alexandria was 
rapidly establishing itself as Egypt’s preeminent port, while the hybrid 
foundation of land and water upon which Thonis-Heracleion was built had begun 
to feel less secure. It wasn’t a single natural disaster – an earthquake, 
tsunami, rising sea levels, or subsidence – that doomed the city, but rather a 
combination of them all.

Lost cities #7: how Nasa technology uncovered the 'megacity' of Angkor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/16/lost-cities-6-angkor-wat-nasa-technology-khmer-megacity>
At the end of the century, probably after a severe flood, the central island – 
already sagging under the weight of the main temple buildings – succumbed to
liquefaction <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soil_liquefaction>. In what must 
have been a terrifying experience, the hard clay soil turned to liquid in 
moments and the buildings atop it collapsed swiftly into the water. The supply 
of pottery and coins into Thonis-Heracleion appears to have ended at this 
point; a few hardy residents clung on to their homes throughout the Roman 
period and even into the beginning of Arab rule, but the last vestiges of the 
city sunk below the sea at the end of the eighth century.


At a time of looming ecological catastrophe, it is perhaps unsurprising that 
we should find the tale of Thonis-Heracleion so fascinating. Its rediscovery is 
a testament to advanced technology and human ingenuity, but the city’s fate – 
and the eerily inanimate memories of a long-forgotten urban life left behind – 
are a reminder of howfragile many of our own contemporary cities are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/01/what-world-most-vulnerable-city-battle-survival-nature>
.

Venice, arguably Thonis-Heracleion’s closest modern cousin owing to its siting 
on a lagoon and its famed network of waterways,is sinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/16/inside-venice-bid-hold-back-tide-sea-level-rise>
; Egypt’s Mediterranean coastline remains one of the places on earthmost 
vulnerable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/aug/21/climate-change-nile-flooding-farming>
 to rising sea levels, and even the most optimistic projections of global 
temperature increases could still displace millions in the region from their 
homes.

Hapy’s reawakening from the seabed, a millennium in the making, is a unique 
window to our urban past. The struggle continues to ensure he and his city are 
not also a vision of our future.

The Egyptians: A Radical Story, by Jack Shenker, is published by Allen Lane 
(£15.99);buy it for £11.19 here 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/359890/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
.Sunken Cities 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/exhibitions/sunken_cities.aspx>, an 
exhibition of artefacts found at Thonis-Heracleion and Canopus, is at the 
British Museum until 27 November 2016

Please share your stories of other ‘lost cities’ throughout history in the 
comments below. Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join in the discussion
 