
The sitcom is not a genre, it is a structure. It is a mechanism for delivering 
jokes in the same way that a newspaper is for delivering information and an 
Uber is a way for delivering people holding lattes to events they think are 
more important than they really are. There have been artistic improvements 
since Seinfeld found a way to rejig the mechanism, but most of those 
modifications amount to shows “about nothing”. Louie, though a comedy, is not a 
sitcom. It is something else entirely. it is a show about, well, everything.

Louis CK standup review – this time it's not personal for the arch-misanthrope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/26/louis-ck-standup-review-madison-square-garden-this-time-its-not-personal-for-the-bostonian-misanthrope>
Tuning in to the show’s fifth season, which aired Thursday on FX, viewers 
didn’t find that familiar sitcom structure. Of course it is filmed with a 
single camera and doesn’t have a laugh track, but these days the same can be 
said for every 30-minute show not on CBS. What is different about Louie is that
viewers must recalibrate their expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/24/louie-box-set-review-louis-ck>
 of what the show is every time they watch it. Unlike the Big Bang Theory, 
where you could watch an episode on mute while waiting for a plane at the 
airport and still understand what’s happening, Louie offers no comforting (or 
numbing) familiarity.

The first episode of the new season opens up with Louie telling a joke from 
his standup act, a familiar framing device, but one that doesn’t appear again 
in the first four episodes. In several of those episodes, we see Louie 
performing in the club, but not in this standalone way that it is related to 
the plot. What’s so great about Louie is that one week it is a surreal 
exploration of the gender dynamics between a man and a woman, and the next week 
it is an absurdist parody of an action movie that is really just one giant poop 
joke. Though his daughters are always played by the same actresses, continuity 
is fast and loose. One episode hinges around Louie hanging out with the 
ex-fiancé of a sister we’ve never heard about (and might not hear about ever 
again).
 Iconoclast without a cause: Louis CK Photograph: FX 
What each episode does have in common is Louis CK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/louis-ck>, of course, who writes, 
directs, edits and does everything except perform the theme song and monitor 
the muffin table at craft services (which he might do as a side gig). Every 
installment shares his sensibility, the idea that comedy is pervasive in our 
human interactions – especially romantic relationships and family dynamics – 
and that exploring our shared humanity not only leads to laughs but some sort 
of enlightenment. This can be found in helping a pregnant woman feel beautiful 
or consoling the crazy (and crazy-annoying) acquaintances who materialize out 
of our past.

Both of these things happen this season, which finds a renewed emphasis on not 
only creating comedy but exploring the industry of comedy (the second episode 
sees Louie hosting an open mic night with the most odd set you’ve ever seen). 
Last season contained a lot of strange episodes where Louie explored romantic 
relationships with a neighbour and his friend Pamela (Pamela Adlon). It was 
Louie’s serious year, where he explored whatdating is like for a “fat girl” 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/05/14/showbiz/tv/louis-ck-fat-girl/> and committing 
sexual assault 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2014/06/louis-ck-rape-scene-pamela-part-one>
.

A guide to Louie's New York City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/05/louie-louis-ck-new-york-map-season-four>
Pamela is still around these days, but their relationship is protean and odd, 
just like the show. That’s how Louie manages to push the boundaries – by having 
no form or boundaries at all. He toys with our very idea of what we’re 
watching, creating a reality that is at once grounded in the mundane urbanity 
of New York but also off-kilter enough that it seems like a dream. No one’s 
life could be as weird as Louie’s, with its “a la carte” relationship with 
Pamela, showing up at the wrong potluck dinner, or getting cussed out by an 
angry lesbian in a hospital waiting room.

But through that weirdness, we can explore our lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2013/mar/12/have-you-been-watching-louie>
, how we’re all a product of the expectations of race, class, gender and 
circumstance that are greater than ourselves. Louie is greater than a sitcom or 
even a comedy. It’s actually a tragedy with at least one laugh-out-loud moment 
each episode (just wait for the squirm-inducing but relatably hilarious opening 
of the second episode). Louie is the tragic figure, struggling to succeed at 
life and failing at every turn, even when it seems like he succeeds. That is 
his way into examining the modern condition. While the best sitcoms can only 
hope to be something about nothing, Louie is a show about everything.
 