
To witness the pinnacle of fashion today – in terms of both commercial might 
and creative endeavour – it doesn’t get much better than theLouis Vuitton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/louis-vuitton> show that has taken place 
in Paris.

According to the fashion house’s creative director, Nicolas Ghesquière, this 
collection was about “the frontier of the digital world” – a theme that enabled 
him to dress models inshimmering space-age creations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/07/louis-vuitton-turns-catwalk-into-a-spaceship-as-fashion-goes-intergalactic>
 while flagging up the brand’s heritage as a purveyor of very posh luggage. 
“It’s another way of travelling at the end of the day,” he said, “this digital 
travelling that we are all experiencing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Flouis-vuitton-nicolas-ghesquiere-digital-punk-paris-fashion-week-catwalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F545249d355bf4dc3e3d3ac93fe31d49ed4b0798a%2F416_69_2811_4851%2F2811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louis%20Vuitton's%20Nicolas%20Ghesqui%C3%A8re%20brings%20digital%20punk%20to%20Paris%20catwalk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Flouis-vuitton-nicolas-ghesquiere-digital-punk-paris-fashion-week-catwalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louis%20Vuitton%27s%20Nicolas%20Ghesqui%C3%A8re%20brings%20digital%20punk%20to%20Paris%20catwalk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Flouis-vuitton-nicolas-ghesquiere-digital-punk-paris-fashion-week-catwalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F545249d355bf4dc3e3d3ac93fe31d49ed4b0798a%2F416_69_2811_4851%2F2811.jpg>
 The show represents ‘the frontier of the digital world’, according to 
Ghesquière. Photograph: Bertrand Guay/AFP/Getty Images 
Often when designers refer to the digital landscape they do so 
straightforwardly, staging catwalk “moments” or creating novelty accessories 
designed to break Instagram. Ghesquière’s approach on Wednesday was more 
conceptual: models looked like wild creatures fromMad Max 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> or Blade Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/14/why-blade-runner-is-timeless> 
with pink hair or mohawks or their ears painted silver.


There were punky biker jackets and jumpsuits, cowboy-influenced spurs and 
leather waistcoats, and two-tone trousers that looked like chaps. Red stripes 
on leather jackets recalled the US flag, but were joined by Louis Vuitton’s 
yellow and brown insignia rather than stars. The final looks were tulle skirts 
appliquéd with celluloid sequins that looked like a glamorous oil slick.

The accessories were particularly tough: leather cuffs worn on the fingers 
like boxers’ tape, bags covered in swirls of smudged graffiti; silver 
headpieces that looked as though models might be plugged into the mainframe. 
Even when dresses were long and flowing they were paired with squidgy-soled 
shoes, brogues or slingback loafers.

Video screens ran alongside and above the catwalk, images morphing from a 
virtual reality headset to silvery, robot curves and a voiceover quoting the
video game Minecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/shortcuts/2015/sep/01/markus-persson-the-minecraft-billionaire-sending-lonely-late-night-tweets-from-ibiza>
 andJeff Bridges in Tron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/dec/06/jeff-bridges-tron-legacy>
.

Backstage, for half an hour, Ghesquière greeted a procession of stars who 
looked smaller in real life than they do on the screen – Alicia Vikander,
Catherine Deneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/13/catherine-deneuve-social-media-has-stopped-people-dreaming-about-stars>
, Michelle Williams – to the delight of the attendant scrum of photographers. 
Like many in the crowd, these celebrities were either clad head to toe in Louis 
Vuitton or pledged their allegiance more subtly with a top or a handbag. But 
the influence of this collection will be felt far beyond these hardcore, 
moneyed fans.

Ever since Ghesquière joined Vuitton from Balenciaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/07/balenciaga-demna-gvasalia-new-creative-director>
, four seasons ago, his work has had a huge impact on the wider fashion world; 
the polo necks and sepia-toned mustard and beige 1970s vision he presented for 
his first Louis Vuitton collection is still being replicated by other designers 
and on the high street.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Flouis-vuitton-nicolas-ghesquiere-digital-punk-paris-fashion-week-catwalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf36914686a2ddd809bd7116102d0757a54baef0%2F0_221_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louis%20Vuitton's%20Nicolas%20Ghesqui%C3%A8re%20brings%20digital%20punk%20to%20Paris%20catwalk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Flouis-vuitton-nicolas-ghesquiere-digital-punk-paris-fashion-week-catwalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louis%20Vuitton%27s%20Nicolas%20Ghesqui%C3%A8re%20brings%20digital%20punk%20to%20Paris%20catwalk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Flouis-vuitton-nicolas-ghesquiere-digital-punk-paris-fashion-week-catwalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf36914686a2ddd809bd7116102d0757a54baef0%2F0_221_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Nicolas Ghesquière and actress Catherine Deneuve backstage after the Louis 
Vuitton show. Photograph: Bertrand Rindoff Petroff/Getty Images 
This season was a clear continuation of that look, but more streetwise than 
before. The influence of the ever-important east Asian market was clearly felt. 
Korean actress Doona Bae, star of theNetflix series Sense8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/04/sense8-review-wachowskis-netflix>
, was a big inspiration this season, said Ghesquière, as well as the Japanese 
anime Evangelion andWong Kar-Wai’s sci-fi 2046 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/sep/21/londonfilmfestival2004.londonfilmfestival>
.

Prada and Louis Vuitton new patrons of art – shame they're so boring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/jun/01/prada-louis-vuitton-new-patrons-of-art-shame-theyre-so-boring>
There has been much talk in the luxury industry about customers craving 
discreet, under-the-radar or unusual brands that reflect their taste and 
individuality rather than staying loyal to the big names whose designs are 
universally recognised as unapologetic signifiers of wealth – and universally 
copied by counterfeiters. Louis Vuitton is the biggest brand of them all – 
worth $28.1bn (£18bn)according to Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/companies/louis-vuitton/> – and has answered this 
challenge by producing collections and collaborations aiming to marry high art 
with big commerce.

The show’s venue – the Frank Gehry-designed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/14/frank-gehry-los-angeles-river>
 Louis Vuitton Fondation in the 16th arrondissement, of Paris – encapsulates 
this ambition. The 40,000 sq ft art gallery – a staggering building made of 
irregular glass panels rising into the sky in a ululating motion like a 
windmill – wasopened last year 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/unchanged/2014/09/frank-gehry-foundation-louis-vuitton-paris>
 at a reported cost of $143m.
 