
From bizarrely dressed bloggers to Botoxed editors, there’s no place for 
people-watching quite like the entrance to a fashion show. But the models who 
walk in the shows are usually pretty anonymous: they slink from one job to the 
next with their backpacks on, unnoticed.

At last month’s menswear shows, something changed. Outside Versace 
<http://uk.versace.com/> in Milan, 50 girls in denim cut-offs lined the narrow 
streets. AtBottega Veneta 
<http://www.bottegaveneta.com/gb?tp=62206&gclid=CO7z0t3xvsYCFaPnwgodA6gKfQ>, a 
cluster of teens stood by the entrance, craning their necks. AtEtro 
<https://www.etro.com/en_uk/>, the excitement peaked as more than 200 teenagers 
colonised the road, brandishing iPhones and shouting: “Lucky!”

The object of the girls’ affection is Lucky Blue Smith, a 6ft 3in American 
with blond Mr Whippy hair and unreal, swimming pool blue eyes. On Instagram (
@luckybsmith <https://instagram.com/luckybsmith/?hl=en>) he comes across as the 
fantasy boyfriend, clowning with friends, cuddling puppies, peering sleepy-eyed 
from crisp white bed sheets. At 17, Smith has 1.2 million followers, which 
doesn’t put him in the same league as social media giants like Kim Kardashian 
(37.6m followers) or Justin Bieber (31.6m) – but still, it’s a coup for an 
emerging male model. (The world’s highest-earning male models,Sean O’Pry 
<https://instagram.com/seanopry55/> and David Gandy 
<https://instagram.com/davidgandy_official/>, have 389,000 and 358,000 
Instagram followers respectively.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436284865789%2F76c00d7e-b6b1-4332-b743-d080c7ca56aa-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lucky%20Blue%20Smith%3A%20the%20Mormon%20model%20with%20a%20million%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lucky%20Blue%20Smith%3A%20the%20Mormon%20model%20with%20a%20million%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436284865789%2F76c00d7e-b6b1-4332-b743-d080c7ca56aa-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘They just want a photo and a hug’: Lucky Blue Smith meets his fans on the 
streets of Paris, accompanied by his sister Daisy Clementine (on right). 
Photograph: Samuel Kirszenbaum for the Guardian 
It helps that Smith is happy to spend hours with his self-styled Lucky Charms, 
signing autographs and giving them hugs. Often, the fans get together on 
Twitter to work out where he will be. Nina, 16, has tracked him down to the 
Balmain show in Paris. “I like him because he is beautiful,” she explains. 
“He’s always on Instagram, so he connects with his fans. I prefer models to pop 
stars. I don’t really like the music.” Gabrielle Benhemon, 14, has met Smith 
before and shares her trophy: a smiling selfie he took with her iPhone. Later, 
on the phone from Los Angeles, his American agent Mimi Yapor explains the 
strategy: “He’s doing things the old-school way, like Elvis Presley. He wants 
to be a lot more accessible than the typical Hollywood star. His fans have 
given him this success, so he is kind of giving back.”

Often, Smith invites his fans to meet him, posting a time and address on 
Instagram; it is at these meet-ups that teenage roadblocks can be guaranteed. 
He says he started doing this out of curiosity; now he treats it more 
strategically. “You can’t do it all the time,” he says. “You don’t want to be 
too accessible or too far away – you want it to be just right.” It’s also best 
to announce the meet-ups the night before, he explains, because: “They have to 
work it out with their mums, because half of them don’t drive.”

‘I want the main thing to be the music. Like Justin Bieber’

One recent meet-up in Paris saw 300 fans descend on a busy corner near the 
Eiffel Tower, while Smith and his sister Daisy Clementine – a calm, smiley 
19-year-old, also in possession of the family cheekbones and eyebrows – stood 
on a ledge, gazing down at a sea of waving hands and selfie sticks. There was 
jostling at the front, and those at the back were perilously close to the 
fast-moving traffic. “Everyone stop pushing,” Smith said, his voice remaining 
cool even though the top of his T-shirt had been ripped. On his fans’ Twitter 
feeds that night one camp berated another (the camp they call the “groupies”) 
for their hysterical behaviour. Right now, for the most part, Smith is able to 
engage with fans without security, but Alexis Borges – director of his agency 
NextModels <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/models> LA – says these 
meet-ups have been mushrooming and may soon need to be held in a “more 
controlled” environment.

Away from the crowds, in his representatives’ light-filled offices in Paris’s 
8th arrondissement, Lucky Blue is a friendly, fidgety teen. He waves his gangly 
arms around as he talks, runs his hands through his hair, and tugs at his 
T-shirt until its neckline goes baggy. His voice is gravelly, with a touch of 
Valley Girl inflection – part Jack Nicholson, part Kim Kardashian.

It turns out Lucky is not the only member of the family with star quality: his 
siblings are also quirkily named models and musicians. As well as Daisy – who 
chaperones him today – their sistersPyper America 
<https://instagram.com/pyperamerica/?hl=en>, 18, and Starlie Cheyenne 
<https://instagram.com/queenstarlie/?hl=en>, 21, are all signed to Next Models, 
and play in an “old-school surf” band calledThe Atomics 
<https://instagram.com/theatomics/?hl=en>. Lucky is the drummer; their father, 
Dallon Smith, taught them to play.

It was Borges, of Next Models, who discovered them, meeting Daisy first when 
she was on a scouting trip to Salt Lake City, near the family’s home town of 
Spanish Fork, Utah (the Smiths are Mormons). Daisy was 12; her little brother 
Lucky was 10, and even then Borges saw his potential: “He reminded me of a baby 
Brad Pitt,” he says. Daisy was formally signed at 14, followed by the rest of 
the family. “We don’t typically represent kids,” says Mimi Yapor, “but you know 
a star when you see one.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436284648280%2F3f53c429-7c9b-4f7d-a0db-0a0d3d019495-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lucky%20Blue%20Smith%3A%20the%20Mormon%20model%20with%20a%20million%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lucky%20Blue%20Smith%3A%20the%20Mormon%20model%20with%20a%20million%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436284648280%2F3f53c429-7c9b-4f7d-a0db-0a0d3d019495-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Photograph: Ed Alcock for the Guardian 
Lucky Blue’s first proper photo shoot was at the age of 12, photographed by 
designerHedi Slimane <http://www.hedislimane.com/> for Japanese Arena Hommes; 
at 13 the entire family did a Gap campaign; at 14 he was playing the drums in 
front of the Hollywood sign in a campaign for Levi’s. A couple of years ago, 
Smith’s agency suggested he “edged up” his look by dyeing his dark blond hair 
platinum; they were right, and his career gathered momentum. In the past year, 
he has walked for brands from Moschino to Fendi, featured in advertisements for 
Calvin Klein and was recently revealed as the male face of Tom Ford. Smith has 
appeared onnumerous covers, too, ofL’Officiel Hommes Italia 
<http://designsfever.com/2015/06/17/lucky-blue-smith-covers-lofficiel-hommes-italia-fallwinter-2015-issue-in-prada/>
 and onHarper’s Bazaar China 
<http://forums.thefashionspot.com/f78/harpers-bazaar-china-may-2015-lucky-blue-smith-pyper-america-265457.html>
 – where he is particularly popular, in part because his agency has developed 
his presence on social media platforms such as Weibo and WeChat. This does not 
make him the male Kate Moss – he has yet to score a major campaign with a 
storied house such as Gucci, Valentino or Prada – but it’s not a bad start.

As well as modelling and the band, Smith has ambitions to act. Borges tells me 
he hasn’t worked with a “triple threat” of this potential in decades. Nor, in a 
27-year career, has he signed an entire family; he compares the Smiths “to the 
Osmonds or the Jacksons”.

For the moment, though, the spotlight shines brightest on Lucky, especially as 
far as fans are concerned. He says he enjoys the meet-ups – “they just want a 
photo and a hug” – though in January, “one girl got a little experimental. She 
lifted up my hoodie, stuck her hand down… I pulled it out, and asked what she 
was doing, but she just laughed.” In China, he says: “They really wanna touch 
you. They are aggressive – in a good way.”

Though Lucky is a special case, being what the industry would call a “slashie” 
(model-slash-actor-slash-musician), he is also representative of a sea change 
in the modelling profession. A few short years ago, only the names of the most 
successful models were known outside the industry. Now, even mid-ranking 
models’ careers may suffer if they don’t cultivate a decent profile online, 
with casting agents as likely to ask for a model’s Instagram numbers as their 
height.

“Some agencies have started special divisions for models who have a lot of 
social media followers,” says Joseph Thornton-Allan, model booker atPremier 
Model Management <http://www.premiermodelmanagement.com/> in London. “It adds a 
whole new aspect to what models can do for a brand. They might get paid to post 
something, or a certain amount of posts might be part of the agreement for a 
shoot.”

‘He reminded me of a baby Brad Pitt,’ says the agent who spotted Smith, aged 
10. ‘You know a star when you see one’

“Instagram is a massive commodity to a model now,” says Richard Storer, 
managing director of Eleventen Communications, a PR agency for brands, models 
and celebrities. “It’s often handled with a separate contract to modelling 
work, and the value of that contract is based on your numbers.” A big-name 
model or celebrity could easily get paid between £3,000 and £15,000 for just 
one post about a brand, he says. “It’s an entirely new revenue stream.”

It’s little wonder that models are not above calculating behaviour to get 
their numbers up. “I think some of the models do play along with [teenage girls 
online] and write comments back,” says Thornton-Allan. Smith has noticed yet 
more crafty tricks: “I know when [other models] are just talking to me to try 
to get a following,” he says. “They’re like, ‘Let’s take a picture!’ or ‘Oh 
Lucky, let’s hang out!’ And I can tell right away when they’re trying to use 
me.” (Surely, the politics of Instagram will offer excellent fodder for the new 
filmZoolander 2 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1608290/>.)

Modelling remains one of the few industries where women are routinely paid 
more than men 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/vannale/2013/10/08/the-worlds-highest-paid-male-models-2013-oprys-1-5m-still-far-from-giseles-42m/>
. In 2013, the world’s highest-earning model was Gisele Bündchen, who made 
$42m; the top 10 highest-earning male models made $8m put together. Female 
models have been harnessing the power of social media for longer: Chanel 
couture shows are now populated by Instagram stars such as Kendall Jenner 
(30.1m followers) and Cara Delevingne (14.5m followers). Making money through 
Instagram is also easier for female models than for men. “I know female models 
whose postings about high-street brands cause sales to spike – and you can 
measure that – because the girls who follow them are the same people buying the 
clothes,” says Storer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNSC5_CYHnw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNSC5_CYHnw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNSC5_CYHnw&media=>
 Video: behind the scenes with Lucky Blue Smith at the menswear shows. 
The benefits of male models’ postings are a little more vague – brand 
awareness, a certain boost in cool factor, perhaps – but if that designer also 
sells products for women that teens can afford, like perfume, it’s an 
association that can be very lucrative.

In the past year, male models have been striving to catch up with the women. 
Some have launched their careers on Instagram:Matthew Noszka 
<https://instagram.com/p/1rbkjPjCHE/>, a muscly 22-year-old with 256,000 
followers and a dimple in his chin, was working for his father’s construction 
company one summer when an agent happened upon his profile and signed him up. 
In Paris, Lucky Blue’s fans tell me they also followFrancisco Lachowski 
<https://instagram.com/chico_lachowski/?hl=en> (excellent hair; posts lots of 
pictures of his adorable two-year-old son; 737,000 followers) andMarc Schulze 
<https://instagram.com/marcschulze__/> (a 21-year-old Berliner who looks a 
little like Freddie Mercury and has a bijou but dedicated following of 19,600).
Edward Wilding <https://instagram.com/edward_wilding/?hl=en>, Manchester’s 
answer to Clark Kent, keeps 94,000 followers hanging on his every topless shot 
and picture of his dinner. “People become obsessed not with the fashion but 
with the lifestyle,” explains Thornton-Allan.

Rather than one or two models becoming the sole focus of millions upon 
millions of girls worldwide, in the manner of One Direction, hundreds of models 
are being discovered by fans online. In other words, says Storer: “People are 
making it their business to be accessible all the time on social media and are 
becoming legends in their own lunch hour. You might have 3,000 followers on 
your YouTube channel, but for those people you are a rock star.”

Lucky Blue has the fanbase, but he’s not yet living the millionaire lifestyle. 
His agency won’t tell me what he’s earning, but while he may have earned 
£80,000 or more for a recent Philipp Plein campaign, a lot of models take home 
just £400 per catwalk show.

He still shares a bedroom with his sisters and brother. The Smiths left their 
high school in Utah to be home-schooled two years ago, and now live in a 
two-bedroom apartment in Hollywood. Four teenagers in one bedroom sounds like a 
recipe for hormone-fuelled disaster, but Daisy assures me it’s not that bad, 
explaining, “We all have our nook.” They didn’t really fit in back in Spanish 
Fork anyway, she adds; neighbours nicknamed them “the Cullins” after the 
mysterious vampire family in the Twilight books.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436284996492%2F8f37b82f-9eee-4da7-bcd6-3766b689b1f3-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lucky%20Blue%20Smith%3A%20the%20Mormon%20model%20with%20a%20million%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lucky%20Blue%20Smith%3A%20the%20Mormon%20model%20with%20a%20million%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436284996492%2F8f37b82f-9eee-4da7-bcd6-3766b689b1f3-1020x612.jpeg>
 Backstage at the Balmain spring/summer 2016 show in Paris. Photograph: Samuel 
Kirszenbaum for the Guardian 
Those distinctive looks work for Lucky Blue in front of the camera. His go-to 
pose is the James Dean/Brad Pitt head tilt: chin down, he glances upwards and 
narrows his eyes soulfully. He can do arch and cheeky, too: lips parted, one 
eyebrow raised, just likeLinda Evangelista on the August 1991 cover of British 
Vogue <http://www.vogue.co.uk/magazine/archive/issue/1991/August>.

But music remains his passion. Asked what he enjoys about modelling, he sounds 
like a Miss World contestant (“meeting new people, travelling the world”) but 
fizzes with excitement when talking about his bigger goals – “Playing sell-out 
shows and starring in movies. I want the main thing to be music and then, ‘Oh 
yeah, he’s in a Calvin Klein campaign.’ Like Justin Bieber.” Getting his fans 
to buy the band’s music will be one way Smith could monetise his popularity 
(although that would not be his choice of word). “I want to show my fans my 
music career and for them to [still] be fans of me when they’re mums,” he says. 
Meanwhile, there will be a range of Lucky Blue-branded hoodies and T-shirts.

‘I know when models are just talking to me to get a following. They’re like, 
“Oh, Lucky, let’s hang out!” ’

Inevitably, the Smiths are in talks to do a TV series. But if the family is 
starting to sound like Utah’s answer to the Kardashians, Lucky Blue is at pains 
to point out that the show will not be “another crap reality drama that is 
pointless” but an inspiring “docu-show about the making of the music”. Nor, he 
says, is their mother aKris Jenner <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kris_Jenner>
-style “momager”: “She hates that word and I don’t like it, either. She’s just 
my mum. If my parents were making me do this, I would rebel and not do it.”

He gets this nonconformist streak from his parents. He describes his father as 
an “entrepreneur” and a “big personality. He doesn’t like working a J.O.B. – 
I’ll quote him on that, and that’s like me. I will never work in a cubicle.” 
His parents tell me they are “somewhat strict, but not in the typical ways. We 
are a lot more strict with how you treat someone, and if you are a good person, 
than with missing a curfew or a homework assignment. We are risk-takers and 
will always default to creativity.” The family’s unusual names came about 
partly because their last name was Smith, they say. “How could we not? We did 
have to meet each of our kiddos before we could name them. They had to fit and 
feel right.”

I am desperate to know how the family’s Mormon faith ties in with the 
showbusiness lifestyle. Does Lucky drink alcohol or caffeine, or smoke, all of 
which is prohibited? But I am told the subject of religion is off-limits. The 
family take a wholesome attitude to life, is as much as his mother Sheridan 
will tell me, over email. “We definitely have concerns [about the perils of 
fame] but we have confidence and faith in our children. There have been 
countless discussions about how it is OK to be in the world, but you don’t have 
to beof the world.” Adds Borges: “He’s an honest kid. He’s squeaky clean, he 
doesn’t go to clubs. It’s all about work for him at the moment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436286248268%2F66425035-6dde-49ad-85c1-67efcfb2e3d3-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lucky%20Blue%20Smith%3A%20the%20Mormon%20model%20with%20a%20million%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lucky%20Blue%20Smith%3A%20the%20Mormon%20model%20with%20a%20million%20fans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fup-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436286248268%2F66425035-6dde-49ad-85c1-67efcfb2e3d3-680x1020.jpeg>
 Photograph: Ed Alcock for the Guardian 
The sort of scenes Smith has inspired at the last two rounds of menswear shows 
could soon become standard during fashion weeks – much to the chagrin of the 
long-term buyers and editors who roll their eyes at such fuss. Girls have 
started turning up on the off-chance that something might happen. Outside the 
Armani show in Milan I meet a wide-eyed girl who says: “I follow models [on 
Instagram] but I don’t know who is in this show. I hope Leonardo DiCaprio might 
be here, since he is friends with Armani.” (He isn’t here).

Meanwhile, others only have eyes for Lucky. Like Justine, 18, and Miriam, 16, 
who I find sitting cross-legged in the doorway of his agency in Paris. They 
first spotted him a year ago on a Twitter feed featuring pictures of “cute 
boys” and are now truly hooked. “He’s so nice and down to earth. He’s like a 
brother,” says Justine. The previous day, she says, she spent an hour with him 
and Daisy, “just hanging out, like friends. That’s why I love him.” 
Attainability is important, she points out: “There are too many people 
following One Direction.”

When Lucky and Daisy emerge from the office, the fans greet him like an old 
pal. He is late for an appointment but hugs them, takes selfies, and apologises 
sweetly for the fact that he can’t stay as long as he would like. How much 
longer will he be able to hang out with his fans in the street like this, 
before security becomes a concern or, God forbid, Smith loses his patience? If 
the fans are worried their Lucky days are numbered, they don’t show it – 
they’re just enjoying this moment. Even in the very 21st-century world of the 
Instagram star, it seems, there is nothing so powerful as the real thing.
 