
How does a generation that has never truly grown up deal with turning 40? For 
Luella Bartley <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/luella-bartley> and Katie 
Hillier, the answer was obvious: set up a fashion label. Last year, when they 
were 42 and 41 respectively, they foundedHillier Bartley 
<http://hillierbartley.com>, making the clothes they felt no one else was 
making, for women who are fine with getting older (well, pretty much) but who 
most certainly do not consider themselves middle-aged. Fashion for the 
post-midlife crisis generation, let’s call it. Velvet tailoring in petrol blue; 
a floor-length hostess gown in mustard silk. Party clothes for women who don’t 
do party dresses. A little bitAlexa Chung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung>, a little bit Florence Welch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/florence-and-the-machine>. (Both are 
customers.)

When Bartley founded the Luella label in 1999, aged 25, with Hillier as her 
right-hand woman, their lives revolved around Shoreditch parties, late nights 
in Soho members’ clubs withKate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss>, that sort of thing. Today, she 
and I are sitting in the garden of the Hillier Bartley studio, and things have 
changed. Green juice for her, flat white for me. “I got to 40 and thought I had 
to grow up,” she says. “This was my answer to that. This is something no one 
else is doing. Because the thing is, women don’t age in the same way any more. 
Our generation has women likePatti Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/patti-smith> to look up to. Getting older 
doesn’t mean what it used to.”

At the Port Eliot festival <http://porteliotfestival.com/> in Cornwall this 
summer, Bartley went to a talk byGloria Steinem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gloria-steinem>. “She is 82, and how she 
looks just hasn’t changed. She still has the same style, the same mannerisms. I 
found that deeply inspiring, but it’s actually not easy to figure out how to do 
that. How to retain your identity while making a womanly progression from being 
a jeans and T-shirt girl.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4302690741b1ab79779f9b34fcee7b7749dc5209%2F479_298_1643_3016%2F1643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4302690741b1ab79779f9b34fcee7b7749dc5209%2F479_298_1643_3016%2F1643.jpg>
 Post-midlife crisis fashion: Hillier Bartley’s A/W 16 collection, from
matchesfashion.com <http://www.matchesfashion.com/womens>. 
In many ways, Bartley and Hillier are the It girls who grew up. The Luella 
years were a riot of youthful energy, a celebration of teenage kicks: the first 
collection was called Daddy I Want A Pony; the second Daddy Who Were The Clash? 
Hillier’s career has been that of the ultimate fashion insider, putting her 
magic touch (but not her name) to It bags for Marc byMarc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marc-jacobs>, Victoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham> and Asprey 
<http://www.asprey.com/>, to name just a few. One of this season’s most 
striking trends is a motocross aesthetic (colourful motorcycle leathers) that 
was highly visible on the Paris catwalks; it’s a look that began with a 
collection Hillier and Bartley designed for Marc by Marc Jacobs two years ago. 
They have a knack for knowing which way the wind is blowing, which makes their 
unconventional design philosophy all the more compelling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd56afd5c6a18d868c2f7ec63ea462d93da37bbe%2F553_81_963_2844%2F963.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd56afd5c6a18d868c2f7ec63ea462d93da37bbe%2F553_81_963_2844%2F963.jpg>
 Bartley and Hillier for Marc by Marc Jacobs A/W 14. Photograph: Thomas 
Concordia/WireImage 
The Hillier Bartley story began one afternoon in 1999, when the stylist Katie 
Grand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/14/magazine-editor-katie-grand-designer-luella-bartley-on-friendship>
 introduced them in a pub on Kings Road in London. Within a few hours they were 
friends; within a week, Hillier had come to work with Bartley. Luella won 
Bartley theDesigner of the Year <http://www.fashionawards.com/Archive> award in 
2008, but being the hottest ticket in London ended – as being the hottest 
ticket in London often does – withclosure in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/nov/10/luella-bartley-ceases-trading-closure-fashion>
 [after Bartley’s major Italian manufacturer went bust and the collection 
couldn’t be produced]. When the pair were announced four years later innew 
roles at Marc by Marc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/may/31/luella-bartley-katie-hillier-marc-jacobs>
, with Hillier as creative director and Bartley as design director, a cheer 
went up around the fashion world. They seem somehow meant to be, likeRoss and 
Rachel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/30/friends-millennials-gentler-simpler-time>
, to reference a pairing of similar vintage.

But it’s just me and Bartley today, soaking up the unseasonably glorious 
September sunshine, it having proved impossible to get the two in the same 
place at the same time: Bartley decamped from Bloomsbury to Cornwall for the 
summer, and by the time she was back in London, Hillier was in New York. 
Bartley’s hair is salt-bleached from the beach and she emanates the intensely 
laid-back vibe you can get only by spending two months by the sea, 300 miles 
from the city. The author of a book,Luella’s Guide To English Style 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Luellas-Guide-English-Luella-Bartley/dp/0007285310>, 
she began her career in fashion as a journalist, and her sentences are 
writerly, with thoughtful pauses. I spoke to Hillier on the phone in New York, 
for the same amount of time I spent with Bartley, but when I transcribed the 
call, it was twice as long, because Hillier talks and talks without drawing 
breath.

The two friends now find themselves, at similar ages, living out very 
different scenarios. Bartley, who has three children (Kip, 13, Stevie, 11, and 
Ned, nine) with her partner,the fashion photographer David Sims 
<http://showstudio.com/contributor/david_sims>, has recently moved back to 
London after a decade in Cornwall (“My wilderness years,” she sort-of jokes). 
“When we moved there, Luella was in full flow and the plan was that I’d 
commute. I mean, people in fashion do it between London and Paris. But Kip and 
Stevie were really young, then I had Ned, and after a while it felt like all I 
was ever doing was putting out fires, at work or at home.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febf2f29c1198fc3b7958daa89328fbfbcdd5f6b4%2F95_127_2219_2409%2F2219.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febf2f29c1198fc3b7958daa89328fbfbcdd5f6b4%2F95_127_2219_2409%2F2219.jpg>
 With Marc Jacobs. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Meanwhile, Hillier, whose eight-year relationship with menswear designer (and 
Great British Sewing Bee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/great-british-sewing-bee-review-plebs-series-end>
 judge)Patrick Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/may/29/patrick-grant-five-things-about-style>
 ended last year, is spending more time in the US, motivated in part by a new 
relationship in Seattle. “I love being in my 40s,” she says, “but it’s not like 
it hasn’t come with its hurdles. To be at the point I am – 42, with no children 
but not in a frame of mind where I definitely don’t want them – that has its 
challenges. When I was younger, I very much put my career to the forefront. I 
didn’t have children, and I never gave myself that breathing space from work. 
So even though doing our own label is a lot more work, weirdly it has allowed 
me to think about my own life, and what I want.”

“Fashion,” Bartley says, “is more interesting than you think. Gender, ageing – 
these are big issues in our society, and fashion does have a hand in shifting 
things.” Theirautumn 2016 collection 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/shows/autumn-winter-2016-ready-to-wear/hillier-bartley/>
 was inspired byDavid Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> (you 
can’t get through a conversation with either of these two without Bowie being 
mentioned),Brian Eno <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brianeno>, Francis Bacon
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bacon> and Oscar Wilde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde>. The idea is to capture in 
womenswear, Bartley says, “a rakish attitude that has before now seemed part of 
a rather male identity – louche, dashing, with a possibility of the 
disreputable”. In the traditional iconography, the cool girls are always young. 
Women over 35 can be either ladies or power dressers, both of whom are rather 
severe and serious. Or they can be pink-haired, crazy-old-ladies. Hillier 
Bartley offers a new paradigm – a grownup, confident individuality that is chic 
and sophisticated, rather than laughably eccentric.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe45e4771d435d7815e3934bac6dd4675cfeae94%2F164_226_2156_3095%2F2156.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe45e4771d435d7815e3934bac6dd4675cfeae94%2F164_226_2156_3095%2F2156.jpg>
 ‘There’s something about a woman in a trouser suit that is really sexy’: 
Hillier Bartley A/W 16. 
Swagger is a word that comes up a lot with these two. “You can have swagger in 
jeans and an old T-shirt and a pair of heels,” Hillier says. “But as I get 
older, I am drawn to different things. I might wear the same thing now, but 
with a tux, you know?” Bartley says the character she has in mind when she 
designs “is someone very stylish but slightly dishevelled.Lucian Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/freud> in a tuxedo scarf, but with 
paint all over him. That confidence and the slight suggestion of bad behaviour.”

Bartley often makes these references to aristocratic style, but insists, “It’s 
not about class, it’s about confidence. That’s the part I want to take from 
that. The thing is, lots of things in English culture do cross over with class, 
whether that’s Savile Row or the football terraces. There are a lot of English 
traditions that are really seductive. Oh God, listen to me. Please don’t make 
me sound likeTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, 
will you?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc4e17ebf4447fe6a3437be1249609e0fe00ed47%2F45_619_3947_5261%2F3947.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc4e17ebf4447fe6a3437be1249609e0fe00ed47%2F45_619_3947_5261%2F3947.jpg>
 Very stylish but slightly dishevelled: muse David Bowie. Photograph: Brian 
Rasic/Getty Images 
The day Hillier and Bartley decided to launch their label, they went to the 
park with a notebook, sandwiches and crisps, and talked for four hours. “It 
started out being about tailoring,” Hillier says. “Away from any feminist 
analysing, we just like the look,” Bartley says. “There’s something about a 
woman in a trouser suit that is really sexy.” Hillier designs the handbags, 
Bartley the clothes, but soon Hillier’s influence (she likes a dress) seeped 
into Bartley’s moodboard: “And now we do a lot of beautiful dresses. They are 
long, but ankle-length not gown-length, so you can wear them comfortably with 
flat shoes, and with pockets.” Sometimes they go into battle over ideas. “But 
that’s good,” Bartley insists, “because it means the things that you don’t 
fight for drop out of the collection, and those things probably weren’t strong 
enough to be there.”

Neither of them is afraid to speak her mind (when David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> invited Bartley to 10 
Downing Street, she wrote a letter telling him she couldn’t drink champagne 
there when she fundamentally disagreed with his policy on admitting refugees), 
which makes the adoring way each talks about the other even sweeter. “What’s 
nice,” Bartley says, “is that I’ve been the boss [at Luella], she’s been the 
boss [at Marc by Marc], and now we’re together, and it works whichever way 
round. If Katie can help you, she will. She’s just the most lovely, loyal, 
supportive person.”

Hillier, meanwhile, says, “Luella inspires me. If I have an idea for 
something, she’s the person I really want to like that idea. Working with her 
gives me confidence.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ff0cd79a8e5a9811065ff191e6e6d8294ad37e2%2F335_198_1420_3129%2F1420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luella%20Bartley%20and%20Katie%20Hillier%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20have%20swagger%20in%20jeans%2C%20an%20old%20T-shirt%20and%20heels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fluella-bartley-katie-hillier-fashion-in-40s-interview-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ff0cd79a8e5a9811065ff191e6e6d8294ad37e2%2F335_198_1420_3129%2F1420.jpg>
 Grownup individuality: Hillier Bartley A/W 16. 
When we meet, Bartley is wearing grey cords, battered brown leather loafers 
and a pale pink cotton shirt washed almost transparent. Unless you count her
Ray-Ban Wayfarers <http://www.ray-ban.com/uk/sunglasses/wayfarer/clv>, the only 
thing you could consider a status symbol is her emerald-green, monogrammed
Smythson diary <http://www.smythson.com/leather-diaries-and-books.html>. But 
the loafers are byCrockett & Jones <http://crockettandjones.com/>, whose 
Northampton-made shoes cost around £500; the shirt is by45rpm 
<https://www.45rpm.jp/en/>, a below-the-radar Japanese brand whose shirts 
retail for £400. She doesn’t buy much, she says, but will invest in beautifully 
made pieces that last for ever. “I’ve had this shirt for, I don’t know, 10 
years, 15 maybe? And these shoes…” We both look under the table at her shoes, 
which boast a truly impressive patina of scuff marks, and start laughing.

Hillier Bartley is expensive, but “it’s the best fabrics, hand-finished”. The 
next stage for the label is to bring investment into a business that until now 
has been self-funded. Not that Bartley wants to return to the bombastic catwalk 
shows of her Luella days: “I loved our shows. I loved watching the character we 
had created come to life and walk down a catwalk, but that’s not us any more. 
And, actually, I think I prefer the way we are now.”
 