
At the beginning of September, Justine Tabak launched her first eponymous 
collection. At 52, with a high-flying career as a designer and creative 
director with Fendi, Laura Ashley, M&S, Jigsaw, LK Bennett and Boden under her 
belt, Tabak is treading tentatively with her fledgling label. So why did she 
walk away from a secure, well-paid and coveted job with a high-profile brand, 
to risk everything in a highly competitive marketplace?

“Having spent the last decade or so working with factories in China, I felt 
passionately that I wanted to work more closely with British manufacturers and 
collaborate with creative communities that I could build relationships with,” 
explains the entrepreneur, whose label features the tagline: “Inspired, 
fashioned and made in the British Isles.”

Tabak’s <https://www.justinetabak.co.uk/> start-up works with a small 
family-run factory in London that also works with established labels such as 
Victoria Beckham, Roland Mouret and House of Holland. And they are not alone: a 
number of smaller enterprises, high street brands and international labels are 
supporting the resurgence of the UK as a fashion manufacturing hub.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Ffashion-luxury-brands-return-of-uk-cotton-mills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8869534764399264d37be581a700b881955cee2e%2F8_93_847_1058%2F847.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luxury%20brands%20feed%20demand%20for%20return%20of%20UK%E2%80%99s%20cotton%20and%20knitwear%20mills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Ffashion-luxury-brands-return-of-uk-cotton-mills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luxury%20brands%20feed%20demand%20for%20return%20of%20UK%E2%80%99s%20cotton%20and%20knitwear%20mills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Ffashion-luxury-brands-return-of-uk-cotton-mills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8869534764399264d37be581a700b881955cee2e%2F8_93_847_1058%2F847.jpg>
 Justine Tabak wearing a Petticoat Lane red corduroy dress from her Match Girl 
collection. 
As a fashion consultant and a former head of UK production for Roland Mouret, 
Daliah Simble-Hearn, explains: “I can remember a time when London was full of 
pockets of manufacturers, and you could spend a day going from factory to 
factory.

“Two decades on, while we don’t have the density of those factories, the 
growth potential is there. Communities are evolving again and interestingly 
with a new skill-set and dynamic that is fulfilling both the luxury and the 
high street sectors.”

Just this month, English Fine Cottons <https://www.englishfinecottons.co.uk/>, 
a brand new, state-of-the-art spinning business, opened in a reconditioned mill 
in Tameside, Greater Manchester, in a bid to satisfy demand for luxury goods 
with a “Made in Britain” stamp, throughout the supply chain.

According to the UK Fashion and Textile Association <http://ukft.org/>, this 
renewed interest in British-made clothing and textiles has seen the number of 
people employed in the sector grow by 9% in the past five years, with 
predictions that up to 20,000 more jobs could be created by 2020.

Ellie Lines <http://www.ellielines.co.uk/>, a stylist and designer, launched 
her label in 2014 and uses a production facility in west London to print her 
bespoke fabrics and make her collection of dresses and separates. She said the 
choice of factory was intended “to reduce the carbon footprint of fashion” and 
was “a reaction to the endless brands that launch with their name and ‘London’ 
on the label, but who manufacture in China, and that drives me insane. The 
implication is that it is made here, but it’s not. I am proud of my ‘designed 
and made with love in London’ stance.”

Nicola Woods’s womenswear label, Beautiful Soul 
<https://www.beautiful-soul.co.uk/> – which was launched five years ago and is 
worn by the likes ofTaylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift>, Livia Firth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/dec/04/livia-firth-design-fashion-recycle>
 and Pippa Middleton – is created in and around London, and Woods aims to open 
her “own manufacturing unit in England and develop international wholesale 
distribution”.

When former Gap PR Buffy Reid and her father, Columba, a retired knitwear 
industry executive, launched their labelAnd Daughter 
<https://www.and-daughter.com/> three years ago, they wanted to support the 
mills and factories in Donegal and Scotland by producing a contemporary 
collection of timeless knitwear staples. Starting with 10 styles, they have 
evolved to sell 40 pieces via their website, Selfridges and the Conran Shop in 
London as well as independent stores in Japan, the US and Europe.

From Paccbet to Halloween haters: this week’s fashion trends
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/28/paccbet-halloween-haters-fashion-trends>
Basing their production in Britain enables those behind the brands to meet 
face-to-face with fabric producers and printers, cutters, machinists and others 
involved in the process, giving them more control over the entire process.

“There are definitely some very passionate people putting domestic 
manufacturing on the road again,” says Tabak, who last week was a keynote 
speaker at theMake it British <http://makeitbritish.co.uk/> forum in Leicester, 
traditionally the heart of the UK’s garment-making industry. “After years of 
working with mass producers in far-flung places it’s good to be able to meet 
people in the UK that can make it happen and fly the flag for homegrown talent 
and industry.”

Kate Hills, a former designer and buyer for M&S and Burberry, founded Make it 
British six years ago in response to growing demand for UK manufacturing, and 
helps match designers and brands to production facilities. “I could see prices 
in the Far East were going up and wanted to do what I could to help the 
dwindling supply chain we have in the UK, which is still held in high regard 
around the world,” says Hills.

“Now, I get around 2,000 businesses a month contact me to try to find 
manufacturers in the UK. Asos, Jigsaw, Topshop and M&S all still make some of 
their clothes here and, according to HM Customs and Excise there has been a 25% 
rise in the export of British-made clothing since 2011.”

And, while the pound is weak and the international luxury goods houses 
struggle to define what high-spending customers want and to retain the prestige 
of their labels, the renaissance of craftsmanship seems to be helping the boom 
in British manufacturing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Ffashion-luxury-brands-return-of-uk-cotton-mills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a83a33521f074a728a83e5325ec6c021d47582c%2F39_193_1095_657%2F1095.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luxury%20brands%20feed%20demand%20for%20return%20of%20UK%E2%80%99s%20cotton%20and%20knitwear%20mills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Ffashion-luxury-brands-return-of-uk-cotton-mills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luxury%20brands%20feed%20demand%20for%20return%20of%20UK%E2%80%99s%20cotton%20and%20knitwear%20mills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Ffashion-luxury-brands-return-of-uk-cotton-mills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a83a33521f074a728a83e5325ec6c021d47582c%2F39_193_1095_657%2F1095.jpg>
 Mimi Berry’s handbags are created in factories in London, Manchester and the 
West Country. 
Mimi Berry <http://www.mimiberry.co.uk/> launched her leather accessories 
brand in London’s East End 15 years ago, and now uses three local factories as 
well as one in Manchester and another in the west country – staffed by a number 
of former Clarks shoes workers – to produce around 1,400 handbags and satchels 
each season.

“We have stockists in Paris who sell our bags alongside Louis Vuitton and YSL, 
and so we are seen on a par with homegrown French brands,” says Berry of her 
collection, which exports to Japan, France, Switzerland and the US.

“I think it shows a certain intelligence to be confident about the provenance 
of your wardrobe. The more I work with our British factories and grow to know 
the families behind them, I knew I was directly helping the people I could see 
working there. I feel a certain responsibility to support the British workforce 
and the great heritage we have.”
 