
Lyon’s festival of lights has been opened by France’s new prime minister amid 
tight security a year after the the city cancelled the annual event following 
terrorist attacks in Paris.

Bernard Cazeneuve, who was appointed prime minister earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/bernard-cazeneuve-named-french-pm-as-manuel-valls-resigns>
, said on Thursday: “This evening, millions of visitors will demonstrate the 
resilience that is the strength of your city and our country.”

The Fête des Lumières, which originated in Lyon in the mid-19th century, has 
grown over the past 10 years into a major cultural event attracting millions of 
visitors. Dozens of light installations have been concentrated into the central 
areas of the city this year, in order to tighten the security operation. 
Cordons have been erected around the Presqu’île, Vieux Lyon and Fourvière 
neighbourhoods, with security personnel checking bags.

Last year the mayor of Lyon cancelled the light extravaganza following attacks 
on the Bataclan theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/paris-attacks-bataclan-concert-hall>
 and other places in the capital on 13 November in which 130 people were 
killed. Instead, a single projection and a candle-lit procession in Lyon 
honoured the victims of the attacks.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flyons-fete-des-lumieres-returns-for-2016-amid-tight-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44d5c14a3b13b9759c8f21ef4185521cec511b6c%2F0_114_5041_3025%2F5041.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lyon's%20F%C3%AAte%20des%20Lumi%C3%A8res%20returns%20for%202016%20amid%20tight%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flyons-fete-des-lumieres-returns-for-2016-amid-tight-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lyon%27s%20F%C3%AAte%20des%20Lumi%C3%A8res%20returns%20for%202016%20amid%20tight%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flyons-fete-des-lumieres-returns-for-2016-amid-tight-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44d5c14a3b13b9759c8f21ef4185521cec511b6c%2F0_114_5041_3025%2F5041.jpg>
 Un songe forain installation. Photograph: Brice Robert Photographe 
Deputy mayor George Képénékian said there had been a further debate on whether 
to hold the festival this year following the attack in Nice in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/nice-attack-leaves-84-dead-and-france-in-shock>
, in which 86 people were killed when a truck was driven into crowds 
celebrating Bastille Day.

“It raised questions for us. Is it reasonable to hold our festival? But it’s a 
way of showing our resistance. We will not be beaten by terrorists, no one will 
decide for us how we will live. We cannot allow common barbarians to impose a 
way of life on us,” said Képénékian.

France’s ministry of interior supported the decision to hold the festival and 
had provided additional security forces, he added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flyons-fete-des-lumieres-returns-for-2016-amid-tight-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7eb8927bcf87a68f8770b68c8e6b44bfa6ca4efd%2F0_162_5486_3293%2F5486.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lyon's%20F%C3%AAte%20des%20Lumi%C3%A8res%20returns%20for%202016%20amid%20tight%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flyons-fete-des-lumieres-returns-for-2016-amid-tight-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lyon%27s%20F%C3%AAte%20des%20Lumi%C3%A8res%20returns%20for%202016%20amid%20tight%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flyons-fete-des-lumieres-returns-for-2016-amid-tight-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7eb8927bcf87a68f8770b68c8e6b44bfa6ca4efd%2F0_162_5486_3293%2F5486.jpg>
 Platonium, City Hall courtyard. Photograph: Brice Robert Photographe 
The festival will be shorter than in previous years – taking place over three 
nights rather (8-10 December) than the customary four – and with installations 
lit from 8pm until midnight, two hours less than usual. About 1,100 security 
personnel are being deployed, and 40 checkpoints have been set up around the 
area. Vehicles are banned.

“There’s no such thing as zero risk, of course, but we are well organised,” 
said Képénékian.

Lyon’s Fête des Lumières was first celebrated in 1852, when people lit candles 
to thank their patron saint, the Virgin Mary, for saving the city from 
invasion, floods and plague. In 2014 it attracted about 3m visitors from all 
over the world to a city whose core population is 500,000.

As well as exhibits by French artists, this year’s festival includes 
installations created by Chinese light designers. About 40 Installations have 
been mounted in the city, at a cost of €2.6m, according to Jean-Francois 
Zurawik, the festival’s creative director.

“I hope next year we will be able to go back to four nights,” he said.

 * fetedeslumieres.lyon.fr <http://www.fetedeslumieres.lyon.fr/en/>  