
Some of the best known names on the high street could be forced out by a 
bloody price war and huge amounts of new shopping space, according to a report 
published today.

 The poor performance of Mark & Spencer is expected to propel it into more 
aggressive tactics, the shock waves from which could claim struggling chains 
such as Laura Ashley, Etam and Mackays.

 M&S's share of the clothing market fell by more than one percentage point 
last year, as it fumbled its expansion plan and buying programme.

 Dramatic action expected to include price-cuts of 10 to 15 per cent to claw 
back some of that market share is also likely to have a damaging impact on 
hard-pressed retailers, including BhS, House of Fraser, Richards and Monsoon.

 The high street market leader still sold an eighth of all the clothing bought 
in Britain and twice as much as its nearest rival, Burtons-to-Dorothy Perkins 
chain Arcadia, according to retail researcher Verdict.

 But that represents a sharp reversal of its steady advance earlier this 
decade, with St Michael's share rising to a peak of 13.4 per cent in 1997.

 Under its new chief executive, Peter Salsbury, various senior executives have 
been fired and hundreds more redundancies are expected. The group is looking at 
designer labels in addition to its own brand name, but the most immediate move 
has been a promise to cut prices.

 Verdict says M&S will cut prices by an average 10-15 per cent and that will 
hit rivals hard. 'The impact on the rest of the market will be profound, and 
will force every competing retailer to respond.

 'The increased pressure on margins flowing from M&S's repositioning will... 
produce some fall-out. The middle market can no longer support all the 
players', Verdict says.

 The clothing market grew by only 1 per cent to Â£27 billion in 1998, the 
smallest percentage of the 1990s. After adjusting for minimal clothing price 
inflation and the 2.5 per cent increase in floorspace, like-for-like sales in 
the sector actually fell by 1.5 per cent last year.

 Verdict warns that a huge amount of new shopping space will be opened in the 
next few years. The Bluewater retail park near the south side of the Dartford 
Bridge opens next week, part of 7.5 million square feet of space opening this 
year.

 By 2003, the equivalent of 25 new regional shopping centres will have been 
opened, adding to the challenge for retailers of increasing sales in their 
existing stores.
 