
What a difference a week makes in the world of M&S clothing. Last week was 
dominated by the launch ofthe second Alexa Chung-designed archive collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/29/alexa-chung-marks-and-spencer-kenzo-for-h-and-m-fashion-retail>
, with several pieces including Instagram favouriteCrown jacket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/01/buy-of-the-day-archive-by-alexa-for-ms-the-crown-jacket>
 – currently sold out in most sizes. This week, thestore is downsizing its 
clothing ranges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/m-and-s-marks-spencer-close-80-stores-major-overhaul>
 in response to consistently bad figures.

From a fashion point of view, it’s a bit of a shame. Chung’s collection was a 
bold move for a brand more associated with cotton knickers and Twiggy Christmas 
adverts than a style icon with reach to the millennial customer. It seemed to 
suggest the ship was finally turning around, and has been followed with other 
collaborations – Princess Marie-Chantal of Greece on childrenswear, Baarts & 
Siegels on menswear.

The main line has enjoyed moments in the spotlight – the pink coat of 2013, 
and the suede skirt last year, as modelled by Chung – but they have been too 
few and far between for the executives watching the sales figures fall.

M&S culls clothing business as major overhaul curtails global ambition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/m-and-s-marks-spencer-close-80-stores-major-overhaul>
But behind these headliners, the bulk of what’s in store is miles behind. 
Fashion insiders head for the eveningwear (velvet dresses, sequin skirts) 
rather than staples like jumpers and sensible work clothes. The daywear – the 
bread and butter of the brand – feels outdated and stale. That is a misstep 
when everyday staples are now the height of fashion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmarks-spencer-fashion-faux-pas-clothes-stores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac6a6f5592ed22e69160bd29e34478616431cf5a%2F0_0_5150_3422%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M%26S%20hangs%20up%20its%20fashion%20aspirations%20after%20series%20of%20faux%20pas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmarks-spencer-fashion-faux-pas-clothes-stores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M%26S%20hangs%20up%20its%20fashion%20aspirations%20after%20series%20of%20faux%20pas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fmarks-spencer-fashion-faux-pas-clothes-stores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac6a6f5592ed22e69160bd29e34478616431cf5a%2F0_0_5150_3422%2F5150.jpg>
 Marks & Spencer’s daywear is crying out for a reboot. Photograph: Alamy 
Just look at the competitors. Zara’s profits rose by 8% recently, largely due 
to a consistent drip of trend-led but wearable clothes that have a day-to-night 
ease and friendly price that appeals to a younger customer. Or take Ted Baker, 
where profits rose 20.5% last year. The current Ted Baker homepage is dedicated 
to “a simple formula for everyday style”, featuring subtly designed items 
including a Lurex polo shirt or a colour-block dress worn with trainers. By 
contrast, the M&S homepage focuses on padded jackets – a big trend for the 
season – but makes them look cosy and practical rather than cool and exciting.

Rebooting the daywear could be a good first step to improvement. 

The spring/summer 2017 collections will be revealed next week – the first 
designs we’ll see after this overhaul, and the ones that will be sold in the 
remaining clothing departments next year. Another week in the life of M&S may 
yet provide another twist and turn.
 