
Marks & Spencer is expected to be the biggest winner from the collapse of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
 as its older clothing shoppers switch allegiance to the high street grande 
dame.

“We expect Marks & Spencer to be the biggest beneficiary, given its market 
share and older customer demographic,” said RBC analyst Richard Chamberlain. 
“We estimateBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> has around 1% of the 
[clothing] market and has the most similar product offer to M&S.”

M&S’s clothing business  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/07/marks-and-spencer-steve-rowe-clothing-sales-fall>
has struggled to compete with nimbler rivals such as Primark, Zara and H&M in 
recent years, achieving growth in only one quarter in the past five years.

If M&S hoovers up the stricken retailer’s sales, Chamberlain estimates it 
could boost its clothing and homeware sales by up to 1%, although if a fashion 
rival purchases some of BHS’s 164 stores the tailwind would be reduced. BHS 
recorded annual sales of £668m at last count. The sale fillip would be good 
news for M&S’s new chief executive,Steve Rowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/07/marks-and-spencers-difficulties-come-into-focus-in-croydon>
, who took over from Mark Bolland at the start of last month.

Duff & Phelps, BHS’s administrators, have had 50 expressions of interest in 
the business although only 10 are thought to be serious. Mike Ashley’s Sports 
Direct has indicated itcould bid for BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/24/bhs-on-the-brink-of-collapse-unless-60m-pounds-funding-found>
, while Preston-based property millionaire Yousuf Bhailok and Allan Leighton, 
the retail turnaround specialist who currently chairs the Co-op, are also 
interested in taking on BHS.

Fashion retailers have been enduring a miserable year as the mild winter 
resulted in disappointing sales of high-margin winter clothing, while the cool 
spring has similarly subdued demand for new-season ranges. Analysts say there 
are too many mouths to feed on a high street battling the growth of online 
retailers while staff costs are rising due to the national living wage. The 
strengthening US currency is also a problem because retailers buy many garments 
in dollars but sell them in sterling.

Fashion giant Next is due to update the City on first-quarter trading on 
Wednesday, with Chamberlain predicting that like-for-like sales at its stores 
will be down at least 3% and sales from its Directory catalogue arm also 
slightly negative. In March, Next’s chief executive, Lord Wolfson, predicted
difficult conditions in the clothing sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/next-warns-of-toughest-trading-since-financial-crisis-and-cuts-sales-forecast>
, likening the outlook to 2008, a time when the country was mired in the 
financial crisis.
 