
Everything that happens at Marks & Spencer, the 132-year-old high street 
retailer, causes more drama than its peers. Predictably, the news last week 
that M&Splans to close 30 UK stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/m-and-s-marks-spencer-close-80-stores-major-overhaul>
 and convert 45 others into food-only sites created quite a stir. The 
retailer’s shops are the bedrock of high streets in towns and cities across the 
country, and have been for years, so any change is noticed by the locals.

The closures are an admission of defeat: that M&S cannot make its clothing 
popular enough to justify the amount of space dedicated to selling it across 
the country. It is a costly admission too: it will cost M&S £150m to rework its 
UK shops over the next three years and a further £200m to shut struggling shops 
abroad.

However, it was the right move by Steve Rowe, the M&S chief executive. If 
anything, he should have been more radical. In an online world where 
marksandspencer.com is the company’s biggest shop, it would be foolish for the 
retailer to stick with a business model from a previous generation. M&S has 
significantly more stores than rivals John Lewis and Debenhams, and 
significantly larger ones than rivals that, like M&S, only sell own-brand 
clothing, such as Zara and H&M. One of the reasons that M&S’s clothing range 
can look so dowdy is that there is so much retail space to fill: it can’t 
possibly get everything right.

In contrast to M&S’s clothing, its food business has a clear upmarket 
position. This Christmas, families will flock to M&S for their festive fare. 
With Tesco, Asda, Sainsbury’s, Morrisons and Waitrose dramatically cutting back 
investment, M&S has a glorious opportunity to expand.

Having said all this, M&S should not start treating its clothing arm as a 
secondary consideration within the group. Cutting the amount of the space 
dedicated to clothing gives the company an opportunity to rethink its approach 
to fashion. Rowe must surely follow the success of the food business and make 
M&S clothing more aspirational.
 