
Marks & Spencer has offered thousands of long-term staff increased 
compensation amid pressure to backtrack on planned pay cuts.

M&S to be lobbied by MPs and fair pay activists at flagship store
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/31/mands-mps-fair-pay-activists-flagship-store-siobhain-mcdonagh-london>
However, the offer – including a multiyear pay guarantee – was criticised by a 
prominent campaigner for M&S workers in the dispute.Siobhain McDonagh MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/31/mands-mps-fair-pay-activists-flagship-store-siobhain-mcdonagh-london>
 said the proposal “still falls short of the offer that longstanding and loyal 
staff from Britain’s premier retailer really deserve”.

Long-serving shop staff say they face pay cuts that could potentially cost 
thousands of pounds after M&S removed premiums for working Sundays and 
antisocial hours, trimmed bank holiday payments and changed pension payments. 
McDonagh said 2,700 staff would lose more than £1,000 a year and 700 would lose 
more than £2,000.

The retailer said it was making the changes to help pay for a 15% increase in 
basic pay for its 69,000 workers from April to £8.50 an hour.

M&S said it was still going ahead with its changes to premium pay and pension 
contributions but had improved compensation so all staff affected would either 
receive higher pay or have the opportunity to maintain their current pay level.

The company had already pledged to top up the pay of those affected to 2015-16 
levels for two years. It now says that from 2019-20 any employee whose pay 
would still be lower under the new regime will receive an additional top up 
payment representing 50% of that shortfall in total pay. They will also be 
offered guaranteed extra hours to make up the remaining 50%. In subsequent 
years an additional top-up payment and guaranteed hours will be offered 
annually until total pay reaches at least 2015-16 levels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fms-improves-pay-deal-but-critics-say-offer-still-falls-short%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F716ef3dc955d8f2ade654180814d37ad6b3600ea%2F0_47_2835_3541%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M%26S%20improves%20pay%20deal%20but%20critics%20say%20offer%20still%20falls%20short&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fms-improves-pay-deal-but-critics-say-offer-still-falls-short%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M%26S%20improves%20pay%20deal%20but%20critics%20say%20offer%20still%20falls%20short&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fms-improves-pay-deal-but-critics-say-offer-still-falls-short%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F716ef3dc955d8f2ade654180814d37ad6b3600ea%2F0_47_2835_3541%2F2835.jpg>
 Siobhain McDonagh, Labour MP for Mitcham and Morden, joined campaigners as 
they delivered their petition to M&S bosses. Photograph: Katie Collins/PA 
The company is also offering a third year of additional cash to compensate 
colleagues who are being switched to a defined contribution pension from a more 
secure defined benefit scheme.

Sacha Berendji, M&S’s retail director, said: “We’ve listened to our 
colleagues, acted on their feedback and are pleased that we’ve reached an 
outcome that gives enhanced support for our colleagues as well as making 
necessary changes to our business.

“From April 2017 our people will be among the highest paid in UK retail and 
receive one of the best benefits packages. The changes will reward our people 
in a fair and consistent way, simplify and modernise our business and help us 
attract and retain the best talent.”

But McDonagh responded that M&S had only promised that staff would be able to 
earn the same amount they did now in three years, even if they worked extra 
hours to make up the difference.

She said: “How is that fair? M&S is saying that no employee will be worse off 
as a result of these changes. Who thinks their gas bills, electricity bills and 
their rent, and travel fares will be the same in 2019 and 2020 as they are 
today? Inflation means that these employees will be relatively significantly 
worse off – and that’s not even considering their pensions. Will Steve Rowe 
guarantee that he will earn no more in three years time than he does today?”

She added that workers had been told they either had to agree to the 
compensation package now or lose out on the payment altogether. “It would be a 
betrayal to loyal staff, many with more than two or three decades professional 
experience, to say that this is a very good offer for them,” McDonagh said.
 