 We regret to state that the breaking of thrashing and other machines and the 
burning of agricultural produce, which began in the counties of Kent and 
Sussex, has now extended to nearly the whole of the southern and midland 
counties.
At High Wycombe persons were assembled at five o'clock in the morning, armed 
with sledge-hammers, crow-bars, pick-axes, &c., and proceeded to the paper-mill 
of Messrs Lane. The rioters attempted to force the entrance. The door was 
partly broken open, when a gun was discharged, and the contents lodged in the 
arm of an elderly man named William Bryant, a paper-maker.

The mob broke the windows, when they were saluted with four gallons of 
vitriol, and many of them burnt very severely. An entrance being obtained, 
within less than fifteen minutes the machine was destroyed. The person who 
threw the vitriol narrowly escaped with his life. They proceeded to five or six 
other mills, destroying the machines in each, also one or two thrashing 
machines. The assistance of the gentleman of the hunt was obtained, and an 
attack was made upon the rioters. Several shots were fired; one man was wounded 
in the breast; two were taken away apparently lifeless, and about nine were 
taken prisoners. The damage is estimated at Â£12,000.

A special session has been held in East Kent and a number of the rioters tried 
and found guilty of breaking machines, and other outrages. Many have been 
sentenced to transportation, one man for life, and others for seven and 
fourteen years.

Wrotham, East Kent: Yesterday this place was visited by numerous labouring 
people, who surrounded the mansion of the Rector, the Rev. Mr. Moore, crying 
out for "Bread or blood," and demanding a diminution of his tithes [by] one 
half, declaring the impossibility of the farmers paying them for their labour 
while so much was paid in tithes.

The rev. gentleman reasoned with them on the impropriety of their conduct, 
declaring that he would rather submit to be hanged on the first tree than 
accede. After an hour's debate they seized the overseer, a very respectable 
man, forced him from the vestry and, placing him in a cart, wheeled him in 
triumph to the bounds of the parish. The overseer entreated that they would not 
ill-treat him and that he would give them a sovereign to buy drink. They 
assured him of his safety, but that he must never act in the capacity of an 
overseer again and readily consented to wheel him back again.
 