
At the end of the second world war there was a famine of fabric across Europe: 
almost no raw fibres were imported, almost none produced, mills and factories 
were in disrepair or ruins. Only a few major couturiers inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> had small caches of prewar textiles, 
or strong connections with government sources and suppliers with some samples, 
to attempt a postwar collection.

Marie-Louise Carven, without those contacts, had to scrabble for every scrap 
for the debut of her fashion house in July 1945. (“Young women,” she 
remembered, “had nothing to wear and even less to eat.”) The star of the show – 
so much Carven’s favourite that she called it “ma griffe”, my signature – was a 
generous-skirted summer dress, created from a roll of cotton, striped 
mint-green and white, found in the attic of a chateau, and probably originally 
purchased before the first world war for the summer uniforms of housemaids. It 
was, like its designer, fresh and casual, a statement of intent about the way 
that fashion should go – and spring-like Carven green was the colour of late 
1940s French fashion, just as Lanvin blue had been in the 20s or Schiaparelli 
pink in the late 30s.
 Carven, right, trying out a hat on a model in 1979. Photograph: 
Gamma-Keystone/Getty Images 
Carven, who has died aged 105, did not regard her business on the Rond-Point 
des Champs d’Elysées as grand couture: she just meant to supply a niche market, 
petite women like herself – she was just over 5ft, a height that had not been 
fashionable since the doll-like Romantic ballerinas of a century before.

She was born in Châtellerault, central France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, and took her first steps in fashion 
making outfits for her pet cat. Her aunt, Josy Boyriven (from whom she borrowed 
the “ven” of her working name – she had been christened Carmen de Tommaso, and 
loathed it), and her chic mother took the young Carmen to Paris collections, 
all shown on long-legged, swan-necked models. She was told her smallness meant 
she could never be elegant.

A student of interior decor and architecture at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in 
Paris, in 1939 she married Phillippe Mallet, brother of the modernist architect 
Robert Mallet-Stevens, and was introduced to craftspeople who had worked on 
Robert’s clear-cut projects. Her similar style of 1945 found a market at once 
among a new generation of performers with physiques like her own – Leslie 
Caron, Martine Carol, Zizi Jeanmaire; – and she didn’t have to stand on tiptoe 
to do their fittings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmadame-carven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F14%2F1434297847632%2F8f00a11e-6342-4703-8963-7b6ec3827039-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madame%20Carven%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmadame-carven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madame%20Carven%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmadame-carven%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F14%2F1434297847632%2F8f00a11e-6342-4703-8963-7b6ec3827039-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Carven, left, with Princess Fawzia-Latifa of Egypt during a dress fitting in 
1998. Photograph: Chomel/Sipa/Rex Shutterstock 
She also worked for the tiny Edith Piaf, who demanded the charming details be 
taken off the clothes – all she wanted was the vulnerability. Carven could 
dress swans as well as cygnets (she costumed Simone Signoret, never an 
innocent, to commit murder in the 1955 film Les Diaboliques), but she was 
candid in saying that she disliked Parisian sophistication, finding it too 
close to cynicism, and that she had no taste for the belle-epoque grandeur of 
heavy silk and corseted cut, suited to wealthy older women, that had been 
revived by Christian Dior.

By comparison with the Dior-Balmain circle, Carven’s preferred fabrics were 
not luxurious – pink gingham, broderie anglaise, Indian and Asian cottons – but 
these made it easy for her to go into ready-to-wear in 1950 as part of the 
first generation of French designers to work directly with manufacturers. From 
1949 she toured her collections, with a cast of mini-models, to Brazil, Mexico, 
Thailand and Indonesia. Americans were charmed by the cute girls, but needed 
the clothes scaled up (she opened her own outlet in New York); Japanese 
customers stayed faithful for decades to her respect for the petite.

She saw herself as a clothing technician as much as an artist – the work was 
everything, and the idea was to flatter the wearers rather than magnify her own 
identity – and was amenable, too, to designing clothes for men and children. 
She also turned her hand to uniforms, for airlines including Air France, the 
French team at the 1976 Olympics, and Parisian traffic wardens and Eurostar 
staff. She did not enjoy the hardness of 60s young fashion, but when her type 
of natural fabrics returned with the hippies circa 1968, she was successful for 
another decade. The Carven name drooped in the 80s, when neat, sweet and petite 
was not a smart taste; she retired at 84, in 1993.

Hers was among the last of the old labels to be revived, and by the time of 
her 100th birthday in 2009 (celebrated with a huge party, complete with 
mint-green Ladurée macaroons) it had been relaunched. Carven is now a 
ready-to-wear brand. In her centenary year, too, she was made a commander of 
the Légion d’Honneur.

The glad-to-be-alive-and-free associations of Carven’s initial minty frock 
were transferred to the packaging of her 1947 perfume Ma Griffe. As a witty 
promotion (she was clever with those) and in memory of the liberation of Paris, 
she had hundreds of sample bottles dropped over the city on little striped 
parachutes in 1954. Her men’s cologne, Vétiver, 1957, had the same 
picnic-in-the-country mossiness.

Phillippe died in 1966, and in 1972, Carven married a Swiss businessman, René 
Grog. They both collected 18th-century furniture (the rococo especially 
appealed to Carven’s sense of the delicate – she herself looked like a 
Fragonard drawing), and in 1973, they gave their magnificent collection to the 
Louvre. After Grog’s death in 1981, she founded an association in their names 
to help students of the decorative arts.

Later she donated her label’s archive to the Galliera fashion museum 
<http://www.palaisgalliera.paris.fr/en> in Paris, which put on an exhibition of 
the prettiest items in 2002 – she was delighted that it was a big draw for 
teenagers: “In a young girl, there’s always something beautiful if we try to 
discover it,” she said.

• Marie-Louise Grog-Carven, fashion designer, born 31 August 1909; died 8 June 
2015
 