
The severe drought afflicting southern Madagascar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/madagascar> has left 330,000 people on the 
brink of famine, a senior UN official has warned.


Three successive years of failed rains have left the island nation wrestling 
with crop failure and a chronic lack of food and clean drinking water, with 
agencies warning last month that nearly 850,000 people areexperiencing 
“alarming” hunger levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/madagascar-drought-catastrophe-looms-as-850000-go-hungry-says-un>
.

“Three hundred and thirty thousand are on the verge of a food security 
catastrophe, next step being famine,” said Dominique Burgeon, director of 
emergencies and rehabilitation at the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation 
(FAO).

Madagascar drought: catastrophe looms as 850,000 go hungry, says UN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/madagascar-drought-catastrophe-looms-as-850000-go-hungry-says-un>
“People go from one lean season to the next, resorting to negative coping 
strategies. People are eating anything to fill their stomachs, selling most of 
their belongings, cattle and land. It shows the severity of the situation and 
the need for us to act.”

Farmers talk of the earth changing; of failed rains and crops, and barren 
land. Meanwhile, agencies are fighting a desperate rearguard action. Unicef, 
the UN children’s agency, reports growing demand for the high-calorie, 
peanut-based paste used to combat severe acute malnutrition.

“People are living under extreme conditions. We are dealing with a development 
crisis that has lasted for decades now, worsened by El Niño. For many, it is 
day-to-day survival,” said Elke Wisch, country representative for Unicef 
Madagascar.

Wisch emphasised the need to build resilience in the disaster-prone country, 
where food production has all but ground to a halt asthe El Niño 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/drought-high-temperatures-el-nino-36m-people-africa-hunger>
 weather phenomenon exacerbates the effects of the drought. “We know that 
natural disasters will occur,” she said. “The important thing is how the local 
population can respond to these shocks.”

Yet mounting any kind of response is complicated by huge funding shortfalls. 
The World Food Programme’s (WFP) operations across seven countries in southern 
Africa are only50% funded between now and April 
<http://news.trust.org/item/20161124172335-tkd13/>, with the total deficit at 
roughly $300m. The organisation’s $82m drought relief operation in Madagascar, 
which runs until March 2017, faces a $50m shortfall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmadagascar-drought-330000-one-step-from-famine-un-food-and-agriculture-organisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd65f143b3a21e1f0c1549d408e04293152e51b32%2F0_0_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madagascar%20drought%3A%20330%2C000%20people%20'one%20step%20from%20famine'%2C%20UN%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmadagascar-drought-330000-one-step-from-famine-un-food-and-agriculture-organisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madagascar%20drought%3A%20330%2C000%20people%20%27one%20step%20from%20famine%27%2C%20UN%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmadagascar-drought-330000-one-step-from-famine-un-food-and-agriculture-organisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd65f143b3a21e1f0c1549d408e04293152e51b32%2F0_0_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Ertharin Cousin, executive director of the World Food Programme, with a child 
in southern Madagascar. Photograph: David Orr/WFP 
The FAO is also struggling, with a $17.5m shortfall limiting the distribution 
of emergency packages to 75,000 of the the 175,000 farming households in need.

Appealing for further donations 
<http://www.wfp.org/news/news-release/un-food-agencies-call-urgent-action-address-southern-madagascar%E2%80%99s-worsening-food-0>
, both organisations have stressed the importance of the forthcoming planting 
season. “If we miss planting season, the need for food assistance could go into 
March 2018,” warned Burgeon.

Either way, the situation is likely to get worse before it gets better. Poor 
infrastructure makes it difficult to get assistance to remote areas of the 
south, with journeys of more than 200km likely to take days by road.

Moreover, nutritional challenges are endemic, with more than 50% of children 
suffering from stunted growth 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/sief-trust-fund/brief/addressing-chronic-malnutrition-in-madagascar>
, a condition caused by malnutrition over the first 1,000 days of life. The 
issue costs the world’s sixth poorest country an estimated $740m a year, 
roughly 7% of its GDP.

We're starting to see people eating seeds instead of planting them. That is a 
desperate situation
Elle Wisch, country representative, Unicef Madagascar 
“We have not even reached the peak yet, we are four to five months away from 
the next harvest,” said David Orr, the WFP’s regional spokesperson.


Madagascar’s president, Hery Rajaonarimampianina, will be anxious to ensure 
that infrastructure issues in Antananarivo, the country’s gridlocked capital, 
do not impinge on the hosting of asummit for French language states 
<http://www.francophonie.org/> this weekend. With hotel swimming pools being 
used for drying sheets and laundry, and the city’s river running lower than 
normal due to its use for bathing, washing and stone production, Antananarivo 
has not been untouched by the effects of the drought.

After the summit, Rajaonarimampianina will travel to the Paris headquarters of 
the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation for a donor conference.

In the absence of more immediate support, however, farmers in the region 
reliant on rain-fed agriculture face a precarious existence. “Worst case is 
another crop failure,” said Wisch. “Then you are looking at – and we’re 
starting to see this now – people eating seeds instead of planting them. That 
is a desperate situation.”




















 