
I took a deep breath, checked my harness for the tenth time, then ran towards 
the edge of the cliff. Just before I hurtled off into the abyss, the wind 
seized my parachute and whisked me up into the air. I’d landed in Madeira just 
a couple of hours earlier, and I was already doing my firsttandem paraglide 
flight <http://www.madeira-paragliding.com/>. This whirlwind adventure set the 
tone for the week ahead.

When I thought about going to Madeira, a Portuguese island (actually, four 
islands) in the north Atlantic, I pictured wine, cake, flowers … and old 
people. It was filed in my mind as a pretty but dull destination, full of 
pensioners on package deals and cruises. Not that there is anything wrong with 
that, but I didn’t think it was for me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bd8ef48c0c3516f465be93896d5ca5298db0f9e%2F0_0_3892_2336%2F3892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madeira's%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madeira%27s%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bd8ef48c0c3516f465be93896d5ca5298db0f9e%2F0_0_3892_2336%2F3892.jpg>
Canto das Fontes <http://www.cantodasfontes.pt/> glamping site, Madeira 
The reality turned out to be rather different. Yes, the main tourist 
demographic is still overseas retirees (and Portuguese honeymooners), but 
Madeira is starting to attract more adventurous travellers, too. For one thing, 
the accommodation is changing. It is no longer restricted to large, faceless 
hotels; I was here to visit the island’s first glampsite,Canto das Fontes 
<http://www.cantodasfontes.pt/>. There is an increasing number of boutique 
hotels – I spent a night at the super-stylishEstalagem 
<http://www.pontadosol.com/> in nearby Ponta do Sol, which has recently opened 
a cheaper, funky sister property,Hotel da Vila 
<http://www.pontadosol.com/hoteldavila/>. And in the capital, Funchal, there 
are great options for self-caterers; I stayed in a beach house in the old town, 
one of a collection of seafront villas (funchalcottages.co.uk 
<http://www.funchalcottages.co.uk/>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d6809b131d2ec332262686d0a8a12e65cf862a5%2F0_300_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madeira's%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madeira%27s%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d6809b131d2ec332262686d0a8a12e65cf862a5%2F0_300_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Madeira’s hiking trails often follow irrigation canals. Photograph: Alamy 
Canto das Fontes is a magical place: just two tipis on a banana farm on 
Madeira’s sunny south coast. I got my first view of it from the air, when I 
soared over it during my paraglide. Owner Roberto Varela, a local entrepreneur, 
has restored his late grandmother’s farm, repairing the old stone walls, buying 
up adjacent abandoned land and building a small house. It is not a farm as 
Britons would know it, but a series of terraces on a steep hillside, 100 metres 
above the sea. The land is farmed organically and according to permaculture 
principles; as well as bananas there is a host of other fruits, flowers and 
herbs. I picked the strawberries growing up the side of my compost loo for 
breakfast; physalis and ferns were growing inside my shower; I snacked on 
pitanga, a delicious sweet-sour berry. In the evenings, we harvested limes and 
mint for mojitos made withMadeiran sugarcane rum 
<http://www.icon-key.com/en/marcas/rum>. And when I got sunburnt, Roberto cut a 
fresh leaf of aloe vera for its soothing gel.

It is an utterly peaceful place. The tipis, perched high on the cliffside, are 
entirely private; from mine, I could see nothing but sea. At night, all I could 
hear was water: the waves below and the site’s own 30 metre-high waterfall. But 
it was sociable, too – Roberto organised a barbecue (with steaks from his 
cattle-farmer friend) and a fish supper (with octopus stew from his fisherman 
friend). He also arranges activities on request – and that is the second reason 
Madeira is starting to attract a new crowd: it offers every kind of adventure 
sport you can imagine.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff888077b3be74218f095804d9b741ee6a9d01948%2F0_24_3222_1934%2F3222.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madeira's%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madeira%27s%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff888077b3be74218f095804d9b741ee6a9d01948%2F0_24_3222_1934%2F3222.jpg>
 Grappling with grouper … diving off Garajau beach 
I tried scuba-diving <http://www.merodivingcenter.com/> from Garajau beach in 
Caniço; the clear water of this protected marine reserve is teeming with big, 
friendlymero (grouper) and surprisingly tropical-looking fish, such as rainbow 
wrasse and damsel fish. I wenthorse-riding <http://quintadoriacho.com/> in the 
mountains along thelevadas, a unique irrigation system of narrow water channels 
that extend for more than 2,000km. The channels were carved by early settlers 
(or, more likely, their slaves), and now form an unofficial hiking and hacking 
network through beautiful and otherwise inaccessible countryside. Some pass 
through Unesco-protected pockets of ancient Laurisilva forest, which once 
covered most of Madeira.

Thanks to its volcanic origins, Madeira is world-class destination for 
canyoning – the interior is mountainous and rocky, rich with gorges, waterfalls 
and lagoons. Sadly, I couldn’t try it – my trip was cancelled at the last 
minute – but at least it’s a reason to return.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb681f18075791aeaefe7e1e8aadf202b17896a0a%2F329_456_5340_3205%2F5340.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madeira's%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madeira%27s%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb681f18075791aeaefe7e1e8aadf202b17896a0a%2F329_456_5340_3205%2F5340.jpg>
 A viewpoint high in Madeira’s 1,800-metre mountains. Photograph: Alamy 
There are whales and dolphins just off the coast, and it is possible to avoid 
the more commercial whale-watching trips; I sailed with skipper João Vieira on 
theIlhéu <http://ilheu-sailing.com/>, an elegant 1946 ketch. We saw only a 
solitary dolphin, but João assured me they aren’t usually so shy. I also 
arranged aHarley Davidson tour <http://harleymadeiratours.com/> to see more of 
the island. It was a blast, like riding a cross between an armchair and a 
rocket, and a much more exciting alternative to the ubiquitous coach and 
minibus tours. We went to the most easterly part of the island, bleakly 
beautiful Ponta de São Lourenço; into the isolated Curral das Freiras (Nun’s 
Valley); and above the clouds to the 1,818m Pico do Arieiro.Jeep tours 
<http://www.adventuremadeira.com/> are also a good bet, for those who don’t 
fancy a bike.

The Harley Davidson tour was a blast – much more exciting than the usual 
minibus tour

As well as its topography, what makes Madeira an adventurer’s paradise is its 
climate, which is mild year-round – even in the depths of winter, an outdoor 
activity break is less than a four-hour flight away from the UK. (Having said 
that, I have never been anywhere with such dramatic microclimates. In April, I 
was sunbathing in sweltering Ponta do Sol, which has the best weather on the 
island. Fifteen minutes later, I was driving through freezing rain and fog in 
the mountains, trying – and failing – to reach the ancient forest at Fanal.)

One downside is that Madeira doesn’t have any sandy beaches, apart from a 
couple of artificial ones. However, the nearby island of Porto Santo, part of 
the Madeiran archipelago, has a glorious, 9km stretch of golden sand, running 
along the whole of its south side. There are daily ferries from Funchal (
portosantoline.pt <http://www.portosantoline.pt/>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5ef5843143796ff1c108744de97e9b01e159933%2F0_339_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madeira's%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madeira%27s%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5ef5843143796ff1c108744de97e9b01e159933%2F0_339_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Lapas (limpets) at A Poita, Madalena do Mar. Photograph: Rachel Dixon for the 
Guardian 
Madeiran food is also major draw. Lapas (limpets) are one delicacy, served in 
their shells and slathered in garlic and lemon butter – I had them first atA 
Poita <https://www.facebook.com/Restaurante-A-Poita-1461344890780511/>, a 
family-run restaurant in Madalena do Mar.Espada (scabbard fish) is another 
speciality; it is served as a small plate at O Tasca in Funchal (Rua Bela São 
Tiago 137), followed bypudim de maracujá (passion fruit pudding). Octopus is 
common; I had it at on a terrace by the sea atRestaurante Sol Poente 
<https://www.facebook.com/SolPoenteSnackBarRestaurante> in Ponta do Sol. The 
local bread,bolo de caco, made with potato and served with more garlic butter, 
is astonishingly good.Bolo de miel, or honey cake, is delicious and robust 
enough to survive the journey home.

Madeira wine may be famous in the UK, but the locals prefer a more potent 
drink:poncha. This traditional tipple is made from aguardente de cana 
(distilled alcohol from sugarcane juice), honey and freshly squeezed lemon and 
orange juice. It is drunk everywhere, at any time of day: I was plied with it 
at 10am at the excellent Sunday market in the mountain village of Santo de 
Serra. The stallholders wanted me to try everything: a version of pork 
scratchings,milho frito (fried polenta) and sopa de trigo (wheat soup with 
chunks of pork), plus the aforementioned poncha, local wine, cider, brandy, 
liqueurs made from strawberry and eucalyptus …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cfe8a5f9ce8b5be68da3db9e8ee40a05aadd4c1%2F0_321_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madeira's%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madeira%27s%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cfe8a5f9ce8b5be68da3db9e8ee40a05aadd4c1%2F0_321_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
 Porto Santo Beach. Photograph: Alamy 
Another great spot for poncha is A Venda do Andre 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/A-Venda-Do-Andre/210116899008933>, in the hills 
above the fishing village of Câmara de Lobos. It is a bar on one side and a 
sort of museum on the other, preserving the kind of traditional village store 
that died out when supermarkets arrived. Here, as everywhere, drinks are served 
with monkey nuts andtremoços – incredibly moreish lupin beans that you bite to 
squeeze out of their skins.

Madeira isn’t a place for wild partying, but Funchal’s old town is great for 
bar-hopping. The area used to be a rundown fishing district, but it has livened 
up in recent years: artists have painted all the doors with multicoloured 
murals, and there has been an influx of bars and restaurants. It is all centred 
around Rua Santa Maria –O Ginjinhas <https://www.facebook.com/oginjinhas>, at 
number 33, is a typical vintage bar. Heading further east, the esplanade is 
dotted with churches and forts interspersed with bars and restaurants –
Barreirinha <http://www.madeira-restaurants.com/funchal/barreirinha-bar-cafe> 
is a lively cafe-bar with a terrace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb610547c1406e6aed7b4d08405034ce79a993f5d%2F0_71_6071_3643%2F6071.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madeira's%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madeira%27s%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb610547c1406e6aed7b4d08405034ce79a993f5d%2F0_71_6071_3643%2F6071.jpg>
 The Monte cable car and Funchal. Photograph: Alamy 
Around the harbour, there are developments such as the new Cristiano Ronaldo 
CR7 hotel 
<http://www.pestana.com/uk/contents/institutional/press/cristiano-ronaldo-and-dionisio-pestana-launch-joint-hotel-venture>
 (the Portuguese footballer is the world’s most famous Madeiran),his revamped 
CR7 museum <https://www.facebook.com/MuseuCr7>, and a swish new design centre 
<http://www.ninidesigncentre.com/pt/>. The latter showcases the work of 
Madeiran interior designer Nini Andrade Silva, and has a Michelin-starred 
restaurant with panoramic views of the city and bay. I had lunch there, 
including a standout starter of seafood tartare on banana puree with edible 
flowers.

The hill village of Monte, with its lovely church and gardens, is reached by 
cable car from Funchal. But it is the return journey that is the most fun: a 
high-speed toboggan run down the steep, twisting streets, guided by two 
uniformed “drivers”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa4624b31385d2d7eca1d7bf36471e23914ac6f5%2F0_87_5638_3382%2F5638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madeira's%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madeira%27s%20pulse%20quickens%20with%20extreme%20sports%20and%20glamping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmadeira-glamping-hotels-mountains-coast-camping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa4624b31385d2d7eca1d7bf36471e23914ac6f5%2F0_87_5638_3382%2F5638.jpg>
 The toboggan ride back from Monte. Photograph: Alamy 
Another unmissable experience in Funchal is a visit to the independent country 
of Pontinha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/14/experience-i-founded-my-own-country>
, officially the smallest in the world. Pontinha was founded by Renato Barros, 
AKA Prince Renato II, on an old fort. The public are welcome to visit – and get 
a stamp in their passport – and the Prince is often in residence with his many 
rescued cats. I was granted an audience with him in his art gallery, where he 
makes and paints ceramic pigs. “Life goes in a flash,” he told me. “We must 
enjoy it.” In Madeira, that royal decree turns out to be surprisingly easy to 
obey.


• Flights and accommodation at Canto des Fontes provided by Canopy & Stars (a 
tipi sleeping two from £65 a night,canopyandstars.co.uk/cantodasfontes 
<http://www.canopyandstars.co.uk/cantodasfontes>). Accommodation at Hotel 
Estalagem provided by i-escape (doubles from £71 B&B,i-escape.com) 
<https://www.i-escape.com/estalagem-da-ponta-do-sol>. Beach house in Funchal 
provided by Funchal Cottages (villas for two from €95 a night,
funchalcottages.co.uk <http://www.funchalcottages.co.uk/>)

 