
People of colour in South Africa have faced a long history of ostracism on 
multiple levels. Though I missed the worst of it, apartheid laws mandated 
racist exclusion: careers, political roles, even door entrances and homes, all 
were determined by race. These attitudes remain, even without laws to back them 
up.

I was a child, the first time I was subjected to a racial slur. Decades later 
it continues in South Africa, but also online, particularly in an internet 
environment dominated by status quo warriors who love Trump, hate women and 
believe progress is poison.

It was fascinating to me, then, to encounter a racial slur in the recent video 
gameMafia III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/10/mafia-3-review-1960s-shooter-gameplay>
. It was intentionally made at the game’s main character, who’s black.

13th review – Ava DuVernay's angry, persuasive film about the jailing of black 
men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/06/13th-review-ava-duvernay-jailing-black-men-netflix-selma-13th-constitutional-amendment-slavery>
Mafia III is an open-world sandbox game, similar in design to the recent Grand 
Theft Auto <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grand-theft-auto> titles. 
The creators, Hangar 13,make no apologies for the inclusion of racism 
<http://www.gamespot.com/articles/mafia-3-begins-with-statement-about-racism/1100-6444303/>
 as it’s central to their story of a black man in the middle of the 20th 
century. These were the attitudes at the time, they remind us. In a version of 
1960s America, players take on the role of Lincoln Clay, a biracial Vietnam war 
veteran. Lincoln returns home to the fictional city of New Bordeaux and his 
adopted family, members of the Black Mob.

In an early part of the game, Lincoln pretends to be a security guard. A white 
character snarls that his white friend is unable to find a job, but “some 
nigger” can. Lincoln says nothing, staying in disguise. A few moments later, 
the game instructs you to throw that same racist character into a furnace.

The game continues to display similar views, while Lincoln is provided with 
opportunities to respond. There are complaints about affirmative action, how 
everyone “wants equality” (as if that’s bad), suggestions that black protesters 
are inherently violent or too loud or too demanding; there’s disbelief that 
anyone who isn’t white could be better than a white person.

But these views are not caged in the past 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2016/10/14/blatant-discrimination-black-female-doctor-says-flight-crew-questioned-her-credentials-during-medical-emergency/>
; they linger today, and they’restill dangerous 
<http://fusion.net/story/350187/racism-linked-to-death-penalty/>. While 
playing, Lincoln is frequently warned to leave certain establishments by signs 
saying “whites only” – a sign I’ve seen in my own country. The game has markers 
indicating when police are watching Lincoln – and this is more frequent in 
white areas in the game world, where there is a larger police presence.

Officers walking by Lincoln question what he’s doing there. A white woman 
clutches a bag to her chest when Lincoln passes by. As you progress through the 
game, the Italian mob becomes flustered, wavering between disbelief and anger 
at how “some nigger” could be tearing apart their empire.

The best – and very worst – sex scenes in video game history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/04/the-best-and-very-worst-sex-scenes-in-video-game-history>
This is a game about how a person of colour destroys white supremacy.

As someone who’s frequently the target of racist hate, it’s somewhat cathartic 
to be able to play a game that not only features racism but doesn’t let racism 
stand – Lincoln tackles it head on, dismantles “supremacy”, says: no more.

Of course, most of that response is incredibly violent, and there are 
questions about whether replacing one criminal empire with another is really 
progress. But that’s another topic. Whatever the rights or wrongs of this 
traditional gaming narrative, Mafia III tackles the issue of race within those 
confines.

The racism on display isn’t some caricature. White men can be nice and also 
racist; they can be caring fathers and horrific bigots at the same time. This 
is reality.

Racism didn’t disappear 
<http://ewn.co.za/2016/06/29/Sodwana-Bay-Guest-House-owner-not-sorry-about-his-comments>
 because laws said “no”. People with racist beliefs didn’t disappear. They had 
kids and perpetuated their views. Kids who then felt it was OK to exclude a 
brown kid with an Arabic name because they believed “those people” weren’t 
smart or capable. This is the disbelief that flows through the horror of white 
supremacists in Mafia III, as a man of colour destroys everything white people 
stole from the labour of black people.

In a time when racism seems to be becoming more acceptable, when confronting 
and talking about it brings more wrath from self-proclaimed “not racists” than 
the existence of racism, I’m glad we have fiction reminding people that racism 
existed and still exists. I’m glad its effects are used as part of the game’s 
design, not merely relegated to cutscenes (animated, non-playable interludes) 
or dialogue. I’m glad its racism isn’t caricatured as so unbelievably evil that 
only cartoon villains could ever hold such views.

Game of trolls: how I took on the internet sexists with Misogyny Monday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/19/game-trolls-internet-sexists-misogyny-monday-twitter-youtube>
I want people to know what racism feels like. Too many would rather we never 
have conversations about issues of race or politics in fictional media. Status 
quo warriors have long ignored criticisms they have no interest in – instead 
demanding silence from the marginalised voices offering the criticism and 
perspective severely lacking from wider debate.

This need to see things remain “the same” isn’t neutral, because appealing to 
“the same” group means appealing to those who have privileges that the rest of 
us do not. The yearning for some golden age is so often code for returning to a 
time when white supremacy was unquestioned, unchallenged. The very world 
Lincoln finds himself in when the game begins.

Mafia III isn’t a perfect game, but it’s one of the few that looks at white 
supremacy as the established norm and rejects it. Art confronts us with the 
world from new perspectives. It’s both mirror and window, showing us how the 
world is and what it could be. At a time when those with themost privilege 
<https://twitter.com/GeorgeTakei/status/788511124777992192> do the most whining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/18/trump-rigged-election-obama-warning-america-divided>
, Mafia III feels important to those of us who have been told our entire lives 
to either be silent or know our place because of our skin colour.

Mafia III may be unremarkable or mediocre in many ways, but it is necessary in 
a world that for too long has catered to a core demographic – one that would 
rather spend time complaining that people of colour are talking about racism 
than tackling racism itself.

If Mafia III has one message it is: “Things don’t have to be this way.” 
Indeed, many point to the game’s depictions of history to say “look how far 
we’ve come” in terms of race relations; but there are those of us who then 
point out: “We’re not there yet.”
 