
To some, the menswear catwalks are the poor relations to their female 
equivalents – a trouser-heavy prologue to the haute couture shows that begin in
Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> on Sunday. But those people 
have not been paying attention. Right now, menswear in the French capital is 
having a burst of creative energy.

Both on and off the catwalk, a look is emerging from the Paris autumn/winter 
2016 menswear shows. It isn’t a trend as such, more a long-term shift in the 
way men who care about clothes are dressing, which blurs the lines between 
smart and casual. It is a haphazard, almost accidental way of dressing – padded 
coats over smart trousers, giant trapper hats worn with tailored pieces, 
tracksuit bottoms worn too high at the waist with long wool overcoats and a 
beanie hat.

It is an incongruous styling technique that has been pushed by a small but 
incredibly influential group of new east European designers. They include the 
RussianGosha Rubchinskiy <http://gosharubchinskiy.com/>, whose own-brand show 
was a highlight earlier in the week. In a down-at-heel theatre his catwalk 
featured a gravel runway, dry ice, banana-yellow trapper hats, skater-boy 
chains and off-key trackpants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmaison-margiela-menswear-paris-is-chip-off-eastern-bloc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c22e87abef42d5a313d6c52d5ca1834d8d51f3d%2F91_216_2339_3510%2F2339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maison%20Margiela%20menswear%20is%20a%20chip%20off%20the%20eastern%20bloc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmaison-margiela-menswear-paris-is-chip-off-eastern-bloc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maison%20Margiela%20menswear%20is%20a%20chip%20off%20the%20eastern%20bloc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmaison-margiela-menswear-paris-is-chip-off-eastern-bloc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c22e87abef42d5a313d6c52d5ca1834d8d51f3d%2F91_216_2339_3510%2F2339.jpg>
 A cropped quilted jacket is worn over a suit at the Maison Margiela show. 
Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
The look is echoed at the much-lauded Vetements <http://vetementswebsite.com/> 
label, a collective including the Georgian designer Demna Gvasalia. Now big 
brands have picked up on this aesthetic – Balenciaga has installed Gvasalia as 
itsnew creative director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/07/balenciaga-demna-gvasalia-new-creative-director>
, and backstage at theLouis Vuitton show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/21/louis-vuitton-celebrates-stoic-paris-in-menswear-show>
 on Thursday the designer Kim Jones praised the creativity of the east 
Europeans.

John Galliano attempts fashion comeback after four years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/12/john-galliano-fashion-comeback-four-years>
It is fair to say that John Galliano, the creative director at Maison Margiela,
has not prioritised menswear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/26/maison-margiela-galliano-paris-fashion-week>
 at the label since he joined in October 2014. The official party line is that 
Galliano oversees everything Margiela related, but does not specifically design 
the men’s collection.

The label’s owner, Renzo Rosso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/feb/26/foodanddrink.features8> – 
who also owns Diesel – has said Galliano will put his imprint on menswear in 
mid-2016, which all seems a bit vague and a missed opportunity, especially 
since there is both a buzz about menswear and, commercially, Rosso’s risky hire 
of Galliano has paid off with revenues reportedly up 30%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmaison-margiela-menswear-paris-is-chip-off-eastern-bloc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5d973560e93da14301a8e1abd84dbeb2fd9f5ba%2F0_102_2611_3917%2F2611.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maison%20Margiela%20menswear%20is%20a%20chip%20off%20the%20eastern%20bloc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmaison-margiela-menswear-paris-is-chip-off-eastern-bloc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maison%20Margiela%20menswear%20is%20a%20chip%20off%20the%20eastern%20bloc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmaison-margiela-menswear-paris-is-chip-off-eastern-bloc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5d973560e93da14301a8e1abd84dbeb2fd9f5ba%2F0_102_2611_3917%2F2611.jpg>
 A Maison Margiela look, including a giant duffle coat with missing sleeves. 
Photograph: Ian Langsdon/EPA 
On the Margiela catwalk at Paris there was evidence too of the eastern bloc 
styling aesthetic – only without the excitement. The look was an unlikely mix 
of cycling bib shorts (the sort favoured by professional time-trial 
specialists), giant duffle coats with ripped-off sleeves and hefty boots. 
Cropped quilted jackets were worn over suits. Jackets were deconstructed – 
missing sleeves and glimpses of the inner workings of tailoring are a Margiela 
hallmark. Also present and correct were MA1 bomber jackets, which have had 
plenty of airtime on the catwalks of London and Milan already.

The show notes referred to clothes being “interrupted”, which (unusually for 
show notes, which are often incomprehensible) is a rather helpful way of 
describing this new Parisian aesthetic.
 