
John Galliano <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/john-galliano> is beginning 
to put his mark on Maison Margiela, the label where he has been creative 
director since 2014. The founder, Martin Margiela, who retired in 2009, gave 
the designer one piece of advice before the British designer took over: “Make 
it your own.” Two years in, it looks as if he is taking that advice.

If the house has always centred notions of eccentricity in a kind of 
minimalism,Galliano is at heart a romantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/02/john-galliano-takes-maison-margiela-non-traditional>
. Above all else, he uses quirk to tell stories. The autumn/winter 2016 
so-called Artisanal collection, shown on the Paris couture schedule on 
Wednesday morning, demonstrated this. The show notes produced by the house even 
described it as Galliano’s “most personal interpretation of Maison Margiela’s 
esprit to date”. The trademark Margiela-isms were there on topsy-turvy designs, 
such as the opening outfit of an upside-down jacket bunched up around the 
model’s neck and tied at her waist, or a white pleated gown accessorised with 
motorcycle jackets worn as water wings. But the show really gained momentum 
when the Galliano trademarks – often mishmashes of historical characters – came 
into play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmaison-margiela-topsy-turvy-designs-with-historical-depth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc905d42d431aefffe9ea904c0f78a0d1c7ae753d%2F0_4_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maison%20Margiela%3A%20topsy-turvy%20designs%20with%20historical%20depth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmaison-margiela-topsy-turvy-designs-with-historical-depth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maison%20Margiela%3A%20topsy-turvy%20designs%20with%20historical%20depth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmaison-margiela-topsy-turvy-designs-with-historical-depth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc905d42d431aefffe9ea904c0f78a0d1c7ae753d%2F0_4_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 A touch of the Vita Sackville-Wests. Photograph: Benoit Tessier/Reuters 
The show notes described the collection as a “timeless array of commonplace 
ephemera and things strangely familiar”. This translated to a model in a 
floorlength coat and a Napoleonic bicorn hat, or another in atoile de jouy 
printed corset over a silver space-age jacket. An outfit of a long tweed skirt 
embroidered with feathers, a chunky pullover and a beekeeper’s veil was a bit 
Vita Sackville-West at Sissinghurst, while the final outfit, a cape of green, 
white and purple rip-stop nylon and wellies, brought the suffragettes to the 
catwalk via Glastonbury. The makeup of punky neons and glitter mouths, and hair 
with birds’ feathers weaved in, only added to the strangely familiar feeling of 
a dressing-up box, and referenced Galliano’s origins as a club kid in 80s 
London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmaison-margiela-topsy-turvy-designs-with-historical-depth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc7866c141f469d137cd67cbd8a7b43ab474594b%2F0_0_3648_5472%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maison%20Margiela%3A%20topsy-turvy%20designs%20with%20historical%20depth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmaison-margiela-topsy-turvy-designs-with-historical-depth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maison%20Margiela%3A%20topsy-turvy%20designs%20with%20historical%20depth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmaison-margiela-topsy-turvy-designs-with-historical-depth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc7866c141f469d137cd67cbd8a7b43ab474594b%2F0_0_3648_5472%2F3648.jpg>
 Make up of punky neons and glitter mouths referenced Galliano’s 80s origins. 
Photograph: Francois Guillot/AFP/Getty Images 
While a couture show such as those by Armani Privé or Versace has one eye on 
red carpet-worthy glamour for the super rich, the Margiela-by-Galliano take is 
about clothes as anything-goes art objects. Controversy remains from the 2011 
sacking from Dior, but Galliano’s experience producing couture shows for 15 
years cannot be questioned.

The work on some of these outfits was striking – particularly a white muslin 
slipdress with red lace in the image of cherubs constructed from thousands of 
tiny fragments of lace stitched together. Renzo Rosso, the owner of Margiela, 
sat front row on Wednesday. He appointed Galliano to his position in 2014, and 
has said that couture is a priority for the new Margiela. It is a way to pursue 
ideas that trickle down to ready-to-wear. Speaking to Women’s Wear Daily late 
last year, Rosso said, “all the rest is coming after couture. So, thanks to 
John, I started to think and to work differently.”

The figures show that his couture-down approach is working. At the end of 
2015, revenues were up 30%.
 