
Majestic Wine <https://www.theguardian.com/business/majestic-wine>’s share 
price has plunged more than 25% after the company issued a profit warning 
because of a failed marketing campaign in the US and weak sales to business 
customers.

Britain’s biggest specialist wine retailer said it had overspent on testing a 
direct mailing campaign at Naked Wines in the US. The company has stopped the 
initiative, but said in the short term it would mean higher costs in the first 
half of the year.


Majestic said it would miss profit expectations for the year ending next 
April. The gloomy trading update sent the company’s share price down by 25% in 
early trading on Wednesday, to 325p.

The chief executive, Rowan Gormley, said: “No one likes to see the share price 
go down, but the long-term outlook is what matters.”

He said that while Majestic was operating in a tough market, there was no 
discernible impact as yet from the Brexit vote in June and consumer spending 
remained unchanged.

He warned, however, that the weaker pound – which makes imports more expensive 
– could mean higher prices have to be passed on to customers in the future. “If 
the pound remains down over the long term, at some point wine prices will have 
to go up to reflect that, and that will be the same for all retailers. Prices 
will have to adjust,” Gormley said.

In April 2015, Majestic bought Naked Wines, an online retailer that lets 
subscribers fund independent winemakers in exchange for purchases of exclusive 
bottles at preferential prices. Gormley was its founder, andbecame Majestic’s 
CEO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/10/majestic-wine-to-buy-online-retailer-naked-wines-for-70m>
 when the deal occurred.


Regal wines from Majestic | David Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/18/regal-wines-majestic-wigig-david-williams>
After making an unexpected profit for Majestic last year, Naked Wines is 
expected to make a small loss in the current financial year.

Majestic said the second factor weighing on full-year profits was weak growth 
in its commercial division, which sells wine to businesses. It said conditions 
had become more challenging, with sales flat in the first half of the year. The 
company needed to find a better, more profitable way forward for the commercial 
business, it said.

The combination of weak sales and the failed direct mailing test meant profits 
in the year to 3 April 2017 would be lower than current market expectations of 
£16.1m, Majestic said.

Gormley added: “It is very disappointing that two isolated factors are 
distracting from the great progress across the rest of the group. We have 
always said that we would adopt a test and learn approach, and be quick to 
redeploy capital from underperforming areas, which is exactly what we are doing.

Majestic Wine sales rise for first time in four years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/20/majestic-wine-sales-rise-for-first-time-in-four-years>
“While this approach is delivering good results in the other business units, 
the scale of the US market means that even a test can have a material effect on 
profits.”

Gormley said the turnaround plan for its retail business – which includes 210 
stores in the UK – was progressing well, and preparations for the peak 
Christmas trading period were “well in hand”.

He pledged to revive Majestic after several years of disappointing results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/07/majestic-wine-shares-price-slash-christmas-profit-margin-sales-growth>
 and abandoneda minimum six-bottle purchase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/26/majestic-wines-rowan-gormley-six-bottle-minimum>
 rule left over from its days as a warehouse, simplified prices and updated the 
range of drinks.

Naked Wines in the UK and Australia, and the underlying business in the US, 
were trading well, he said.

Despite the profit warning, Majestic said it was on track to resume dividend 
payments this year and to achieve its goal of £500m sales by 2019.In the year 
to 28 March 2016, sales were £402m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/20/majestic-wine-sales-rise-for-first-time-in-four-years>
.


Connor Campbell, an analyst at Spreadex, said: “It looked like someone at 
Majestic Wine <https://www.theguardian.com/business/majestic-wine> had smashed 
a crate of claret over its chart on Wednesday, with the stock plunging 25%.

“At the time, the Majestic Wine/Naked Wines merger was celebrated as a savvy 
consolidation of the two companies; now, however, it looks like Rowan Gormley 
may be pushing the firm to expand too quickly, resulting in the direct mail 
mess in the US.”
 