
A masterpiece by the 20th-century British sculptor Sir Eduardo Paolozzi  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/apr/23/artsandhumanities.arts>is 
deteriorating because no one is taking responsibility for it, his foundation 
has warned.

The sculpture, an enormous abstracted head titled Piscator, is considered a 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> landmark. Commissioned by 
British Rail in 1980 for the forecourt of Euston station, it still stands on 
its original site but looks forlorn and filthy.

Toby Treves, a former Tate curator and trustee of the Eduardo Paolozzi 
Foundation, told the Guardian the charity had struggled for years to find out 
who owns it so that it can be restored.


He said: “Originally it was acquired by British Rail but, after privatisation, 
ownership of this work … on the British Rail estate fell into a black hole. We 
have been trying to find out ifNetwork Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail> owns it, but they have been 
extremely slow in coming back to us – presumably because, if it is their 
responsibility, they don’t want to have to pay to maintain it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaolozzi-sculpture-london-euston-facing-decay-because-no-one-wants-to-own-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aba349a02ab35cb5183cc83da828983f918e2c3%2F0_268_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20Paolozzi%20sculpture%20facing%20decay%20'because%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20own%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaolozzi-sculpture-london-euston-facing-decay-because-no-one-wants-to-own-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20Paolozzi%20sculpture%20facing%20decay%20%27because%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20own%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaolozzi-sculpture-london-euston-facing-decay-because-no-one-wants-to-own-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aba349a02ab35cb5183cc83da828983f918e2c3%2F0_268_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Paolozzi mosaics at Tottenham Court Road station. Photograph: Linda Nylind for 
the Guardian 
He added: “The absurdity of this is that the foundation would willingly pay to 
restore and clean the sculpture, but we can’t do it without the permission of 
the owners and, since nobody seems to know who they are, the sculpture 
languishes unloved and filthy.”

Any contemporary public art gallery would jump at the chance to own such an 
important sculpture, worth hundreds of thousands of pounds.

Paolozzi, who died in 2005, is best known for his vibrant mosaics at Tottenham 
Court Road tube station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/31/eduardo-paolozzi-tottenham-court-road-mosaics-saved-edinburgh-university>
in London and the monumental bronze of Sir Isaac Newton outside the British 
Library.

Treves said of Piscator: “It’s one of his most prominent public sculptures in 
London.”

A hybrid of mechanical and organic shapes, it is made from cast iron with an 
aluminium finish and measures 3.1 metres x 4.6 metres x 1.85 metres. The 
sculpture was a homage to Erwin Piscator, the 20th-century German Expressionist 
and political theatre director who worked with the playwright and poet Bertolt 
Brecht in Berlin.

Paolozzi once said: “Because of a reasonable budget, we were able to spend 
some time on research and use the same kinds of paints that have been developed 
for oil rigs, which are absolutely vandal-proof, which was one of the 
considerations, and will also be able to sustain without any maintenance for a 
period of time.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaolozzi-sculpture-london-euston-facing-decay-because-no-one-wants-to-own-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97723cbc8deefbdc1012beddb901e59129d408ce%2F765_67_2532_1520%2F2532.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20Paolozzi%20sculpture%20facing%20decay%20'because%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20own%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaolozzi-sculpture-london-euston-facing-decay-because-no-one-wants-to-own-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20Paolozzi%20sculpture%20facing%20decay%20%27because%20no%20one%20wants%20to%20own%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpaolozzi-sculpture-london-euston-facing-decay-because-no-one-wants-to-own-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97723cbc8deefbdc1012beddb901e59129d408ce%2F765_67_2532_1520%2F2532.jpg>
 A statue of Newton at the British Library. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the 
Guardian 
But Derek Pullen, of sculpture conservation consultancy SculpCons, said that 
beyond its “unsightly” appearance “there may be more serious structural 
problems developing inside”.

He told the foundation that the artwork was “soiled by oily traffic dirt”, 
with rust at some of the upper joints and a worn paint layer where it was used 
as a seat.


Network Rail said: “Network Rail does not own the Piscator sculpture and so is 
not responsible for maintaining it. Though we are the freeholder of the land it 
sits on, the leaseholder of that area is Sydney & London [Properties].”

S&L, which owns and manages commercial properties, also denied ownership: 
“Although S&L are leaseholders, they’re leaseholders for the physical 
buildings, not the space outside.”

Treves likened the responses to “a buck being passed”.

News of the sculpture’s demise came as the Whitechapel Gallery announced a 
major Paolozzi retrospective for next year.
 