
With the decline in the value of the pound and subsequent increase in the 
number of tourists coming to Britain (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/brexit-tourists-exploit-weak-pound-to-boost-uk-high-street-sales>
, 13 January), London galleries and museums should start charging them (Former 
MP backtracks on abolishing free entry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/13/va-reiterates-commitment-to-free-entry-after-tristram-hunt-appointment>
, 14 January). A system whereby British taxpayers can enter for free while 
tourists pay, as in Italy, would certainly satisfy those who rarely get the 
opportunity to visit London to see what we pay for. Outside the south-east we 
receive a fraction per head of arts and cultural funding of that received by 
Londoners.
Moira Sykes
Manchester

• “So” at the beginning of an utterance is now widespread among the medical 
education community I work with but I hadn’t expected to see it in print (
Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/12/yadda-yadda-yadda-as-the-new-blah-blah-blah>
, 13 January). So imagine my surprise when I saw it begin a sentence in a 
medical education book I am editing. I was so worried that I had become so 
inured to hearing it that I had missed other instances. So I crossed it out.
Dr Mike Davis
Blackpool

• John Lee Hooker didn’t choose eight of his own records on Desert Island 
Discs (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/13/changing-your-tune-on-desert-island-discs>
, 14 January). Only one featured him – and that was a duet with BB King. The 
remaining seven were by other blues musicians: Muddy Waters, Robert Cray, 
Howlin’ Wolf, Stevie Ray Vaughan, Eric Clapton, Albert King and Bobby Bland.
Mick Poore
Sheffield

• Buttered Weetabix (Letters, 14 January) reminds me of a conference I 
attended many years ago, where at breakfast an eminent professor spread butter 
and jam on two Weetabix and ate the crumbly delicacy with evident enjoyment.
Jane Sutherland
Reading

• I once worked at one of the big four accountancy firms, which had lots of 
vending machines as the staff often worked long and irregular hours. One young 
man regularly breakfasted on Weetabix drenched in chicken soup.
Dariel Francis
Tunbridge Wells, Kent

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 