
A conservative political party in El Salvador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/el-salvador> wants jail terms for women 
accused of having abortions increased to up to 50 years. The dangerous proposed 
amendment to the country’s penal code, discussions on which begin in Congress 
on Thursday, would also increase sanctions and jail times for healthcare 
providers and others accused of “promoting” abortion services.

Since 1998, abortion has been illegal in El Salvador, even when pregnancy is 
the result of rape or incest, or puts the woman’s life at risk. Despite the 
ban, the Salvadoran health ministry’s information, monitoring and evaluation 
unit estimates that more than 19,000 clandestine abortions took place, a figure 
widely regarded as unreliably low. Adolescents comprise nearly a third of this 
number, further compromising their health and wellbeing in a region with some 
of the highest unplanned pregnancy and sexual assault rates.

El Salvador abortion law change could leave women facing 50 years in jail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/14/el-salvador-abortion-law-change-women-facing-50-years-jail>
Under the country’s “guilty until proven innocent approach”, women are serving 
criminal sentences for legal offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/dec/17/el-salvador-miscarriage-judge-accused-me-murder-anti-abortion-law-video>
 linked to abortion, fostering an environment of fear and despair among women 
and health providers. Local groups estimate that, to date, 17 women have been 
imprisoned as a result of seeking unsafe abortions and treatment for obstetric 
emergencies such as miscarriage or stillbirth.

In El Salvador, one of a handful of countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2014/oct/01/-sp-abortion-rights-around-world-interactive>
 where abortion is completely illegal, women and girls’ lives are on the line 
daily.

The proposal to increase sentences for women who have had abortions is not 
only an egregious human rights violation, but also flies in the face of 
evidence showing that restricting access to abortion does not reduce the number 
of terminations. World Health Organisation research has shown thatrates of 
unsafe abortion are likely to increase 
<http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/general/lancet_4.pdf> 
unless women are provided with access to comprehensive sexual and reproductive 
health services, including contraception and safe legal abortion. The UN 
special rapporteur on violence against women has identified the complete ban on 
abortionas a direct contributor to the country’s high maternal mortality rates 
<http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/women/rapporteur/docs/A.HRC.17.26.Add.2_en.pdf>
.

Restrictive laws and the threat of criminal sentences deter service providers 
from giving women who experience obstetric or post-abortion emergencies the 
care and treatment they need. Consider the case ofMaría Teresa Rivera 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/05/el-salvador-release-of-woman-jailed-after-miscarriage-a-victory-for-human-rights/>
. When Rivera went into early labour and began bleeding heavily one night, her 
family called an ambulance. The next day, she was taken to jail. Her “crime” 
was to have a miscarriage. She was recently freed after serving four years in 
prison. Where will women with few options and limited access to services turn?

The proposed law change comes at a time when the government has asked women to 
avoid getting pregnant for two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/04/brazil-zika-virus-pregnancy-microcephaly-mosquito-rare-birth-defect>
 in light of the rapid spread of the Zika virus. Women are in a 
life-threatening catch-22 situation.

But the issue is not only a matter of reproductive rights and public health. 
In a region with staggering levels of inequality, young, poor, indigenous women 
are particularly likely to resort to unsafe abortion. The proposed legal change 
would only exacerbate this injustice and stall efforts to amplify social 
justice and accelerate national development.

 Parliamentarians are playing a dangerous game. Banning abortion in all 
circumstances is deplorable; proposing increased jail terms for women who seek 
an abortion, or those who provide medical support, is simply shameful and 
irresponsible. Thwarting the proposed change will require strong leadership. 
Global human rights bodies, and women everywhere, will be watching.

• Kelly Castagnaro is communications director at the International Planned 
Parenthood Federation, western hemisphere region
 