
Greg Hunt is to become Australia’s health and sport minister, with Senator 
Arthur Sinodinos <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos> 
taking Hunt’s portfolio of industry, innovation and science.

Malcolm Turnbull made the announcement at a media conference in Sydney, ending 
days of speculation afterSussan Ley quit as health minister on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/sussan-ley-quits-health-minister-turnbull-outlines-reform-expenses>
.

In the outer ministry, the assistant health minister, Ken Wyatt, will become 
the aged care minister and minister for Indigenous health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/18/ken-wyatt-to-become-australias-first-indigenous-minister>
, making him the first Indigenous person appointed to a commonwealth ministry.

The rising conservative talent Michael Sukkar will be appointed assistant 
minister to the treasurer. The changes will take effect when the new ministers 
are sworn in by the governor general on Tuesday.

Related: Ken Wyatt to become Australia's first Indigenous minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/18/ken-wyatt-to-become-australias-first-indigenous-minister>

The prime minister said Hunt was “ideally suited” to health because he had 
“strong policy, analytical and communication skills, developed over a very long 
frontbench career”.

Hunt will represent the aged care sector in the cabinet and David Gillespie 
will continue to serve as assistant minister for health.

Turnbull said he had opted for a small reshuffle because he has a “very strong 
ministry” that was performing well. The reshuffle would further strengthen it 
by “combining experience and new talent”, he said.

He paid tribute to Sinodinos, who he said could return to a frontline 
portfolio after he “restored traditional cabinet processes” in the position of 
cabinet secretary.

The cabinet secretary function will return to the prime minister’s office, 
reducing the size of the cabinet by one. The special minister of state, Senator 
Scott Ryan, will continue as minister assisting the prime minister for cabinet.

Asked about the representation of women falling, Turnbull responded that he 
still had a “historically large number of women in my cabinet” for a Coalition 
government.

“I have appointed more women to my cabinet than any previous Coalition 
leader,” he said. I am very committed to having strong representation of women 
in the ministry.”

In a statement on Wednesday the Australian Medical Association president, 
Michael Gannon, welcomed the appointments of Hunt and Wyatt.

He said Hunt’s experience as a senior minister in the environment and industry 
portfolios should prepare him for the demands of the health portfolio.

Gannon said the AMA would meet Hunt “at the earliest opportunity” to discuss 
urgent matters before the May budget.

On Sunday Gannon told Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/15/doctors-lobby-group-would-welcome-arthur-sinodinos-as-health-minister>
 the incoming minister would have to deal with “a number of policies” the 
Coalition took to the election that had been “rejected” by many Australians.

“The AMA would like to see Mr Hunt get off to a flying start by scrapping the 
government’s freeze of Medicare patient rebates, which is causing great 
hardship for patients and doctors,” he said.

Gannon said other priorities included getting across reviews of the Medicare 
benefits schedule and private health insurance, and “the ongoing issue of 
public hospital funding … along with Indigenous health, mental health and 
prevention”.

Related: Greg Hunt. Best. Minister. Ever | First Dog on the Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/feb/11/greg-hunt-best-minister-ever>

Labor’s health spokeswoman, Catherine King, lamented that Turnbull had 
“changed his salesperson when it comes to health but he hasn’t changed a single 
one of his policies”.

She called on the government to unfreeze the Medicare benefits schedule and 
cuts to bulk-billing incentives for diagnostic and medical imaging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/09/medicare-cuts-to-diagnostic-scans-will-cost-cancer-patients-say-radiologists>
.

King criticised Turnbull for not appointing another woman to cabinet or as 
assistant minister, describing it as “telling” of the way the Liberal party 
failed to promote women.

The Greens leader Richard Di Natale lamented that female representation was 
down to five ministers out of 22. He also called for Hunt to “rule out the 
exorbitant increase in health insurance premiums demanded by the industry and 
reverse the cuts to children’s dental care announced by his predecessor”.

Ley resigned after an investigation into her travel expense claims including 
what she called an “error of judgment” in charging for a trip to the Gold Coast 
in which she boughta $795,000 apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
.


On Tuesday Turnbull refused to release the report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/17/malcolm-turnbull-says-australia-must-put-safety-first-when-asked-about-burqa-ban>
 of the investigation, citing the fact it was a report to himself and the 
cabinet governance committee, but reiterated that Ley had made the right call 
in quitting.

Labor has sought to target Sinodinos, accusing Turnbull of “recycling” him 
after hestood aside as assistant treasurer in 2014 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-03-19/arthur-sinodinos-stands-aside-as-assistant-treasurer/5331388>
 pending investigation by the New South Wales Independent Commission Against 
Corruption of Australian Water Holdings, of which he was the deputy director.

Sinodinos was cleared in relation to AWH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/21/arthur-sinodinos-reportedly-cleared-by-icac-over-corruption-claims>
 butfaced enormous political pressure over illegal donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/02/arthur-sinodinos-under-constant-stress-over-nsw-liberal-donations-revelations>
 from property developers through the Free Enterprise Foundation to the NSW 
Liberal party during his time as treasurer of the party, of which he said he 
was unaware.

Asked whether Sinodinos had problematic “baggage”, Turnbull turned the attack 
on Labor. He criticisedBill Shorten’s decision to appoint his factional ally 
Kimberley Kitching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bill-shorten-ally-kimberley-kitching-to-replace-stephen-conroy-in-senate>
 to a Senate vacancy despite adverse findings about her by the trade union 
royal commission, which referred her for possible prosecution.
 