
The prime minister has said the Australian of the Year should be someone who 
uses the platform to advocate for cultural change, pointing toRosie Batty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/rosie-batty> as an outstanding 
example of a strong advocate for a cause.

Rosie Batty: I was reeling with raw grief while Australian of the year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/rosie-batty-i-was-reeling-with-raw-grief-while-australian-of-the-year>
“The Australians of the Year have been, many of them, very formidable 
advocates, none more so than Rosie Batty,” Turnbull told 3AW’s Neil Mitchell.

“Rosie Batty as I said is really an outstanding example of someone who made a 
contribution to I think a great cultural shift in attitudes towards domestic 
violence.”

In a wide-ranging radio interview on Friday, Turnbull backed the Australia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day> Council’s choice of 
ex-army chief David Morrison as Australian of the Year and rejected suggestions 
the role had become too politicised.

“I know there’s been some controversy about David Morrison, I think he’s a 
very good choice, he’s been an outstanding general, he’s shown great leadership 
but ultimately we are informed and the Australia Day Council is informed by the 
progress of each new appointment,” Turnbull said.

“The role of the Australian of the Year is to be themselves. They need to be a 
person of a character and a quality that is admired, that is something of a 
role model, but also somebody that can use that platform or that megaphone, and 
it’s quite a big one, to be able to make a case. To be another voice.”

David Morrison, former chief of army, named Australian of the Year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/david-morrison-former-chief-of-army-named-australian-of-the-year>
Turnbull’s view of the role as a “megaphone” puts him at odds with several 
conservative commentators in the Australian this week who have criticised the 
choice of Morrison who they characterise as a social and political activist 
rather than an “achiever”, an industrialist or a business leader.

In a piece originally published in Quadrant 
<https://quadrant.org.au/opinion/qed/2016/01/lets-cashier-australian-year/>, 
Geoffrey Luck complained the Australia Day Council had awarded the gong to a
“hectoring activist” 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/david-morrision-is-another-hectoring-activist-of-the-year/news-story/8cd104c282c382229a90a9291ab7f517>
 with an “unremarkable military career”.

“It has abandoned the achiever and role model categories,” Luck said. “Now 
it’s in danger of crippling itself in political activism.”

The Australian’s foreign editor Greg Sheridan has also weighed in 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/columnists/greg-sheridan/social-agendas-are-sure-to-wreck-the-military/news-story/6d35d875d0f8a97fe910b3790f7eda90>
, scolding Morrison for what he calls sermonising about the republic, gender 
equity and racism.


“And then why did Morrison have to make sure he got every Zeitgeist 
thought-bubble orthodoxy of the day covered by telling us he’s going to speak 
all year about how we have to become a republic?” Sheridan said.


Bill Shorten praises Rosie Batty and pledges action on domestic violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/bill-shorten-praises-rosie-batty-and-pledges-action-on-domestic-violence>
“Are we really going to have to listen to another year of sanctimonious 
lectures about what we need to do to become independent, from someone who I 
thought knew he had spent his life defending a proud and independent nation?


“The Australian of the Year is meant to have been outstanding in their career 
and then done something extra,” Sheridan wrote. “The something extra now 
apparently is entirely advocacy for any approved social cause. How about an 
Australian of the Year who doesn’t support the republic and has spent his or 
her life advocating fiscal discipline?”


Morrison’s former speechwriter Catherine McGregor, who was named Queenslander 
of the Year this week, has also come under fire from the Australian because she 
has lived outside the state for much of her adult life.


“Having lived mostly in Canberra or Sydney since leaving high school, as 
Malcolm McGregor, in Toowoomba in the early 1970s, her triumph as Queenslander 
of the Year has raised questions about the council’s process,” national chief 
correspondent Hedley Thomas wrote on Friday.


McGregor’s own unflattering comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/27/catherine-mcgregor-sorry-for-weak-jibe-at-david-morrison-as-australian-of-the-year>
 about the choice of Morrison led to the transgender activist apologising hours 
after describing the appointment as “weak and conventional”.

 