
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has used his Christmas video message to urge Australians to celebrate the 
country’s cultural diversity.

In a year that has seen a rise in anti-immigration rhetoric from the right of 
his ownLiberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> 
and the resurgence ofPauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson>’s One Nation party, 
the prime minister made a pointed reference to Australia’s multicultural 
population.

“In Australia we have much for which to be grateful,” he said. “Not least that 
so many different people of so many different backgrounds, races and religions 
live together here in a harmony founded on mutual respect.

“We also remember those who find Christmas difficult – the lonely, the poor, 
the sick and those who are away from their families. Reach out to them if you 
can.”

Malcolm Turnbull interview: Trump can boost case for business tax cuts in 
Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/17/malcolm-turnbull-interview-trump-can-boost-case-for-business-tax-cuts-in-australia>
In an earlier radio interview, Turnbull said Christmas was a season of love 
and that people should find time for others.

“It’s also a very important time to reach out and give a hug to those who 
aren’t having as happy a Christmas as you might be,” he told 2GB radio on 
Saturday.

“You know for whatever reason – they’re lonely, sick, estranged from their 
families. This is a season of love, and you should share it.”

Turnbull said he would be spending Sunday with his family, including his three 
grandchildren, and continuing his annual Christmas tradition of visiting 
Sydney’sWayside Chapel <https://www.thewaysidechapel.com/>.


But he said his family was shunning the traditional Christmas Day roast lunch 
in favour of cold dishes, and fish and ham. He downplayed his cooking 
abilities, describing himself as an “enthusiastic amateur”.

“I’ve got to tell you, the rest of my family are much more talented at cooking 
than me,” he admitted.

Turnbull also paid tribute to his grandchildren – aged three, 18 months and 
six months – saying they made him feel like a young man again.

“Every time I am with our grandchildren, it makes me feel as though I am back 
in my late 20s, early 30s, and I know [my wife] Lucy feels the same,” he said.
 