
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has used the win by the leave campaign to warn that the result could cause a 
“shock” and he has urged Australians to vote for the Coalition government’s 
“strong economic leadership”.

Speaking at 2pm on Friday when the BBC had already called the vote for the 
“leave” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
, Turnbull warned there would be a level of uncertainty in the economy, which 
would require a stable majority government.


“You have already seen the pound has lost a lot of value,” he said. 

EU referendum result: Britain votes for Brexit – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-result-live-counting-leave-remain-brain-in-europe>
“It will create a shock. I’m sure stability will return in due course, but it 
will be a shock.”


But in a second news conference an hour later, Turnbull urged calm in the face 
of the result, given Britain would take several years to leave the European 
Union.

“We respect the wishes of the British people, expressed through this 
referendum,” he said.

“I want to say that Australians, I recognise, will be concerned by the 
uncertainty and instability in global markets, falls in currencies, including 
the Australian dollar, and in equity markets.

“It is important to remember that the Australian economy is strong and 
resilient, and has weathered global shocks before and weathered them well. I 
have no doubt that in due course, the British government will negotiate a 
satisfactory departure from the European Union.”

Turnbull said Australia’s relationship with Britain would be as “strong and 
intimate” as ever while negotiations towards a free trade agreement with the 
European Union would continue.

“So there is no cause for Australians to be alarmed by these developments,” he 
said.


Bill Shorten said the Brexit vote proved the need for inclusive growth to 
avoid disenchantment but he said it would not change Australia’s economic 
fundamentals.

“Like the treasurer and the prime minister, we urge people to remain calm and 
not necessarily confuse the volatility of the stockmarket with any greater 
economic shift ... in Australia’s economic fundamentals,” Shorten said.


Labor’s Chris Bowen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen> warned the 
Coalition against “politicising” the results for the sake of the Australian 
election.


“While the United Kingdom leaving Europe would have economic impacts around 
the world, now is not the time for these impacts to be politicised or 
dramatised in a scare campaign by Malcolm Turnbull andScott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>,” the shadow 
treasurer said.

“The Australian people need their prime minister, their treasurer and the 
alternative prime minister and treasurer, outlining clearly the impacts of 
Britain potentially leaving the European Union, without scaring the Australian 
people about those impacts.”

Australian election 2016: Turnbull says majority government needed to ride out 
Brexit turbulence – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/24/australian-election-2016-liberals-sailing-close-to-the-wind-with-donations-politics-live>
The treasurer, Scott Morrison, said Australia had a growth rate exceeding all 
advanced economies and growth in exports, particularly in the services sector.

“In the short term, and the volatility we are seeing in markets is not 
unanticipated, in many respects some of these issues have been priced at 
various levels within the market,” Morrison said.

Foreign minister Julie Bishop said Australia’s trade agreements would help 
maintain the country’s economic strength.

“There will be great volatility, which we’ve seen at the prospect of Britain 
leaving the EU,” Bishop said.

“But it can’t be taken for granted. We have an economic plan for growing the 
economy so we can withstand these kind of external shocks.

“That’s what our plan is about – making sure the Australian economy is strong. 
Our trade agreements with countries to our north and our trade agreements 
around the world that theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> has been negotiating 
will help us maintain that strength.”

 