
Alex Duval Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alexduvalsmith> reports 
from the Mbera refugee camp in south-east Mauritania, which is host to rising 
numbers of people fleeing conflict in central Mali. Even though armed groups 
haveagreed a peace deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/01/mali-peace-deal-a-welcome-development-but-will-it-work-this-time>
 with the government in Bamako, there are about 42,000 people in the camp, 
mainly Tuareg and Arab refugees, with their numbers bolstered bythe recent 
arrival of more than 500 Fulani nomads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/17/refugees-claim-abuse-by-soldiers-as-malis-conflict-spreads>
. Mali and Mauritania both have high rates of child marriage, but NGOs working 
at the camp are trying to provide education and training opportunitiesto 
dissuade both child marriage and young men from joining armed groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/10/threat-of-marriage-young-malian-refugee-girls-mauritania-mbera-camp>
.

Khabar Lahariya is an Indian newspaper that has come a long way: from 
fortnightly publications hand-delivered around villages, its reportage now 
includes video and WhatsApp updates. But what makes the publication special is 
the way it is breaking gender and caste taboos.The newspaper is the first and 
only paper in India staffed, edited and run entirely by women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/10/india-all-female-newspaper-khabar-lahariya-gender-taboos-old-news>
, mostly from low-caste, rural backgrounds. We’ve also had reports from India 
in the past two weeks on how little is being done to helpIndians displaced by 
the Maoist insurgency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/11/no-legal-status-how-india-is-ignoring-its-thousands-of-displaced-citizens-maoist-insurgency>
, and on schools in Delhi that are opening upa safe space for children to speak 
up about sexual abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/22/children-start-talk-about-sexual-abuse-india-delhi-schools-offer-safe-space>
.

Elsewhere on the site
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fmalian-refugees-in-mauritania-and-indias-all-woman-newspaper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02ba19abd078749a51056eccb61aa80c70b04da6%2F0_245_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malian%20refugees%20in%20Mauritania%2C%20and%20India's%20all-woman%20newspaper&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fmalian-refugees-in-mauritania-and-indias-all-woman-newspaper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malian%20refugees%20in%20Mauritania%2C%20and%20India%27s%20all-woman%20newspaper&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fmalian-refugees-in-mauritania-and-indias-all-woman-newspaper%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02ba19abd078749a51056eccb61aa80c70b04da6%2F0_245_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Geraldine Jones, headteacher at the Oscar Romero school for deaf children in 
Tubmanburg, Liberia. Photograph: Kate Holt 
‘My job is to make children hopeful’: inside Liberia’s deaf school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/10/liberia-school-deaf-marginalised-my-job-is-to-make-children-hopeful>

Conakry hairdressers dispense cut-and-dried contraceptive advice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/12/conakry-guinea-hairdressers-contraceptive-advice-hair-salons-women>


Peruvian women protest against tide of murder and sexual crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/13/women-peru-protest-rising-tide-murder-sexual-crime>


As the mercury soars, fear grows over ‘air-con effect’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/15/increase-air-conditioning-accelerate-climate-change>


Kenya’s Ogiek people face ‘colonial approach to conservation’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/18/kenyas-ogiek-people-are-seeing-their-land-rights-brutalised>


Iraqi children pay high health cost of war-induced air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/22/iraq-children-health-cost-war-induced-air-pollution-study-toxic-waste-birth-defects>


Cambodia proves fertile ground for foreign surrogacy
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/19/cambodia-foreign-surrogacy-thailand-ban>

Opinion

Kevin Hyland: Britain must address sex trafficking from Nigeria to Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/12/britain-must-address-root-causes-sex-trafficking-nigeria-to-europe>


Jimmy Smith: Veganism is not the key to sustainable development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/16/veganism-not-key-sustainable-development-natural-resources-jimmy-smith>

Multimedia
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ffrom-rural-romania-to-a-swiss-brothel-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Generations%20of%20Romanian%20girls%20trafficked%20into%20Europe's%20sex%20industry%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ffrom-rural-romania-to-a-swiss-brothel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Generations%20of%20Romanian%20girls%20trafficked%20into%20Europe%27s%20sex%20industry%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ffrom-rural-romania-to-a-swiss-brothel-video&media=>
Generations of Romanian girls trafficked into Europe’s sex industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/aug/19/from-rural-romania-to-a-swiss-brothel-video>
Olympians find fetching water in Uganda far from child’s play – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/aug/15/olympians-fetching-water-uganda-british-rowers-peter-richard-chambers-in-pictures>


Students Speak

Is peace a prerequisite for development? Why are the least peaceful countries 
often among the poorest? What’s the link between peace and progress? We want 
your views.Submit a response of 250 words or fewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/19/students-speak-is-peace-prerequisite-for-development>
, and we’ll publish the best ones.

Book extracts

In an extract from South Sudan: The Untold Story from Independence to Civil War
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/17/south-sudan-an-insider-view-untold-story-independence-civil-war-hilde-f-johnson-un>
, Hilde F Johnson, former head of the UN there, shares how the world’s newest 
nation descended into war in December 2013.

In Today We Drop Bombs, Tomorrow We Build Bridges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/23/humanitarian-airstrikes-reassuring-gloss-actions-politicians-peter-gill-today-we-drop-bombs-tomorrow-we-build-bridges>
, Peter Gill laments aid agencies’ waning independence and the dangers staff 
face.

What you said

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fmalian-refugees-in-mauritania-and-indias-all-woman-newspaper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb6716cfea423f37ca72abbfff2ce6b761219340%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malian%20refugees%20in%20Mauritania%2C%20and%20India's%20all-woman%20newspaper&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fmalian-refugees-in-mauritania-and-indias-all-woman-newspaper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malian%20refugees%20in%20Mauritania%2C%20and%20India%27s%20all-woman%20newspaper&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fmalian-refugees-in-mauritania-and-indias-all-woman-newspaper%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb6716cfea423f37ca72abbfff2ce6b761219340%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 A picture from February 2012 showing Bahr El Ghazal province, northern Chad, 
in the ecologically fragile Sahel region. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer
Jimmy Smith’s repudiation of the vegan lifestyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/16/veganism-not-key-sustainable-development-natural-resources-jimmy-smith>
 attracted hundreds of comments.VashtiGwynn 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16421983> wrote:

There are marginal lands where crop production isn’t possible (uplands, 
deserts, wetlands, forests) but there is a very strong argument for allowing 
these to revert to a natural state, rather than decimating their biodiversity 
by crowding them with livestock. I doubt the assertion that the Sahel is better 
off lightly farmed. Farming and scrub-clearing has been one of the primary 
causes of ever-spreading desertification and sub-Saharan countries increasingly 
face recurrent crop failures … This sort of subsistence farming is therefore 
manifestly unsustainable, and should not be romanticised as ‘natural’ or 
‘pastoral’.

Highlight from the blogosphere

The International Solidarity Mission has been investigating how the Jalaur 
Mega dam in the Philippines threatens to displace indigenous people in Panay 
island. Writing forGlobal Voices <https://globalvoices.org>, Karlo Mikhail 
Mongaya <https://globalvoices.org/author/karlo-mongaya/>, who lives on the 
island, writes that local people are afraid that the dam will cause flooding 
and landslides as well as the drowning not only of their homes and villages, 
but also of their agricultural lands and cultural heritage, as six burial 
grounds and sacred sites would be destroyed.

Farmers tackling climate change event

Join Guardian sustainable business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business> for a seminar on 21 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/26/agriculture-climate-change-rural-poverty-farmers-investment-technology>
 to discuss how to support the developing world’s farmers, from Colombia to 
Ivory Coast, and help end rural poverty.

And finally …


Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian> on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 