
Chase the dollar or chase bespoke preparation for the new season? This is the 
question fans of Manchester United and Manchester City may ask following 
Monday’s derby inBeijing being called off less than six hours before kick-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/25/manchester-united-city-called-off-beijing>
, and the unsuitable conditions often found in far-off destinations.

Given the pitch at the National Stadium was a patchwork of loose turf and was 
infected with fungus, the puzzle is why the match was not cancelled earlier. 
The outcome was damaging for United, City and Relevant Sports, which is headed 
by Charlie Stillitano, the man behind the International Champions Cup.

Manchester United v Manchester City game called off in Beijing over pitch fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/25/manchester-united-city-called-off-beijing>
Hu Mulin, a 17-year-old wearing a David Beckham shirt outside the Bird’s Nest, 
as the ground is also known, said: “I am a bigManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> fan. I love Beckham, 
Rooney and Rashford. I am angry because I had a ticket and now they can’t play 
the match. We drove here by car and it took six or seven hours with my father 
and my friend.”

The farce may also cause awkward debate involving José Mourinho, Pep Guardiola 
and the commercial departments of United and City about where the clubs go next 
summer.

The decision to cancel was taken at 2pm local time following a pitch 
inspection but Mourinho and Guardiola already had strong reservations. These 
were simple: three weeks before the Premier League season starts, they had to 
prepare players in stifling heat and play on a pitch that threatened to cause 
serious injury. On Sunday, Guardiola, despite having considerable input into 
City’s tour, highlighted the conditions, saying: “We know the humidity is not 
ideal.”

Weather that “would have caused problems anywhere in the world”, according to 
Ed Woodward, United’s executive vice-chairman, was blamed for the match being 
called off. Yet City’s deputy head groundsman was at the stadium for 10 days, 
helping with the pitch. United’s groundsman was also consulted about the 
surface and given the venue is rarely used for football each club had concerns 
before the torrential rain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fvincent-kompany-disappointed-manchester-derby-cancellation-china-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vincent%20Kompany%20disappointed%20at%20Manchester%20derby%20cancellation%20in%20China%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fvincent-kompany-disappointed-manchester-derby-cancellation-china-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vincent%20Kompany%20disappointed%20at%20Manchester%20derby%20cancellation%20in%20China%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fvincent-kompany-disappointed-manchester-derby-cancellation-china-video&media=>
Vincent Kompany disappointed at Manchester derby cancellation in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jul/25/vincent-kompany-disappointed-manchester-derby-cancellation-china-video>
It may be the first time United have not been able to play a game in China but 
they have had at least one close call. Three years ago in Hong Kong, United – 
and City – experienced similar difficulties when almost incessant rain 
prevented David Moyes’s side from training at Hong Kong Stadium beforefacing 
Kitchee in a friendly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/29/manchester-united-kitchee-match-report>
. Again there was concern about player safety. A few days before, City’s match 
with Tottenham Hotspur at the same venue had a delayed kick-off and was 
shortened to 40 minutes a half for the same reason.

Again, there were the stifling, humid conditions that affect south-east Asia 
and make it difficult for players to train: a factor also present on Friday when
United lost 4-1 to Borussia Dortmund in Shanghai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/manchester-united-borussia-dortmund-friendly-match-report>
.

Mourinho had no say in the two-game eight-day trip because it was planned by 
his predecessor, Louis van Gaal. Next summer it is his decision alone where 
United go, the club say. Yet Woodward and the owners, the Glazers, will have 
considerable input and will stress commercial imperatives. At City, Guardiola 
will make the call in conjunction with the commercial department and other club 
stakeholders.

A glaring truth is that United and City are engaged in the race for global 
reach and the finance this yields. It means Khaldoon al-Mubarak and Ferran 
Soriano, City’s chairman and chief executive respectively, sign off a trip to 
China then find Guardiola feel moved to say “no injuries” as his first words of 
the pre-Beijing derby press conference. It means Woodward and the Glazers can 
sanction a trip to the same destination and watch a visibly upset Mourinho wish 
for the “good luck” of no injuries.

Van Gaal, on his first tour with United in 2014, complained bitterly at the 
five-state odyssey across America that took in California, Colorado, Washington 
DC, Michigan and Florida. His preference was for the cooler, dryer climes of 
Europe. United returned the following year to America, the “compromise” being 
there were two bases – in Seattle and San Jose – plus a flying visit to Chicago 
for the final game.

In a message to fans on Monday City’s captain, Vincent Kompany, said: “There’s 
things in life that you don’t control.” But where his club and United choose to 
tour is within their

control. In summer 2014, in the second year of Mourinho’s second spell at 
Chelsea, he took the club solely to Europe, playing games in England, Austria, 
Slovenia, the Netherlands, Germany, Turkey, and Hungary. Yet there is a 
suggestion United may return to America next summer and for some length , 
because Mourinho favours three-week tours for team-bonding reasons.

His decision to add an extra friendly to this summer’s schedule – the 2-0 
victory at Wigan Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/16/manchester-united-beat-wigan-jose-mourinho-first-game-luke-shaw>
 – appears wise following the loss of the Beijing game. When the season starts 
United will have had five warm-up matches but City only three. For Guardiola 
there is a chance his team could be undercooked when they play Sunderland at 
home on 13 August and the Champions League play-off first leg the following 
week.

Yet if fans want change it may be not be dramatic. Woodward says: “I am sure 
we will return to the Bird’s Nest” while City havesold a £265m stake in the 
City Football Group to a Chinese consortium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/01/manchester-city-265m-deal-chinese-investment-group>
.

It seems Europe is the location during the season, when the Champions League 
and Europa League are being played. In the close season the prime spot is the 
rest of the world.

Manchester United plane gets ‘lost’ in China before farcical press conference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/24/manchester-united-plane-arrives-safely-after-getting-lost> 