
Detainees on Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> are demanding answers 
about the death of a refugee as advocates call for a royal commission into 
medical care at Australia’s offshore detention centres.

Faysal Ishak Ahmed, a 27-year-old Sudanese man, died on Saturday in Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/sudanese-refugee-dies-in-brisbane-hospital-after-medivac-from-manus>
 after being airlifted there from the centre in Papua New Guinea the day before.

He had reportedly been unwell for more than six months, prompting fellow 
detainees to complain to International Health and Medical Services (IHMS), the 
organisation responsible for his and others’ care on the island.


Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> and asylum seekers on 
Manus rebelled against guards on Saturday night in a non-violent protest in 
response to Ahmed’s death, peacefully taking control of two of the four 
internal compounds in the detention centre.

Sudanese refugee dies in Brisbane hospital after medivac from Manus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/sudanese-refugee-dies-in-brisbane-hospital-after-medivac-from-manus>
Behrouz Boochani, an Iranian journalist and refugee who has been held on the 
island for more than three years, told Guardian Australia that he and others 
had “kicked the officers and staff out in a serious way” and “took control” of 
the centre.


He said it was an attempt to seek answers from the “fascist system” about the 
circumstances surrounding Ahmed’s death. “They must answer our questions and 
make it clear who is responsible,” he said.

The officers and staff returned to the centre on Sunday, he said. “Now the 
refugees are angry and sad but the situation otherwise looks like normal.”

Memorial services for Ahmed were to be held on Sunday evening.

The Department of Immigration and Border Protection said on Saturday that 
Ahmed had died from “a fall and seizure” and it was not aware of any suspicious 
circumstances surrounding his death. “The death will be reported to the 
Queensland coroner,” it said. “No further comment will be made at this time.”

Ahmed fled Sudan in 2013 and tried to reach Australia by boat.

Boochani said it was widely known within the compound that Ahmed was unwell 
and that he had complained of experiencing heart problems and constant 
headaches.

“Many times Faysal collapsed and all of us here knew that he was seriously 
sick for more than six months … Every day Faysal went to medical asking for 
help. They did not help him.”

Boochani said a nurse had told Ahmed that “he was fine and didn’t need medical 
treatment” a few days before he died.

He encouraged advocates and human rights organisations to lodge complaints 
against IHMS.

Refugee Action Coalition spokesman Ian Rintoul said Ahmed had been suffering 
seizures “for weeks without treatment”.

“We do not yet know the precise case of Faysal’s death – whether it is the 
head injuries he suffered or his underlying medical condition,” he said.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, made no apology 
for the government’s policy not to allow asylum-seeker boat arrivals to set 
foot on Australian soil.

“That has stopped the people-smuggling and it’s stopped the drownings at sea,” 
he told reporters in Sydney on Sunday. “Our policy is compassionate but it 
respects the sovereignty of Australia.”

Calls have been made for the Australian government to instigate a royal 
commission into the medical care refugees receive on Manus Island and Nauru, 
the other offshore processing centre.

George Newhouse, the principal solicitor of the not-for-profit human rights 
law centre the National Justice Project, said Ahmed was the latest victim of 
the “systematically cruel and inhumane system”.

“It appears that Faysal did not receive appropriate treatment for his 
condition and we now have another death that was likely to have been entirely 
avoidable,” he said on Sunday.

Newhouse said Ahmed’s death was the “tip of the iceberg” and that a royal 
commission with broader powers of inquiry was necessary to determine the full 
extent of the “miserable level” of medical treatment on Manus and Nauru.

Happy Bloody Christmas: The True Story of Faysal, by Eaten Fish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/25/happy-bloody-christmas-the-true-story-of-faysal-by-eaten-fish>
He pointed to the deaths of Hamid Kehazaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/delay-to-treatment-of-hamid-kehazaei-before-he-died-revealed-in-leaked-files>
, an Iranian asylum seeker who died in a Brisbane hospital in September 2014, 
and Rakib Khan, who died while awaiting medical evacuation from Nauru this year.

Kehazaei, 24, had originally presented with a minor infection in his leg that 
developed into sepsis, eventually causing a series of heart attacks.

The coronial inquest into his death heard that the Manus Island medical 
facilities were inadequate, doctors’ clinical instructions were ignored and 
critical medical equipment was not working.

Khan, 26, died from suspected heart failure in Nauru hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/11/bangladeshi-refugee-dies-on-nauru-of-suspected-heart-attack>
 in May. Plans had been made to take him to Australia by air ambulance but he 
could not be moved. An overdose of medicines may have contributed to his death.
 