
Maps <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/travel-maps> of cities are great. By 
visualising information about a place you can see geographical patterns that 
can yield dozens of insights.

The city of Amsterdam <http://www.iamsterdam.com/en/> clearly agrees. The 
municipal authority has put together a collection of about 70 maps of the 
capital of the Netherlands.

The batch of cartography covers everything from the city’s solar panels 
<http://www.zonopdekaart.amsterdam.nl/> to its Airbnb prices 
<http://maps.amsterdam.nl/airbnb/?LANG=en> and even the breeding grounds of 
swifts, sparrows and starlings <http://maps.amsterdam.nl/vogels/?LANG=en>. 
 Breeding grounds of swifts, sparrows and starlings in Amsterdam. Map: 
maps.amsterdam.nl <http://maps.Amsterdam.nl> 
The collection was started by Klaas-Bindert de Haan, a mapping specialist who 
has worked for the city of Amsterdam for 15 years. He says the maps are not 
just used by interested citizens but also by colleagues looking at city 
planning and sustainability.

A neat feature <http://maps.amsterdam.nl/grabbel/> is the ability to choose up 
to three maps to display alongside one another. You can then see, for example, 
current house prices alongside the parts of the city that were attacked during 
the second world war.

While the majority of the maps on the site are produced by the municipal 
authority itself, there are some external ones featured. These include an
animation showing the development of the city’s canal system 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IvsHvfs3G1M> over the course of the 17th 
century.

And one of the most intriguing maps on the site is another animation, showing 
the development of Amsterdam over time 
<http://maps.amsterdam.nl/bouwjaar/?LANG=en>. It uses the ages of different 
buildings to show how the city swelled rapidly after 1860.
 Buildings in Amsterdam built before 1860. Map: maps.amsterdam.nl 
<http://maps.amsterdam.nl/> 
De Haan said: “With the animation of time a simple story is told.” He added 
that one map he is particularly keen on creating in the future is one showing 
which neighbourhoods people are moving into and out of.

You can explore the whole collection of maps here <http://maps.amsterdam.nl/>.
 