
Louis Vuitton <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/louis-vuitton> died 120 
years ago, but the whole world knows his name. Now it is time for the world to 
hear more about the name Marc Jacobs.

In 16 years Marc Jacobs has transformed Louis Vuitton from a maker of 
old-fashioned suitcases into a fashion house whose dresses are worn by Kate 
Moss on the catwalk andMichelle Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michelle-williams> on the Oscar red carpet. 
Now 50, Jacobs feels it is time to build a legacy of his own.

Marc Jacobs is a genius of branding. To say this is not to diminish his 
artistry: after all, Steve Jobs, another brand genius, once said that brand 
building was all in the storytelling, and storytelling is creative work. At 
Louis Vuitton,Marc Jacobs <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marc-jacobs> has 
written the greatest fairy tale of the modern luxury industry.

Jacobs was 34 when he joined Vuitton; he has spent much of his prime building 
a brand in someone else's name. This, rather than money, is the motivation for 
the decision to leave Louis Vuitton and focus on his own label. When the young 
American designer Alexander Wang presented his first collection for the 
Parisian house ofBalenciaga <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga> 
earlier this year, he told reporters that "forever and always I'll remember 
that the name on the door is Balenciaga". Jacobs followed that path for 16 
years but on Wednesday he struck out on his own.

The prospect of Jacobs focusing his talents into the building of Marc Jacobs 
into a powerhouse brand in its own right is a mouthwatering one. The Marc 
Jacobs name commands cachet within the industry, but in recent years the New 
York catwalk show has developed an increasingly arthouse bent, with a fetish 
for arcane references and avant-garde hats. With a public offering is on the 
horizon, surely Jacobs – the master storyteller – has a few plot twists up his 
sleeve.
 