
Mortgage lending soared to a nine-year high in March as the housing market’s 
traditional spring rush coincided with landlords hurrying to beat stamp duty 
changes, new figures show.

Homeowners borrowed £13.8bn for house purchase in March, the highest monthly 
amount since August 2007. Meanwhile, landlords borrowed £7.1bn, which was 163% 
up on the £2.7bn lent in March 2015.


Even the Council of Mortgage Lenders, which issued the figures 
<https://www.cml.org.uk/news/press-releases/home-owner-house-purchase-lending-up-21-year-on-year/>
, described these levels of activity as “supercharged”, though it went on to 
say the data was “distorted” by the March rush to beatnew stamp duty rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/31/stamp-duty-second-homes-what-will-i-pay>
 for buy-to-let and second homes, which took effect on 1 April.


Borrowing for house purchase was up 59% on February this year, and 60% higher 
than March 2015. Meanwhile, first-time buyers borrowed £4.5bn, which was 32% up 
on February.


Paul Smee, the CML’s director general, said the increases were “substantial” 
but added: “These supercharged levels of activity are likely to be temporary 
and will fall back over the summer months.”


House prices fall as stamp duty changes cool buy-to-let market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/09/house-prices-fall-stamp-duty-changes-cool-buy-to-let-market>
The strong house purchase figures were mainly driven by home-mover activity, 
which includes people upgrading to a larger property and those downsizing. Home 
movers borrowed £9.3bn of mortgage money in March, which represents a 75% leap 
on the levels seen in February.


Jeremy Duncombe, director of Legal & General Mortgage Club, said the strong 
data relating to landlords showed that the stamp duty hike “had the 
opposite-than-intended effect”. He added: “Instead of cooling the market, they 
have driven demand and encouraged a spike in investors, ultimately pushing up 
prices and making homeownership a more unaffordable concept for many.”


Peter Williams, executive director of the Intermediary Mortgage Lenders 
Association (IMLA), said: “It’s no surprise to see an artificially induced 
spike in house prices during March … The leap in landlord lending makes it 
clear that price inflation has been fuelled by the government’s stamp duty 
changes for buy-to-let properties and second homes, incentivising many buyers 
to bring their purchases forward where possible.”

 