
“You can ask me anything. I’m an open book. What do you want to know?”

That, right there, is who Marc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marc-jacobs> is. Maybe he doesn’t mean it 
quite literally – what smart, self-respecting 52-year-old is going to share his 
deepest secrets with a journalist he barely knows? – but the sentiment is 
heartfelt, no doubt about that.I Want Your Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xv744Ckqp5U>, Chic’s 1979 disco classic, is 
playing in his office, seven floors above Spring Street in New York’s SoHo. 
Jacobs lights a cigarette and leans back in his chair. “I have the word 
‘Shameless’ tattooed on my chest. I want to be as honest as I possibly can,” he 
says. “I sleep better at night.”

Marc Jacobs made his first appearance in American Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.com/869395/from-the-archives-marc-jacobs-in-vogue/> in 1986, 
sporting long hair and an oversized black sweater in the back row of a group 
shot of eight up-and-coming designers. Thirty years later his name remains box 
office, with the clout to close New York fashion week. But this Marc Jacobs, on 
the other hand – the joke-sharing, secret-spilling social media personality – 
is newly minted in the two years since he finished an epic 16-year stint at the 
helm ofLouis Vuitton <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/louis-vuitton>. He 
has climbed down from his Parisian ivory tower, settled back into downtown New 
York and begun a restructuring of his label that puts Marc Jacobs, the man – 
his face, his values, his sense of humour – front and centre. And in doing so, 
he has rebooted his persona as one of the most compelling figures in the 
fashion industry.
 Marc Jacobs for S/S 16. Photograph: Edward James/WireImage 
Right. So what do I ask him? I want to ask about his spring/summer collection, 
conceived as a celebration of America’s legalisation of gay marriage. And about 
his casting of transgender directorLana Wachowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/07/lana-wachowski-transgender-struggle>
 as a campaign model, and the process by which he is engaged, through fashion, 
with contemporary issues around gender. But I am also dying to be really nosy 
about what went down on his recent Caribbean holiday, the one from which he 
postedZoolander tribute videos 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BADmAjTGJPN/?taken-by=themarcjacobs> and amateur 
cabaret skits wearing polyesterSanta costumes 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BAGjbiMmJBt/?taken-by=themarcjacobs>, and was 
rewarded for his jollity with snipey online noise about whether he was partying 
when he should be designing. (Jacobs did spells in rehab for alcohol and drug 
addiction in 1999 and 2007, before getting sober.)

So, naturally, I ask him about the videos. “That was a happy, healthy vacation 
after working really hard all year. It was actually hilarious, because one day 
we’re all at the table – I was withNeil [Barrett 
<http://www.neilbarrett.com/it/>, fashion designer] and his boyfriend, and Dean 
and Dan [Caten <http://www.dsquared2.com/experience/en/history/>, designers of 
Dsquared2 <http://www.dsquared2.com/gb>] and their boyfriends, and they are all 
European, so they take the whole month of August off – and there’s this 
magazine article about Marc Jacobs’ never-ending vacation. And I’m like, what? 
I’ve had two weeks off this entire year!”

Sober? “Totally. The previous year, I would have had maybe a glass of rosé at 
lunch. But this Christmas I didn’t drink at all.” The idea for the first video 
came at “about 11am one morning. We had drunk grapefruit juice and double 
espressos, eaten brioche and omelettes. We were having fun, which is what being 
on holiday is about, right? And dressing up, self-expression – that is what 
fashion is all about. It has nothing to do with being drunk.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fmarc-jacobs-i-have-the-word-shameless-tattooed-on-my-chest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb708b380b07c2bde8d96e819798625f43b23e047%2F0_0_9444_11820%2F9444.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marc%20Jacobs%3A%20%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20the%20word%20Shameless%20tattooed%20on%20my%20chest'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fmarc-jacobs-i-have-the-word-shameless-tattooed-on-my-chest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marc%20Jacobs%3A%20%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20the%20word%20Shameless%20tattooed%20on%20my%20chest%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fmarc-jacobs-i-have-the-word-shameless-tattooed-on-my-chest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb708b380b07c2bde8d96e819798625f43b23e047%2F0_0_9444_11820%2F9444.jpg>
 ‘If there’s a great Prada coat that fits me, I don’t care if it’s in the 
women’s department.’ Photograph: Platon for the Guardian 
As if to prove his point, the Marc Jacobs I meet is quite different from the 
one you see in the portrait, taken a couple of hours ago. “I got up this 
morning and dressed for the photo. I thought, I want to wear a suit, I want to 
shave and trim, I want to mean business. And then I came into work and 10 
minutes later I changed into this, which is what I work in every day.” His 
office uniform is hi-low athleisure: Marc Jacobs sneakers, white towelling 
socks, lean Adidas tracksuit bottoms, a snug long-sleeved ribbed T-shirt he 
calls a “thermal”. It shows off a gym-honed body made, if not for sin any more, 
then certainly for selfies. The insanely good shape he is in for 52 certainly 
corroborates a holiday fuelled by nothing more than coffee and omelette. He is 
refreshingly open about having had a little help with his youthful complexion –
his first-ever Instagram selfie 
<http://fashionista.com/2015/03/marc-jacobs-instagram> was captioned “No 
filter, (some filler)!” – but his healthy glow looks very real. Only the 
salt-and-pepper stubble hints at his age, and it suits him. (I guess he knows 
this, because the silver flecks are on his face but not his head, so if he 
didn’t like them he could lose the beard.) The one hangover from his misspent 
youth are the ever-present cigarettes, which he treats like a stage prop. When 
he is being intense, he presses the manicured fingers of his smoking hand to 
his forehead, smoke curling above his head, like Marlene Dietrich.

There is something of the character actor about Jacobs, a petite man with 
six-foot-four charisma. “My relationship with fashion has always been that each 
of us stars in our own movies and costumes ourselves to play the part we want. 
You take blouses and jeans and dresses, and you put them together and they tell 
your story.” This is especially potent for people who feel they don’t fit in, 
or that the jeans or dress laid out for them doesn’t reflect who they really 
are. In October 2012, Lana Wachowski, director ofthe Matrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-matrix> films, gave an emotional and 
candid account of her transgender experience inan acceptance speech for the 
Human Rights Campaign’s Visibility award 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=crHHycz7T_c>, in which she spoke of feeling 
“that I am broken, that there is something wrong with me, that I will never be 
lovable.” The speech resonated with Jacobs, because, “while I didn’t have that 
particular experience – I never had any kind of gender confusion – I knew from 
a very early age that I was gay. And so at nine years old I felt like I was 
different from the other boys. I didn’t want to play sports or roll in the mud 
eating worms, or whatever. I wanted to make ceramics and embroider my jeans and 
go shopping for back-to-school clothes. My parents never, ever taught me that 
one skin colour was better than another or a particular sexual preference made 
me normal– and yet when I was with the other kids, I just knew that I was 
different. That was hard. That’s where I had such a connection to what Lana was 
saying.”Sandra Bernhard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sandra-bernhard>, 
Bette Midler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/15/bette-midler-this-much-i-know>
 anddrag queen Dan Donigan 
<https://twitter.com/bigandmilky?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 also feature in this season’s campaign. “Authentic, extraordinary human beings 
who, at various times in my life, opened my mind,” he says. “And, you know, 
wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could just all accept each other’s differences?” 
He throws his arms wide in a Broadway flourish, ever the performer.
 Marc Jacobs for S/S 16. Photograph: Edward James/WireImage 
Jacobs himself has always been broad-minded about gender in his wardrobe. He 
wore a kilt to jury duty in 2010 anda black lace dress to the Met Gala 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2012/05/09/marc-jacobs-met-ball-2012-outfit---red-carpet-designer-look>
 two years later. “Lorenzo Martone 
<https://www.instagram.com/lorenzomartone/?hl=en>, who I used to be engaged to 
be married to, used to tease me about wearing skirts. But I don’t see how 
there’s anything masculine or feminine about a piece of clothing. If there’s a 
greatPrada <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada> coat that fits me, I 
don’t care if it’s in the women’s department. But things are changing. Lorenzo 
has evolved, so much, as a human being, that he would never say something like 
that now.” Despite their split, Jacobs and Martone remain such good friends 
that Martone and his boyfriend, as well as Jacobs’ boyfriend, were part of the 
Caribbean holiday gang.

***

Jacobs’ early childhood was chaotic. After his father died when he was seven, 
his mother remarried several times in quick succession, uprooting the family 
each time before Jacobs found emotional stability as a teenager, living with 
his grandmother on the Upper West Side. You get the impression he became 
worldly at an early age, even for a New Yorker. Last September,Jacobs closed 
New York fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/18/marc-jacobs-closes-new-york-fashion-week-in-trademark-spectacular-style>
 with a love letter to his native city, an exuberant, Broadway-themed show 
staged in the historic Ziegfeld theatre, entitled Marc Jacobs: One Night Only. 
It was part nostalgia and part optimism, born out of the emotion of the June 
day last year whenthe supreme court ruled same-sex marriage to be a legal right 
across the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/26/gay-marriage-legal-supreme-court>
. “We were all elated on that day. We were together for the first meeting about 
the collection and in a very flip sort of way I said to the design team, we 
should do Americana, the red, white and blue. And we started talking about 
America, and about New York, andKatie [Grand <http://katiegrand.com/>, Jacobs’ 
stylist and collaborator] told me about this documentary where Bette Midler, 
who is a performer I have loved since I was eight or nine, takes the journalist 
around all the places of her past in the city. And when I watched it, so much 
of it was my New York, the city I grew up with. So that became the starting 
point for the collection.”

But how, I ask, does that translate into fashion? How do you get from the 
emotional power of the idea of New York City, to clothes in a store? “Because 
there’s a visual aspect to everything. And to me the visual part is the 
seductive part. Every colour, every print, every embroidery in that collection 
references some aspect of my life in New York over the past 40 years.” The show 
was a knockout, and its autobiographical spirit seemed to symbolise how Jacobs, 
no longer splitting his time between Marc Jacobs, a diffusion line and Louis 
Vuitton, was once more putting his heart and soul intoMarc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marc-jacobs>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fmarc-jacobs-i-have-the-word-shameless-tattooed-on-my-chest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1840f281ddd048db49addf9084d8ef7f6e4e3235%2F0_0_8182_10256%2F8182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marc%20Jacobs%3A%20%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20the%20word%20Shameless%20tattooed%20on%20my%20chest'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fmarc-jacobs-i-have-the-word-shameless-tattooed-on-my-chest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marc%20Jacobs%3A%20%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20the%20word%20Shameless%20tattooed%20on%20my%20chest%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fmarc-jacobs-i-have-the-word-shameless-tattooed-on-my-chest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1840f281ddd048db49addf9084d8ef7f6e4e3235%2F0_0_8182_10256%2F8182.jpg>
 ‘Dressing up, self-expression – that is what fashion is all about.’ 
Photograph: Platon for the Guardian 
Jacobs is wearing Adidas striped tracksuit bottoms, the polyester kind, and a 
Cartier “Juste un clou” bracelet 
<http://www.cartier.co.uk/collections/jewellery/collections/juste-un-clou/juste-un-clou-bracelets>
, styled after a curved nail, which retails at £34,300. A healthy tension 
between low-fi and high-flying has been a theme since 1993, whenthe Grunge 
collection he designed for Perry Ellis 
<http://www.vogue.com/13293785/marc-jacobs-perry-ellis-grunge-collection-90s-fashion/>
, aged 30, won him the prestigious CFDA Women’s Designer of the Year award, but 
also got him sacked. Many promising young fashion stars, once knocked off 
course, are never seen again, but not Jacobs. Within a year he was back on the 
New York fashion week schedule with his own label,Linda Evangelista and Naomi 
Campbell walking in the first show 
<http://www.gettyimages.co.uk/detail/news-photo/linda-evangelista-during-marc-jacobs-fashion-show-1994-in-news-photo/115489986>
 for free. In 1997, he was hired by Louis Vuitton, where he turned a luxury 
luggage company into a fashion powerhouse, while simultaneously expanding the 
Marc Jacobs empire with the launch of a Marc by Marc Jacobs diffusion line in 
2001. In 2013 Jacobs left Louis Vuitton to concentrate on his own line, after 
which the Marc by Marc Jacobs line enjoyed a feted last hurrah under British 
designersLuella Bartley and Katie Hillier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/sep/02/luella-bartley-katie-hillier-marc-jacobs>
,and then shuttered 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2015/03/23/marc-jacobs-on-marc-by-marc-closure---katie-hillier-luella-bartley>
. The signs are that the newly streamlined Marc Jacobs company – majority owned 
by LVMH, with Jacobs and longtime business partner Robert Duffy each retaining 
a stake – is headed for a stock market launch. (In 2013, a timescale of three 
years was mooted, but no date has yet been set.) Duffy has stepped aside from 
CEO duties, replaced bySebastian Suhl 
<http://www.businessoffashion.com/community/people/sebastian-suhl>, fresh from 
overseeing a period of expansion at Givenchy, and today Jacobs is enthusiastic 
about pouring his energies into a new, potentially lucrative Marc Jacobs beauty 
line. “I love cosmetics,” he says. “It’s like a show: choosing the colours, the 
image, the shapes and forms with the packaging, the names.”
 Marc Jacobs for S/S 16. Photograph: Edward James/WireImage 
Jacobs’ first Marc Jacobs show after leaving Louis Vuitton was a homage to the 
veteran Vogue editor Diana Vreeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/20/marc-jacobs-dismisses-street-style-at-new-york-fashion-week>
. At the time,Jacobs was quoted in Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/suzy-menkes/2015/02/suzy-menkes-interviews-marc-jacobs> 
saying, “I am so appalled by the whole social media thing. I don’t get it, it 
doesn’t appeal to me.” I spoke to Jacobs backstage after that show, and wrote 
in my notebook that he spoke of Vreeland as “passionate in her tastes, but 
never afraid to totally change her mind” – words that seemed prophetic a month 
later, when Jacobs embraced Instagram with zeal. He laughs about this, when I 
ask him. “When I said that about social media, I was on a bit of a tirade. Four 
blocks of the West Village were shut off that day because of the crowds to meet
Kendall Jenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/30/kendall-jenner-instagram-photo-most-liked-history>
, and it just seemed insane. I was very intoVreeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/diana-vreeland> at that time, and her 
thing of being very absolute yet very arbitrary in her tastes. She absolutely 
loved something right up until the point where she absolutely hated it.” The 
day he read his quotes in Vogue, he went home and took a selfie. “And that was 
how my Instagram account was born.”

He now has 400,000 followers. “I like the attention,” he says, disarmingly. “I 
like reading the comments. Well, most of them. Of course the problem is that 
there can be 500 positive comments, but the one negative comment will be the 
one that I remember and the one I talk to you about. I talk to my therapist 
about this all the time.”

The dynamic goes like this: I ask Jacobs questions about fashion, which he 
answers by talking about people and relationships and conversations, rather 
than about clothes. Ask him about red carpet fashion and he talks about how 
much he loves Cher, whom he dressed for the Met Gala last year. Ask him about 
the Americana collection and he talks about his memories of clubbing in the 
meatpacking district before gentrification. Ask him about the ad campaign and 
he talks about how he and his boyfriend cried when they listened to Lana 
Wachowski’s speech. He is good at chat, the type who can make a taped 
mid-afternoon workplace interview feel like an after-hours catchup. Even his 
personal extravagances seem centred around relationships rather than 
aesthetics: when I admire the Cartier bracelet, he tells me how he bought plain 
gold versions for each of the friends he went on holiday with. A generous 
gesture, because Cartier bracelets, even the ones without diamonds, aren’t 
cheap, and he ran through the holiday guest list at one point and I am pretty 
sure it ran into double figures. And it’s the same later on, when he tells me 
about his art collection. It’s about creating a dialogue in a room, he says, 
about filling a space with ideas and emotions. One of his favourite pieces, he 
says, is “a 1960sEllsworth Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/28/ellsworth-kelly>. It’s a 
yellow curve 
<http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/paintings/ellsworth-kelly-yellow-curve-5315261-details.aspx>
 on a white canvas, which I’ve imbued with these warm feelings, like a 
beautiful sunny smile. Really, it’s just a yellow shape. But I feel like it 
tells a story.
 