
Bob Dylan called her his favourite folk singer. Christy Moore says she still 
inspires him. Norma Waterson likens her to Edith Piaf and Bessie Smith.Sir 
David Attenborough put her on live TV <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0857wv1>
. And even Van Morrison stops being grumpy to talk animatedly of “a great soul 
singer” when her name is mentioned.

A hundred years since her birth in Cork, the legend of Irish street singer 
Margaret Barry 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/heritage/the-voice-of-ireland-an-irishman-s-diary-about-margaret-barry-and-alan-lomax-1.2085740>
 continues to grow. From her early days busking during some of Ireland’s most 
troubled years, she went on to become a revered attraction in London pubs where 
the Irish labourers who’d migrated after the war to help rebuild Britain’s 
capital congregated after work for a few jars of stout and a flavour of home. 
At a time when Irish traditional music might have been heading for extinction – 
a victim of state and church disapproval – exiled musicians kept the flame 
burning, resulting in a vibrant Irish scene in the English capital, coalescing 
around pubs such as the Favourite on the Holloway Road and the Bedford Arms in 
Camden. The uncompromising voice and raucous banjo of Margaret Barry were at 
its formidable heart.

Teaming up with the great Sligo fiddle player Michael Gorman 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Gorman_(musician)>, she became a star on 
the burgeoning British folk club scene of the time, recording her first album,
Street Songs and Fiddle Tunes 
<https://www.discogs.com/Margaret-Barry-and-Michael-Gorman-Street-Songs-and-Fiddle-Tunes-of-Ireland/release/9136475>
, for Topic in 1957. Several others followed, notably Songs of an Irish Tinker 
Lady (1959) and Her Mantle So Green (1965), as she went on to headline concerts 
at the Royal Albert Hall and New York’s Carnegie Hall, singing the same songs 
just as she’d sung them on the streets: traditional ballads, travellers’ tunes, 
populist Irish songs such as The Blarney Stone, or anything else she had 
thought would earn her enough to buy lodgings for the night.

She gained considerable fame within folk music circles but remained gloriously 
untouched by it. She smoke, she drank, she cussed, she span yarns, she marched 
on stage carrying pints of Guinness, she didn’t care who she offended and she 
spent money as fast as she earned it. She acquired not one ounce of polish or 
gentility along the way and sang the only way she knew how – as if her life 
depended on it (which, when she started out, it almost did).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DZXRQLN3bs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DZXRQLN3bs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2DZXRQLN3bs&media=>
Hear Margaret Barry sing She Moved Through the Fair 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2DZXRQLN3bs> 
Competing for attention with traffic noise and the chatter of shoppers, her 
voice had acquired a bloodcurdling intensity exacerbated by her furious banjo 
accompaniment. There was coarseness and conviction, but beauty and elegance, 
too, in the way she delivered great ballads such as The Galway Shawl and 
Factory Girl; while her thick black hair, rugged features and stern expression 
gave her a ferocious charisma that was enhanced by the endless fund of 
anecdotes that enveloped her.

Barry had a neat turn of phrase. She said she had “millions of miles of words” 
and, occasionally neglecting to fit her false teeth for performances, she said: 
“I have a mouth full of no teeth.” Asked about her opinion ofDylan, with whom 
she appeared at the 1965 Newport folk festival (when he outraged folk purists 
by going electric) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/10/dylan-goes-electric-elijah-wald-review-when-bob-took-stratocaster-newport-folk-festival>
, her only comment was that he was “awfully smelly”. She wasn’t impressed, 
either, by Frank Sinatra, berating him for his bad manners. Or the quality of 
American beer, buttonholing the futurePresident Gerald Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/dec/27/guardianobituaries.usa> to tell 
him: “I don’t like your Guinness … ’tis very, very weak.”

There was also the time she heckled Paul Simon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/paul-simon> so much when he appeared at the 
Royal Albert Hall that he eventually invited her on stage with him to sing her 
most celebrated ballad She Moved Through the Fair – which many were shocked to 
discover she’d originally learned in a shop doorway listening to a recording by 
the tenorCount John McCormack <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X-g_4yVxnQY>. 
And they still talk in awe at the Brazen Head pub in Dublin of the time she 
drank notorious writer and carouserBrendan Behan  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/mar/23/observer-archive-sad-death-brendan-behan>
under the table.
 Margaret Barry with Guinness … and Brendan Behan. 
The myths that surrounded her were often perpetuated by Barry herself. It’s 
unlikely she attended Elvis Presley’s wedding, as she claimed, and she was 
certainly never married toRobert Mitchum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/26/1>, though she convinced her 
grandchildren that she was and that he’d be over to see them as soon as he’d 
finished his latest movie in Hollywood.


Dubbed “queen of the Gypsies” by a sharp entrepreneur promoting a St Patrick’s 
Day concert at the Royal Albert Hall in the early 60s, she later rode up to the 
gates of Buckingham Palace in a pony and trap to announce: “The queen of the 
Gypsies wishes to meet the queen of England.” But the image of her as a 
Traveller wasn’t strictly true either.

She may well have had Gypsy blood from a Spanish grandmother, but she grew up 
in a tenement building in the heart of Cork city in a musical family. Her 
grandfather, Robert Thompson, had been one of Ireland’s most celebrated pipers, 
while her father played banjo to accompany silent movies at the local picture 
house.

The death of her mother when Margaret was 12, and her father’s subsequent 
marriage to a teenager little older than his daughter, led to her decision to 
leave home on her bicycle at 16 and throw herself at the mercy of fate. All she 
had was a 17-shilling wooden banjo tied to her back with a piece of string.

Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> in the 1930s was a nation 
still divided, riven by poverty and the scars of oppression, and the sight of a 
teenage girl on her own, busking on street corners with a banjo – itself then 
an unfamiliar instrument in the country – invited all manner of dangers and 
prejudices. “I just sang my way from town to town,” she said later. “I was 
always looking for a place to stay. I just wanted to earn enough to get a roof 
over my head for the night.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmargaret-barry-wild-irish-woman-of-the-british-folk-scene-celtic-connections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b7ec45ce7bfe706c0865520a59dee915c068089%2F0_0_3551_2482%2F3551.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Barry%3A%20wild%20Irish%20woman%20of%20the%20British%20folk%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmargaret-barry-wild-irish-woman-of-the-british-folk-scene-celtic-connections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Barry%3A%20wild%20Irish%20woman%20of%20the%20British%20folk%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmargaret-barry-wild-irish-woman-of-the-british-folk-scene-celtic-connections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b7ec45ce7bfe706c0865520a59dee915c068089%2F0_0_3551_2482%2F3551.jpg>
 Margaret Barry performs with Felix Doran and fiddler Michael Gorman at Keele 
folk festival, c1965. Photograph: Brian Shuel/Redferns 
Little wonder she grew up fast and swiftly developed the repertoire and skills 
to fill her hat with coins, overcoming abuse and the prejudices of the day, 
which decreed that a woman’s place was in the home. She was not averse to 
giving her tormentors a whack with her banjo if they irked her, and the force 
of her personality and the richness of her music ultimately won people over. 
She became a familiar and popular figure at fairs and football matches all over 
Ireland. She had a child, Nora, fathered by a man called Charlie Power who soon 
disappeared from her life, and gravitated a mile or so across the Northern 
Irish border to Crossmaglen, where she lived in a roundtop caravan.

Then, one cold, bright morning in 1951, while she was singing Bold Fenian Men 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KxVbIC2lvls> on a street corner in Dundalk, a 
young American woman stopped to watch her, transfixed. “I’ll never forget it,” 
Robin Roberts told me 60 years later. “She seemed so small then. A skinny 
little lady wearing a worn green coat. She had no teeth. But what a voice!”

Roberts, assistant to the great American song collector Alan Lomax 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Lomax>, told Barry: “Don’t move”, and ran 
off to inform Lomax of her discovery. In his hotel room later that day, he 
recording her singing. She played him Goodnight Irene, which he’d previously 
recorded byLead Belly <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xn50JSI0W-E> in a 
Louisiana penitentiary. Lomax asked how she knew the song. “I learned it off 
Radio Luxembourg,” she said.

The meeting precipitated her move to London, initially to appear on a TV 
series called The Songhunter, produced by a youngDavid Attenborough, who still 
tells the story <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0857wv1> of how Barry’s wild, 
toothless appearance, playing an out-of-tune banjo, prompted a volley of angry 
complaints about Irish tinkers being allowed on the TV.

Nevertheless, Barry stayed in London and, in partnership with Michael Gorman, 
her extraordinary adventure gained pace. Twenty years her senior, Gorman was a 
stabilising influence, who helped her write tunes – most famously the 
autobiographical Strayaway Child. Her career faltered in the years following 
his death in 1970, and she seemed lost for a while, attempting to replace his 
calm wisdom and great instrumental virtuosity in a bizarre partnership with an 
ex-PE teacher from County Mayo called Maura O’Malley, who dressed as an Irish 
colleen, played fiddle and danced at the same time. O’Malley complained of 
Barry’s drinking and snoring while Barry grew incensed by O’Malley’s 
controlling tendencies. She escaped through an upstairs New York hotel window 
while they were on tour in America and never saw her again.

Barry grew old – disgracefully, of course - in Lawrencetown, Co Down, annoying 
the neighbours by adopting a noisy donkey, crashing a car without learning to 
drive first, betting on the horses, smoking and telling fortunes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyxzSVtZekXM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyxzSVtZekXM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyxzSVtZekXM&media=>
Margaret Barry sings The Galway Shawl and The Flowers of Sweet Strabane 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yxzSVtZekXM> 
She died in 1989 aged 72, but she is not easily forgotten, and the 
significance of her role in the folk music revival – especially for women – has 
grown as the years have passed. Irish singerMary McPartlan 
<http://www.marymcpartlan.ie/> explains: “From 1900 to 1925, women were very 
active politically in Ireland, but the church and state came together in the 
1930s to make women subservient again. Margaret wouldn’t have seen herself 
politically as a feminist activist, but the fact that she pursued her personal 
journey with complete disregard for the restraints of the church and state, and 
her diligent pursuit of her art, mean she created her own brand of feminism. In 
many ways, it was a purer form of dedication to the objectives of the feminist 
movement.”

I saw Barry perform live once. The ceilidh band the Rakes invited her to play 
a guest spot in an honourable attempt to revive her faltering career. She 
looked at the ceiling, strummed her banjo to within an inch of its life, and 
when she started to sing the roof seemed to cave in. She made no eye contact 
with the audience, said nothing, and ignored the nervous giggles from a gang of 
bikers at the back. But that voice felt like an electric shock.

As the years have passed., her blazing, take-no-prisoners style has seemed a 
more and more vital antidote to the feyness infecting so many modern folk 
singers. Hers was truly a voice honed on the streets, without need for 
microphones or sophisticated equipment.

One night in Galway a couple of years ago, I went to see Mary McPartlan in 
concert. Chatting afterwards, Margaret Barry’s name came up. “I was thinking 
about doing a play about her,” she said. “That’s funny, I want to write a book 
about her,” I said. We pooled our resources, interviewed as many people as we 
could who had played a part in her story, and slowly emerged with a show based 
on Margaret’s life – She Moved Through the Fair: The Legend of Margaret Barry.

And thus an Irish band (McPartlan, John Carty, Mary Shannon and Garry 
O’Briain) head off to Glasgow on Sunday with two actors (Ruby Campbell and John 
Wheeler) and myself as narrator to celebrate her 100th birthday with her own 
words ringing in our ears. “I don’t think I was ever in love with a man … you 
can’t love a man when you love the music as much as me.”

 * She Moved Through the Fair is at the Tron theatre, Glasgow, on 22 January 
<http://www.tron.co.uk/event/she-moved-through-the-fair--the-legend-of-margaret-barry/>
, part of theCeltic Connections festival 
<http://www.celticconnections.com/Pages/default.aspx>.
 