
A gnarled piece of wood may not sound like the most thrilling of tourist 
attractions. But this isn’t just any piece of wood: it is the oldest grapevine 
on Earth, as certified by Guinness World Records. At about 450 years old, the
Old Vine <http://maribor-pohorje.si/worlds-oldest-vine.aspx> has survived war, 
fire and pestilence, and still produces fat bunches of red Žametovka grapes 
(most vines slow down at the tender age of 40). Bottles of the Old Vine’s 
precious wine – which is admittedly undrinkable – have been presented to popes, 
presidents, emperors … and Brad Pitt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmaribor-slovenia-new-flight-city-break-wine-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433335080981%2F1c7cee01-279a-4445-bff4-ccb5829761f1-1856x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maribor%2C%20Slovenia%3A%20let%E2%80%99s%20hear%20it%20for%20the%20grapevine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmaribor-slovenia-new-flight-city-break-wine-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maribor%2C%20Slovenia%3A%20let%E2%80%99s%20hear%20it%20for%20the%20grapevine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmaribor-slovenia-new-flight-city-break-wine-food%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433335080981%2F1c7cee01-279a-4445-bff4-ccb5829761f1-1856x2040.jpeg>
 The Old Vine 
The vine is the jewel in the crown of Maribor, Slovenia’s wine-loving second 
city, in the north-east of the country, which can now be reached by direct 
flights from Southend withAdria Airways <https://www.adria.si/en/>. In Maribor, 
11 November isn’t Remembrance Day butSt Martin’s Day 
<http://maribor-pohorje.si/top-events/st-martins-day-celebrations-in-maribor.aspx>
, a drunken party to mark the end of theOld Vine festival  
<http://maribor-pohorje.si/old-vine-festival.aspx>and honour the saint who 
turned grape juice into wine.Anton Martin Slomšek 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anton_Martin_Slom%C5%A1ek>, who became the city’s 
first bishop in 1846, is also well-known for writing a popular drinking song. 
The city has two statues of Bacchus, the god of wine; Slovenes joke that 
visitors can get drunk just breathing the air here.

The Old Vine Museum  
<http://www.slovenia.info/en/Museums-and-galleries/The-Old-Vine-House.htm?muzej=9389&lng=2>
(Vojašniška 8) offers tastings (from €4) of Slovenian grape varieties, such as 
crisp, herbaceous zelen, and pinot gris, gewürztraminer and muscat. I tried 
sweet ice wine, made from grapes that have frozen on the vine. There are also 
tastings atVinag <http://maribor-pohorje.si/vinag-wine-cellar0.aspx>, one of 
the biggest cellars in Europe: it holds 5½ million litres of wine in 2½km of 
tunnels under the city’s Trg Svobode (Freedom Square), including a riesling 
made during the second world war.

Two good wine bars are ultra-modern Rozmarin <http://www.rozmarin.si/en> 
(Gosposka 8), andLuft 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/LUFT-kavica-zabavica/698706616911408> (Vita 
Kraigherja 3), a smart space with great views on the top floor of the 
Communist-era Slavija hotel (now offices). Both serve a delicate šipon white 
made by Benedictine monks at their Dveri Pax winery a few miles north of the 
city. On the banks of the Drava, the 16th-century Water Tower (Usnjarska 10) is 
now a romantic wine bar with live jazz and passing swans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmaribor-slovenia-new-flight-city-break-wine-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433334935658%2Fcc43f89d-2f0b-4c39-a92b-bda0d94949e4-2060x741.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maribor%2C%20Slovenia%3A%20let%E2%80%99s%20hear%20it%20for%20the%20grapevine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmaribor-slovenia-new-flight-city-break-wine-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maribor%2C%20Slovenia%3A%20let%E2%80%99s%20hear%20it%20for%20the%20grapevine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmaribor-slovenia-new-flight-city-break-wine-food%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433334935658%2Fcc43f89d-2f0b-4c39-a92b-bda0d94949e4-2060x741.jpeg>
 Maribor on the banks of the Drava 
Maribor is also a great base for exploring the Drava Valley vineyards, perhaps 
on an electric bike hired fromKULeBIKE <http://www.kulebike.si/>, which has 
downloadable routes and free transfers from the city.

But there is more to Maribor than wine – it has great beer, too. Postna, a 
street near the university, has a cluster of lively bars: Isabella (no 3) serves
Bevog <http://bevog.at/#> pale ale and oatmeal stout made by a Slovene in a 
microbrewery just over the Austrian border.The Living Room 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheLivingRoomMB/timeline> on Glavni Square, one of 
the three main squares, serves guest ales from breweries such as Reservoir Dogs 
in western Slovenia.Udarnik Cafe <https://www.facebook.com/Udarnikcafe/timeline>
 on Grajski Square is a great circular space in a 1930s cinema, with film 
quotes on the wall and seriously cheap beer.
 Udarnik Cafe 
Slovenian cuisine is an interesting mix of Balkan and Mediterranean. Gostilna 
Pri treh Ribnikih <http://www.trijeribniki.si/en/#about> (+386 2 23 44 170, 
Ribniška 9) is Maribor’s oldest restaurant (established 1825), in a park north 
of the centre. I had wild garlic soup, zander fillets with polenta and 
asparagus, and a yoghurt parfait.Štajerc 
<https://www.facebook.com/RestavracijainpivnicaStajerc/timeline> (+386 2 234 42 
34, Vetrinjska 30), in the old town, does Slovenian specialities such as 
stuffed squid, washed down with the restaurant’s startlingly green beer.

Architecturally, Maribor is a mixed bag, too: those expecting a little 
Ljubljana will be disappointed. It was badly bombed during the second world 
war, and President Tito’s reconstruction will not be universally admired. But 
there is plenty left to enjoy: the 15th-century castle, the even older 
cathedral, the Renaissance town hall, the synagogue. Maribor hit hard times 
after the breakup of Yugoslavia, and again in the 2008 financial crisis, and 
unemployment is still high. After a huge shopping centre opened on the edge of 
town in 2000, many city centre shops went out of business.

Things are improving, though. Farm shops such as Zadruga Dobrina Trgovina 
<http://www.zadruga-dobrina.si/>, on narrow Tkalski prehod, sell local food and 
wine, and nearby at Gosposka 7,Art Mar 
<http://www.artmar.si/Index.asp?action=trgovina> sells contemporary Slovenian 
arts and crafts. TheSalon of Applied Arts 
<https://www.facebook.com/SALON.maribor/timeline> on Glavni Square is a symbol 
of this regeneration: formerly a grand cafe, it became a casino, then went 
bust. Now it is a beautifully restored cafe-bar that hosts gigs and sells work 
by local designers.
 Contemporary crafts at Art Mar 
Maribor was European capital of culture in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/dec/30/maribor-slovenia-european-capital-culture>
 and is home to Slovenia’s biggest festival,Lent 
<http://www.festival-lent.si/en/> (26 June-11 July), which has nothing to do 
with Easter, and theSlovene National Theatre <http://www.sng-mb.si/en/>, where 
I caught an experimental production of Dracula: lots of nudity, swearing and 
politics but a conspicuous lack of vampires.

The city’s hotels haven’t kept pace with its cuisine and culture, however. 
Those in the centre tend to be business-focused, and there are “luxury” (but 
very dated) options near the Pohorje ski area. The closest thing to a boutique 
isHotel City <http://cityhotel-mb.si/en/> (doubles from €80 B&B), built in 
2011, which has 66 modern rooms and a top-floor bar/restaurant serving seasonal 
menus – in June, the focus is on porcini and chanterelle mushrooms.
 Tourist farm Stern Pri Kovacniku 
Another option is a farm stay. At Tourist Farm Stern Pri Kovacniku 
<http://tourist-farm-stern-pri-kovacniku.sloveniahotel.net/en/> (doubles €72) 
near Fram, a 30-minute drive south, host Barbara showed me around the rolling 
acres, and introduced me to a two-day-old calf. Breakfast was a lavish spread, 
including home-cured ham and a tarragon and strawberry cake. There was lots 
more homegrown food at dinner – pearled spelt with wild garlic pesto was a 
revelation – plus three local wines to wash it all down. None was particularly 
old – and all were definitely drinkable.

• Flights were provided by Adria Airways <https://www.adria.si>, which flies 
from Southend to Maribor from €139 return. Airport transfers were provided by
GoOpti.si <http://www.goopti.com/>, and car hire by Europcar.si. Accommodation 
was provided by theSlovenian tourist board <http://www.slovenia.info/> and the 
Maribor tourist board <http://maribor-pohorje.si/priporocamo.aspx>
 