
 Roger Hammond, the former one-day Classic specialist who is Mark Cavendish’s 
directeur sportif at the Dimension Data squad, is confident that his protege 
will prove hard to beat in Sunday’s world road race championship in Doha where 
the Manxman is chasing the second world road title of his career following his
victory in Copenhagen in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/25/mark-cavendish-road-race-championships>
.

“The beauty of Sunday, what’s difficult to predict, is that you have to ask 
how he can lose it,” said Hammond, who finished third in the Paris-Roubaix 
Classic in 2004. “If you control it as a team, you end up in a one on one with 
your sprinter and Cav in the finale. If there are cross-winds, well, winning 
the overall twice in the Tour of Qatar” – Cavendishtook the race this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/12/mark-cavendish-wins-tour-qatar> 
andin 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/feb/08/mark-cavendish-wins-tour-qatar> 
– “means you are scintillating at riding in those conditions because you are in 
the yellow jersey and people are trying to get rid of you.

“So it’s very difficult to get rid of him as long as he’s fit, meaning the 
only thing [his rivals] can do is make it so hard that you isolate him. The 
problem with that is that not many riders are good at that and you risk 
isolating yourself, which means you end up with the status quo.” In other 
words, if a team attempts to toughen up the race and cannot leave Cavendish 
behind, there is a good chance that another sprinter, such as André Greipel or 
thedefending champion, Peter Sagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/peter-sagan-mens-road-race-world-championships>
, might simply have to tackle Cavendish man to man.

Mark Cavendish's world championships road race win puts Britain on top | 
Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/25/mark-cavendish-road-race-championships>
Cavendish enjoyed a smooth build-up through September until stomach problems 
mean he missed six days of training at the end of the month, and pulled out of 
two races. He did, however, finish strongly in the Paris-Tours Classic last 
Sunday, implying that he is not far from his best.

“Without that sickness you’d be a fool to bet against him [for the World’s] 
but now we don’t know,” said Hammond. “Paris-Tours was a good sign, people 
underestimate that race but he rode 250 kilometres and was at the front after a 
hard run-in.”

Hammond joined the Dimension Data team this year and oversaw Cavendish’s 
successful campaign in the Tour de France, wherehe won four stages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/mark-cavendish-four-timer-30-tour-de-france-stage-wins>
. He added that the rider’s form in mid-September at the Tour of Britain had 
been outstanding. “He was bloody strong there. We had to use him in a different 
way because Steve Cummings was in the yellow jersey, so everyone overlooked 
him. He saved the day for us several times.”

Cavendish was prominent in setting up Cummings, who went on to win overall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/steve-cummings-tour-of-britain-biggest-win>
, for what proved to be the key climb, the Struggle in the Lake District, but, 
said Hammond, there was more. “The most impressive thing was on the days when 
the other riders were attacking left, right and centre at the start, on several 
days Cav was our last man standing after doing 500 sprints to control all the 
breaks.”

Sunday’s world championships course consists of a 150km loop to the north of 
Doha where the race is likely to be buffeted by the wind, before seven laps of 
the 15km finishing circuit on the Pearl peninsula, where a plethora of 
roundabouts and corners makes for a race that is technically demanding but 
completely flat. There have been issues with riders collapsing in the heat – 
Great Britain’s Luke Rowe tweeted a picture of his handlebar computer 
displaying a temperature of 47.9C – and the extreme conditions are likely to 
play a central role.

Depending on how they cope with the heat, Great Britain field a team which, on 
paper, is at least as strong as the one which dominated in 2011. As well as the 
Team Sky stalwarts Ian Stannard, Geraint Thomas and Rowe – who protected Chris 
Froome when strong winds hit the Tour de France this summer – sprinters such as 
Ben Swift, Dan McLay and Adam Blythe could provide strong support in a blanket 
finish.
 