
London Fashion Week label Marques’Almeida regularly see their creations worn 
by celebrities from Rihanna to Elle Fanning. But, as their show on Tuesday 
afternoon proved, the designers, Marta Marques and Paolo Almeida, are far more 
interested in their friends’ approval. About half of the models in the show 
were not professionals but longtime friends of the designers enjoying a catwalk 
moment.

 As is typical of a label that grew up in the digital era, the departure from 
the norm was signalled on Instagram before the show, with a series of posts 
profiling those in it. There’s Jessie who overplays songs, and Rita who is into 
cats. For Marques’Almeida, these kind of details matter. Designing as diktat is 
an alien concept. Instead, personality is all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Flondon-fashion-week-marquesalmeida-rock-a-1990s-look-to-tie-dye-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48d37ff85b93806ebc860787216f67d33d8cf2c3%2F0_94_3032_1821%2F3032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marques%E2%80%99Almeida%20rocks%20a%201990s%20look%20to%20tie-dye%20for%20at%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Flondon-fashion-week-marquesalmeida-rock-a-1990s-look-to-tie-dye-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marques%E2%80%99Almeida%20rocks%20a%201990s%20look%20to%20tie-dye%20for%20at%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Flondon-fashion-week-marquesalmeida-rock-a-1990s-look-to-tie-dye-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48d37ff85b93806ebc860787216f67d33d8cf2c3%2F0_94_3032_1821%2F3032.jpg>
 Marta Marques and Paolo Almeida on Tuesday. Photograph: James 
Gourley/Rex/Shutterstock 
 The label launched in 2011 with a collection of shredded denim with a slacker 
90s feel. It quickly gained a following of twentysomethings nostalgic for the 
decade of their childhoods, who bought its relatively accessibly priced items, 
such as jeans for about £200. The impact of those collections can be still be 
seen in the cropped frayed jeans so popular on the front row this season. The 
designers now have 85 stockists and won the prestigious LVMH Prize in 2015, 
with €300,000 (£234,000) and a year’s mentoring from the conglomerate invested 
in their business. They worked on a collection with Topshop in 2014.

 Marques’Almeida’s reputation as cool and approachable is established. The 
music on Tuesday underlined this theme, combining samples from obscure 90s teen 
documentary Wild Wood, NJ with Beyoncé’s Formation, arguably the song of the 
moment. The inspiration of Charles and Ray Eames – who were partners in life 
and work – felt apt. While the whimsical aesthetic of these mid-century 
interior design giants was nowhere to be seen, both duos gravitate towards 
innovative design that speaks to real life.

 The clothes worn for the show were an eclectic mix. Inside a roomin London’s 
Olympia West, models – and friends – wore tie-dyed slip dresses with oversized 
gingham shirts underneath, huge sweatshirts and shearling jackets with 
sheepskin edges dyed in pumpkin orange. Elements that fans will find familiar – 
denim, ruffles, asymmetric hems – were all there but in a new recipe, with 
sweatshirts and gingham-fresh ingredients. There was a deliberately “off” 
colour palette of lemon curd, pea green and Ribena purple, and lots of awkward 
lengths. While other designers this season are merely influenced by Parisian 
wonky streetwear specialists Vetements, Marques’Almeida are holding their own.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Flondon-fashion-week-marquesalmeida-rock-a-1990s-look-to-tie-dye-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F076aa6a2e07aa5cca59d43dba40b17c79ab6963d%2F161_57_2594_4249%2F2594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marques%E2%80%99Almeida%20rocks%20a%201990s%20look%20to%20tie-dye%20for%20at%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Flondon-fashion-week-marquesalmeida-rock-a-1990s-look-to-tie-dye-for%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marques%E2%80%99Almeida%20rocks%20a%201990s%20look%20to%20tie-dye%20for%20at%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Flondon-fashion-week-marquesalmeida-rock-a-1990s-look-to-tie-dye-for%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F076aa6a2e07aa5cca59d43dba40b17c79ab6963d%2F161_57_2594_4249%2F2594.jpg>
 A model on the catwalk. Photograph: John Phillips/Getty Images 
London fashion week behind the scenes – a photo essay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/ng-interactive/2016/feb/23/london-fashion-week-behind-the-scenes-a-photo-essay>
 Backstage, a breathless Marques said they were inspired by the girls who wore 
the clothes. “We always want the collection to feel like it comes from 
someone’s closet rather than a department store,” she said. “We wanted it to be 
about the girls, and the personal, individual thing. We had the images of them 
up on the wall, and we were thinking: ‘What would she wear?’ It ended up being 
a complete mess of all of them.”

If the looks of Riot Grrrl documentaries and Larry Clark’s Kids influenced the 
aesthetic, the Eames had an impact on the method. “Ray collected tiny little 
pieces of paper and fabric samples, a mess of things,” said Marques. “I think 
this collection really feels like a collage.” In an age where a pick-and-mix 
approach comes as standard on everything from Instagram to Kanye West’s Life of 
Pablo, that is what makes it modern.

 London Fashion Week finished on Tuesday, with Alexander McQueen, Christopher 
Kane and Mulberry highlights on the schedule. The focus now turns to Milan, 
where Alessandro Michele shows his latest collection for Gucci on Wednesday.
 