
For those unfamiliar with Marques Almeida, whose CV includes a collaboration 
with Topshop, celebrity fans including Rihanna, and a young fashion designer of 
the year prize of €300,000 (£258,000) from LVMH, two consecutive looks at their 
spring/summer 2017 show atLondon fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week> epitomise their 
success.

One model wore a black knee-length knitted dress with metal loops – a wearable 
take on a classic. The next wore wide pink and silver brocade trousers frilled 
at the hem, a puff-sleeved sweater with a fringe of orange marabou on one 
shoulder and red-lensed sunglasses. That’s the formula of this design duo: one 
part commercial accessibility to two parts Instagram-friendly peacockery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmarques-almeida-one-part-commercial-two-parts-instagram-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bcf355e9286758025391a36e11e34f6715605de%2F0_0_3013_4451%2F3013.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marques%20Almeida%3A%20one%20part%20commercial%2C%20two%20parts%20Instagram-friendly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmarques-almeida-one-part-commercial-two-parts-instagram-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marques%20Almeida%3A%20one%20part%20commercial%2C%20two%20parts%20Instagram-friendly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmarques-almeida-one-part-commercial-two-parts-instagram-friendly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bcf355e9286758025391a36e11e34f6715605de%2F0_0_3013_4451%2F3013.jpg>
 Marques Almeida boasts celebrity fans including Rihanna. Photograph: 
Giannoni/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
This collection, shown on Brick Lane in east London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, continued on a theme established last 
season in which Marta Marques and Paulo Almeida worked with girls they found on 
Instagram, who were cast in the show alongside professional models.

The result meant a sort of naturalism – a lot of the models could have walked 
straight off the catwalk and on to the streets of east London – but that prize 
money is still showing its effect, in luxury silk, satin fabrics and 
custom-made accessories.

The clothes were a mixed bag, as most clothes of young fashion-conscious women 
are now. There were signature looks familiar to a customer base including 
Rihanna, Kylie Jenner and Solange Knowles – and their fans (Marques Almeida is 
on the lower end of the designer label price point, so relatively affordable).

The frayed-denim look that the label started five years ago was there in 
wide-legged jeans, while slipdresses and the pastel colour palette also 
featured, most successfully on a series of coloured lace pieces.

There was the pomp of baroque – all curly foliage, feathers and metallics, and 
some ruched yellow trousers that a macaroni (the 18th-century answer to a 
hipster) might have favoured, as well as the DIY rawness of punk in frayed 
denim, asymmetric hems and silver trousers worthy of Iggy Pop. This was also 
reflected in the soundtrack: Vivaldi with Savages collaborator Trentemøller.

Backstage after the show, a breathless Marques and Almeida said it was 
collaborating with the women in this show that made the mix come together. 
“It’s such a collage with punk and baroque,” said Marques. “But it made sense 
when we put it on the girls, because that mix is how they wear clothes.”

While the LVMH prize money earned in 2015 allowed them to hire more staff, use 
more expensive fabric and develop accessories, the duo realise it’s consistency 
that is key. Asked why there was still so much of the raw-edged denim in the 
collection, Almeida responded that “it grounds everything into reality”.

London fashion week finished on Tuesday, with highlights of the week including 
Christopher Kane, Burberry and Roksanda Ilincic. The focus now moves to Milan, 
where Gucci and Prada – two of the most influential shows of any season – will 
present their collections on Wednesday.
 