
This is what many people – gay and straight – are concerned the LGBTI 
community will face, if the Australian government goes through with a 
plebiscite canvassing voters’ opinions on marriage equality.

In an open letter to Australia’s politicians, Irish marriage equality activist 
Dr Grainne Healy warns of the harmful effects inherent in holding the proposed 
plebiscite.

“At least we knew that at the end of it, if we won, we would have full 
constitutional equality for LGBT marriage rights”, Dr Healy writes. “To hold a 
non-binding plebiscite seems to be at the least insensitive to the LGBT 
community who will bear the brunt of the negative campaigning, and at best will 
lead to an experience of divisive, hurtful campaigning with no guarantee of 
progressing marriage equality.

“As a civil and human rights issue of equality, as a matter of family equality 
and as a matter of equality for our sons and daughters and our friends and 
workmates, legislation to introduce marriage equality is what is needed in 
Australia.”

That an issue of human rights should be put to a public vote instead of simply 
being legislated by the parliament, is of particular concern to Maurice 
Blackburn Associate Alana Heffernan.

“We’ve never had an amendment to human rights legislation brought in by way of 
popular vote”, Heffernan says. “In 2012 there were amendments to provide 
protection to the LGBTI community from discrimination, and that didn’t require 
a public vote.

“Similarly, removing the discriminatory clause from our marriage laws should 
not require a public vote, just as it didn’t to insert it in the first place.”

That ‘discriminatory clause’ is an amendment made in 2004 by the Howard 
government to close a potential loophole in the legislation, allowing marriage 
between ‘consenting adults’.

Marriage means the union of a man and a woman to the exclusion of all others, 
voluntarily entered into for life. Certain unions are not marriages. A union 
solemnised in a foreign country between: (a) a man and another man; or (b) a 
woman and another woman; must not be recognised as a marriage in Australia.

Marriage Amendment Bill 2014 - Federal Register of Legislation 

We’ve never had an amendment to human rights legislation brought in by way of 
popular vote
Alana Heffernan 
“There is absolutely no requirement to have the plebiscite, nor is it 
appropriate” Heffernan says. “They’ve acknowledged that by saying the outcome 
won’t be binding on the MPs.”

The real issue many people have with the plebiscite, however, apart from 
wasting taxpayer funds, is the effect it will have on members of the LGBTI 
community, who may find themselves the target of vilification and abuse.

“We have laws in place for vilification, but not for generally demeaning and 
offensive campaign material which is a natural consequence of this type of 
plebiscite”, Heffernan says.

“This is potentially such a critical issue, that Maurice Blackburn will 
provide free advice through our social justice practice to people who feel they 
have been vilified by the campaign.”

Married, but not

After ten years together, Cath Pope and her partner, Kris, travelled to 
Argentina to get married.


“It was a crazy wild adventure, but truly memorable”, Pope says. “Getting 
married overseas is probably not for everyone, but it was the right decision 
for us and we’re glad we didn’t wait. The experience of being married, even 
though it’s not recognised in this country, has made a huge difference to our 
lives.”

“I love wearing my wedding ring and revere the commitment we’ve made to each 
other.”

They’ve experienced the joy, excitement and precious bond felt by all 
newlyweds, yet that’s where the similarities end. Back in Australia, they have 
no legal or even social recognition of the relationship.

Being able to speak of Kris as her wife is important to Pope.


My taxes are being used to fund a campaign that tells us that we are not 
equal, and it makes me angry...
Cath Pope 
“When I’m travelling in countries where gay marriage is legal, there’s no 
ambiguity, no misunderstanding of what our relationship is. I call Kris my 
wife, and peopleget it. They ask ‘oh, when were you married?’ ‘Where did you 
get married?’ It opens up a completely different dialogue”, she says.

“Usually, whenever someone we know gets engaged, married or has a baby, we all 
share that joy as a community.

“It’s what connects us, what we have in common. Yet LGBTI people can’t observe 
this very human ritual.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fmarriage-equality-who-wins-with-a-plebiscite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9e2df72af7167c1cf843d5a02fd5762a2332bb%2F70_0_5751_2160%2F5751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marriage%20equality%3A%20who%20wins%20with%20a%20plebiscite%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fmarriage-equality-who-wins-with-a-plebiscite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marriage%20equality%3A%20who%20wins%20with%20a%20plebiscite%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fmarriage-equality-who-wins-with-a-plebiscite%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9e2df72af7167c1cf843d5a02fd5762a2332bb%2F70_0_5751_2160%2F5751.jpg>
 Photograph: Supplied by Maurice Blackburn 
There are other, more practical difficulties faced by people who are in 
committed relationships without legal recognition in Australia, such as not 
being accepted as next-of-kin.

“If ever we have a crisis or medical emergency, one of us has to jump through 
hoops to be recognised as a valid family member”, Pope says. “It’s even worse 
if there are children involved.”

Nevertheless, while being married is the “best thing they ever did”, and she’d 
love to see marriage equality in Australia, Pope believes that holding a 
plebiscite is not the way to go about it.

“I’m in my forties and pretty thick-skinned, but in the past weeks as I watch 
the commentary on this, I already have a heightened sense of anxiety. I can’t 
imagine how a 16 year old, or someone who is less confident or not ‘out’ must 
be feeling.

“My taxes are being used to fund a campaign that tells us that we are not 
equal, and it makes me angry to have healthy happy children of gay parents see 
on television that there’s something wrong with them. We are so much better 
than this.

“It shouldn’t be an issue. We’re good, ordinary, decent, citizens who want to 
lead productive lives with the same rights afforded every other Australian. We 
want the right to get married and enable the people who love us to share in 
that wonderful, joyful, human experience that connects us.”
 