
A few metres from turquoise lagoon waters that have sustained Marshall 
Islanders with marine life for two millennia, the steady sound of saws slicing 
into wood can be heard from inside a two-storey timber building. But at the 
Waan Aelon in Majel training centre, the sounds signify more than simply 
carpenters at work: here, young people who left school before the age of 13 are 
learning to build outrigger canoes as they immerse themselves in the culture of 
their ancestors.

“A hundred years ago, everyone had a position in life as fishermen, weavers 
and local medicine experts,” says Alson Kelen, who has directed the youth 
programme at the training centre for 20 years. “Everyone participated in the 
culture. Today, kids are lost – they don’t know where to fit in.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fmarshall-islands-floats-youth-alternative-to-pacifics-high-dependency-on-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439396047909%2F6a809821-ea0d-456d-8d67-2955b661627d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marshall%20Islands%20floats%20youth%20alternative%20to%20Pacific's%20high%20dependency%20on%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fmarshall-islands-floats-youth-alternative-to-pacifics-high-dependency-on-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marshall%20Islands%20floats%20youth%20alternative%20to%20Pacific%27s%20high%20dependency%20on%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fmarshall-islands-floats-youth-alternative-to-pacifics-high-dependency-on-aid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439396047909%2F6a809821-ea0d-456d-8d67-2955b661627d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A small island in one of the 24 atolls of the Marshall Islands in the western 
Pacific Ocean. Photograph: Alamy 
 For Kelen, addressing issues of cultural identity while developing practical 
vocational skills is key to the success of his programme for out-of-school 
Marshall Islanders. “They can go western and get more education or a job, but 
they also know who they are, and can go to an outer island and have the 
subsistence skills to live,” he says.

School dropout rates are high in urban areas of the Marshall Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marshall-islands>, where 75% of the 
population of 53,000 live. Youth unemployment is estimated at 60% in these 
areas of the islands, which are located near the equator in the Pacific Ocean.

 The canoe building programme and other community projects aim to harness 
local culture and traditions to equip younger generations to succeed in a 
country that – like other Pacific nations – has a high dependency on aid.



“Aid dependency here is a problem,” says Kelen. “In government, all the talk 
is about aid, how much we can get, not about implementing projects that produce 
results.”

The eighth millennium development goal (MDG) included a target on increasing 
aid to small island developing nations, and aid to the region has gone up as a 
result: official development assistance (ODA) to the 14 Pacific nations has 
doubled since 2002, with two-thirds directed to social infrastructure and 
services such as education, health, water and sanitation.

Despite this increase, progress on the MDGs 
<http://www.forumsec.org/resources/uploads/attachments/documents/2013_Pac_Regional_MDGs_Tracking_Report_FINAL.pdf>
 remains mixed. By 2013, only two Pacific Island countries – Cook Islands and 
Niue – were on track to achieve MDG1 of halving extreme poverty and hunger. On 
many islands, education and health indicators have declined, while levels of 
domestic violence remain high. Overall,progress on the MDGs 
<http://www.undp.org/content/dam/rbap/docs/Research%20&%20Publications/mdg/RBAP-RMDG-Report-2014-2015.pdf>
 for the Pacific Islands is not positive. Ten of the nations were unable to 
achieve a majority of the eight MDGs, and three failed to successfully 
implement a single one.

Rising poverty, government corruption and an epidemic of lifestyle diseases 
dominate <http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/88/7/10-010710/en/> daily life 
for an increasing number of Marshall Islanders. Sixty years ago, diabetes was 
virtually unheard of here, but today the country is among the 10 most obese 
nations globally. In fact, nine out of 10 countries on the World Health 
Organisation’slist of top obese nations 
<http://www.radionz.co.nz/international/pacific-news/273142/pacific-has-nine-of-the-ten-fattest-countries>
 are in the Pacific.

As across the Pacific, the Marshall Islands are also grappling with the rising 
ocean, among the first effects of climate change. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/09/losing-paradise-the-people-displaced-by-atomic-bombs-and-now-climate-change>

Last year, Australia’s foreign minister, Julie Bishop, spoke bluntly about the 
lack of results from her government’s foreign aid to the region. “I find it 
distressing to know that despite the fact that Australia invests about half a 
billion dollars every year into Papua New Guinea, it will not meet one of its 
millennium development goals— in fact, it is going backwards,” she said.

Kelen believes the key to providing young urban Marshall Islanders with a 
sustainable future is giving them a strong cultural foundation. “Many youth 
just play ukeleles all day, talk, or drink alcohol,” says Kelen, whose team of 
master canoe builders, teachers and counsellors provide six months of life 
skills and vocational training.

“Now [after the training], the youth are saying things like, ‘can you help me 
with a resume?’ There is something productive in their lives. They are thinking 
about jobs, higher education and training in other places,” he says.


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fmarshall-islands-floats-youth-alternative-to-pacifics-high-dependency-on-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff56f4e93e90f7db1dfc21d5c4045592ef3b7911f%2F0_0_4000_3000%2Fmaster%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marshall%20Islands%20floats%20youth%20alternative%20to%20Pacific's%20high%20dependency%20on%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fmarshall-islands-floats-youth-alternative-to-pacifics-high-dependency-on-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marshall%20Islands%20floats%20youth%20alternative%20to%20Pacific%27s%20high%20dependency%20on%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fmarshall-islands-floats-youth-alternative-to-pacifics-high-dependency-on-aid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff56f4e93e90f7db1dfc21d5c4045592ef3b7911f%2F0_0_4000_3000%2Fmaster%2F4000.jpg>
 After an 80-mile voyage from Majuro to Aur Atoll using only traditional 
navigation methods, crew members Elmi Juonraan and master canoe builder Binton 
Daniel repair the outrigger canoe before the return trip. Photograph: Alson 
Kelen 
It is a philosophy that some say is not shared by Pacific governments or 
donors, who have preferred to opt for modern solutions – which have borne scant 
results. This year, one government official in the Marshalls said the country 
needed more aid to implement human rights improvements in response to the UN 
Universal Periodic Review every five years.

But others see it differently, including Kathryn Relang, who directs the 
national women’s organisation (Wutmi) in the Marshall Islands. “I think it is 
just a matter of our own capacity and willingness to take on these issues,” 
said Relang.

Implementing 17 new sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 from 2016 is a concern among NGOs, who fear island governments will repeat 
mistakes made in delivering the MDGs. They are calling on governments and their 
donors to reinvent their development agendas and means of implementation.

Kelen believes island culture holds the key to sustainable development. “Some 
see the outrigger canoe as a thing of the past, but it’s a tool that has 
survived 2,000 years and it will survive 2,000 more,” he says. “Sustainable 
livelihoods start from our traditions.”

 * Giff Johnson is the editor of the Marshall Islands Journal, a weekly 
newspaper published in Majuro. His latest book, Idyllic No More: Pacific Island 
Climate, Corruption and Development Dilemmas, was published in July.  