
I have wanted to make and design clothes for as long as I can remember. Even 
at the age of four I was appallingly aware of my clothes. This was because they 
came from a cousin who was either richer or who looked after her clothes 
better, I can’t remember which – but anyway they did not suit me. They were too 
frilly and as soon as I was able I would try and adapt them.

I had a very clear idea of how I wanted to look. At my dancing class there was 
a girl of seven who looked exactly the way I wanted to look. She had a square 
Vidal Sassoon haircut of the kind I’ve had for most of my life, and she wore 
black tights with white ankle socks and black shinny shoes with a button strap, 
a very short pleated skirt, and an elongated sweater.

My parents, who were both school teachers, were concerned with only one thing 
– that I should get qualifications to ensure that I could always earn my own 
living. In this way they were ahead of their time and treated me exactly the 
same as my brother who became a plastic surgeon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmary-quant-first-job-hats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe48b0066dd44417d45ea0fb62f6f20281951a8f1%2F0_145_2913_1749%2F2913.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mary%20Quant%20on%20her%20first%20job%20%E2%80%93%20fashion%20archive%2C%2016%20December%201977&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmary-quant-first-job-hats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mary%20Quant%20on%20her%20first%20job%20%E2%80%93%20fashion%20archive%2C%2016%20December%201977&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmary-quant-first-job-hats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe48b0066dd44417d45ea0fb62f6f20281951a8f1%2F0_145_2913_1749%2F2913.jpg>
 Mary Quant with examples from the Mary Quant range of products including 
shoes, makeup, glasses and textiles. Photograph: Tony McGrath/taken from 
picture library 
I wanted to go to fashion school, such as St Martins, when I left school, but 
my parents felt that fashion was far too dangerous and insisted that I go to 
Art School instead so that I was at least qualified to teach.

In retrospect this was a very lucky decision, because fashion was taught in a 
most depressing way in those days. Students would go to for the Collections 
once a year and then come home and analyse the clothes to remake them for the 
mass market. In this way, fashion stemmed from the top; it was created for 
people who never picked their noses or ran for buses, and it was then watered 
down for the working classes. I firmly believe that fashion should start from 
the bottom.

While I was at Goldsmith’s College I did very little actual fashion although I 
did go to cutting classes in the evenings. At the end of my course I hawked my 
drawings all over the place trying to sell my designs and everyone would say 
how many years have you done and in whose workshop and of course I had no 
experience at all. So I realised I just had to get in somewhere and learn how 
things worked.

The sign most commonly seen in those days was “Milliner’s assistant wanted.” 
Hats were very big in the early fifties, so off I went to work for Eric, a 
Danish milliner who had a shop and workshop next to Claridge’s.

I was paid £2.50 a week to work from 8.30 to 5.30 and I spent the first three 
months ironing veils. They were curved like a visor and the curve was achieved 
by ironing. I also picked up pins at the end of the day with a magnet and was 
responsible for counting the Penguin biscuits. On pay day we would each put so 
much into the kitty to enable us to have one Penguin a day.

I loved working there and did not for a minute feel resentful that I was not 
designing. The other staff – we were about eight in all – were either very 
young and unskilled or very old and skilled. I didn’t tell them about my art 
school qualifications. I might not have got the job if they had known.

Continue reading <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/12/12/maryquant1977.jpeg>
 