
Sir Edward Penton, who spoke of himself as a shoemaker and who was in charge 
of the boots section of the Royal Army Clothing Department during several years 
of the war, yesterday opened the Free Foot Hospital in Strangeways, Manchester.

The hospital is associated with the National School of Chiropody, whose vice 
president, Miss W.R.S. Simmons, presented the gold key with which Sir Edward 
performed the opening.

Fashion archive, 1923: High heels are ‘instruments of torture’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/08/high-heels-shoes-women-health> 
Subsequently there was a brief meeting in the lecture hall, at which Dr. 
J.Neil Leitch, president of the National School of Chiropody, who presided, 
said that more than 200 patients were already receiving treatment daily in the 
hospital.

Sir Edward Penton traced the origin of the word chiropodist back to 1768 when 
one who had previously called himself a corn-cutter adopted that style. “But I 
am inclined to think,” he added, “that the need for the chiropodist has arisen 
largely during modern civilisation. As one who has been engaged in shoemaking 
nearly all his life, I am certain that the present methods of mass production 
by which we clothe the heads, bodies, hands, and feet are raising in the case 
of the feet difficulties which the skilled chiropodist alone will be able to 
put right.

“It is obvious that where factory after factory drives through ten, twenty, or 
thirty thousand pairs of shoes a week you cannot hope to get the accurate fit 
of the shoemaker who worked to alast 
<http://shoes.about.com/od/footwear/g/shoe_lasts.htm> which had the 
measurements of the wearer’s feet. And when you get a spate of fashion shoes 
bought, whatever may be the care of the salesman in nine cases out of ten – or 
an even bigger proportion – rather for their appearance than their fit, then I 
am not sure we are not taking up one of the worst traits of the most ancient 
civilisation and that our ladies, for all their modernity, are not harking back 
to thecustom of the Chinese women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/15/the-last-women-in-china-with-bound-feet>
.”

 