
It’s been four years since Canadian studio Bioware seemingly closed out its 
science fiction RPG series Mass Effect with one of the most controversial (or 
as some put it, “disappointing”) endings in video game history. Next March, 
however, the beloved series is returning, with a brand-new cast and setting, 
and some interesting new design features.

Coming two years after the developer’s acclaimed Dragon Age: Inquisition, it’s 
likely Andromeda will draw on a lot of the ideas and systems from that game, as 
well as from the Mass Effect canon.

But what do we actually know about the next title? Here’s everything.

It’s the most cinematic instalment so far

Mass Effect has often been beautiful, but it’s never looked so much like an 
actual, modern-day sci-fi movie as Andromeda does in the trailers. Sure, a lot 
of what we’ve seen is cut-scenes and pre-rendered imagery, but the latest 
trailer – released on N7 Day, AKA November 7th – shows the game looking like 
some ethereal blockbuster starring Matt Damon, Michael Fassbender or Scarlett 
Johansson, and directed by JJ Abrams.

And it’s got a plot to match...

The game actually begins between Mass Effect 2 and 3
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSPkv7DmeM1A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSPkv7DmeM1A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSPkv7DmeM1A&media=>
Andromeda originates in the year 2185 – the year that Mass Effect 2 ends, and 
right before the Reapers invade the Milky Way, kickstarting Mass Effect 3.

A group of desperate scientists and explorers form the Andromeda initiative, 
its aim to leave the threatened Milky Way behind to make a new life in the 
Andromeda galaxy – which, unfortunately, is a bum-numbing 600 years away. It 
sounds like the action kicks off when the voyagers’ cryogenic sleep is 
interrupted by a Very Bad Catastrophe, after which you have to lead exploration 
of the unknown galaxy in your new role as Pathfinder. According to the official 
synopsis, you’re among the first humans in the Andromeda galaxy, alongside 
three other arks which probably contain other species from the Milky Way. There 
will, of course, be scary monsters, undiscovered planets and exotic new 
extraterrestrial allies. In short: No Man’s Sky with a linear plot and alien 
kissing.

New characters, new lead
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpyZw_oqk7Q8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpyZw_oqk7Q8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpyZw_oqk7Q8&media=>
A few characters have been leaked or revealed already, including the lead 
protagonist – or more accurately, protagonists – Ryder. For the first time in 
Mass Effect history, both male and female leads (Scott and Sarah) exist as 
separate characters: they’re siblings.

We also know that the Ryder family patriarch, Alec, will be in the game: he 
voices the trailer (he’s the guy in the black N7 helmet). We’re told that he 
was a Pathfinder, but that you’re “the new pathfinder” – so, uh, draw your own 
conclusions there. We’ve also heard – through the Reddit leak - of someone 
called Cora, and a “squad mate” called Drack. It could be that he’s the 
mysterious krogan we saw in an earlier trailer.The Game Informer article 
mentions 
<http://www.gameinformer.com/b/features/archive/2016/11/10/meet-your-mass-effect-squadmates-liam-and-peebee.aspx?utm_content=buffer66fca&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
 a young, enthusiastic human police officer named Liam, and an asari nicknamed 
Peebee, a lone wolf adventurer you pick up en route and whose blunt manner is 
likely to cause some friction.

And, of course, loyalty missions return, in which you can complete a unique 
and personal quest for each character to make them “loyal” to you, unlocking 
bonus items, skills and dialogue and sometimes affecting the plot.

Your Mass Effect 3 ending doesn’t matter – but history no doubt will

After the long space journey that initiates the story, the bulk of Andromeda 
is set hundreds of years after Mass Effect 3, so Shepard’s long gone. Sorry. On 
the plus side, no matter what you thought of that ending – Andromeda doesn’t 
care at all: you’ll get to start afresh. There will, however, be knowing 
references to the older games and plenty of fan service. Bioware titlesalways 
feature recurring characters, nods to missions from older games and hey, 
remember that bit in the ME3 Citadel DLC where you got to dance a tango with 
Garrus?

Destructible cover


The one thing missing from Mass Effect so far has been the ability to make all 
that handy waist-high scenery explode into fragments. Then, earlier this year, 
US retailer Best Buy accidentally posted an early preorder offer online, 
mentioning destructible cover. Not much else is known about how this works but 
it will be interesting to see how different alien environments react to combat 
situations and what effect this all has on tactics.

A recent cover feature in Game Informer magazine added that the cover system 
will be dynamic – a la The Last of Us – so characters will use it automatically 
without annoying button prompts. It’s possible there is also a jetpack to add 
some verticality. Wow, game designers really loved Titanfall didn’t they?

Multiplayer returns


It’s not yet clear what kind of multiplayer we’ll see in Mass Effect: 
Andromeda, but it’s definitely coming. Several modes were leaked on Reddit a 
few months ago: “Active Strike Team” missions, a multiplayer Horde mode, and 
“Deployed Strike Team”.

Active strike team missions can be tackled either solo or with up to three of 
your friends to gain rewards. Horde mode is separate to the main game, and 
provides the classic wave-based co-op shooter experience – apparently, this 
will earn you in-game currency that can be used in the single player campaign. 
It’s likely this will follow the pattern of Dragon Age: Inquisition’s 
multiplayer mode, with microtransactions allowing you to purchase the currency, 
too.

Meanwhile, the active strike team multiplayer missions look similar to how 
Dragon Age: Inquisition’s war table worked, with real-time missions, collecting 
resources, etc. However, the game’s producer, Fernando Melo, has stated that 
multiplayer will have much less of an effect on the outcome of the campaign 
than it did in ME3.

A multiplayer beta is due sometime before the spring.

Romance!

Whether you enjoy the romance in Bioware games or not, it’s here to stay – and 
in Andromeda it’s likely to be deeper and more nuanced than ever before. Some 
characters want long-term relationships, others are just looking for a good 
time as the galaxy crashes and burns around them.

The dialogue system has also been updated, rejecting the old Renegade/Paragon 
choices and using a new set of response types: Heart, Head, Professional and 
Casual. This sounds like a simplified version of Inquisition’s emotions-based 
dialogue options, where choices were shown with a symbol (heart, crying eye, 
fist, etc) to show the tone of your reply.

It seems the greater nuance in the romance system will allow for more complex 
interpersonal relationships with companion characters, but the simplified 
dialogue system will make it easier to gauge their reactions – you’ll no longer 
have to figure out whether you are Renegade or Paragon enough to make something 
work.

Sexy new box art
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmass-effect-andromeda-everything-we-know-so-far%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7c7cb01e99146b8a1097e19efdf93272a18b074%2F0_44_1846_1108%2F1846.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mass%20Effect%3A%20Andromeda%20%E2%80%93%20everything%20we%20know%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmass-effect-andromeda-everything-we-know-so-far%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mass%20Effect%3A%20Andromeda%20%E2%80%93%20everything%20we%20know%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmass-effect-andromeda-everything-we-know-so-far%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7c7cb01e99146b8a1097e19efdf93272a18b074%2F0_44_1846_1108%2F1846.jpg>
 Mass Effect Andromeda box art Photograph: Electronic Arts 
Have you seen it? It’s really very nice. There will of course be standard, 
deluxe and super deluxe editions 
<https://www.origin.com/gbr/en-us/store/mass-effect/mass-effect-andromeda/standard-edition>
 of the game, the latter two offering varying selections of armour types and 
multiplayer booster packs.

New Bad Guy

It seems like Andromeda’s main antagonist is one of the Kett – one of two new 
races/species that have been leaked already – and though we don’t know much 
about him, he really doesn’t seem to like the Andromeda initiative. The Kett 
and the Guardians, the major two inhabitants of the Andromeda galaxy, are 
seemingly in conflict, and you’ve turned up right in the middle of that.

It’s hard to say if you’ll be forced to choose a side in this galactic 
skirmish. Maybe you’ll be forced to side with the goody-two-shoes Guardians – 
or perhaps you’ll get the chance to join forces with the Kett to establish a 
dictatorship for the good of humanity. After all, that’s your only mission… 
right?

New skill trees
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmass-effect-andromeda-everything-we-know-so-far%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb68c771d51be4ea7b365986d1df476643d68a3e7%2F49_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mass%20Effect%3A%20Andromeda%20%E2%80%93%20everything%20we%20know%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmass-effect-andromeda-everything-we-know-so-far%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mass%20Effect%3A%20Andromeda%20%E2%80%93%20everything%20we%20know%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fmass-effect-andromeda-everything-we-know-so-far%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb68c771d51be4ea7b365986d1df476643d68a3e7%2F49_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Mass Effect: Andromeda Photograph: Bioware 
Another Dragon Age: Inquisition-style update: it looks like the class system 
from previous games has been removed in favour of a skill tree that Ryder can 
customise through the game. Only by picking specialities can you gain classes 
like before, and there’s apparently an in-game skill shuffle that will allow 
you to reconfigure your setup and try out multiple classes.

This exact thing happened in Inquisition: you begin life as a Rogue, Warrior, 
or Mage, and at one point in the game you find an item that allows you to 
regain all your previously spent skill points and re-spec your character 
completely. There’s also a plot point in Inquisition where you can take your 
chosen character class to the next level – for example, a Rogue can choose to 
specialise in stealth (Assassin class), traps (Artificer) or spells (Tempest). 
Each class specialisation lets you gain new skills, weapons and abilities. This 
could form the basis of the Mass Effect: Andromeda system.

This will probably mean that players will get to experience a wider range of 
attack and play styles, making it more important and difficult to choose a 
well-balanced party of companions, and making multiplayer co-op much harder to 
predict and plan for. In a good way.

There will be crafting

Producer Fabrice Condominas has revealed that players will be able to discover 
blueprints to alien technologies, allowing them to craft new weapons. However, 
in a recent tweet creative director Mac Walters suggested that players who 
don’t want to gather materials and craft will have other means to get their 
hands on exciting tech.
Mac Walters (@macwalterslives) 
You will have options. We want you to play Andromeda how you want. Freedom is 
a big part of the experience.https://t.co/lgdCWmwVoR <https://t.co/lgdCWmwVoR>
 <https://twitter.com/macwalterslives/status/797528647036899329> November 12, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/macwalterslives/status/797528647036899329> 
A different sort of ending

After the controversy surrounding Mass Effect 3, one big question is how 
Bioware is planning to handle the close of Andromeda. Will there be an array of 
possibilities? Will it be a largely linear narrative with a few small twists? 
The one thing we know for now is that it won’t follow the conventions of 
previous titles.

When asked if there would be multiple endings, producer Michael Gamble said, 
“We want to leave the ending, and what we’re doing with it, as a surprise. This 
is a different type of story, so it will be something different than the 
trilogy. We can’t wait to hear what fans think.”
 