
Thrusting a hand to his brow in an impromptu military salute, 10-year-old 
Timon Kamis stands to attention at his family’s tent inside one of the 
sprawling camps where tens of thousands of South Sudanese have sought sanctuary 
from thethree years of bloodletting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/south-sudan-civil-war-inquiry-details-torture-and-forced-cannibalism>
 that have poisoned the world’s youngest country.

It is just after 7am on the UN protection of civilians (PoC) site at Malakal, 
in the country’s north, and nearby Timon’s mother, Anya, is packing up. In a 
few hours the mother of seven will set off with him and some of her younger 
children to trek across the border into Sudan, from which South Sudan gained 
its independence in 2011, afterAfrica’s longest-running civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/20/south-sudan-death-of-a-dream>.

“People still talk of peace but we just don’t think that it will come soon, 
and after three years of waiting here we have to leave,” says Anya, 35. She 
talks despairingly of life in the camp, where families survive on meagre 
rations and rates of mental illness – and even suicide among children – are 
rising.

Vicious fighting between different ethnic groups erupted in the camp last 
year. It was not the first time they had seen violence. Timon remembers vividly 
the killing that took place around them as they abandoned the family’s 10 
prized cows and escaped the fierce conflict around Malakal, the capital of 
oil-producing Upper Nile region.

Inside the camp, however, violence erupted again. Timon told how the family 
huddled together as opposing ethnic groups fought in the narrow lanes using 
knives, guns and grenades. Among his mother’s worries is that he could be at 
risk of joining theestimated 16,000 children recruited by armed forces and 
militias 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjV3cbTwvjQAhVEC8AKHXEODIwQFggsMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.unicef.gr%2Fuploads%2Ffilemanager%2FPDF%2F2016%2Fchildsoldiers.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHuA_-aUv8t9s-oBZLHEUq3CWklXQ&cad=rja>
since the conflict began in 2013.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febd72b8069a40357be9a8691ac6c40f54c287f79%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mass%20atrocities%20feared%20in%20South%20Sudan%20as%20ethnic%20violence%20is%20stoked%20by%20hunger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mass%20atrocities%20feared%20in%20South%20Sudan%20as%20ethnic%20violence%20is%20stoked%20by%20hunger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febd72b8069a40357be9a8691ac6c40f54c287f79%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Timon Kamis, 10, salutes like a soldier in the shelter he shares with his 
family in Malakal, South Sudan. 
The family’s latest flight comes as even darker storm clouds gather. The UN 
Commission on Human Rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/14/south-sudan-swift-action-genocide-un-human-rights-chief>
 has warned that ethnic cleansing involvingmassacres, starvation and gang rape 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21028&LangID=E>
 is taking place, threatening a repeat of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. On 
Wednesday, an emergency session of the UN human rights council was told swift 
action was needed to avert disaster.

“South Sudan stands on the brink of an all-out ethnic civil war, which could 
destabilise the entire region,” said the commission’s chair, Yasmin Sooka, who 
called for the immediate deployment of a planned 4,000-strong protection force 
as well as a new court to prosecute those behind the atrocities.

Diplomats on the ground in the capital, Juba, refrain from using the term 
genocide. But they point to a number of factors that have heightened alarm, not 
least signs of a mass build-up of regular troops and militias loyal to the 
president, Salva Kiir. Since December 2013, the former independence fighter has 
been at odds with his former vice-president, Riek Machar. Kiir, a Dinka, 
accused Machar, a Nuer, of plotting a coup, quickly dividing the country along 
sectarian lines.

Machar returned to Juba in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/south-sudan-rebel-leader-reik-machar-returns-juba>
 to join a unity government designed to end hostilities. Conflictreignited 
later in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/05/violence-erupts-again-in-south-sudan-wau-as-faith-in-peace-deal-flounders>
, however.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a91bbd2953ab2ef3ad15a08161fb0967644f951%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mass%20atrocities%20feared%20in%20South%20Sudan%20as%20ethnic%20violence%20is%20stoked%20by%20hunger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mass%20atrocities%20feared%20in%20South%20Sudan%20as%20ethnic%20violence%20is%20stoked%20by%20hunger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a91bbd2953ab2ef3ad15a08161fb0967644f951%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Makeshift shelters at the UN camp in Malakal, home to more than 33,000 people 
from the Nuer and Shilluk tribes 
The build-up has taken place in the southern states of Equatoria, according to 
the US, which also says that it has “credible information” that South Sudan’s 
government is targeting civilians and preparing for imminent “large-scale” 
attacks against the backdrop of the dry season.

“Given the way that warfare is conducted here and the way in which civilians 
are considered legitimate targets, we are concerned that the potential for mass 
atrocities if they resume offensives is very high,” said US ambassador Mary 
Catherine Phee.

Only swift action can avert South Sudan genocide, says UN human rights chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/14/south-sudan-swift-action-genocide-un-human-rights-chief>
Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general, has also voiced concern. Calling on the 
UN security council to take punitive action, he said on Friday: “The country’s 
leaders have betrayed their people’s trust, and squandered a peace agreement. 
Tens of thousands lie dead.”

Machar’s forces and a fractured list of other armed groups also stand accused 
of rights abuses, but it is the government’s overwhelming military might that 
most concerns external observers, in particular its fleet of helicopter 
gunships. AUS bid to implement an arms embargo and targeted sanctions 
<http://www.whatsinblue.org/2016/11/vote-delayed-on-south-sudan-arms-embargo-and-targeted-sanctions.php>
 has been opposed by the UN security council, but remains an option.

Ensconced in the presidential palace, which still bears deep bulletholes on 
its perimeter walls from July’s intensive fighting, Kiir has strongly denied 
allegations of ethnic cleansing. Government representatives have accused 
diplomats of making“baseless” claims of a military build-up 
<https://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article61073>.

“South Sudan as a sovereign nation has the right and the capacity to protect 
its citizens and in doing so it must deal with both internal and external 
aggressors in order to maintain law and order in the country,” the chief of 
staff of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), Gen Paul Malong Awan,said 
last week <http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article61073>.

Aid and humanitarian organisations are sounding alarm bells over the mounting 
human cost of the crisis, which has led to more than 1 million of South Sudan’s 
estimated population of 12 millionfleeing to neighbouring countries 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/unicef-south-sudan-humanitarian-situation-report-98-15-november-30-november-2016>
. Uganda alone is now host to more than 450,000 South Sudanese.

Mahimbo Mdoe, Unicef’s representative in South Sudan, believes the combination 
of conflict, rising levels of malnutrition and economic crisis –inflation is at 
830% <http://www.tradingeconomics.com/south-sudan/inflation-cpi> – has created 
a “perfect storm” for further deterioration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa63dedf970ae3219b6a6c0cc268feb63e707d589%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mass%20atrocities%20feared%20in%20South%20Sudan%20as%20ethnic%20violence%20is%20stoked%20by%20hunger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mass%20atrocities%20feared%20in%20South%20Sudan%20as%20ethnic%20violence%20is%20stoked%20by%20hunger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa63dedf970ae3219b6a6c0cc268feb63e707d589%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 At the UN camp in Malakal, a girl hits children through a fence dividing the 
Nuer and Shiluk ethnic groups 
“We’re concerned about huge levels of malnutrition, the protection of children 
and gender-based violence, but my particular priority is the northern region of 
Bahr el Ghazal, where the malnutrition levels are through the roof,” he said, 
adding that Unicef’s annual target for children across the country to be 
treated for severe malnutrition has increased this year from166,222 to 360,000 
of those aged under five <https://www.unicef.org/appeals/south_sudan.html>.

While Bahr el Ghazal was largely untouched by the recent fighting, Mdoe said 
the food crisis there had deteriorated to the extent that refugees were now 
making their way to Darfur, itself the scene of warnings of famine in 2004. “At 
the moment, malnutrition is at catastrophic levels and if there is no 
intervention then the region will slip into a famine.”

Back in a sector of the Malakal camp populated by members of the Shilluk 
ethnic group, 45-year-old Dagaban is sweeping the dirt floor of her shack as 
her neighbour Anya and her family prepare to leave.


“Only God knows how this situation will change,” she says. Her six-year-old 
grandson, Kamis, watches her from the edge of his bed through bloodshot eyes. 
His father was killed in fighting between government and opposition forces in 
2014, and his mother left her three children behind, remaining with troops as a 
cook.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaf7613f49afbe50f7ea6458a1ecd5aebebe5591%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mass%20atrocities%20feared%20in%20South%20Sudan%20as%20ethnic%20violence%20is%20stoked%20by%20hunger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mass%20atrocities%20feared%20in%20South%20Sudan%20as%20ethnic%20violence%20is%20stoked%20by%20hunger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmass-atrocities-feared-in-south-sudan-as-ethnic-violence-is-stoked-by-hunger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaf7613f49afbe50f7ea6458a1ecd5aebebe5591%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Dagaban, who looks after her three grandchildren at Malakal camp 
“We are stuck here. Otherwise we would have gone to another camp in a 
neighbouring country,” his grandmother continues. Sometimes, she and other 
women risk their security outside of the camp to collect firewood, or venture 
into the market a few kilometres away in the town of Malakal, the scene of 
continued fighting but held for now by government forces.

Asked how the conflict compared to the more than two decades of fighting that 
preceded South Sudan’s independence, she pauses and shakes her head: “This war 
has gone beyond any expectation. When we were fighting with the Arabs they 
would spare women and children, but now everyone is killed, even blind people 
and those who are mad. They kill everyone. It’s worse than before.”

 