
The news that the Italian prime minister, Matteo Renzi, is opening Milan 
fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/03/italian-pm-matteo-renzi-to-open-milan-fashion-week>
 this month has caused a bit of a stir. Renzi is notorious for his ankle-baring 
trousers: last year, after he met the Philippines president, Benigno Aquino 
III, with more than an inch of his socks on show, the Milan-based Corriere 
Della Serafinger-waggingly complained 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/matteo-renzi-italy-in-shock-as-politician-is-caught-with-his-trousers-up-a6761111.html>
 that a “hem of two fingers longer would attract less attention”. His tailoring 
was considered boyish and informal, unbecoming of a 41-year-old Italian 
politician.

Of course, the country has seen worse. In 2004, when Tony and Cherie Blair 
spent a long summer weekend at a Sardinian villa, their mahogany-tanned host, 
Silvio Berlusconi, wore a wide-open white shirt and matching bandanna – like a 
pirate.

Nonetheless, the silhouette of Renzi’s shoes-socks-trousers combination was 
always likely to be remarked upon in a nation that itself looks like a boot. 
Really, this is what Italian menswear is all about, these subtle and banal 
variations on the suit form – as opposed to London’s catwalks, which are 
crowded with men in halter necks and see-through tracksuits, often wearing no 
trousers whatsoever.

Those who have read Elena Ferrante’s four-part publishing phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/02/elena-ferrante-speculation-she-could-be-man-italian-novelist>
 the Neapolitan Novels will recall that the climactic closing scene of the 
first book, My Brilliant Friend, revolves around the provocative choice of 
formal footwear of a man attending a wedding party. Its disastrous consequences 
are felt deep into the following books.

Italian PM Matteo Renzi to open Milan fashion week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/03/italian-pm-matteo-renzi-to-open-milan-fashion-week>
But most men wear their trousers too long. Far too much time is spent in shops 
looking for the correct waist size, which can be simply adjusted with a belt, 
rather than the correct length, which requires a tailor or else an unsightly 
turn-up (once is too much, anything beyond that an abomination). While Renzi’s 
trousers are short enough to attract opprobrium among Italian political 
commentators, they are not actually that short at all.

If it comes to famous men wearing their trousers too short, the most 
appropriate examples are towering, fashion-loving basketball players (who have 
the excuse of being exceedingly tall): Dwyane Wade, who was pilloried for his 
polkadot, capri-pant suit from Gucci; orRussell Westbrook, in his really tight 
ruby clam-diggers 
<https://www.facebook.com/bleacherreport/videos/10153733030691006/>, which he 
somehow pulls off with punkish aplomb.

No, the Italian prime minister’s trousers are a fine length; the problem is 
the cut, which is too skinny and tapered, and lacks weight and volume. Compared 
with the dramatic drapery gathered around the legs of the military man he stood 
beside in the Philippines, it appeared weak and impoverished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-milan-fashion-week-trousers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfe99fdc81d9c6b387121c466f0357f63b187009%2F0_177_2152_1292%2F2152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matteo%20Renzi%2C%20Milan%20fashion%20week%20is%20no%20place%20for%20those%20trousers%20%7C%20Dean%20Kissick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-milan-fashion-week-trousers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matteo%20Renzi%2C%20Milan%20fashion%20week%20is%20no%20place%20for%20those%20trousers%20%7C%20Dean%20Kissick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-milan-fashion-week-trousers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfe99fdc81d9c6b387121c466f0357f63b187009%2F0_177_2152_1292%2F2152.jpg>
 Matteo Renzi with the German chancellor Angela Merkel. Renzi’s 
shoes-socks-trousers combination has raised eyebrows. Photograph: Michael 
Kappeler/dpa/Corbis 
Renzi must opt for a much wider leg that protrudes at right angles. His 
trousers should carve dynamic shapes through the air, like a futurist sculpture 
by Umberto Boccioni, like a force of modernity. He should stride into the 
Palazzo Reale to openMilan fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week> with hems swishing 
powerfully beneath him like the wings of Pegasus.

Another thing about slightly shorter trousers is that they show off your shoes 
and socks, which must be chosen with more care. Renzi would really be much 
better off with a more heavyset style: perhaps a pair of Prada brogues or, if 
he dares, some floral-print Gucci sneakers, playing into the colourful 70s 
androgyny trend that the Italian house has foisted upon the entire fashion 
world.

And then there’s the conundrum of socks. “If he were to opt for midnight blue 
or black socks,” suggested the Corriere Della Sera, sensibly but boringly, 
“they would be less flashy and absorb, rather than reflect the spotlight.” A 
much more interesting approach would be even brighter socks. How about a 
passionate red, the colour of Renzi’s Democratic party? After all, the prime 
minister is a Florentine politician, and the greatest Florentine politician of 
them all – Lorenzo de’ Medici – was renowned for his bright crimson stockings.
 