
The Maxmara world is reimagined every autumn, but its north star will always 
be the classic camel coat. And so its Milan show is a masterclass in the subtle 
navigation of fashion, adept in endlessly reinventing that piece into a look 
that fits the mood of the moment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fmaxmara-shows-a-collection-thats-hot-on-detail-and-of-course-camel-coats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50cde92553248fb197402e46cafa153858f0924a%2F0_0_3091_4624%2F3091.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maxmara%20shows%20a%20collection%20that's%20hot%20on%20detail%20(and%2C%20of%20course%2C%20camel%20coats)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fmaxmara-shows-a-collection-thats-hot-on-detail-and-of-course-camel-coats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maxmara%20shows%20a%20collection%20that%27s%20hot%20on%20detail%20%28and%2C%20of%20course%2C%20camel%20coats%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fmaxmara-shows-a-collection-thats-hot-on-detail-and-of-course-camel-coats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50cde92553248fb197402e46cafa153858f0924a%2F0_0_3091_4624%2F3091.jpg>
 Bright stripes and outsized sunglasses: a model on the Max Mara catwalk. 
Photograph: Pietro D'aprano/Getty Images 
The details that told the story of this Maxmara collection were the pockets, 
the lipstick and the shoes. Maxmara’s last autumn collection, shown in Milan a 
year ago, opened with Gigi Hadid, dreamy-eyed and tousle-haired, clutching the 
front of her coat closed over a slip dress. It was a classic image, channelling 
that most blue-chip and untouchable of icons: Marilyn Monroe.

This time, by contrast, the mood was deliberately challenging. The models 
walked with their arms swinging, hands in bright leather gloves, or with one 
hand plunged into a huge patch pocket. The runway backdrop was a zigzagging 
flight of metal stairs, like a nightclub fire escape. (Golden and polished to a 
gleam, rather than chipped iron, of course. This is, after all,Milan fashion 
week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week>.) Instead of 
Monroe’s wide eyes, there were owlish sunglasses. With their dark Josephine 
Baker lips and outsize sunglasses, sequin dance dresses and bright Bauhaus 
stripes glimpsed under the coats, the women could have been emerging from a 
Weimar republic cabaret.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fmaxmara-shows-a-collection-thats-hot-on-detail-and-of-course-camel-coats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7730a56e89f5bb5dbe61aae2530b85d595221d0b%2F0_0_3032_4483%2F3032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maxmara%20shows%20a%20collection%20that's%20hot%20on%20detail%20(and%2C%20of%20course%2C%20camel%20coats)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fmaxmara-shows-a-collection-thats-hot-on-detail-and-of-course-camel-coats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maxmara%20shows%20a%20collection%20that%27s%20hot%20on%20detail%20%28and%2C%20of%20course%2C%20camel%20coats%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fmaxmara-shows-a-collection-thats-hot-on-detail-and-of-course-camel-coats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7730a56e89f5bb5dbe61aae2530b85d595221d0b%2F0_0_3032_4483%2F3032.jpg>
 Black trenches on the Max Mara catwalk. Photograph: Pietro D'aprano/Getty 
Images 
The camel coat of this season has a fuzzy, teddy bear fur finish or a nubbly, 
boiled-wool one rather than plush, giftbox-fresh cashmere. The look is about 
scale: these coats are cut to appear, by illusion of tailoring, as if they are 
eternally about to slip off your shoulders.

To a soundtrack of a smoky French jazz singer, Maxmara’s creative director Ian 
Griffiths sent out a collection heady with au courant sexed-up androgyny. There 
were straight-cut jumpsuits with daringly deep-dipped necklines, and hot pants 
under long coats. Sensible lace-up brogues came high heeled and in glittered 
gold, worn with fishnet tights.

Griffiths name-checked “sachlich [down-to-earth] heroines” such as the Russian 
constructivist artistLyubov Popova 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/artists/bios/1144>
. The boilersuits such pioneering women wore were translated into “patch 
pockets big enough for a set of tools (or a reel of film).”

Milan fashion week continues with shows from Versace and Giorgio Armani over 
the weekend.
 