
Theresa May’s government is to set out a new social justice strategy early 
next year aimed at helping those even poorer than the “just about managing” 
households who will be singled out for a boost in the autumn statement.


The policy will be taken over by Damian Green, the work and pensions 
secretary, after concerns were raised among ministers that the government 
should not forget about those who are struggling even more than thegroup known 
as “jams” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/17/philip-hammond-aims-autumn-statement-at-the-jam-people>
.


Philip Hammond aims autumn statement at the 'jam' people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/17/philip-hammond-aims-autumn-statement-at-the-jam-people>
It is understood he is likely to set out the scope of the work in the next few 
weeks with a view to publishing a green paper in the new year.

A major plank of the strategy will be about addressing joblessness in 
families, which ministers believe would be the biggest step towards improving 
social mobility for children.

One person familiar with the thinking behind the work said it was designed to 
be the “son ofDavid Cameron’s life-chances strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/cameron-pushes-for-trident-and-life-chances-plan-at-last-cabinet-meeting>
”, which the former prime minister had aimed to make the focus of his final 
years in Downing Street.

May has concentrated many of her speeches on saying she will help the “just 
about managing” who are likely to receive modest help in the autumn statement, 
amid pressure from MPs for a freeze on fuel duty or a cut in air passenger duty.

The Resolution Foundation thinktank has calculated that there are almost 6 
million working households who could be described as jams – with a net income 
of between £12,000 and £34,000 – and that their living standards have barely 
risen in a decade.

However, there are also many who are worse off than that, who are looking for 
work or earning less than £12,000 through part time jobs. Cameron first set out 
hislife chances plan last January 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/prime-ministers-speech-on-life-chances>
, saying he wanted to help those who “don’t just get left behind; they start 
behind”.

“Today in Britain, around a million children are growing up without the love 
of a dad,” he said at the time. “In Britain, a child born in a poor area will 
die an average of nine years earlier than their peers.

“In Britain, there are more young black men in our prisons than there are 
studying at a Russell Group university. These problems – they have been years 
in the making, and will take time to tackle.”

However, some will be sceptical of the Conservative government’s ability to 
address some of these problems, given the ineffectiveness ofCameron’s “troubled 
families” programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/08/13bn-troubled-families-scheme-has-had-no-discernible-impact>
 and oversight of years ofcuts to benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/26/guardian-view-on-benefit-cuts-cameron-menu-of-pain>
, soaring levels offood bank use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/22/food-bank-users-uk-low-paid-workers-poverty>
, and lower funding for public services.

Since coming to power, Theresa May has brought in plans to bring back grammar 
schools which critics such as the Ofsted chief inspector have said could harm 
thelife chances of children in non-selective schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/30/grammars-harm-british-schools-says-ofsted-chief-michael-wilshaw>
.


A report from the Social Mobility Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/16/uks-social-mobility-problem-holding-back-thatcher-generation-says-report>
 found last week that Britain has a “deep social mobility problem which is 
getting worse for an entire generation of young people”.

According to the commission, those born in the 1980s are the first cohort 
since the second world war to not start their careers with higher incomes than 
their parents and immediate predecessors. It also identified “treadmill 
families” who are running harder and harder but standing still.

Labour’s shadow education secretary, Angela Rayner, said the government had 
created a “growing sense of two nations: the lucky few at the very top and the 
millions who make up ‘everyone else’.”

“Since they came to power in 2010 we have seen our country go backwards on the 
progress the Labour government made on social mobility,” she said . “The 
educational attainment gap between lower-income children and their wealthier 
classmates is getting bigger, and these children still have little chance of 
going into high-level professions.”
 