
Poor Ronald McDonald. Following the scary clown appearances that shocked 
people around the globe, the burger chain has decided to cut back on public 
appearances of its pasty-faced mascot.

That is not the only bad news for McDonald’s, which reports third-quarter 
figures on Friday. According to theWall Street Journal, an internal memo shows 
that only one in five millennials has ever tried a Big Mac.

No wonder the company is trying so hard to reinvent itself. It is now 
18 months into a transformation plan led by British-born chief executive Steve 
Easterbrook, which includes offering all-day breakfasts, improving the quality 
of the food on offer, and selling thousands of its restaurants to franchisees. 
Last week it said it would be making $130m of restructuring charges in this 
latest quarter and would increase the number of restaurants sold to franchisees 
from 3,500 to 4,000, out of a total of 36,000.

In July, McDonald’s reported a 4% fall in second-quarter revenues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/mcdonalds-revenue-falls-second-quarter-2016>
 amid growing consumer uncertainty. Since then, thanks to further turmoil after 
the Brexit vote and the increasingly vicious US election campaign, things have 
hardly improved. Still, analysts expect third-quarter revenues to be unchanged 
or only marginally lower. Anything else could prove very scary for investors.

Bailey decision should check Burberry’s slide

With Burberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> planning to 
end its experiment with creative director Christopher Bailey also acting as 
chief executive, the luxury goods group could be back on the road to recovery.

In the summer, the company announced that Bailey would move back to his 
creative role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/burberrys-christopher-bailey-new-ceo-celine-marco-gobbetti>
, and that Marco Gobbetti, the man behind LVMH’s Céline brand, would take over 
as chief executive some time in 2017. During his tenure Bailey was unfortunate 
to face a slowdown in demand for luxury goods, particularly in China and Hong 
Kong. But since the summer things have picked up, helped by the slump in the 
pound – which is boosting its overseas profits as well as tempting more 
tourists to visit London and snap up its trademark beige check.

Recent positive comments from LVMH on trading in Hong Kong also bode well for 
Burberry, which releases its latest update on Tuesday. Despite the delay in 
Gobbetti starting, analysts at Berenberg said: “The recently revamped 
management team should provide the necessary talent and focus to steer it in 
the right direction. We believe that the second-quarter results [this week] 
could mark Burberry’s return to positive like-for-like sales.”

BHP gets the carrot and stick treatment

It’s rare to see a company winning plaudits over its pay policy and then 
almost immediately being slapped down. But mining groupBHP Billiton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhpbilliton> has achieved that 
distinction before its annual meeting on Thursday.

Corporate governance advisor Pirc praised the company for not paying chief 
executive Andrew Mackenzie anything under its various incentive schemes last 
year, cutting his bonus to zero following the dam disaster at the Samarco mine 
in Brazil in 2015 and the decline in commodity markets that has undermined the 
whole sector.

Pirc said: “This is a welcome use of the remuneration committee’s discretion. 
Furthermore, the ratio of chief executive to average employee pay is considered 
acceptable.”

But before BHP could get too carried away, Pirc criticised plans to give 
Mackenzie up to 200% of his salary under further incentive schemes, “which is 
considered excessive”.

It added: “Performance targets for short-term incentives are not 
disclosed, making it impossible for shareholders to judge if the targets are 
challenging.” It said proposed long-term incentive plans were not “an effective 
means of incentivising performance … not properly long-term and are subject to 
manipulation due to their discretionary nature”.
 