
I was on the boat back from Büyükada, an otherworldly island 75 minutes’ ferry 
ride from central Istanbul, when a scruffy blonde boy stepped on to the upper 
deck and planted a cello on the wooden floor. He was wearing cut-off jeans and 
a trucker cap, and his brow was shiny from the heat. It was hard to tell where 
he was from and what to expect.

The outward journey had been unpleasant: the boat was packed to the rafters 
and we stood the whole way, crammed in among fellow tourists looking to escape 
the heat of the city but instead sweltering in an overcrowded cabin.

The voyage home was far less fraught. We found a place on the upper deck where 
the breeze flowed freely, and stretched out on the wooden benches for a snooze 
in the afternoon sun.

It was already a beautiful setting, our ferry chugging slowly through the Sea 
of Marmara towards the Bosphorus, the vast waterway that runs through the 
centre of Istanbul. But when the cellist struck up the first notes of the 
prelude fromBach’s Suite No1 in G Major <https://costanzabach.stanford.edu/>, 
it was like being transported intoWalt Disney’s Fantasia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2010/nov/03/fantasia-walt-disney-video>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c221cc7872f376ec87237442b2c7c0545b0b1ed%2F255_0_5361_3217%2F5361.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Alaskan%20cellist%20who%20broke%20barriers%20by%20playing%20Istanbul's%20ferries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Alaskan%20cellist%20who%20broke%20barriers%20by%20playing%20Istanbul%27s%20ferries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c221cc7872f376ec87237442b2c7c0545b0b1ed%2F255_0_5361_3217%2F5361.jpg>
 Ferry attendants often stop Piper from boarding when they spot his blue cello 
case. Photograph: Bradley Secker 
Our surroundings were brought to life by their musical accompaniment. The 
other boats no longer laboured but glid elegantly past the sprawling cityscape. 
The wooded hills in the distance unfolded as if part of a stage set. Even the 
seagulls acquired a new air of majesty as they surfed the breeze alongside our 
ferry.

The young man in question, I later learned, was called Jari Piper. A 
classically trained musician who grew up in Alaska, he moved to Istanbul in 
2014 to join his older brother Ernie. For two years now, the 25-year-old has 
earned his keep by serenading commuters and tourists as they ride the city’s 
many ferries.

Piper’s tales lift the lid on a side of Istanbul that few others get to 
glimpse. He has learned the inner workings of its public transport system, 
jostled with fellow buskers, forged unlikely friendships. And he has watched 
the collective mood of the city’s crowds rise and crash in parallel with 
Turkey’s recent waves of turmoil.

In the early days, Piper struggled to negotiate the unwritten rules of working 
Istanbul’s ferries. On the first attempt, he and his brother – who plays guitar 
– picked an empty cabin, took out their instruments and broke into a song. 
After a minute, a man selling vegetable peelers came in and began shouting over 
them; they looked at each other, and began playing louder.

Then a man with a dulcimer <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hammered_dulcimer> 
arrived and began hammering out a tune. “Everyone, including us, started 
laughing,” Piper recalls. “And we gave up. I was like, ‘OK Turkey, you win.’ We 
got pushed out really hard – and it took me a long time to move back on to the 
boats again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a273b5afcfbd5ff57c914db28479f1da8373562%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Alaskan%20cellist%20who%20broke%20barriers%20by%20playing%20Istanbul's%20ferries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Alaskan%20cellist%20who%20broke%20barriers%20by%20playing%20Istanbul%27s%20ferries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a273b5afcfbd5ff57c914db28479f1da8373562%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Piper has twice been kicked off by fellow passengers for playing soon after 
bombs have gone off in Istanbul. Photograph: Bradley Secker 
Disheartened, for a year he played mainly on Istanbul street corners. He 
enjoyed it, but the money was not great and in winter it became too cold – for 
the spectators, if not the hardy Alaskan.

The turning point came by fluke, when on a night out he met a Turkish musician 
called Hakkan, who plays thecajón <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caj%C3%B3n> (a 
South American drum box) and is high in the busking pecking order. After 
hearing Piper play, the “King of the Boats” took the American under his wing — 
and back on to the ferries.

It was a revelation: “On the street, in a really good hour, I could maybe make 
60 lira (about £14),” Piper says. “But on a boat, even when I first started and 
was new to the public, I could make 150 an hour (£35) – which is like, huge. 
Huge!”

Since then, he has earned all his money from playing just a few hours a week 
on the city ferries – which is also testament to the enduring importance of 
boat travel in Istanbul. Home to somewhere between 14 and 18 million people, 
road traffic in the city is unbearably bad. New metros are springing up, 
including theMarmaray rail line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/29/istanbul-underwater-bosphorus-rail-tunnel-european-asian-earthquake>
, which boasts the world’s deepest underwater railway tunnel (running under the 
Bosphorus, wincingly close to a major tectonic fault line) – but millions still 
choose to commute by boat.

The short ferry journeys – with views of Ottoman palaces, hilltop mosques and 
giant freighters rumbling between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean – are 
like a meditation break for those frazzled by the otherwise unstoppable pace of 
life in Istanbul.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff94586b928386ffc9284cb861752c3eed957d139%2F0_42_5115_3339%2F5115.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20Alaskan%20cellist%20who%20broke%20barriers%20by%20playing%20Istanbul's%20ferries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20Alaskan%20cellist%20who%20broke%20barriers%20by%20playing%20Istanbul%27s%20ferries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Falaskan-cellist-cello-bach-istanbul-ferries-boat-travel-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff94586b928386ffc9284cb861752c3eed957d139%2F0_42_5115_3339%2F5115.jpg>
 Millions of people use Istanbul’s ferries to navigate the crowded city. 
Photograph: Chris McGrath/Getty Images 
The most lucrative lines are rumoured to be rife with racketeering, with 
sharp-elbowed musicians forcing out those without the right connections. Piper 
tends to stick to less fraught boats, though there are still pitfalls. 
Attendants often stop him from boarding when they spy the duck-egg blue of his 
cello case — or try to cut him-off mid-flow. “That’s the worst part of my day,” 
he says. “You’re just playing music, making people happy, and then security are 
like: ‘Go away!’”

Such scrapes have helped him bond with his fellow wayfarers, including a pair 
of Roma children, Gabriel and Gabriella, who play the accordion under the 
watchful eye of their grandmother. They like to hide with Piper when the boat 
turns around, to avoid having to get off and on again and pay a new fare.

Navigating the passengers is a whole other challenge. Turkey is facing one of 
the most troubled times in its recent history. In the south-east of the 
country, abloody war is raging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/09/destruction-sur-turkey-historic-district-gentrification-kurdish>
 between the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and the state. A series of suicide 
bombings by Kurdish groups and Isis have hit towns and cities across the 
country. Tourism has plummeted, while the political debate is increasingly 
fraught and intolerant.

Piper has twice been kicked off by fellow passengers for playing too soon 
after bombings – accused of frippery in the face of darkness even though, as he 
puts it, “music and fun aren’t exactly the same thing”.

Istanbul shows ferries have a future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/28/istanbul-ferries-future-transport-new-york-london>
In March, after a suicide bombing near Istanbul’s central Taksim Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/19/istanbul-hit-by-deadly-bomb-attack>
 had killed five and wounded dozens, he decided to begin with an expression of 
sympathy and a few words about seeking solace in music. He was met with a round 
of applause.

Piper says he has learnt to pick out the different characters from watching as 
he plays. “Sometimes there’ll be an old, super-conservative couple across from 
me, so much so that they won’t even acknowledge my existence.” He once had a 
man stand up and angrily declare that no one understood his stupid music, 
before loudly storming out.

But on the good days, he finds that playing music in public spaces lifts the 
invisible barrier between strangers in a city where it is rare even to smile at 
a passer-by, let alone talk to them. “I’ve met friends, girlfriends, random 
people, creeps,” he says. “But mostly, really nice people. You open yourself up 
to the world when you’re playing the ferries here.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 