
Melania Trump, whose husband has built a public profile partly around his 
vulgar 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/333089735570493440?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 andoffensive 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/146994336670822400?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 Twitter account, called for a gentler and kinder America on Thursday, where 
children can spend time on social media without fear of harassment.

In a rare public appearance, Trump portrayed her husband as a devoted family 
man with “deep love and respect” for all Americans with a speech intended to 
help soften his public image with women.

Early voter turnout worries Democrats who fear 'enthusiasm gap' for Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/early-voting-results-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states>
“Our culture has gotten too mean and too rough, especially to children and 
teenagers,” Trump said at a sports center in Berwyn, a suburb of Philadelphia 
suburb. She drew cheers as she continued.

“It is never OK when a 12-year-old girl or boy is mocked, bullied or attacked. 
It is terrible when that happens on the playground and it is absolutely 
unacceptable when it’s done by someone with no name hiding on the internet.”

As first lady, Melania Trump said she would work to combat online bullying and 
harassment. As a presidential nominee, Donald Trump has used Twitter tomock 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/621783757532626944> and degrade 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/672877439400460290> his opponent and
women <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/240462265680289792> who have 
criticized him. He also has a pattern of sharing posts from sources with a 
history of spreading racism, antisemitism or white supremacy.

Melania Trump’s speech was a direct appeal to suburban women who remain wary 
of the Republican nominee. His dire standing with women, and especially with 
white educated women who have been a cornerstone of Republican support, has 
imperiled his chances of winning key battleground states like Pennsylvania.

Hillary Clinton’s lead in Pennsylvania has dropped slightly as the race 
tightens in the final days of the campaign. Yet women in the state favor 
Clinton by 20 percentage points, according to a newQuinnipiac University swing 
state poll 
<https://poll.qu.edu/2016-presidential-swing-state-polls/release-detail?ReleaseID=2399>
.

Melania Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump> recalled her 
upbringing in communist Slovenia, and the distinct memory of waking up as a 
10-year-old and learning that Ronald Reagan had been elected president of the 
United States.

“It began to feel like morning around the world, even in my small country. It 
was a true inspiration for me,” she said, in reference to the memorable line 
from Reagan’s 1984 campaign.

Trump has studiously avoided the spotlight of her husband’s presidential 
campaign, allowing her step-daughter, Ivanka, to play the role typically filled 
by the candidate’s spouse.


Her last public appearance was a speech at the Republican national convention 
that was initially well-received but ended in calamity after it emerged that 
key passages had beenlifted from a speech delivered by Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/melania-trump-republican-convention-plagiarism-michelle-obama>
 at the 2008 Democratic convention.

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> recently made 
light of the incident at a charity dinner in New York, which he attended with 
his wife.

“Michelle Obama gives a speech and everyone loves it. It’s fantastic. They 
think she’s absolutely great,” Trump said at the Alfred E Smith Memorial 
Foundation dinner. “My wife Melania gives the exact same speech and people get 
on her case, and I don’t get it.”

Melania Trump has stood steadfast by her husband’s side as more than a dozen 
women have come forward to accuse him of sexual harassment and assault.

In a handful of recent media interviews, she said that she was appalled by the 
language used by her husband in a decade-old Access Hollywood video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 that emerged last month, but dismissed the remarks as just “boy talk”. In the 
tape, Trump can be heard bragging that his fame enables him to grab and kiss 
women without their consent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nevada's%20women%20stand%20divided%20over%20Trump%20and%20Clinton%20on%20eve%20of%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nevada%27s%20women%20stand%20divided%20over%20Trump%20and%20Clinton%20on%20eve%20of%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women&media=>
Nevada’s women stand divided over Trump and Clinton on eve of election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/03/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-nevada-voters-women>
. 
Addressing the spate of allegations that emerged in October, Trump told CNN 
that the accusations of sexual misconduct brought against her husband by more 
than a dozen women were “lies” and claimed the charges are part of a 
coordinated campaign by the opposition to smear her husband.

In Pennsylvania, Trump promised that electing her husband president would put 
the country on course to economic prosperity, and that by his side, she would 
help promote “respect and kindness” in all facets of American life.

“Donald Trump will make America fair. He will make America safe. He will make 
America prosperous. He will make America proud,” she said in closing.


“And, yes, this man I know so well, Donald Trump, with your help and God’s 
grace, will make America great again.”
 