
A report from Human Rights Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/21/living-in-hell-indonesia-mentally-ill-people-chained-confined-human-rights-watch-report>
 found that, almost 40 years after Indonesia banned shackling people with 
mental health conditions, nearly 19,000 are living in chains, or are locked up 
in institutions where they are vulnerable to abuse. Stigma and a chronic lack 
of mental healthcare and community support services mean the treatment is 
widespread.

Liz Ford was in New York last week at the Commission on the Status of Women, 
whereactivists have been demanding better care of rape survivors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/15/campaigners-demand-better-care-for-rape-survivors-in-hours-after-attack>
. She also reported onwhat’s blocking women’s access to better pay and jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/17/empowering-women-will-mean-little-without-decent-jobs-un-panel-warned-commission-on-the-status-of-women>
, andinterviewed Bertha Cáceres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/16/berta-caceres-bertha-honduras-not-first-human-rights-defender-assassinated>
, whose motherBerta was assassinated in Honduras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/honduras-berta-caceres-murder-enivronment-activist-human-rights>
 this month.

Elsewhere on the site

Ebola vaccine trial in Sierra Leone battles against fear and logistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/10/ebola-vaccine-trial-sierra-leone-fear-logistics-immunisations>

UN report: South Sudan allowed soldiers to rape civilians in civil war  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/11/south-sudans-soldiers-allowed-to-rape-civilians-civil-war-says-un-government-torture>

Forced labour common among Hong Kong’s domestic helpers, study finds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/14/forced-labour-common-among-hong-kongs-domestic-helpers-study-finds>


Spuds in space: is growing potatoes on Mars key to surviving climate change? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/14/spuds-in-space-growing-potatoes-on-mars-climate-change-the-martian-ridley-scott>

EU suspends aid to Burundi’s government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/15/eu-suspends-aid-to-burundi-government>

Opinion



World Water Day quiz – are you a fount of wisdom?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/22/world-water-day-quiz-are-you-a-fount-of-wisdom>
Fairtrade Fortnight <http://fortnight.fairtrade.org.uk/> brings us some 
inspirational images of smiling farmers in Africa. Smiling female farmers. But 
although European cocoa consumption contributes €9.8m (£7.6m)to the Fairtrade 
premium received 
<http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/~/media/fairtradeuk/what%20is%20fairtrade/documents/policy%20and%20research%20documents/monitoring%20reports/monitoring%20the%20scope%20and%20benefits%20of%20fairtrade%202014.ashx>
 by farmers, women are yet to reap the rewards, write Roy Maconachie and 
Elizabeth Fortin.

Magdy Martínez-Solimán, assistant secretary general of the UN, explores the 
large rise in the number of people dying from violent extremism and terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/14/terrorism-can-stunt-progress-for-decades-the-answer-is-tolerance>
. Discrimination, inequality and marginalisation contribute to radicalisation, 
he argues, but when faced with violent extremism, we need to embrace diversity.




Galleries

Tuesday 15 March marked five years since the start of the Syrian war. Kate 
Holt travelledto Lebanon to meet some of those trying to build a new life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/mar/12/syrian-refugees-in-lebanon-want-to-go-home-zahle>
.

As well as being one of the world’s most violent countries, Honduras is also 
under threat from the Aedes aegypti mosquito 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/mar/17/zika-threatens-honduras-worlds-most-dangerous-countries-in-pictures>
, the primary carrier of the Zika virus.

Take part in Students Speak 

Health campaigners are warning of a growing diabetes epidemic in developing 
countries, as poor nutrition and obesity rates climb. Yet infectious diseases 
such as tuberculosis, malaria and Aids continue to have a devastating impact. 
If you were in charge of global health campaigns,what would you focus on? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/16/students-speak-whats-the-biggest-health-crisis-facing-the-world>

What you said

On Norway takes pathway to ethical investment with human rights policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/18/responsible-investing-financial-winner-human-rights-strategy>
,ijackinthegreen wrote:

There may be flaws in their approach, and many loopholes that will mean 
investments in companies with dubious practices ...

But as a clear public position, it is to be commended and is certainly a step 
in the right direction. I somehow doubt it will lead to a glut of others taking 
the same position, however – not least because in other countries there is 
simply little public call for such a move.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Helen Parker suggests three ways to build water security for rural women 
<http://www.odi.org/comment/10367-three-ways-build-water-security-rural-women-resilience>
 in a blog for the Overseas Development Institute.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 