
In Instanbul’s Grand Bazaar, where eager traders usually hawk their wares to 
passersby, an entirely different noise echoes through the old shopping street.


An angry crowd of shopkeepers has gathered to protest about pending evictions. 
The general directorate of foundations, their landlord, has sold a long-term 
lease to a new owner, resulting in rent increases that make trading in the 
bazaar unaffordable to most of its tenants.

Turkish protesters clash with police at May Day rally in Istanbul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/01/turkish-protesters-clash-police-may-day-rally-istanbul>
The Grand Bazaar, one of the largest covered markets in the world, houses more 
than 3,000 shops and attracts up to half a million visitors each day. Now the 
Fatih municipality has set out to mine the 550-year-old bazaar and large swaths 
of the historical peninsula for profit, and many fear no stone will remain 
unturned.

Ilyas Öztürk, 35, rents a small shop where he sells leather bags. He has been 
working in the bazaar since he was 12. “I have spent all my money on this shop, 
and the summer season has just begun,” he says through the thick wooden door 
behind which he and other shopkeepers have locked themselves away to resist 
eviction. “We have always paid our rent; we are not criminals. They cannot just 
put us out on the street.”

The same evening, units of riot police break open the doors of Sandal 
Bedesteni, the old textile market inside the bazaar. The next morning, the 80 
shops are emptied under the watchful eyes of the municipal authorities.

“I have debts; I have bought merchandise for thousands of dollars,” says one 
merchant who declines to be named. “What am I supposed to do? Where am I 
supposed to go?”

The shopkeepers evicted from the Grand Bazaar last week will not be the last. 
Mustafa Demir, the mayor of Fatih, which covers large parts of the peninsula, 
last month announced ambitious renovation plans for the entire Ottoman market 
and its environs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fsep%2F14%2Fistanbul-grand-bazaar-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Istanbul%3A%20the%20Grand%20Bazaar%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fsep%2F14%2Fistanbul-grand-bazaar-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Istanbul%3A%20the%20Grand%20Bazaar%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fsep%2F14%2Fistanbul-grand-bazaar-video&media=>
 Saffet Emre Tonguç leads a tour through the Grand Bazaar. 
The 250m lira (£61m) project envisages more than 1,700 historical buildings 
being turned into hotels, including several of the old inns around courtyards, 
calledhan, where merchants used to store their wares. Most were dedicated to a 
particular craft, and many still house craftsmen and small workshops. More than 
25,000 people are employed inside the Grand Bazaar.

In leafy Çebeci Han, the metallic sounds of coppersmiths at work reverberate 
through the courtyard. Master coppersmith Abdullah Eryilmaz, 65, who has worked 
in the han for almost a decade, is angry about the municipality’s plans.

“They should go and build their hotels elsewhere. We don’t want them here. 
Their only worry is what else they can sell, after they have sold everything 
else already,” Eryilmaz says, adding that he tried to move his workshop to a 
more industrial zone on the outskirts of Istanbul, without success. “Our 
customers come here; they know where to find us. There are no places left in 
this city where I can even find a space for the work I am doing.”

Despite Turkey’s increasingly bad press and the turmoil across the region, 
tourism in Istanbul is booming, with 11.8 million people visiting the city in 
2014, 13.1% more than the year before. According to data published by the 
association of tourist hotels and investors (Turob) in 2010, the number of 
licensed hotels increased from 283 to 766 in only four years, and many more 
projects are in the pipeline. Mayor Demir recently valued the tourism potential 
of the historical peninsula alone at $38bn.

But critics warn that brutish, top-down tourism development will have a 
disastrous impact on the social fabric of the city.

“This is very short-sighted planning that is entirely profit-oriented,” says 
Mücella Yapici, of the Istanbul chamber of architects. “It destroys the history 
and the culture of Istanbul. They chase out the original residents, small 
businesses and traditional trades. In the end, tourism will kill itself, 
because tourists don’t come here to see luxury hotels, shopping centres and 
glitzy residences. But there will be nothing else left.”

Ugur Tanyeli, an architectural historian, accuses the Turkish government of 
turning the city into a soulless theme park for the sake of ever more tourism 
and construction-generated profit. “So much of the historic peninsula has been 
developed for tourism already,” he says. “It’s a terrible loss for Istanbul. 
The whole city is being eaten up by tourism development and is turned into a 
lifeless place with no culture of its own. Little by little, it becomes like 
Las Vegas.”

Istanbul's 'illegal' towers to be demolished after landmark court ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/aug/21/istanbuls-illegal-towers-to-be-demolished-after-landmark-court-ruling>
Demir has promised that renovations would return the bazaar to its original 
state. “The infrastructure, the piping and telephone lines will be renewed,” he 
says. “The water tanks, antenna, air conditioning units and cables on the roof 
will be removed. Sale space inside the bazaar will be regulated.” Nobody, he 
adds, will be forced to open a hotel.

But tenants and shop owners in Çebeci Han, among them carpet and textile 
traders, sellers of artistic woodwork, jewellers and tailors for belly dance 
costumes, are worried the renewal project will spell a substantial rise in rent 
and, for most, eviction.

“We are not against renovations,” says Aziz Özcan, 45, a trader of central 
Asian textiles and pottery. “We have asked the municipality to renovate here 
many times, but they always refused. They now use renovations as a pretext to 
throw us out and raise the rent.”

Like many other property holders in the bazaar, Özcan holds no official title 
deed for the small shop that he bought from its previous owner 25 years ago 
through an informal contract. “But I have been paying property taxes, rubbish 
taxes and all my fees to the municipality,” he explains. “Yet on paper I look 
like a squatter. If they want to, they can throw me out any day, and there is 
nothing I can do.”

About 70% of all shopkeepers in the bazaar are tenants without any rights to 
resist eviction, but even those who hold title deeds for their shops are not 
safe. The Grand Bazaar, declared an urban renewal zone in 2010, falls under the 
same disaster prevention laws that forced residents inSulukule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/09/sulukule-roma-housing-row-istanbul>
 orTarlabasi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/07/turkey-construction-anger-istanbul-protests>
 from their homes.

Traders in several of the hans say municipal workers came to take photographs 
and measurements of all buildings, but none of them explained what the work was 
for. “I have never seen a government that looks down on its citizens like 
this,” said 65-year-old Hamza Kenan Kaya, master leather dyer. “We are 
completely excluded from decisions about our livelihoods.”

Eyüp Muhcu, head of the Istanbul chamber of architects, criticises the lack of 
transparency for most construction projects in Istanbul. He points out that 
Demir and the Fatih municipality were implicated in the corruption scandal that 
rocked the governing Justice and Development, or AK, party, in December of 
2013. “Ankara protects them, so often court decisions are simply being ignored 
by the municipalities,” he says. “This way the mayor of Fatih has destroyed so 
much of this historical neighbourhood already.”

Istanbul changes at a breathtaking pace, and many fear the city might soon be 
lost entirely to rabid development, leaving a sanitised, uniform backdrop, 
devoid of life and its original inhabitants. “What people will be able to see 
is not Istanbul, but an illusion of Istanbul,” said Tanyeli. “It is now 
possible to visit Istanbul without ever having seen it.”
 