
Where innumerable others have failed over the past months, years, decades, 
Meryl Streep looks to have really struck a nerve withDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> at the Golden Globe awards 
last night. Not by simply criticising the president-elect for the bullying, 
potentially violent culture he threatens to bring to American public life. Many 
have done that before, with equally accomplished thespian delivery, including 
Hugh Laurie earlier that evening (“I accept this award on behalf of 
psychopathic billionaires everywhere”). Streep built on that sentiment in her 
acceptance speech for the Cecil B DeMille award, condemning Trump’s mockery of 
a disabled reporter in a speech in 2015. But Streep’s masterstroke was to 
characterise Trump’s antics asperformance.

“There was one performance this year that stunned me,” she said. “It sank its 
hooks in my heart. Not because it was good; there was nothing good about it. 
But it was effective and it did its job.” She sounds like the most withering 
theatre critic ever. If that was a review and you had to work a quote out of it 
for a poster, the best you could do would be: “‘Effective’ –Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep>.”

Streep, though, has identified one of Trump’s key weaknesses. You can 
criticise him all you like for being a racist, a sexist, a sexual predator, a 
homophobe, a xenophobe, a conspiracy theorist, a bully, or a bad advert for 
male grooming, but it’s all water off a duck’s back – you could even say that 
duck is sitting on Trump’s head pretending to be a toupee – it doesn’t matter. 
But to disrespect Trump’s performance – that’s gotta hurt.

Inevitably, Trump has been quick to respond, denying accusations he was 
mocking the disabled reporter – New York Times journalist Serge Kovaleski – and 
reminding the public that Streep,“one of the most overrated actresses in 
Hollywood” <http:>, introduced Hillary Clinton 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818419002548568064> at her 
convention and that “a lot of these people supported Hillary”. He wasn’t 
surprised, he said, he was being attacked by “liberal movie people”. And sure 
enough, his defenders scrambled to the social media fronts to boo and hiss 
liberal Hollywood.

But the reality is, Trump desperately wants to be one of those movie people. 
Or at least be accepted by them. And when he’s not, he doesn’t like it. It was 
only a few short years ago thatTrump was complaining about not getting his own 
awards 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/20/the-apprentice-really-might-have-deserved-an-emmy.html>
: “I should have many Emmys for The Apprentice if the process were fair,” he 
tweeted in 2013, after his show was passed up for an award for the ninth time. 
It was only a few years earlier, in 2005, when Trump was gamely dressing up as 
a hillbilly andsinging Green Acres at the Emmy awards show 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AiZqFGLAeAc>. Not even Streep would describe 
that performance as “effective”. It certainly didn’t win Trump any awards, and 
he has been consistently, disproportionately pissed off about it. (Sample 
tweets: “The Emmys are sooooo boring! Terrible show.” “Lots of people agree 
that the Emmys were a joke – got bad ratings – no credibility!”) When Hillary 
Clinton mocked him for caring about Emmy-rigging more then election-rigging 
during the presidential debates, Trump couldn’t resist interjecting “shoulda 
gotten it”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYXE3Ku-mGrk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYXE3Ku-mGrk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYXE3Ku-mGrk&media=>
 Trump’s cameo in Home Alone 2. 
For all his wall-building zeal, Trump has all but demolished what barriers 
remained between showbiz and politics. But unlike, say Ronald Reagan, or Arnold 
Schwarzenegger, you get the sense the former was his ultimate ambition more 
than the latter. He has regularly and willingly put himself in front of the 
camera for brand promotional purposes, and has never been shy of a movie cameo 
or a special guest appearance, from Home Alone 2 to Zoolander, The Fresh Prince 
of Bel-Air to Sex and the City. By all accounts, getting Trump for a cameo is 
not hard; keeping him from hamming it up in front of the camera can be, though. 
The makers of Home Alone 2 didn’t even ask him to be in it, but since he owned 
the hotel they were filming in, they could hardly say no when he turned up on 
the set. The only acting award he has received to date was aRazzie for worst 
supporting actor <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=co0aDXPTK5o> for the 1991 
movie Ghosts Can’t Do It. Not many people can claim to have been acted off the 
screen by Bo Derek.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTu1gj010oa8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTu1gj010oa8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTu1gj010oa8&media=>
 Trump in The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, 1994. 
Despite this resounding lack of acclaim, Trump clearly enjoys his celebrity 
status – and the power it brings. That was made clear by the notorious“grab 
them by the pussy” recording 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 that threatened to derail his presidential campaign (what an apt ending that 
would have been: hoisted by his own television mic). Trump’s boasts of groping 
women without permission, on the way to yet another television appearance, were 
prefaced by the words, “and when you’re a star they let you do it. You can do 
anything.” The same could apply when you’re president, except you might get 
impeached for it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dco0aDXPTK5o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dco0aDXPTK5o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dco0aDXPTK5o&media=>
 Trump in Ghosts Can’t Do It, for which he won a Golden Raspberry award for 
worst supporting actor. 
In politics, too, Trump likes to project the image of being a natural 
performer. His abilities in MCing a crowd-baiting rally are acknowledged even 
by his critics, and Trump has regularly mocked Hillary Clinton and others 
politicians for needing an autocue. Trump boasted he didn’t need one; he was 
more of an improv kind of guy. Admittedly, his off-the-cuff soliloquies have 
often been exposed as incoherent verbal diarrhoea when transcribed and 
scrutinised away from the heat of the rally. As one online critic put it: “I’m 
not alarmed at the guy launching prodigious verbal farts into a microphone. I’m 
alarmed at the people laughing and applauding like he’s forming actual 
thoughts.” Perhaps that is testament to Trump’s powers of performance, but 
compared with Barack Obama’s carefully structured verbal eloquence, Trump is 
more like the caller you wish they would cut off on the talk radio show.

Clearly Trump loves the idea of “being a star”, and not just for the sexual 
predation opportunities, but the stars don’t want him. They flocked around 
Clinton on the campaign trail – not that it made any difference (it seems the 
media underestimated the celebrity wattage of Scott Baio). It looks to be the 
same post-election: all the stories so far have been about celebrities who have 
turned down the invitation to appear at his inauguration. They don’t want him 
in their gang, and he doesn’t like it.

In 2007, Trump received his own star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame – 
confirmation, despite so much criticism, that he really is a star. “It was 
something that was given to me by some very powerful people in Hollywood and 
I’m very honoured by it,” he said at the time. But in recent months, Trump’s 
star has been repeatedly vandalised. It has had graffiti sprayed on it, 
including a Nazi swastika, people have taken selfies raising their middle 
fingers to it, spitting on it, urinating on it, or letting their dogs shit on 
it. In July last year,an artist built a miniature wall around Trump’s star 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-36854572>, topped with razor wire and 
tiny border signs saying “Keep Out”. And last October, a man disguised as a 
construction worker took a sledgehammer to it. He had intended to remove it and 
auction it off to raise funds for the women who accused Trump of groping them. 
Ronald Reagan’s star never had to put up with this.
 The wall placed around Donald Trump’s Hollywood Walk Of Fame star. 
Photograph: David Livingston/Getty Images 
This is by no means the first time “liberal Hollywood” has spoken out on 
presidential candidates and their fitness for office. Streep’s speech stirs 
memories of 2003, when Michael Moore was the sole voice of dissent against 
George W Bush, who was about to launch the Iraq war. Accepting his best 
documentary Oscar for Bowling For Columbine, Moore stated: “We live in the time 
where we have fictitious election results that elect a fictitious president. We 
have a man sending us to war for fictitious reasons.” His speech was cut short 
by the music and he was ushered off stage shortly after. Again “liberal 
Hollywood” was condemned, and Moore received death threats. President Bush 
maintained a silence that could possibly be characterised as dignified. But 
unlike Trump, Bush had little public image to maintain. He ran away from the 
limelight rather than towards it.

So no wonder Trump hates Meryl Streep and all she stands for. And the “lying 
media” that faithfully reports facts unfavourable towards the president elect. 
But perhaps she has found the way to really get under his skin. Perhaps the 
Foreign Press Association has more of a role to play in the Trump resistance 
than it dared imagine. He can take all the criticism political commentators can 
throw at him, but if there’s one thing Trump hates, it’s a bad review.
 