
Congo's first democratically elected prime minister was abducted and killed in 
a cold war operation run by British intelligence, according to remarks said to 
have been made by the woman who was leading theMI6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> station in the central African country at 
the time.

A Labour peer has claimed that Baroness Park of Monmouth admitted to him a few 
months before she died in March 2010 that she arranged Patrice Lumumba'skilling 
in 1961 because of fears he would ally the newly democratic country with the 
Soviet Union.

In a letter to the London Review of Books, Lord Lea said the admission was 
made while he was having a cup of tea with Daphne Park, who had been consul and 
first secretary from 1959 to 1961 in Leopoldville, as the capital of Belgian 
Congo was known before it was later renamed as Kinshasa following independence.

He wrote: "I mentioned the uproar surrounding Lumumba's abduction and murder, 
and recalled the theory that MI6 might have had something to do with it. 'We 
did,' she replied, 'I organised it'."

Park, who was known by some as the "Queen of Spies" after four decades as one 
of Britain's top female intelligence agents, is believed to have been sent by 
MI6 to the Belgian Congo in 1959 under an official diplomatic guise as the 
Belgians were on the point of being ousted from the country.

"We went on to discuss her contention that Lumumba would have handed over the 
whole lot to the Russians: the high-value Katangese uranium deposits as well as 
the diamonds and other important minerals largely located in the secessionist 
eastern state of Katanga," added Lea,who wrote his letter in response to a 
review <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v35/n06/bernard-porter/quiet-sinners> of a book by 
Calder Walton about British intelligence activities during the twilight of the 
British empire.

Doubts about the claim have been raised by historians and former officials, 
including a former senior British intelligence official who knew Parkand told 
the Times <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article3728513.ece>: "It 
doesn't sound like the sort of remark Daphne Park would make. She was never 
indiscreet. Also MI6 never had a licence to kill."

Mystery has continued to surround the death of Lumumba, who was shot on 17 
January 1961, although Belgian troops were known to have been involved.

Park met Lumumba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/mar/28/daphne-park-obituary>, the 
African leader who was to become the short-lived prime minister of an 
independent Congo. After his successor took power, she was arrested and beaten 
by his supporters.

She was able to get herself released and sought local UN intervention, 
securing the release of Britons and other foreigners, for which she was 
appointed OBE in 1960.
 