
Actors Jeff Daniels <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001099/> and Michelle Williams
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michelle-williams> are in a meeting room at 
the offices of the WNYC radio station in SoHo, New York. They have just come 
from one interview and have a couple more scheduled. Both look tired. Williams, 
dressed in black jeans and a black leather jacket, drinks a couple of glasses 
of water while downing a handful of vitamins. Daniels, in a Carhartt jacket, 
jeans and work boots, slumps in his chair. And the real work of the day won’t 
begin for hours yet.

“Do we have to do this tonight?” Williams asks.

“I’m not able to tonight,” Daniels answers, joking in way that doesn’t sound 
like a joke.

“Well, thanks for telling me first,” Williams sighs.

One can understand their hesitation. Eight times a week, they must clamber on 
stage at the Belasco theatre and performBlackbird 
<http://www.newyorkcitytheatre.com/theaters/belascotheater/blackbird.php>, a 
drama by David Harrower that Daniels has called a “soul-scorcher” of a play.

Blackbird review – Michelle Williams and Jeff Daniels stun in abuse drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/10/blackbird-review-michelle-williams-and-jeff-daniels-stun-in-abuse-drama>
An 80-minute show, played in real time, it concerns the distressing reunion of 
Una (Williams) and Ray (Daniels), who last saw one another 15 years ago when 
she was 12 and he was 40 and they had a sexual relationship. Now Una has 
arrived at the office where Ray works, mocking his new name, threatening his 
new life.

The resulting confrontation is ignitable, vicious, sometimes erotic, and 
nearly always shattering. This is a searing story of abuse and its 
consequences. It is also, far more troublingly, a love story. It is, as 
Williams says, “hell to play”, but a hell she never felt she could turn down.

Daniels first played the part of Ray off-Broadway in 2007 opposite Alison Pill 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0683467/>. He had put the character aside until 
last summer when the producer Scott Rudin approached him about returning to it 
with the same director, Joe Mantello. In thinking it over, he realised that the 
2007 production, publicly lauded and personally difficult, hadn’t gone far 
enough. “I knew there were sections that I didn’t understand and I acted my way 
through them,” he says.

So he returned, drawn by the opportunity to improve on his portrayal and the 
audacity of appearing in a play like this on Broadway, where he was last seen 
in a Tony-winning stint inYasmina Reza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/22/yasmina-reza-interview-carnage-polanski>
’s God of Carnage. For him, Blackbird on Broadway is kind of a dare. “Sell 
tickets to this. This ain’t Jersey Boys,” he says.

Williams had never seen the play but, as soon as she read it, she was 
immediately taken with its power and possibility. “I had no idea how to do it, 
but the most essential part of me wanted to,” she says. She then found herself 
almost incapacitated by a sense of alarm. “I immediately felt the dread there,” 
she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fmichelle-williams-jeff-daniels-blackbird-broadway-belasco-theatre-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25c05696eeb3438043aad4b6df95ae9f517ff779%2F0_223_1996_2493%2F1996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Williams%20and%20Jeff%20Daniels%20on%20the%20scared%2C%20desperate%20tale%20of%20Blackbird&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fmichelle-williams-jeff-daniels-blackbird-broadway-belasco-theatre-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Williams%20and%20Jeff%20Daniels%20on%20the%20scared%2C%20desperate%20tale%20of%20Blackbird&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fmichelle-williams-jeff-daniels-blackbird-broadway-belasco-theatre-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25c05696eeb3438043aad4b6df95ae9f517ff779%2F0_223_1996_2493%2F1996.jpg>
 Williams: ‘I immediately felt the dread in this play.’ Photograph: Brigitte 
Lacombe 
“Dread,” Daniels muses. “Dread is a good word.”

They still feel some of that dread now. They have found that the play won’t 
work if they give safe, self-protective performances, the kind that rely on an 
actor’s bag of tricks rather than real, arduous, agonising emotion. OnBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway>, Daniels says, “there’s a 
responsibility, an obligation. People pay money, good money, to see us do it. 
They don’t pay to see us half do it. So load up and do it. Or get out.”

Getting out isn’t really an option. So, before each performance, one can find 
the actors in their separate dressing rooms, getting into the whirring heads of 
their characters. “Scared” is a word Daniels repeats to himself. So is 
“desperate”. He asks himself a series of questions that Ray would ask: “What 
happened when he first saw her? What did she say? Has she talked to the 
receptionist? Has she seen his boss?”

Williams has her own words, her own questions. “What do I want from him?” she 
wonders. “And how does what he gives me change the thing that I want?”

In some ways, Una and Ray are familiar roles for Williams and Daniels. 
Williams played a teen temptress in the 90s dramaDawson’s Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/jan/21/your-next-box-set-dawsons-creek>
. Daniels has played a range of jerks (The Squid and the Whale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/apr/07/2>, The Newsroom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-newsroom>), some of them queasily 
sympathetic. Blackbird both draws on and upends this previous work. To see Una 
as somehow culpable or Ray as somehow pardonable is to embroil oneself in the 
play’s shifting moral landscape and then to feel the revulsion and dismay of 
very nearly forgiving the indefensible.

In approaching Ray this time, Daniels has challenged himself to delve further 
into the character and his crimes. Last time, he says, “I didn’t face the 
12-year-old girl thing, I didn’t see her as specifically as I see her now. I 
didn’t understand that pull, that criminal, horrible thing that so many men go 
to.”

Williams has perhaps the moredifficult role, playing a young woman who is, on 
the one hand a high-heeled revenger and on the other still a traumatised child. 
She often thinks of a line from a poem by Galway Kinnell – “The way a thing 
goes reeling according to where it was touched” – and wonders how the abuse has 
shaped Una’s life. “Her growth was impeded and changed,” says Williams. “She 
was frozen in time in one aspect and then ahead of her years in another.”

'Writers have to take risks': is this really a new Broadway golden age?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/25/new-broadway-golden-age-musical-theater>
At first, says Williams, Una wants to appear “seductive, attractive, powerful, 
in control, terrifying”. She adds: “She wants to show Ray that she could ruin 
his life, that she could punish him. But she’s a broken child and not actually 
capable of doing anything. What she really wants to do is hang around his neck 
and cling to him.”

It’s not really spoiling anything to say that the play doesn’t offer much in 
the way of happy endings and never resolves the unsettling questions at its 
centre: is this a love story or a horror story? Will either character ever 
recover?

Will the actors? At curtain call, both Williams and Daniels look exhausted. 
Neither can meet the other’s gaze. “I don’t dare look at her,” Daniels says, 
although he can’t say exactly why. He tries to forget the performance as soon 
as he has finished it.

Williams needs a few more minutes backstage “to separate from it”. She says: 
“I want to come home proud of what I did, affected by what I did,” but she says 
she also wants to shake off the work before she hurries home and tucks her 
10-year-old daughter, Matilda, into bed.

One might think that with opening night behind them and a sheaf of mostly 
enthusiastic reviews, Williams and Daniels could now relax a little. But 
there’s still a sense of trepidation over how they will get through the weeks 
until the June closing. The play begins at such a crescendo and so rarely 
relaxes that they still often wonder how they will get through each 
performance. “We worry about this on a semi-regular basis,” Daniels says. They 
seem a little worried now.

As each departs for the next appointment, Daniels says, “See you tonight.”

“Maybe,” replies Williams.
 