
Michael Fassbender <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender> is 
either one of the world’s most well-adjusted human beings, or the most 
brilliant liar. “I can lie pretty easily to journalists,” he tells me, and he 
says he’s good at it. “I have to be.” But as this is the policy a well-adjusted 
movie star might adopt, talking about it only reinforces the impression of 
someone unusually at peace with himself.

Fassbender came to fame playing men who are decidedly not at peace with 
themselves. In 2008, he starred inSteve McQueen’s debut film, Hunger 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0986233/>, as the Republican prisoner Bobby Sands 
on hunger strike. McQueen then cast him as a sex addict inShame 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1723811/>, followed by a sadistic plantation owner 
in12 Years A Slave <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2024544/>. Fassbender has 
appeared in Fish Tank andInglourious Basterds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/19/inglourious-basterds-review-brad-pitt-quentin-tarantino>
, played Carl Jung inA Dangerous Method 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/16/a-dangerous-method-fantasy-female>
, Mr Rochester inJane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/11/jane-eyre-philip-french-review> 
andSteve Jobs <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2080374/> in the eponymous biopic, 
as well as the mutant antihero Magneto in the X-Men franchise, and Macbeth. 
Once dubbed “Britain’s Brando”, he brings to every part an intensity of 
commitment that makes audiences feel they are not watching a performance, but 
spying on a man’s rawest private self. This sense of intrusion is both 
electrifying and unsettling; it can feel almost indecent.

Twice nominated for an Oscar, the 39-year-old stars in three new films between 
now and January alone, one of which he also produced. And all this with barely 
a misstep (he opted not even to watch the 2010 flopJonah Hex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/02/jonah-hex-film-review>), nor 
gossip column indiscretion. It is about as flawless a movie star career as 
would be possible to perfect. “Jesus, I know!” he agrees. “I know, I know. It’s 
nuts. It’s been pretty incredible.” There is no actor alive, he says, with whom 
he would want to swap places. “But then, you know – and this is dead true – 
I’ve never wanted to swap places with anyone.”

What is your own moral compass? You've got to stay true to that, regardless of 
what your loved one's compass is

Fassbender has made 10 films back to back since 12 Years A Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/12-years-a-slave>, and must be exhausted, but 
you wouldn’t guess it. In fact, I’m not sure I would have recognised him. He’s 
wearing board shorts when we meet in a Soho hotel, having been to the gym that 
morning, and his face is covered in a careless fuzz of gingery hair. I hadn’t 
expected his accent to have survived 20 years in London, nor so many roles 
demanding different nationalities, but he still sounds unmistakably Irish. He 
has that actorly alchemy which makes his face look quite different in every 
film, so it’s a surprise to find that in real life he looks like Sharon’s 
brother Fergal in Channel 4’s Catastrophe.

We are about to see him in a stunning film adaptation of the 2012 novel, The 
Light Between Oceans <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2547584/>, set on a remote 
island off Western Australia shortly after the first world war. Fassbender 
plays Tom, a taciturn veteran who takes a job as a lighthouse keeper, soothed 
by the isolation until he falls in love with a vivacious young woman from the 
mainland, Isabel, and marries her. The couple are torn apart by two successive 
miscarriages, and when a rowing boat washes up containing a dead young man and 
a crying baby girl, Isabel implores Tom to let her keep her. Against every 
instinct, he agrees and they pass the baby off as their own. “What I liked 
about it is, it’s a film about decent people,” Fassbender says. “You know, it’s 
not, ‘Here’s the baddie, here’s the goodie.’ That’s the great thing about the 
story. It’s not like you think, ‘What were they thinking? They were out of 
their minds.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ae7eb8b92410fd858fca77727f9142a29d311b%2F66_139_3220_1932%2F3220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ae7eb8b92410fd858fca77727f9142a29d311b%2F66_139_3220_1932%2F3220.jpg>
 ‘Obviously chemistry is something that is tangible.’ With real-life partner 
Alicia Vikander In The Light Between Oceans. Photograph: Allstar/Touchstone 
Pictures 
Tom is certainly nothing like the deviants and abusers Fassbender has played, 
so I’m curious to know how closely he identified with the part. “When I read 
it, I thought, ‘God, this is such a good man.’ He’s from another generation, he 
doesn’t talk a lot, his loyalty is fierce and his principles are as well. I 
would like to think that I would do the same as him.”

In the film, Tom delivers the anguished line, “We have to do what’s right”, 
even when that means hurting people you love. “I think you have to be true to 
yourself in life,” Fassbender says. “What is your own moral compass? You’ve got 
to stay true to that, regardless of what your loved one’s compass is, because 
we’re all individuals. You can co-exist with somebody and love somebody, but I 
think if we’re honest with ourselves, we know what our make up is, and what 
sits well with us and what doesn’t.”

Fassbender dries up when I ask about the biggest moral dilemma he has ever 
faced himself. “Oh shit.” He falls silent for 10 seconds. “I don’t know. There 
are so many, I guess. Let me think about it.” He pauses again. “What’s yours? 
Then maybe I’ll get an idea.”

He does this a lot, turning a question back to me or throwing out one of his 
own. It’s a very likable quality in a person, but not ideal in an interviewee, 
and he deploys the device to deflect attention from anything he’d rather not 
say. I offer up a number of my own moral challenges, hoping for the best, but 
when it’s his turn he offers an apologetic grin. “I’m so guarded. I feel a 
little uncomfortable. I’m not going to say.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc321a429c9bd28ddf4cde268ddb4a4979d83a2e6%2F67_56_5094_6363%2F5094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc321a429c9bd28ddf4cde268ddb4a4979d83a2e6%2F67_56_5094_6363%2F5094.jpg>
 ‘I don’t worry about things I can’t control. I don’t spend much time looking 
back, because I think it’s pointless.’

T-shirt, Maison Martin Margiela at Harvey Nichols. Coat, Neil Barrett. Opening 
shot: sweater, Tom Ford at Harrods. Blazer, Dries Van Noten at Browns Fashion. 
Photograph: Brendan Freeman for the Guardian 
The film’s other great theme is forgiveness. Fassbender feels less confident 
now than he thought he did about where he stands on forgiveness. “Well, it’s 
the only way forward, I do believe that. For the person that is forgiving, for 
sure, more than the person that needs forgiveness. There’s a great line in the 
film about it: you only have to forgive once and it’s done; but if you don’t, 
you have to carry on and on resenting.”

He pauses. “But I was thinking about this, this morning. I ended up watching 
one of those videos online, I don’t know how I got on to it, but it was five 
girls beating up this girl – teenagers – and I thought, oh God, it’s so brutal. 
And then it led to another video of this 15-year-old girl in McDonald’s in New 
York being kicked to the ground. They were stomping on her head and they pulled 
out her hair extensions. There was a group of five or six of them. I thought, 
‘God, if I was that girl’s parent, I don’t know if I could forgive that.’ 
Because I was watching it myself, not as a parent, and I thought, God, those 
girls are vile.”

When Fassbender was a teenager, he used to let everything get to him. “I was a 
bit of a worrywart. I would just sit worrying.” About? “Anything.” Aids? 
Nuclear war? “Oh yes.” Getting someone pregnant? “Exactly, yes.” Failing exams? 
“Absolutely. And pimples. I had a lot of pimples. So yes, and then I’d be 
sitting there going, ‘I’m not worrying about anything – what should I be 
worrying about?’” He laughs and shakes his head.

“But I’ve tried to work on not doing that. I don’t worry about things I can’t 
control. I don’t spend much time looking back, because I think it’s pointless. 
There are mistakes that have been made, perhaps, but mainly it’s just 
experiences. Things that gnaw at you, that you have no control to change, are 
pointless. And if you’re not careful, you can start almost to enjoy that 
self-obsessive martyrdom and self-loathing. Things can become patterns that 
become comfortable, because they become habitual. I learned that sort of stuff 
doingShame <https://www.theguardian.com/film/shame> – how patterns become 
safety blankets, even if they’re fucking killing you.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cab9ae114f839a1ba5348cecf6dadf312a63058%2F713_29_2233_1341%2F2233.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cab9ae114f839a1ba5348cecf6dadf312a63058%2F713_29_2233_1341%2F2233.jpg>
 As a sex addict in Shame, 2008. Photograph: c.FoxSearch/Everett/Rex Features 
The only residual trace of resentment I glimpse comes when I ask how he felt 
about finding himself sexually objectified, after Shame was released.The film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/12/shame-film-review-fassbender> 
featured an awful lot more full-frontal nudity from Fassbender than audiences 
are accustomed to seeing from a male lead, and caused something of a sensation.

“Well, I guess at times I was like, ‘Well, you know there’s so much more to 
the film than me with my cock out.’ One journalist kicked things off saying, 
‘So what’s it like to have a big cock?’ That was the first thing she said to 
me. And then she said that I was flirting with her in the interview. Total 
bullshit, you know. The whole interview was so wrong.” He looks properly 
offended, then shrugs.

“But again, you know, it sells more to paint that picture of me than of a guy 
who wasn’t interested and was nonsexual towards her. So I get all that. I 
suppose I took myself more seriously back then. My mum always says, whenever 
we’re watching a film, ‘Oh here we go again. The women are always naked, and 
the guy is always covered up.’” He smiles. “So I was like, this one’s for you, 
Mum.”

Fassbender’s parents weren’t thrilled when he announced he wanted to be an 
actor. He was born in Heidelberg in 1977 – his father is German, hence the name 
– but when he was two, the family moved to County Kerry, where they opened a 
restaurant. At 16, Fassbender began working alongside them, and took up acting 
in his spare time.

I was so lucky. I thought, I’ll just keep knocking on the door – and when the 
opportunity comes, I’m going to take it

“They wanted me to go to university, because they were of that generation when 
anybody who went to university had security and got a good job.” Fassbender’s 
sister took a degree and became a neuropsychologist, but he knew academia 
wasn’t for him, and he told his parents he wanted to act. “They said, ‘Go to 
university first’, and I was like, ‘No, I’m not going to waste time and money, 
I need to do this now.’” The argument continued until, at 17, he directed his 
own stage production of Reservoir Dogs. “They saw me put on that play and they 
thought, ‘Shit, he’s serious.’ When they saw that I’d made up my mind, they 
knew that’s what I was going to do, and I have to say they supported me 
immediately after that.”

Success appeared miraculously effortless at first. He won a place at drama 
school in London, and before even graduating had landed an agent and a part in
Steven Spielberg’s TV mini-series Band Of Brothers 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0185906/>. And then... nothing. After two years in 
Los Angeles, Fassbender had clocked up a grand total of six weeks’ work, and 
returned to London, where long periods of bartending were relieved by the 
occasional part in Holby or a TV commercial. Reluctantly, he was forced to have 
“a conversation with myself where I said, what else can I do?” Opening a 
restaurant was the best he could come up with, and “it wasn’t something I 
wanted to do”. But despite all this, he says the years of unemployment were 
“fine, really. There are a lot of good actors who are still in that position at 
40. Bundles of them. I was so fucking lucky. I thought, I’ll just keep knocking 
on the door – and when the opportunity comes, I’m going to take it.”

The opportunity came with Hunger. Under McQueen’s direction, Fassbender 
established his reputation as an unusually intelligent actor, but protests, 
“I’m definitely not in the intelligent bracket. I mean, I was never 
academically smart. I don’t really consider myself intelligent. I just have a 
good – if I have, I don’t know – intuition. I’m a very intuitive person, and I 
guess I think very simply.”

I ask him to explain. “Well, I just think, ‘Oh, the character might do 
something like that because he has an inferiority complex, so therefore he’s 
sadistic towards somebody else’, or whatever. That’s a very crude example, but 
I just keep things very simple. If I can make them logical to myself, then I 
apply them, and that’s really it. But there are a lot of very intelligent 
actors out there, I would say. I just think maybe what comes across as 
unintelligent is, we end up talking about ourselves an awful lot. And that’s 
sort of boring and unintelligent and uninteresting. That is the danger of the 
job, because it’s a lot of thinking about a character, and thinking about 
yourself, and so one can fall into that trap pretty quickly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faae9dee393803b17323db2b9da71d91f391740b7%2F0_654_1653_992%2F1653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faae9dee393803b17323db2b9da71d91f391740b7%2F0_654_1653_992%2F1653.jpg>
 With his mother at the 2014 Oscars. Photograph: Ethan Miller/WireImage 
It’s certainly true that journalists don’t ask plumbers to talk them through 
how they repair a boiler. “No. And they don’t say to plumbers, ‘Oh, it must 
have been very difficult work.’ And yet people are out there working long hours 
every day.”

If Fassbender was hoping to disprove his intelligence, this doesn’t really 
swing it. It only leaves me even more puzzled by the appeal, for him, of 
blockbuster roles in action movies such as X-Men. Why would someone who can 
lead a film such asThe Light Between Oceans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/the-light-between-oceans-review-michael-fassbender-alicia-vikander>
 want to play a comic book mutant? He seems to confirm what I’d always assumed: 
that if there was another way to secure A-list box office status and earnings 
without them, he would, when he replies, looking faintly uneasy, “Well, you 
work according to the landscape in front of you.”

Then he gathers his thoughts and says all the nice regulation stuff about how 
much fun it wasmaking X-Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/xmen-apocalypse-review-lots-to-marvel-at-oscar-isaac>
 – “Oh, andPrometheus <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1446714/> was a blast” – and 
what great friends he made with his co-stars. “What’s exciting about the big 
films is that you have so many people – you can have 300 crew members on set – 
who all have to integrate to make something at the end. That’s satisfying. 
They’re hard to make, the big ones. They might look like easy ventures when 
people see them and go, ‘Oh God, this is another of these action-packed, 
bish-bosh, blockbuster-type things.’ But they’re bloody hard to make.” The only 
bit that rings completely true, however, is the pleasure he describes in 
travelling all over the world and meeting people touched and excited by those 
movies. “That’s cinema at its best.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6d9ea420414a1458efed2ed1b3048a8974235c6%2F89_0_4973_6214%2F4973.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6d9ea420414a1458efed2ed1b3048a8974235c6%2F89_0_4973_6214%2F4973.jpg>
 ‘I always think if you’ve got five friends that you can depend on, that’s a 
lot, and I definitely have that.’

Stylist: Tania Martin. Stylist’s assistant: Amii McIntosh. Grooming: Petra 
Sellge Photograph: Brendan Freeman for the Guardian 
The proceeds of X-Men have allowed Fassbender to set up his own production 
company,DMC Film <https://twitter.com/dmcfilmofficial?lang=en>, fulfilling the 
ambition he has harboured ever since his Reservoir Dogs debut at 17 to become a 
producer. He appears inTrespass Against Us 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3305308/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_5> this autumn, 
co-produced by DMC, and the production company’s first major film,Assassin’s 
Creed <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2094766/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_4>, will be 
released on 1 January, starring Fassbender opposite Marion Cotillard, his 
Macbeth co-star. Only eight years ago, he couldn’t even land a part; what does 
he still long for, beyond his reach? “I’d like to try and direct,” he says 
softly. “We’ll see, you know. I hate to say it and then for it never to happen. 
But I’d like to try and do that.”

What he really needs, he admits, is a break. He claims to be “very good at 
doing nothing”, and got rid of his TV 10 years ago because “I end up watching 
shit – I’ll be watching the God channel at one in the morning. I could watch 
anything, so I thought I’d just get rid of it.” He is still in the same Hackney 
flat he bought 10 years ago, but wants to move, and is toying with the idea of 
moving to the countryside. He took up surfing four years ago, and spends any 
free time he gets on the water, but doesn’t fancy moving to LA because it’s too 
much of an “industry town”. He thinks about San Francisco, and Austin or New 
Orleans. “But I like Europe, you know. I really do enjoy Europe.”

By the time he has located himself across two potential continents, it’s clear 
that his vagueness has more to do with privacy than indecision; he doesn’t even 
want to say where he goes surfing. He maintains that fame hasn’t changed his 
life terribly; he’s still close to the mates he grew up with, and has made 
several more Irish friends in London. But it’s interesting that he says he 
“streamlined” his friendship circle at 30, the year before Hunger’s release; 
I’d guess he knew his status was about to change.

He has “a few” celebrity friends, but they wouldn’t be in his top five. “I 
always think if you’ve got five friends that you can definitely depend on, 
that’s a lot, and I definitely have that.” He can walk out of the hotel without 
strangers screaming at him. “And I walk around the streets. Sometimes I get the 
bus.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1a28cfe0abed9fb260dc47e2ae23ae9542e9ad2%2F0_77_2540_1524%2F2540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20worrywart.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20tried%20to%20work%20on%20that%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmichael-fassbender-worrywart-work-on-that%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1a28cfe0abed9fb260dc47e2ae23ae9542e9ad2%2F0_77_2540_1524%2F2540.jpg>
 In Steve McQueen’s Hunger.
 Photograph: Allstar/FILM4/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
He sounds so convincing that I’m ready to believe in this remarkably ordinary, 
anonymous London life until I ask how often he gets approached. “It depends if 
I’m stopping still. Give me a distance: where am I walking to?” Imagine walking 
out of the hotel, I suggest, stopping in a newsagent on his way through Soho, 
and walking on. But before I’ve even got him to Oxford Circus, a distance of 
less than a mile, he says, “OK, I would have been stopped three or four times.” 
That’s a lot! He looks embarrassed, and quickly tries to backtrack – “But, but 
there could be nothing” – as if worried it sounded like he was showing off.

One of the ways he has maintained some privacy is by keeping his romantic 
relationships away from the cameras. In the past he has been linked to actors
Zoë Kravitz <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/zoe-kravitz> and Nicole Beharie
 <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2718512/>, but he will have a job remaining under 
the radar now that he is going out withAlicia Vikander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alicia-vikander>, his Swedish co-star in The 
Light Between Oceans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/sep/01/venice-film-festival-2016-the-light-between-oceans-premiere-in-pictures>
. They make a luminous on-screen couple, and he concedes awkwardly that “I 
suppose it translates, yes. Obviously chemistry is something that is tangible.” 
Their relationship maybe made the sex scenes slightly less uncomfortable, he 
agrees, but with every syllable he is withdrawing farther into himself. If the 
gossip columns are hoping for the next Brangelina, they will be disappointed.

It’s no easy trick to sustain an impression of casual normality while guarding 
one’s privacy so closely. I suspect the easy classlessness of being Irish 
helps, and he agrees at once. “I definitely still consider myself Irish. Yes, 
yes. And I’m definitely European.” After 20 years in London, does any part of 
him feel British? “I would never consider myself British,” he says firmly. Does 
he mind being claimed by our media for a Brit? He laughs. “Well, they only do 
it if I’m doing well. If I’m not, I’m Irish.”

• The Light Between Oceans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-light-between-oceans> is released on 1 
November, Assassin’s Creed is released on 1 January
 