
The meaning of Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama>’s upper arms is a topic to 
which we will clearly need to return at length before this presidency is out, 
but for now let’s talk about the dress. The colour was the prime talking point 
of the State of the Union address, before designer Narciso Rodriguez confirmed 
that it is officially “marigold”. (The exact same colour was mustard when J Lo 
wore it to theGolden Globes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes> 
two days earlier, but gofigure 
<http://www.etonline.com/awards/goldenglobes/179790_et_picks_the_best_and_worst_dressed_at_the_2016_golden_globes/>
) The sunniness of the tone was a deliberately upbeat note, chosen as the 
Obamas begin the final, legacy-minded stretch of their White House tenure. 
Compare and contrast withlast year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/20/no-tan-suit-state-of-the-union-obama-white-house>
’s serious, dark-toned skirt suit, which chimed with her husband’s 2015 speech 
focussing on income inequality.


The dress evoked elements of the first lady’s greatest fashion hits. The 
inauguration of 2009 is a key reference here. First, the intriguing colour 
recalled the dress and coat she wore that day, a a paler yellow which sparked a 
similar namingfrenzy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/20/michelle-obama-isabel-toledo-sasha-malia>
. (For the record, some called it citrine, but here at the Guardian we backed 
lemongrass.) For Obama’s arrival last night, her marigold dress was teamed with 
a purple coat, a daring colour combination which also harked back to that 
inauguration, when the first lady wore olive green gloves with her pale yellow 
coat, and Malia and Sasha wore bright, jewel-toned scarves in contrasting 
colours. Bright colours for optimism, and surprising combinations for daring: 
these are central to the Michelle Obama fashion message.

The dress’ designer was Narciso Rodriguez. Rodriguez also designed both the 
black and red dress Michelle Obama wore on election night is 2008, and the 
sleeveless shift in aubergine (or rather, “eggplant”) which she wore for the 
first State of the Union address, in 2009. Here, again,Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> is deliberately reminding 
us of the excitement and glamour of those first chapters of her time as Flotus. 
In a conclusion, you need to remind your audience where you started. Naturally, 
this Flotus is all over that.
 