
The last time I met Michelle Williams, she asked me to lie for her. We were 
having breakfast at a corner cafe in Brooklyn shortly after she received her 
second Oscar nomination, for the gruelling breakup dramaBlue Valentine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/13/blue-valentine-review%C2%A0%C2%A0%C2%A0%C2%A0%C2%A0%C2%A0%C2%A0>
, but before she got her third, forMy Week with Marilyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/24/my-week-with-marilyn-review>. The 
first, of course, was for her performance as a betrayed wife inBrokeback 
Mountain <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/jan/06/3>. She was married in 
that film to Heath Ledger <https://www.theguardian.com/film/heathledger>, who 
became her real-life partner and the father of her daughter, Matilda Rose. I 
asked Williams by way of chit-chat whether she still lived in the area; it was 
common knowledge that she and Ledger had bought a Brooklyn townhouse together. 
But in the wake of their separation in 2007, and Ledger’s death the following 
year from an accidental overdose of prescription drugs, Williams had been 
plagued by paparazzi. All of which helped explain why she arrived wearing 
regulation black shades and had selected our table with the careful 
deliberation of a chess master planning several moves ahead. “No, I don’t live 
around here any more,” she said sadly. “But could you put that I do?” She’d had 
enough. She wanted to throw the wolves off the scent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Williams%20on%20Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%3A%20'Closure%20only%20comes%20when%20we%20die'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Williams%20on%20Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%3A%20%27Closure%20only%20comes%20when%20we%20die%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview&media=>
Michelle Williams on Manchester by the Sea: ‘Closure only comes when we die’ – 
video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/06/michelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview>
That was almost six years ago. The woman sitting in front of me now in a 
London hotel room looks and behaves quite differently. She has always seemed 
gently assertive and self-possessed, as you would expect from someone who has 
been acting since she was 10 and who secured legal emancipation from her 
parents at 15 to enable her to work. It paid off in one respect: she was a 
regular onDawson’s Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/10/why-i-love-dawsons-creek-tv-bim-adewunmi>
 by the age of 17, though she was also desperately lonely and ill-equipped. “I 
didn’t know how to keep myself warm in the winter or cool in the summer,” she
said in 2012 
<http://www.gq.com/story/michelle-williams-gq-february-2012-cover-story-article>
. “It felt like somebody was withholding all the secrets – how to take care of 
yourself and where to get the things that would help you take care of 
yourself.” That fragility persists in her but it is fighting a losing battle 
today with her perky playfulness. That extends to her look: a Jean Seberg-style 
blond pixie-cut and little black boots. A trim black dress, its neckline marked 
by tiny silver squares, halts just above the knee.

When I remind her of that lie about living in Brooklyn, she gasps. “Oh wow. Oh 
God. That is crazy.” She stares straight at me, or through me. Have things 
improved now? “Definitely. It’s much easier. It became an unmanageable life. It 
was certainly no way to be a kid. I was really worried at the time about being 
followed. It was upsetting and hard to deal with and there seemed to be no end 
in sight. That’s all really hard to explain to a kid. But our lives are so 
different now. They’re as normal as anyone else’s.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d95d1a1cf8a10033ebb402d440732b84b8fcb54%2F98_0_3460_2076%2F3460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Williams%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20something%20is%20available%2C%20I%E2%80%99ll%20risk%20any%20embarrassment%20to%20get%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Williams%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20something%20is%20available%2C%20I%E2%80%99ll%20risk%20any%20embarrassment%20to%20get%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d95d1a1cf8a10033ebb402d440732b84b8fcb54%2F98_0_3460_2076%2F3460.jpg>
 Williams in Manchester by the Sea. Photograph: PR company handout 
She is here to discuss the movie that will in all likelihood earn her a fourth 
Oscar nod. Kenneth Lonergan’sManchester by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/manchester-by-the-sea> is a devastating drama 
about a loner, played by Casey Affleck, who is paralysed with grief and guilt 
after suffering a personal tragedy. Williams plays his ex-wife; she is sassy, 
rumpled, no-nonsense, with splotchy roots. “I really worked on those,” she 
grins. “Grow, baby, grow!” Though she appears in only a handful of scenes, her 
presence (and for that matter, her absence) resonates throughout the picture. 
But then the size of the role doesn’t have any bearing on how it affects her. 
She completed what she calls a “pop-in, pop-out” part a few months ago on Todd 
Haynes’s new film, the children’s fantasyWonderstruck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/23/wonderstruck-brian-selznick-review>
, but both that and Manchester still consumed large chunks of her life and her 
headspace.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmanchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%20trailer%3A%20Casey%20Affleck%20stars%20in%20acclaimed%20drama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmanchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%20trailer%3A%20Casey%20Affleck%20stars%20in%20acclaimed%20drama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmanchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video&media=>
Manchester by the Sea trailer: Casey Affleck and Michelle Williams star in 
acclaimed drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/29/manchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video>
“Someone will say: ‘Oh, it won’t take any time.’ And actually it will. I have 
to figure out how I walk and talk and what I wear and what my history is and 
why I’m there and where I’m going and it’s gonna take me all year!” This is her 
favourite form of address: the list that goes on and on, escalating in volume 
and panicky shrillness. “It’s just the process I’ve cobbled together and …” It 
works? She wrinkles her nose. “Ish.”

Manchester by the Sea review: Kenneth Lonergan's morose echo of Margaret
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
At least Lonergan didn’t require her to live with her on-screen husband, which 
is what the director of Blue Valentine, Derek Cianfrance, stipulated she should 
do with her co-star on that film, Ryan Gosling. “Ryan and I decorated a 
Christmas tree together. We made a budget together, we did the dishes together, 
we took our daughter to play mini-golf, we got into fights, we made up, we 
watched TV. We did so much stuff that isn’t on screen.” With Lonergan, 
everything she needed was there on the page, down to the dots of each ellipsis. 
Is he strict? “I found him to be, yes. But he’s also shy when he comes up after 
a take and says: ‘Um, you missed out the second pause.’ He’s absolutely right 
to be like that. His dialogue is the reason I’ve wanted to work with him since 
…” She stops and pulls a what-did-I-come-in-here-for? face. “Wait. How old am 
I?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9e232bb32967422d6f37bcc77a74298210e85ae%2F0_34_1744_1046%2F1744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Williams%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20something%20is%20available%2C%20I%E2%80%99ll%20risk%20any%20embarrassment%20to%20get%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Williams%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20something%20is%20available%2C%20I%E2%80%99ll%20risk%20any%20embarrassment%20to%20get%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9e232bb32967422d6f37bcc77a74298210e85ae%2F0_34_1744_1046%2F1744.jpg>
 With Heath Ledger in Brokeback Mountain (2005), her first nomination for an 
Oscar. Photograph: c.Focus/Everett / Rex Features 
She is 36. It has been nearly 20 years since she made a splash in Dawson’s 
Creek and still she doesn’t seem closer to any objective certainties about the 
job she does. You don’t need to stick to her Oscar-nominated performances to 
know that she is a fine, intuitive actor. Check out her three films withKelly 
Reichardt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/21/-sp-kelly-reichardt-my-films-are-just-glimpses-of-people-passing-through>
:Wendy and Lucy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/06/wendy-and-lucy-film-review>, in 
which she was a penniless, plaintive soul searching for her lost dog, the 
arduous westernMeek’s Cutoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/14/meeks-cutoff-review> and the 
forthcomingCertain Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/25/certain-women-review-kelly-reichardt-returns-melancholy-yet-triumphant>
, in which she is an overruled wife trying to make herself heard. “I am jealous 
of every other actor Kelly works with,” she says sulkily. When Reichardt made 
Night Moves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/28/night-moves-review-jesse-eisenberg>
, her thriller about young eco-terrorists, Williams was livid to discover there 
was no part for her. “Kelly said: ‘You’re too old.’ I was, like …” And at that 
point she repeats the guttural noise she made in response. On and on she goes, 
longer than is strictly necessary, grinding her teeth and growling like 
Muttley. “I had a really hard time on Meek’s Cutoff because there were lots of 
other actors and I had been used to having Kelly to myself on Wendy and Lucy. I 
actually cried about it to her once: ‘I miss when it was just you, me and the 
dog.’” She mimics Reichardt rolling her eyes in exasperation: “‘Michelle, I 
have to deal with other people now. And cattle. Grow up.’”

Then there is the roll-call of incredible directors she has worked with – not 
just Reichardt, Haynes, Lonergan and Cianfrance but Scorsese, Wenders, Ang Lee, 
Sarah Polley, Lukas Moodysson, Charlie Kaufman. And the ease with which she can 
move from those high-fibre auteur projects to a part such as Glinda the Good 
Witch inOz the Great and Powerful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/07/oz-the-great-and-powerful-review>
. But try telling her any of that and she will reply that she is unhappy when 
she works. “It’s the not knowing. The wondering what you’re doing and if it’s 
any good. I love what I do and I’m so curious about it and always trying to 
figure out how to get better at it and asking questions and seeing how other 
people work and tracking down teachers and begging time from them.” Another 
feverish list. “But what makes it hard to sleep at night is wondering: ‘What 
did I do today and was it any good? Was it good enough to justify the time I 
missed out on with my daughter? The time I put into it?’ That’s what I find 
hard to live with.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0806d33c4a31b308e2684d9c67d2e4e52da0e9%2F0_10_2164_1298%2F2164.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Williams%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20something%20is%20available%2C%20I%E2%80%99ll%20risk%20any%20embarrassment%20to%20get%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Williams%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20something%20is%20available%2C%20I%E2%80%99ll%20risk%20any%20embarrassment%20to%20get%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0806d33c4a31b308e2684d9c67d2e4e52da0e9%2F0_10_2164_1298%2F2164.jpg>
 Williams with Ryan Gosling in Blue Valentine, 2010. Photograph: Allstar/THE 
WEINSTEIN COMPANY/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
Are those doubts silenced if the film turns out to have been worth the effort? 
“Not really. It’s only possible to have a clear assessment of a movie once 
you’ve seen it three times. But who wants to watch themselves three times, 
right?” She hasn’t seen Manchester yet. In fact, we are in the middle of 
discussing its complexities when she sits bolt upright and makes an 
announcement: “I’m really gonna have to see this movie! It sounds really good.” 
She is already planning that first viewing. “I’ll invite over my best 
girlfriend, open up a bottle of wine and we’ll put it on a TV that’s this big.” 
She outlines a modest-sized rectangle in the air with her hands. “It’s a lot of 
yourself to handle.” The viewing companion will be her former Dawson’s Creek 
co-star Busy Phillips 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2016/12/michelle-williams-busy-philipps-friendship>
. “I’m so in love with her,” Williams said recently. “She’s proof that the love 
of your life does not have to be a man. That’s the love of my life right 
there.” Second place goes presumably to the novelistJonathan Safran Foer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-safran-foer>, whom Williams has 
been dating since 2015.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6115a9c967bbd351823862dbcacf72f1f3d16688%2F0_264_1168_1168%2F1168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Williams%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20something%20is%20available%2C%20I%E2%80%99ll%20risk%20any%20embarrassment%20to%20get%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Williams%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20something%20is%20available%2C%20I%E2%80%99ll%20risk%20any%20embarrassment%20to%20get%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmichelle-williams-when-something-is-available-ill-risk-any-embarrassment-to-get-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6115a9c967bbd351823862dbcacf72f1f3d16688%2F0_264_1168_1168%2F1168.jpg>
 Williams in Dawson’s Creek, 1999. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
She doesn’t work much these days – one film a year, the odd bit of theatre. 
That enables her to spend more time with her daughter, who is now 10. The shoot 
for Manchester by the Sea, for example, was sandwiched between two punishing 
Broadway productions. First, she did a year-long stint as Sally Bowles inCabaret
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/25/cabaret-review-alan-cumming-sam-mendes-revival>
. “Why a year? Because I’m insane. It nearly took me down.” Then she appeared in
Blackbird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/04/michelle-williams-jeff-daniels-blackbird-broadway-belasco-theatre-interview>
 as a woman confronting the man, played by Jeff Daniels, who raped her as a 
child. “Each thing I do is a product of the thing before because that was the 
thing that made me grow and I only feel the benefit of that growth the next 
time. Everything feels like it’s the bloom from the seed that came before.”

Perhaps her anxieties about acting are what prevent her from generating 
projects, hawking her wares at the bazaar. She calls herself a 
“whatever-happens-happens” kind of person. “I’ve never tried to remake my 
world. I try to deal with what the world brings to me. Though when I know 
something is available, I’ll risk any kind of embarrassment to get it.” That 
was the case, she says, when a role came up in 2011 in Sarah Polley’s oddball 
romanceTake this Waltz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/16/take-this-waltz-review>. “I 
thought: ‘I would do anything!’” I ask what exactly she did to prove her 
commitment, fully expecting to hear how she put her neck on the line and risked 
her career and reputation. “Well, I drove all the way to Toronto to audition. 
My friends were so excited because they knew what this meant to me. One of them 
even made me a mix CD called Michelle Is Driving To Toronto.” In other words, 
she went on a road trip while listening to music. But the manner in which she 
tells this story is the giveaway: the excitement, the breathlessness, the eyes 
popping out on stalks. She has turned the unexceptional into an adventure. It’s 
what she does.

Manchester by the Sea opens in the UK on 13 January 
 