
When Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> gets 
on the microphone, the world listens. Herspeech at the Democratic convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/michelle-obama-convention-speech-female-president>
 in July was judged by many to be the best of the week, reaching the emotional 
and inspirational heights thatHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>’s presidential campaign 
has sometimes struggled to achieve.Her turn on Carpool Karaoke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ln3wAdRAim4> with James Corden this summer, 
singing Beyoncé and Stevie Wonder, has, at the time of writing, been watched 
nearly 44m times on YouTube.

But for most of the eight years she has lived in the White House, there has 
been no microphone. Obama is seen a good deal more than she is heard, so how 
she looks has taken on disproportionate significance. Her image sets the 
emotional tone for the White House, becoming a symbolic ideal for other women, 
for other wives and mothers. Every new hairstyle has been combed as a cipher 
for a change in the national mood; every dress evaluated for the values it 
embodies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec8fa43ccccf93d78c964eaf1dc5917ae162c445%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Obama%3A%20%E2%80%98She%20took%20first%20lady%20chic%20and%20made%C2%A0it%20modern%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Obama%3A%20%E2%80%98She%20took%20first%20lady%20chic%20and%20made%C2%A0it%20modern%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec8fa43ccccf93d78c964eaf1dc5917ae162c445%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 Obama’s Carpool Karaoke with James Corden. Photograph: CBS via Getty Images 
There is no denying that this feels retrograde for a woman of Obama’s 
intellect and background. There is a call-and-response rhythm to this kind of 
coverage, with every fashion feature on her wardrobe triggering an opinion 
piece raging at this unbefitting treatment of a high-achieving lawyer with 
degrees from Harvard and Princeton. Yet, contrary to what many expected, Obama 
herself has played the role in a notably traditional key. In contrast to her 
predecessor Hillary Clinton’s battles over public healthcare, she has adopted 
relatively uncontroversial causes: family nutrition, childhood health and 
girls’ education, issues that sit neatly around her self-proclaimed identity as 
Mom-In-Chief. While these causes are, perhaps, more culturally loaded than they 
first appear – the campaign against childhood obesity has a more progressive 
slant when you take into account the fact that the issue disproportionately 
affects low-income and black families – they have frustrated those who hoped 
for a more radical rewrite.

Obama has followed in the first lady tradition by putting fashion centre stage 
of her public persona. On thenight of her husband’s election to office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/nov/05/uselections2008-barackobama>
 in 2008, she wore aNarciso Rodriguez dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/17/michelleobama-fashion> in a 
fiery red-and-black speckle pattern. The fashion press reported the pattern as 
“dégradé”, while others went with “lava lamp”. To wear a very eye-catching 
dress at such a moment made it clear that Obama had no intention of allowing 
the White House to cramp her style. She had broken an unspoken rule of modern 
culture, which holds that a serious person must have a sober wardrobe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac266b583f634848b00dd527af66700f9ca227c6%2F88_44_1148_2317%2F1148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Obama%3A%20%E2%80%98She%20took%20first%20lady%20chic%20and%20made%C2%A0it%20modern%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Obama%3A%20%E2%80%98She%20took%20first%20lady%20chic%20and%20made%C2%A0it%20modern%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac266b583f634848b00dd527af66700f9ca227c6%2F88_44_1148_2317%2F1148.jpg>
 Michelle Obama wore a controversial Narciso Rodriguez dress at Barack’s 
election night victory rally in 2008. Photograph: Stan Honda/AFP/Getty Images 
Until Obama, the iconography of the first lady revolved around Jackie Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jackie-onassis>. There had been glamorous 
president’s wives since –Nancy Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/06/nancy-reagan> with her Dynasty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/apr/26/your-next-box-set-dynasty>
 gowns, say – but the notion of first lady chic remained almost synonymous with 
that sunny yet streamlined early-1960s style that is for ever Camelot. Half a 
century later, wives of heads of state all over the world are still measured 
against Kennedy, but the comparison is sharpest in the White House. Where her 
predecessors had tiptoed around the edges of Kennedy style, as if anxious to 
avoid the comparison, Obama has embraced many elements of the look and made 
them her own. The sleeveless shift dresses she favours are a direct link, as 
are the outsize strings of pearls, often framed by wide-set necklines. Even 
elements of the two women’s hair and makeup are similar, despite their physical 
difference: note the full, stiffly curled hair and the penchant for false 
eyelashes.

The Kennedys represent an American ideal that is classy and democratic, and 
Obama has used fashion to ally herself and her husband with that same message. 
The visual connection with the Kennedys draws the eye to the obvious 
difference: their skin colour. It’s a way of emphasising the historic nature of 
the Obamas as the first black family to live in the White House, while at the 
same time telling the world that this family, and this administration, is 
traditionally American.

At the first inauguration, in January 2009, Obama wore a dress and matching 
coat in an unusual shade of pale greenish yellow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/20/michelle-obama-isabel-toledo-sasha-malia>
 that observers struggled to put a name to. (The Guardian went with 
lemongrass.) Her elder daughter, Malia, wore a purple coat with black scarf and 
gloves; her younger daughter, Sasha, a pink coat with orange scarf and gloves. 
The colours made for a dazzlingly confident family portrait. Other elements of 
the look were formal, even traditional (the first lady’s sleek leather gloves, 
the two girls in their cosy, buttoned-up coats), but the colours were modern, 
the cheery brights of a holiday snap rather than the sepia tones of an official 
photograph. That was the day Obama took first lady chic and made it modern and 
down-to-earth. Later that year, on a state visit to Britain, she wore an
Azzedine Alaïa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/sep/20/azzedine-alaia-fashion-favourite-maverick>
 cardigan to meet the Queen. “You don’t go to Buckingham Palace in a sweater,”
sniffed the designer Oscar de la Renta 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/04/03/oscar-de-la-renta-slams-m_n_182807.html>
 – but he was already out of touch. Obama’s approachable, real-life wardrobe 
had struck a chord.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c97e3a079fa6f3e8e23484f3926a67e1525a029%2F0_0_2600_2091%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Obama%3A%20%E2%80%98She%20took%20first%20lady%20chic%20and%20made%C2%A0it%20modern%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Obama%3A%20%E2%80%98She%20took%20first%20lady%20chic%20and%20made%C2%A0it%20modern%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c97e3a079fa6f3e8e23484f3926a67e1525a029%2F0_0_2600_2091%2F2600.jpg>
 Obama was criticised for wearing a cardigan to meet the Queen. Photograph: 
John Stillwell/PA 
Without wearing a single outfit that could be considered truly rule-breaking, 
Obama has rewritten the playbook. In early 2009, when the first lady’s official 
website was launched featuring a photo of her wearing a sleeveless dress, the 
Chicago Tribune reported that it had received hundreds of online responses, 
many of which criticised the look for its inappropriate informality. Since 
then, the trend for the sleeveless dress as grownup but fun, dressy but 
comfortable – fuelled, in huge part, by Obama herself – has grown and grown. 
She made it OK for a middle-aged woman to wear a dress showcasing arms that 
speak of serious push-ups, as well as those signature warm Mobama hugs. In that 
sense, she represents a generation growing old in a different way. Many of her 
fashion choices – from thegirlish, bridal Jason Wu gown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/feb/15/michelle-obama-fashion-week> she 
wore for the first inauguration to the full skirts she often favours for 
daytime – are looks that not long ago would have been thought too young, too 
cute, for a woman in her 50s to carry off. Instead, she has captured something 
of the confidence of a generation who will not accept that they should slip 
into the shadows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf8c7564a3c90bf44b4ab1b5ee288bb17cd5f3bf%2F121_154_2197_3341%2F2197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Obama%3A%20%E2%80%98She%20took%20first%20lady%20chic%20and%20made%C2%A0it%20modern%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Obama%3A%20%E2%80%98She%20took%20first%20lady%20chic%20and%20made%C2%A0it%20modern%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmichelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf8c7564a3c90bf44b4ab1b5ee288bb17cd5f3bf%2F121_154_2197_3341%2F2197.jpg>
 Obama wore a girlish, bridal Jason Wu gown for the first inaugural ball in 
2009. Photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images 
Obama has consistently played down any interest in fashion. “It’s so hard. I’m 
kind of a tomboy-jock at heart, but I like to look nice,” she told ABC news in 
2008. But she has steered her image carefully nonetheless. When she appeared on 
thecover of American Vogue in March 2009 
<http://images.huffingtonpost.com/2009-02-10-vogue_cover_michelle_obama.jpg>, 
she did it on condition that the choice of dress was hers, without input from 
the Vogue team, and that she used her own hair and makeup stylists, something 
the magazine had not agreed to before. Even the designer and film-makerTom Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford>, renowned for his control freak 
tendencies, alluded to Obama’s strictures in arecent interview with the 
Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/tom-ford-designer-turned-director-925601>
, when he related the experience of dressing the first lady for an audience 
with the Queen in 2011. “Doing something like that is easy because you’re 
dictated to,” he said. “‘She needs to wear that colour, she has to have gloves, 
she doesn’t like this, she doesn’t like that.’ It’s pretty simple.”

Simple, but strategic. Obama’s mastery of fashion is less about the clothes 
than about a modern woman’s innate understanding that visual messaging is a 
crucial part of public life. As shetold American InStyle magazine 
<http://www.instyle.com/reviews-coverage/michelle-obama-style-social-media> 
last month, “We can fool ourselves into thinking that everybody is still 
watching the evening news, but I live with Generation Z, and I know that their 
habits, the way they take in information, are so different… We’ve got to meet 
our constituents where they are, and they’re on Snapchat.”

Obama has been on Snapchat since June 
<https://www.snapchat.com/add/michelleobama>. Her opening post 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/entertainthis/2016/06/21/michelle-obama-joins-snapchat-teases-upcoming-carpool-karaoke-ride/86191730/>
? A selfie and the emoji of the girl in pink, her hand raised. This is a woman 
who doesn’t need a microphone to get her words across.
 