
Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> has announced two 
new versions of its Xbox One console in an ambitious plan to ensure the 
lifespan of its latest machine.

A new, more compact version called Xbox One S is launching in August, while 
Christmas 2017 will see the arrival ofXbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> One Project Scorpio, a 
significantly more powerful update, that will support high definition virtual 
reality as well as games designed to exploit new 4K Ultra HD technology.

E3 2016: what's it really like to go to the world's biggest games event?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/10/e3-2016-la-games-event-what-is-it-like>
During the company’s press conference ahead of the E3 games event in Los 
Angeles –the industry’s largest event, which begins tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/10/e3-2016-la-games-event-what-is-it-like>
 – Xbox chief Phil Spencer declared that the new consoles are designed to 
ensure the lifespan of the machine beyond a single hardware generation.

He also announced closer compatibility between Xbox One and Windows titles, 
allowing cross-platform multiplayer gaming in titles like Gears of War 4 and 
Minecraft.

“Now we see a whole new gaming landscape being driven by the unprecedented 
pace of innovation,” said Spencer. “While the console ecosystem is stronger 
than ever, most of us play games on more that one device – we want to deliver 
the choice to play the games you want on what you want, with who you want.”

The new all-white Xbox One S is 40% smaller, and features an integrated power 
supply and up to 2TB of hard drive space; it comes with a new, redesigned 
version of the Xbox One controller, complete with textured handles for improved 
grip and increased wireless range. The price will start at $299. A UK price was 
not available at time of press.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmicrosoft-xbox-one-s-project-scorpio-phil-spencer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microsoft%20unveils%20Xbox%20One%20S%20and%20Project%20Scorpio%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmicrosoft-xbox-one-s-project-scorpio-phil-spencer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microsoft%20unveils%20Xbox%20One%20S%20and%20Project%20Scorpio%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fmicrosoft-xbox-one-s-project-scorpio-phil-spencer-video&media=>
Microsoft’s Phil Spencer unveils Xbox One S and Project Scorpio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/jun/14/microsoft-xbox-one-s-project-scorpio-phil-spencer-video>
It will be the first major change to the console since its original launch in 
2013, and was a widely expected move. Sony is also working on an updated 
PlayStation 4 console, rumored to be named PlayStation 4 Neo, which will also 
offer 4K Ultra HD compatibility.

The Xbox One S offers compatibility with 4K displays and will support 4K 
television content, and high dynamic range (HDR) visuals. However, the Project 
Scorpio machine will support a new era of fully 4K games. The machine uses a 
core of eight central processing units, and a six teraflop graphics processor. 
Spencer promised “true 4K visuals without sacrifice” and referred to the 
machine as “the most powerful games console ever made”.

Cross-platform play was another key theme of the conference. A new Xbox Play 
Anywhere campaign will mean that consumers will be able to buy one copy of a 
game which will give them access to both Xbox One and PC versions. The first 
title to support the feature will be Gears of War 4 which will offer 
cooperatively multiplayer play across PC and Xbox One. Minecraft is also set to 
support Xbox Play Anywhere, allowing players to construct and share worlds with 
other players whether they are on console, PC, iPhone or Android.

Spencer also assured players that all game releases would be compatible across 
the entire range of Xbox One consoles. It looks like each disc will include 
content or builds that will be accessible to those with the more powerful 
Scorpio iteration.

E3 2016: our 16 most anticipated games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gallery/2016/jun/09/e3-2016-our-16-most-anticipated-games>
Unless Sony unexpectedly reveals its own hardware plans at E3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/e3>, Microsoft now has a head start on 
its rival in the next stage of this generation, after having struggled to 
maintain competition with PlayStation 4. While Sony’s machine has shifted about 
40m units since its launch in 2013, Microsoft has not released figures on Xbox 
One, but it is thought to be at 20m units sold.

“As Sony did last generation with the PS3 Slim less than three years into the 
sales cycle, Microsoft has moved quickly to release an upgraded version of the 
Xbox One,” said analyst Piers Harding-Rolls of IHS Digital.

“The reversal in fortune of this generation compared to last means that 
Microsoft has to be aggressive with its console upgrade strategy to gain market 
initiative. IHS forecasts the installed base for Xbox One at the end of 2016 
will reach 28.7m consoles, while PS4 will reach 53.3m consoles.”

Alongside these hardware announcements, Microsoft showed several new titles, 
including an array of sequels such as Dead Rising 4, State of Decay 2, Halo 
Wars 2 and the popular open-world racer Forza Horizon 3. However, it was the 
revelation that the Xbox One is now a product family rather than a single 
machine that will have gamers and industry insiders debating the future of the 
console industry.
 