
Last year the Herald Sun in Victoria gave good editorial support to 
Melbourne’s Midsumma festival. “It’s a good time to be gay in Melbourne,”read 
one story 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/opinion/midsumma-festival-is-marching-in-and-everyones-welcome-to-the-gay-pride-event/news-story/17353fac3af0620cff3f325f74e9b59f>
. “Sure, we’re still behind the rest of the western world when it comes to 
marriage equality, but let’s be glass half full about this.” The media giant 
has been a gold partner sponsor of Melbourne’s Midsumma festival for the past 
two years, helping to print the program and lending advertising support in the 
Herald Sun to the LGBTI event.

 But in the past few weeks activists have lobbied the festival hard to sever 
the relationship because of some of the coverage the company has been giving to 
LBGTI issues this year. The Australian cartoonist Bill Leak’s portrayal of the 
gay community as Nazis and Miranda Devine’s attacks on the Safe Schools 
Coalition were just some of the issues cited.

On Thursday the festival announced that while pulling out of the agreement 
“would be extremely difficult for Midsumma at this time” the festival would now 
“not be taking up any of the advertising benefits of the partnership offered by 
the Herald Sun”. “Herald Sun will not be marching at Midsumma Pride March or 
holding a stall at Carnival in 2017,” the statement said. “It is important to 
note that there is no money attached to the agreement. A full review of all 
partnership outcomes and value alignment is already planned and will be 
undertaken after the 2017 festival.”

Picnic protest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmidsumma-spurns-herald-sun-advertising-in-row-about-lgbti-coverage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F295167a5520bb6fbbff75ccef8091ee243ec196e%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Midsumma%20spurns%20Herald%20Sun%20advertising%20in%20row%20about%20LGBTI%20coverage%20%7C%20Weekly%20Beast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmidsumma-spurns-herald-sun-advertising-in-row-about-lgbti-coverage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Midsumma%20spurns%20Herald%20Sun%20advertising%20in%20row%20about%20LGBTI%20coverage%20%7C%20Weekly%20Beast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmidsumma-spurns-herald-sun-advertising-in-row-about-lgbti-coverage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F295167a5520bb6fbbff75ccef8091ee243ec196e%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 A ‘peaceful picnic protest’ at Fremantle Media against the decision to hire a 
Canadian female director in place of an Australian for the television remake of 
Picnic at Hanging Rock. 
 Also on Thursday, a group of women who work in film and television protested 
outside FremantleMedia headquarters in St Leonards, Sydney, against the 
production company’s decision to hire a female Canadian director for the 
upcoming Foxtel TV series Picnic at Hanging Rock. The importing of a Canadian 
director for a quintessential Australian production is a bizarre way to end a 
year which has seen the industry through Screen Australianchampion gender 
diversity in significant ways 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/new-directions/gender-matters> for the first 
time.

The protest followed statements by the Australian Cinematographers Society 
(ACS) and the Australian Director’s Guild (ADG) over the hiring of Larysa 
Kondracki to shoot the series, alongside Australian director Michael Rymer. 
“Quite frankly we are astounded that, given the wealth of directorial talent in 
Australia, someone from overseas has been given the honour to helm the majority 
of this new version of Joan Lindsay’s novel,” the ACS national president, Ron 
Johanson, said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMYXf_SBz-rI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMYXf_SBz-rI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMYXf_SBz-rI&media=>
 The ADG and the New South Wales branch of Women in Film and Television (Wift 
NSW) staged the “peaceful picnic protest” andreleased a video spoof 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MYXf_SBz-rI&feature=youtu.be&app=desktop> of 
the famous movie directed by Peter Weir. The president of the ADG, Samantha 
Lang, told Weekly Beast it was a perplexing decision on the part of Fremantle 
to hire a Canadian for a job that could easily have been done by an Australian 
woman, in particular a series that was publicly funded.

“It’s not rare for non-Australian productions to hire from overseas, but this 
is an Australian production, its not a co-production,” she said. “We are 
finding it hard to understand why there is a need for a Canadian director and 
perhaps Fremantle can explain that to us. Why wasn’t there an Australian 
director that could satisfy that remit? Lang said it would not be impossible to 
change directors now and has called on Foxtel and Fremantle to explain their 
decisions. Weekly Beast understands Fremantle will be making a public statement 
on Friday after meeting with members of the guild.

News gets pants back to front 

 The backlash to the Daily Mail Australia’s giant granny pants story on 
Samantha Armytage was brutal and swift. Posted on a quiet Sunday night, the 
story focused on the Seven personality’s underwear and “set out to demean and 
humiliate Armytage”,according to Guardian Australia’s Brigid Delaney <>. The 
Daily Mail added an apology, changed the the headline and removed references to 
Armytage’s underwear in the story. “An earlier version of this story contained 
critical statements regarding Samantha Armytage’s appearance,” the apology at 
the end of the article said.

 “While the story has since been amended, we apologise for any distress caused 
to Ms Armytage or readers more generally.”

 But the widespread condemnation from media outlets came with lashings of 
hypocrisy. News Corp’s popular websitenews.com.au <http://news.com.au> followed 
the saga closely and had an exclusive story on Wednesday revealing Armytage had 
engaged the legal forces at Seven to threaten the Daily Mail Australia with a 
“costly defamation action if it does not offer an immediate retraction and 
public apology of its shaming of her underwear and dating history”.

 “In a three-page smackdown by Channel 7’s legal counsel at Addisons law firm, 
the gossip site has been accused of using paparazzi photos, sold by Diimex, to 
ridicule and humiliate the TV presenter in an article published on Sunday.” Yep 
that’s right, but guess who also bought the set of paparazzi photos from Diimex 
for a considerable sum and published them? Yepnews.com.au <http://news.com.au>, 
which still has the pictures online.

Guthrie’s Sydney slapdown 

You know we’ve entered the twilight zone when the ABC managing director turns 
up in the Murdoch press declaring she is not “Murdochising” the public 
broadcaster. But on Monday,after a week of controversial decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/09/jaws-drop-at-abc-as-michelle-guthrie-defends-radio-national-cuts>
, it was leaked to the Australian thatGuthrie had assured her team everything 
was on track 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/no-hidden-agenda-or-murdochisation-of-the-abc-guthrie/news-story/901c267785178c5a06e807bf5dbd057d>
.

“Speaking for the first time since some staff were spooked by a review being 
carried out in part by a former News Corp executive, Ms Guthrie launched an 
impassioned defence of her plans, openly addressed a wild conspiracy theory 
being spread by insiders, and slapped down public outbursts by ABC 
personalities.”


The Oz went on to quote Guthrie telling “a closed-door briefing” of senior 
management in Sydney that there was “no hidden agenda or ‘Murdochis­ation’ of 
the ABC, whatever that means”.

At the briefing Guthrie defended the hiring of former Murdoch consultant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/06/michelle-guthrie-murdoch-consultant-restructure-abc-jim-rudder>
 Jim Rudder, saying he would bring “fresh insights” while criticising staff 
such as Robyn Williams, who had publicly complained about the cuts, as 
“mischievous and totally erroneous”.

We understand Guthrie has engaged the services of public relations queen Sue 
Cato, who is giving her personal advice on how to improve her image. Cato, a 
gun for hire for the top end of town,made headlines herself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/14/fairfax-journalists-dont-deserve-a-pay-rise-says-leaked-executive-email>
 when she accidentally forwarded her own advice to Fairfax executives on 
handling the embarrassing timing of a $2.4m pay rise in 2014.

Weekly Beast will return in January
 