
Rape, imprisonment, starvation, beatings – these are just some of the 
hardships revealed by people fleeing war and persecution to make the dangerous 
journey across northern Africa to get to Europe in our collection ofphoto 
stories from the Red Cross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/19/raped-imprisoned-beaten-migrants-reveal-perilous-journeys-europe-united-nations-general-assembly>
.

As world leaders prepared to meet for the UN summit on refugees and migration, 
we also heard fromthe charity War Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/14/millions-of-children-fleeing-war-systematically-denied-basic-rights-war-child-new-york-refugee-summit>
 that children displaced by conflict are being “systematically denied” 
fundamental rights such as access to education or protection from forced 
marriage.Recent research by Unicef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/07/nearly-half-of-all-refugees-are-children-unicef-report-migrants-united-nations>
 found that nearly half of all refugees are children, despite the fact that 
they account for less than a third of the global population.

Meanwhile, a US-driven immigration crackdown is forcing many Central American 
migrants to find alternative routes through Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/15/migrants-mexico-human-trafficking-us-immigration-crackdown>
, with some resorting to perilous sea crossings.

Plus we hear the courageous testimony of Khadidja Zidane, who was raped by 
Chad’s former dictator, Hissène Habré, and tells her story here for the first 
time.Ruth Maclean talks to Zidane and other women who bravely testified against 
Habré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/18/hissene-habre-chad-dictator-couragous-rape-survivors-make-history>
 about the rape and torture they suffered under his regime, helping to secure 
his conviction.

Elsewhere on the site
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fada8a26fa62b8eb5a4b6453bc3d9d95b286ebd2e%2F0_12_5222_3133%2F5222.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Migrants'%20perilous%20journeys%2C%20and%20the%20women%20who%20helped%20convict%20Habr%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Migrants%27%20perilous%20journeys%2C%20and%20the%20women%20who%20helped%20convict%20Habr%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fada8a26fa62b8eb5a4b6453bc3d9d95b286ebd2e%2F0_12_5222_3133%2F5222.jpg>
Pakistan fights devastating malnutrition with mass food-fortifying programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/16/pakistan-fights-devastating-malnutrition-with-mass-food-fortifying-programme>

Summer of carnage on Nepal’s roads: ‘There was a big blast, then silence’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/19/summer-carnage-nepal-road-accident-there-was-a-big-blast-then-silence>


At a global forum of feminists, one thing is clear: it’s where you live that 
counts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/17/global-forum-feminists-where-you-live-that-counts-association-womens-rights-development-conference-brazil>

Fear forces refugees in world’s largest camp to return to conflict zones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/15/fear-forces-refugees-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-camp-return-conflict-zones-human-rights-watch-warns>


Angry clashes in Karnataka as India’s water wars run deep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/15/india-angry-clashes-karnataka-water-wars-run-deep-tamil-nadu>


UK development minister challenged over ‘wasted aid’ claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/14/uk-development-minister-challenged-over-wasted-aid-claim>

UN calls on big pharma to reduce cost of life-saving medicines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/14/un-united-nations-calls-on-big-pharma-reduce-cost-life-saving-medicines>


Africa’s shortage of engineering skills ‘will stunt its growth’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/14/africa-shortage-of-engineering-skills-and-female-students-will-stunt-its-growth>

Nigerians facing desperate hunger accuse officials of stealing food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/13/nigerians-facing-desperate-hunger-accuse-officials-of-stealing-food-un-brink-famine>

World Health Organisation should outsource key duties, experts say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/12/world-health-organisation-should-outsource-key-duties-experts-say-british-medical-journal>

Global food crisis triggered cultural shift towards junk food, say researchers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/09/global-food-crisis-cultural-shift-junk-food-researchers-oxfam-ids>

‘Water is peace, life, dignity’: why the UN deputy chief has a thirst for 
saving lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/09/thirst-for-saving-lives-united-nations-water-man-jan-eliasson-deputy-secretary-general>

Sex trafficking victims forced to work in illicit Texas bars, claims study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/sex-trafficking-victims-forced-to-work-illicit-texas-bars-anti-slavery-study-us-brothels>

Air pollution costs trillions and holds back poor countries, says World Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/air-pollution-costs-trillions-holds-back-poor-countries-world-bank>

Opinion
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8624b3f66dca190d71d94f06734886f0e0f4c807%2F0_436_5329_3198%2F5329.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Migrants'%20perilous%20journeys%2C%20and%20the%20women%20who%20helped%20convict%20Habr%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Migrants%27%20perilous%20journeys%2C%20and%20the%20women%20who%20helped%20convict%20Habr%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8624b3f66dca190d71d94f06734886f0e0f4c807%2F0_436_5329_3198%2F5329.jpg>
Anton du Plessis: Corruption in Africa violates human rights. Why tolerate it? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/16/corruption-africa-violates-human-rights-fuels-radicalism-why-do-we-tolerate-it>

Albert Kan-Dapaah: Our vision for aid? Help the poorest people help themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/14/our-vision-for-aid-help-poorest-people-help-themselves-global-goals>

Blair Glencorse: Crowdfunding development aid would direct funds where they 
are needed most 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/13/crowdfunding-development-aid-funds-globalgiving-kickstarter>

Fiona Hodgson: War disproportionately affects women, so why so few female 
peacekeepers? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/07/war-disproportionately-affects-women-female-peacekeepers-fiona-hodgson>

Nidhi Goyal: Why does the women’s rights movement marginalise women with 
disabilities? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/07/why-does-womens-rights-movement-marginalise-women-with-disabilities-nidhi-goyal>

Book extract

In an excerpt from The Political Origins of Inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/self-interest-celebrity-saving-the-world-political-origins-inequality-simon-reid-henry>
, Simon Reid-Henry examines the see-saw balancing act between a numerically 
tiny global elite and the masses, and the great impact each has on the other.

Multimedia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32f554755a3030d46b183054a5167a290d6046cc%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Migrants'%20perilous%20journeys%2C%20and%20the%20women%20who%20helped%20convict%20Habr%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Migrants%27%20perilous%20journeys%2C%20and%20the%20women%20who%20helped%20convict%20Habr%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmigrants-perilous-journeys-and-the-women-who-helped-convict-habre-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32f554755a3030d46b183054a5167a290d6046cc%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Dirty diesel from European companies fuels pollution in Africa – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/15/dirty-diesel-from-european-companies-fuels-pollution-in-africa-in-pictures>

Yellow fever in Congo: MSF vaccinates 710,000 people in 10 days – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/12/yellow-fever-democratic-republic-congo-msf-vaccinates-710000-people-10-days-kinshasa-in-pictures>

Why are 63 million girls missing out on education? – podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/sep/19/why-are-63-million-girls-missing-out-on-education-podcast>


Students Speak

What’s your verdict on Ban Ki-moon’s reign at the UN? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/09/students-speak-ban-ki-moon-united-nations-secretary-general-your-verdict>
 What do you think Ban will be remembered for? Will it be his attempt to hold 
the world to account with the global goals, or thehalving of child deaths 
inspired by the MDGs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/jul/06/what-millennium-development-goals-achieved-mdgs>
? Or has his term in office been overshadowed by the UN’s failures? We want 
your views.Submit a response of 250 words or fewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/19/students-speak-is-peace-prerequisite-for-development>
, and we’ll publish the best ones.

What you said


On John Vidal’s report on air pollution’s huge economic toll on poor countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/air-pollution-costs-trillions-holds-back-poor-countries-world-bank#comment-82832990>
, DrHugh said:

We need a balanced international approach to environmental issues. The danger 
is if we just push UK production to relocate to less strict regimes. We get a 
nice warm environmental feeling but the result is not just appalling damage to 
those counties but a net increase in international environmental damage. For 
example, if we push out a factory to India, we double the world air pollution 
caused by that factory. CO2 emissions (kg per PPP $ of GDP [a measure of the 
energy efficiency of a country’s economy, using purchasing power parity rates])

• UK: 0.2

• India: 0.4

http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.ATM.CO2E.PP.GD 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.ATM.CO2E.PP.GD>

Highlight from the blogosphere


WhyDev reports on how volunteerism is thriving as the international system is 
falling short 
<http://www.whydev.org/volunteerism-thrives-as-the-international-system-falls-short/>
. Pamela DeLargy writes that while leaders at the world humanitarian summit 
pledged their commitment to humanitarian principles, in the real world: 
“deterrence, not assistance, has been the primary goal of politicians across 
the continent. Meanwhile, poorer countries in regions that host the great 
majority of the world’s refugees are asking why they are expected to respect 
humanitarian standards and refugee law when wealthy Europe has chosen not to.”

And finally …


Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian> on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 