
Workers building 2022 World Cup stadiums  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/fifa-faces-legal-challenge-over-qatar-migrant-workers-world-cup-2022>
in Qatar will remain at risk of forced labour because of “meagre reforms” that 
“barely scratch the surface” of the Gulf state’s exploitation of migrant 
labour, Amnesty International UK has warned.

A law change that comes into effect on Tuesday, which Qatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> says guarantees greater flexibility, 
freedom and protection for workers, will not “significantly change the 
exploitative relationship between employers and workers”, said the rights group.

The Gulf state is spending an estimated $200bn on new transport 
infrastructure, housing and sports facilities, including six stadiums designed 
by architects including Lord Foster and thelate Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/01/zaha-hadid-obituary>. 
Construction for the 2022 World Cup will peak in the coming two years, and 
Spanish champions FC Barcelona are due to play an exhibition match in Doha on 
Tuesday.

But Qatar’s kafala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/video/2015/mar/17/kafala-employment-uk-immigration-law-video>
 system, which is used to recruit the majority of its workforce from countries 
including India, Nepal and Sri Lanka, has prompted international outcry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/28/-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup>
 because it prevents workers from changing jobs or leaving the country without 
a permit. It is alleged to have resulted in modern-day slavery for some workers.

Qatar said on Monday it was abolishing kafala and that it was “enormously 
grateful to the millions of workers who have come to Qatar to build our 
nation’s infrastructure during this period of rapid change”.

But James Lynch, deputy director for global issues at Amnesty, said the new 
law “may get rid of the word ‘sponsorship’ but it leaves the same basic system 
intact”.

“It is good that Qatar has accepted that its laws were fuelling abuse but 
these inadequate changes will continue to leave workers at the mercy of 
exploitative bosses,” he said.

Amnesty has warned Fifa that it “cannot continue to remain shamefully 
ambivalent to the plight of workers in Qatar” and said FC Barcelona “should 
make clear to their hosts their desire to play in a human rights-friendly 
environment. Players and clubs cannot live in a bubble”.

Lynch, a former British diplomat in Doha, said that in practice employers 
would still be able to stop migrant workers from leaving the country and that, 
by making it easier foremployers to confiscate workers’ passports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/apr/23/migrant-maids-qatar-deportation-centre-passports-confiscated>
, the new law could make the situation worse.

“The tragedy is that many workers think that this new law will be the end of 
their ordeal,” he said.

Why it's time to end kafala
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/feb/26/time-to-end-kafala> 
In a statement, the government of Qatar said it “fundamentally rejects Amnesty 
International’s claims”.

Issa bin Saad al-Jafali al-Nuaimi, a minister of labour, said Qatar was 
replacing “thekafala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/feb/26/time-to-end-kafala> 
system with a modernised contract-based system that safeguards worker rights 
and increases job flexibility”.

The ministry of administrative development, labour and social affairs said 
migrant workers would be free to leave the country if their employer allowed 
them and could appeal to a committee if their request was rejected. Workers who 
have completed fixed-term contracts would be free to move jobs, while those on 
rolling contracts would be free to move if they have completed five years of 
service. Employers who confiscate passports will be fined up to QAR25,000 
(£5,400). However, Amnesty says the new law also makes holding passports legal 
if a worker requests it in writing and argues that this could be abused because 
“employers in Qatar enjoy a disproportionate level of influence and control 
over their employees”.

“For a migrant worker, the prospect of being tied to one employer for up to 
five years, unable to change employer to secure better conditions or escape 
poor treatment or abuse, is not greatly different from their current position 
and will not significantly reduce the risk of coercion of workers by their 
employers,” said Lynch.

The International Labour Organisation (ILO) is due to make a judgment in March 
on whether the forced labour of migrant workers in Qatar’s construction 
industry warrants further investigation.

Amnesty is now calling on the Qatari authorities to abolish the exit permit 
system, prohibit all passport confiscation and ensure that workers can change 
jobs without requiring the permission of their employer.

Al-Nuaimi said: “We urge the international community not to draw any 
definitive conclusions until there has been time to see the new law in action.”


 