
The billionaire retailer Mike Ashley has been running Sports Direct like a 
Victorian workhouse, building his success on a business model that treats 
workers “without dignity or respect”, a scathing parliamentary inquiry has 
found.

Sports Direct boss had plenty of warning a crisis was looming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/20/sports-direct-mike-ashley-crisis-mps-pay-working-practices>
The report by the business, innovation and skills (BIS) select committee, 
which was triggered bya Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 last year, said Ashley had used “appalling working practices” and treated his 
“workers as commodities rather than as human beings”.

The committee’s chairman, Iain Wright, said: “Whistleblowers, parts of the 
media and a trade union shone a light on work practices at Sports Direct, and 
what they revealed was extremely disturbing. The evidence we heard points to a 
business whose working practices are closer to that of a Victorian workhouse 
than that of a modern, reputable high street retailer. For this to occur in the 
UK in 2016 is a serious indictment of the management at Sports Direct and Mike 
Ashley, as the face of Sports Direct, must be held accountable for these 
failings.


“It seems incredible that Mike Ashley, who visits the Shirebrook warehouse at 
least once a week, was unaware of these appalling practices. This suggests Mr 
Ashley was turning a blind eye to conditions at Sports Direct in the interests 
of maximising profits, or that there are serious corporate governance failings 
which left him out of the loop in spite of all the evidence.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fsports-direct-workers-unfairly-penalised-mike-ashley-tells-mps-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20workers%20unfairly%20penalised%2C%20Mike%20Ashley%20tells%20MPs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fsports-direct-workers-unfairly-penalised-mike-ashley-tells-mps-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20workers%20unfairly%20penalised%2C%20Mike%20Ashley%20tells%20MPs%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fsports-direct-workers-unfairly-penalised-mike-ashley-tells-mps-video&media=>
Sports Direct workers unfairly penalised, Mike Ashley tells MPs – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/07/sports-direct-workers-unfairly-penalised-mike-ashley-tells-mps-video>
After taking evidence in June from Ashley, Sports Direct workers, union 
representatives and the agencies that employ the majority of the 3,000 staff 
working in the firm’s Derbyshire warehouse, the committee concluded that:

 * Sports Direct’s “success is founded on a business model that enables the 
majority of workers in both the warehouse at Shirebrook and at the shops around 
the UK to be treated without dignity or respect”. 
 * Low prices in the chain’s stores come at a cost to workers who are viewed 
“as commodities rather than as human beings with rights, responsibilities and 
aspirations”. 
 * The “six-strikes-and-you’re-out” policy in the warehouse, where workers can 
be sacked if they receive six black marks over a six-month period, is a 
“punitive measure, which denigrates the workers at Sports Direct and gives the 
management unreasonable and excessive powers to discipline or dismiss at will”. 
 * “No convincing reason” was given as to why Sports Direct maintains a 
workforce of more than 3,000 warehouse workers on short-term, temporary 
contracts, “other than to reduce costs and pass responsibility”. 
 * Transline, one of two agencies that supplies Sports Direct with temporary 
staff, may have deliberately misled the committee in its evidence “which could 
be considered a contempt of parliament”. 
The Guardian view on Mike Ashley: unacceptable face of modern capitalism | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/the-guardian-view-on-mike-ashley-unacceptable-face-of-modern-capitalism>
The retailer has suffered a stream of criticism for its working practices, 
with officials from the union Unite campaigning against a strict culture in the 
warehouse which has made workers afraid to speak out over low pay and 
conditions in case they lose their jobs.

Last year, primary schoolteachers told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-staff-shirebrook-strikes-policy-sick-leave>
 that parents working at Sports Direct were too frightened to take time off 
work, resulting in pupils attending school while ill or returning home to empty 
houses.

Luke Primarolo, the regional officer at Unite, said: “From our perspective, 
these issues stem from the majority of the workforce being employed 
precariously, either through agency or zero-hours contracts. The road to 
dealing with this has to involve moving the workforce on to fixed-hour, 
permanent contracts.

“Sports Direct is by no means the only company to engage people on such terms. 
What this highlights is a wider issue of real work today. The government needs 
to seriously consider what legislation needs to be put in place to protect 
people from exploitation.”

Despite initially refusing to give evidence to MPs, Ashley appeared before the 
committee in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/mike-ashley-admits-sports-direct-staff-were-not-paid-minimum-wage>
 and admitted his company had broken the law byfailing to pay staff the 
national minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/sports-direct-agrees-back-pay-deal-with-hmrc-minimum-wage>
.

The admission confirmed the findings of undercover Guardian reporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
, who exposed how the company was paying staff less than the legal minimum 
wage. Ashley also admitted to the committee that his company was under 
investigation by HM Revenue & Customs for breaching the wage law.

Sports Direct responded to last year’s reports by announcing an internal 
review of the retailer’s working practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/18/sports-direct-accusations-workers-pay-conditions>
 to be led by Ashley,plus a pay rise for staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/31/sports-direct-pledges-10m-towards-staff-pay-rise>
, which the company said would cost it £10m.

In an article in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/21/gig-economy-workers-sports-direct>
, Wright said: “It was clear that [Ashley’s internal review] was hot air; a PR 
stunt designed to get over some damaging headlines. But, for all the theatre of 
his appearance in front of our committee last month, Mike Ashley, to his 
credit, made a very public promise to take action. He has now established a 
review of working practices – conducted by independent lawyers – which will 
report by early September.”

The committee has no real powers to punish the tycoon if he fails to deliver 
on his pledges, although Wright promised to “continue to hold Mr Ashley’s feet 
to the fire, in as constructive a manner as possible, checking on the progress 
he makes on improving working conditions for workers at his premises”.

The Labour MP had less conciliatory words for representatives of the 
employment agency Transline, however, who he accused of misleading the 
committee and raised the prospect of triggering contempt of parliament 
proceedings.

During an evidence session, Jennifer Hardy, the finance director of Transline, 
was asked about the company having its licence revoked by the Gangmasters 
Licensing Authority, which regulates companies involved in food and drink 
processing.

She told the committee it had not been revoked, but had lapsed, a claim that 
the GLA subsequently told the committee to be “categorically not true”.

A spokesman for Transline Group said: “Transline representatives attended the 
committee to give a transparent account of our operations at Shirebrook. No 
incorrect or misleading information was given and we will respond to the 
committee on any and all issues raised within the report within the two-week 
deadline stipulated. Transline remains committed to ensuring a safe working 
environment and fulfilling its duty of care to our employees.”

A spokesman for Sports Direct said: “We will study the contents of the 
committee’s report very carefully. It is our policy to treat all our people 
with dignity and respect.

“We are pleased to see that the committee has recognised Mike Ashley’s 
commitment to engage in addressing any shortcomings in the working practices at 
Sports Direct.”
 