
The chairman of the business select committee has asked Mike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley> to explain the use of a 
camera in an apparent attempt to secretly record MPs’ conversations when they 
visited Sports Direct’s warehouse.

Iain Wright, in a letter to the company’s founder and chief executive 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/business-energy-and-industrial-strategy/Correspondence/161109-Chair-to-Mike-Ashley-Shirebrook-visit.pdf>
, said the action was consistent with the controlling way the MPs were dealt 
with during Monday’s visit. The Labour MP said Ashley had suggested the camera 
was placed under a tray of sandwiches by a committee member in the meeting room 
at the Shirebrook site in Derbyshire.

Wright and five other members of the committee visited the warehouse at short 
notice and asked to be shown round after Ashley invited them to do so in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/six-mps-surprise-visit-sports-direct-shirebrook-warehouse>
. Ashley made his open invitation when the committee questioned him over 
working practices at Sports Direct, which he promised to improve.

After a tour, which one member described as a wild goose chase, the MPs were 
shown to a meeting room to discuss the day. They said a member of staff placed 
a plate of sandwiches on a stool and put the camera, which was used to record 
conversations earlier during the visit, by the plate.
Anna Turley MP (@annaturley) 
Here is the camera I found which was placed under the stool on which the 
sandwiches were placed for our private meeting at#sportsdirect 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/sportsdirect?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/aD6StnX5T9 
<https://t.co/aD6StnX5T9>
 <https://twitter.com/annaturley/status/795689611951542272> November 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/annaturley/status/795689611951542272> 
In his letter, Wright said: “For an organisation in the process of reviewing 
its corporate governance and working practices, it is difficult to understand 
how a representative of the company thought that such an action would assist 
Sports Direct and why this action was authorised.

“I am asking you for an explanation of how and why the camera came to be 
placed in the room, who authorised its placing and what steps you have taken as 
a result … It is staggering to think that nobody thought to think of the 
long-term damage such an act, amateurishly carried out, could inflict upon your 
company.”

Sports Direct published a statement on Tuesday saying it did not know about or 
authorise the use of a camera and questioning “the veracity” of the story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/sports-direct-denies-knowledge-of-secret-camera-filming-mps-shirebrook-warehouse>
.


The board complained that the MPs arrived on a day when Ashley was not at the 
warehouse and that the camera incident had overshadowed positive comments made 
by staff about the company. Ashley added that Sports Direct was being used as a 
political football.

Wright said Sports Direct’s statement was “wholly unsatisfactory”, adding: “I 
will assume your initial suggestion to me during our telephone conversation 
that the device was planted by a committee member was a spur of the moment 
misjudgement rather than what would be a very serious allegation.”


He said he would have liked Ashley to have been at the site but that diary 
clashes did not allow this.Karen Byers, global operations head and one of 
Ashley’s closest associates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/26/karen-byers-sports-direct-hard-hitting-head-retail>
, was understood to have shown the MPs round in Ashley’s absence.

Wright said the MPs were treated with courtesy on their visit but had little 
chance to speak to employees without being monitored and faced delays in being 
allowed into certain parts of the site. Staff interventions were “obviously 
organised and stage managed”.

Wright said the incident had undermined the committee’s faith in Ashley’s 
promises to improve conditions at Sports Directafter the MPs accused him of 
running the company like a Victorian workhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
. He said investors, auditors and other visitors to Shirebrook might 
justifiably question whether they had been secretly recorded.

Wright concluded: “I remain prepared to offer support to your efforts to 
reform your business in a way that treats all workers fairly and with respect … 
However, you do need to demonstrate a degree of trust, openness and 
constructive engagement that I hoped to establish but was so unfortunately 
lacking on our visit to Shirebrook.”
 