
It seemed apt that Giorgio Armani, such a stalwart of the red carpet, should 
present his autumn/winter collection at Milan fashion week the Monday morning 
after the Oscars. The dresses worn for Sunday night’s ceremony – including Cate 
Blanchett’s aqua-coloured Armani Privé gown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/feb/28/oscars-red-carpet-fashion-2016-in-pictures>
 – have been hung back in the wardrobe, but awards-season dressing requires 
careful forward planning. Smart red-carpet players are already shopping for the 
next one.

Prospective red-carpet customers had to wait with this collection. The first 
thing of note was that Armani was catering to the vast majority of the women 
who buy his clothes: professionals, some of whom grew up in the 80s when the 
designer revolutionised workwear by adapting the men’s suit to womenswear. More 
than half of this show had outfits with trousers and a concession to the 
loosening-up of dress codes was implicit. Suits were in the minority here. 
Instead, most outfits were contrasting jacket and trousers – with many 
variations on the combination of black velvet trousers and pink tweed jacket.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmilan-fashion-week-armani-looks-to-next-years-red-carpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e271b73e2491ae53142b68973558dd7b34232f5%2F0_0_2000_2989%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milan%20fashion%20week%3A%20Armani%20looks%20to%20next%20year's%20red%20carpet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmilan-fashion-week-armani-looks-to-next-years-red-carpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milan%20fashion%20week%3A%20Armani%20looks%20to%20next%20year%27s%20red%20carpet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmilan-fashion-week-armani-looks-to-next-years-red-carpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e271b73e2491ae53142b68973558dd7b34232f5%2F0_0_2000_2989%2F2000.jpg>
 A model on the Giorgio Armani autumn/winter 2016 catwalk. Photograph: Vittorio 
Zunino Celotto/Getty Images 
There were also jogging pants, worn with blazers, in a very Armani nod to 
trends such asathleisure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/feb/12/athleisure-key-fashion-trends-of-the-season-in-pictures>
. More garden party than office were a selection of suits and some dresses 
printed with pastel flowers with the blur of a watercolour. Missteps came in 
clashing floral prints on a harlequin-ish jacket, but the cropped bootcut 
velvet trousers were the exact shape currently preferred in the front row.

When the eveningwear section of the show came, it was also heavy on the 
velvet. The dresses were all black, combining the transparent effect you get 
with deep black velvet to dramatic effect. A long dress with an exaggerated V 
neckline and embroidery on the bodice looked straight out of Blanchett’s 
wardrobe, while a sweet, strapless A-line tulle design with big velvet polka 
dots would work for another of Armani’s other celebrity clients, Rihanna. 
Catwalk debut over, the red carpet beckons for these dresses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmilan-fashion-week-armani-looks-to-next-years-red-carpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7adcc695148857c0676f49b397505996f40a685%2F0_0_5736_3840%2F5736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milan%20fashion%20week%3A%20Armani%20looks%20to%20next%20year's%20red%20carpet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmilan-fashion-week-armani-looks-to-next-years-red-carpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milan%20fashion%20week%3A%20Armani%20looks%20to%20next%20year%27s%20red%20carpet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fmilan-fashion-week-armani-looks-to-next-years-red-carpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7adcc695148857c0676f49b397505996f40a685%2F0_0_5736_3840%2F5736.jpg>
 Models backstage at the Giorgio Armani show. Photograph: WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
Last year marked 40 years of Armani, an anniversary that the designer 
celebrated with a coffee table book and a press conference. The show notes on 
Monday said this collection “looks at reality with a new eye”, a “mandatory” 
notion for the designer. How long the brand can keep doing that is unknown, but 
40 years is pretty good going by anyone’s standards. Now 81, Armani has made it 
clear that retirement is not happening any time soon, and the search for a 
successor is not on the horizon. The designer remains the elder statesman of 
Italian fashion. Armani, which is Italy’s biggest luxury brand afterPrada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada>, was one of the first western 
brands to expand into China – with 150 stores there, and a Chinese version of 
the website. Its profits have been affected by the country’s recent slowdown. 
While 2014 saw a 16% growth in profits, largely due to expansion in the region, 
2015’s figures reflect the newer climate. The fashion crowd will now travel to 
Paris, where the shows begin today.
 