
1) Between 2000 and 2012, deaths from malaria fell by 42% 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/aids.shtml>. Health workers attribute much 
of this progress to the expansion of malaria interventions, including 
diagnostics and treatment at the community level and greater use of 
insecticide-treated bednets and indoor residual sprays.


2) The UN estimates 3.3m deaths <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/aids.shtml> 
from malaria were averted between 2000 and 2010. About 90% of these were 
children under the age of five in sub-Saharan Africa.

3) Uptake on insecticide-treated nets has been high in some countries. In 
Benin, Madagascar, Rwanda and Tanzania,more than 70% 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
 of children under five slept under nets in 2012. But this practice is not as 
widespread in other countries, including in Chad, Cameroon and Nigeria where 
about 20% of children under five slept under nets.

4) Greater access to tuberculosis treatment saved approximately 22m lives 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/aids.shtml> between 1995 and 2012.

5) TB treatment success rates have risen, and remain above 85%. Despite 
progress, multi-drug resistant TB continues to pose serious problems, and the
number of TB cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/30/tb-cases-increasingly-resistant-drugs>
 that are resistant to virtually almost all drugs available is increasing.

6) South Asian countries are on track 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs290/en/> to eliminate the 
neglected tropical disease visceral leishmaniasis, also known askala azar 
<http://www.who.int/leishmaniasis/visceral_leishmaniasis/en/>, by 2020. The 
disease is thesecond largest parasitic killer 
<http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org/our-work/medical-issues/kala-azar-leishmaniasis>
 globally after malaria.

7) More than 5bn treatments have been administered for the parasitic infection 
lymphatic filariasis <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs102/en/> 
since 2000. Of the 73 countries where the disease is known to be endemic, 39 are
on track <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs290/en/> to eliminate it 
as a public health problem by 2020.

8) In 2013, the lowest number of human African trypanosomiasis 
<http://www.who.int/trypanosomiasis_african/en/> cases were recorded in 50 
years. The disease, also known as sleeping sickness, is transmitted fromtsetse 
flies <http://www.who.int/trypanosomiasis_african/vector/en/> and can have 
cause seizures, coma and premature death.

9) The number of new HIV infections among every 100 people aged between 15 and 
49fell by 44% <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/aids.shtml> between 2001 and 
2012.

10) By the end of 2013, approximately 12.9 million people were receiving 
antiretroviral therapy <http://www.who.int/hiv/topics/treatment/en/> globally. 
Of these, 11.7 million lived in low- and middle-income countries. If current 
trends continue, theWorld Health Organisation says 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs290/en/> the target of placing 15 
million people on antiretroviral therapy by 2015 will be reached or exceeded.

11) The number of new HIV infections in southern and central Africa fell by 
48% and 54% 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
 respectively between 2001 and 2012. Despite this, an estimated 2.3 million 
people were newly infected.

12) Efforts to reduce the impact of HIV and Aids on children and their 
families continue. HIV is no longer considered a barrier to education for 
children who have lost parents to the virus. There isnear parity 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
 in school attendance rates of orphans and non-orphans aged 10 to 14 years.

13) By the end of 2012, more than 900,000 pregnant women living with HIV 
globally were receiving antiretroviral treatment. Coverage of antiretroviral 
programmes for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission increased from57% 
in 2011 to 62% in 2012 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
.

14) In India, more than 15 million people with TB were diagnosed and treated 
between 1998 and 2012, saving anestimated 2.6 million lives 
<http://www.worldbank.org/mdgs/diseases.html>.


15) Data indicates the stigma around HIV and Aids is slowly subsiding. In 
Congo-Brazzaville, 77% of pregnant women receiving prenatal care took voluntary 
HIV tests in 2011,compared with just 16% 
<http://www.worldbank.org/mdgs/diseases.html> in 2003.
 