
 * Global consumption of ozone-depleting substances fell by more than 98% 
between 1986 and 2013 <http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ozone/index_en.htm>; 
all countries had stopped the use of major ozone-depleting substances by 2010.

 * Afforestation – planting on open land – and natural expansion reduced the 
net loss of forest <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/environ.shtml> from an 
average of 8.3m hectares (20.5m acres) a year in the 1990s to an annual average 
of 5.2m hectares between 2000 and 2010.

 * Protected terrestrial areas <http://wcmc.io/ProtectedPlanetReport2014> 
covered 15% of land and coastal marine areas worldwide by 2014, up from 8.7% in 
1990.

 * Between 2003 and 2011, national forestry programmes in China resulted in 
the reforestation of 36.5m hectares 
<http://www.cn.undp.org/content/china/en/home/mdgoverview/overview/mdg7.html> 
of land.

 * The percentage of protected terrestrial and marine areas in Peru 
<http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Data.aspx> rose from 4.6% in 1990 to 18.3% in 2012.

 * The world met the MDG target of halving the proportion of people without 
access to improved drinking water in 2010 – five years ahead of schedule. 
However, although2.6 billion people have gained access to improved water since 
1990 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/01/billions-have-no-access-to-toilets-says-world-health-organisation-report>
, about 663 million people are still without an improved source of water.

 * Between 1990 and 2015, 2.1 billion people gained access to an “improved 
sanitation facility” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/01/billions-have-no-access-to-toilets-says-world-health-organisation-report>
 – a toilet that hygienically separates people from faeces.

 * Between 2000 and 2014, more than 200 million people living in slums 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCIQFjAAahUKEwj_uM2RmuzGAhXBFtsKHTfPC3Q&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.un.org%2Fmillenniumgoals%2F2014%2520MDG%2520report%2FMDG%25202014%2520English%2520web.pdf&ei=RjiuVf_9JMGt7Aa3nq-gBw&usg=AFQjCNFWBl0a7BjpW5UnSnK0xEZBNHZssQ&sig2=9itDXVJCL94VfsUfaR3-ew&bvm=bv.98197061,d.ZGU>
 got access to either improved water, sanitation, durable housing or less 
crowded housing conditions. The MDG target had been to “achieve a significant 
improvement” in the lives of at least 100 million slum-dwellers by 2020.

 * In eastern Asia, 723 million people became new users of piped water on 
premises between 1990 and 2015 
<http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/Progress_on_Sanitation_and_Drinking_Water_2015_Update_.pdf>
, with 694 million gaining access in China alone.

 * About 427 million people gained access to improved drinking water in 
sub-Saharan Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/01/global-access-clean-water-sanitation-mapped>
 between 1990 and 2015.

 * In 2010, the UN general assembly recognised access to safe and clean 
drinking water and sanitation as a human right 
<http://www.un.org/press/en/2010/ga10967.doc.htm>.

 * One in four people had to defecate in the open in 1990; the proportion in 
2015 is one in eight. However, there are still2.5 billion people who do not use 
an improved sanitation facility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/28/toilets-lives-un-chief>
and946 million who still have to defecate in the open 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs392/en/>.

 * Ethiopia achieved the largest decrease in the proportion of the population 
having to defecate in the open 
<http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/jmp-2015-key-facts/en/>, 
from 92% in 1990 to 29% in 2015.

 * In 1990, 54% of the world’s population used improved sanitation facilities 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0CDAQFjACahUKEwiw16eN8uvGAhUpm9sKHZg9APw&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.who.int%2Fwater_sanitation_health%2Fpublications%2FJMP-2015-keyfacts-en-rev.pdf&ei=TA6uVbCBC6m27gaY-4DgDw&usg=AFQjCNG7z6Mkp5UYAJXXGqSYEeMRC8wmSw&sig2=WaddMJpCDZ_vR3HIuGCj4g&bvm=bv.98197061,d.ZGU>
; in 2015, the figure is 68%.

 * Today, fewer than 1,000 children under five die each day from diarrhoea 
caused by inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene 
<http://www.unicef.org/esaro/5440_2015_mdg-report-sanitation.html> – compared 
withmore than 2,000 15 years ago 
<http://data.unicef.org/child-mortality/under-five>.  