
1. Enrolment in primary education in developing regions reached 90% in 2012 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCUQFjAA&url=http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf&ei=YhAtVcixGaTA7Aap04G4Dw&usg=AFQjCNFWBl0a7BjpW5UnSnK0xEZBNHZssQ&sig2=-KYJkLgGXRSeK5swWIYwjQ&bvm=bv.90790515,d.ZGU>
, up from 83% in 2000, and 80% in 1990.


What is the millennium development goal on education all about?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/millennium-development-goal-education-explainer>
2. The greatest regional improvement was in sub-Saharan Africa, where the 
primary school enrolment rate increased by 18% between 2000 and 2012.

3. Tanzania has achieved near-universal primary education by abolishing school 
fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2010/sep/14/mdg2-education-tanzania>
, and tackling the issues that had kept children out of school. The country’s
holistic approach <http://www.trust.org/item/20150409000146-2giqw> has included 
implementing a gender sensitive curriculum, introducing a specific education 
plan for the country’s nomadic population and providing water facilities to 
communities where girls previously had to stay at home and spend hours 
collecting water. Schools for disabled children have also been introduced, 
along with initiatives to help reduce early pregnancies, which often take girls 
out of school.

Northern Africa had almost achieved universal primary education by 2012, with 
enrolment rates at 99%

4. Northern Africa*, which had enrolment rates of 80% in 1990, had almost 
achieved universal primary education by 2012, with enrolment rates at 99%. 
Eastern Asia, south-east Asia, the Caucasus and central Asia*, and Latin 
America and the Caribbean have also all achieved close to universal primary 
education.


5. Sierra Leone has reversed some of the damage done by the country’s long 
civil war, in which more than10,000 children were conscripted into the army 
<http://www.unicef.org/wcaro/english/media_4887.html>. Since the end of the 
conflict in 2002, the number of children who have never been to school has 
halved. The country has also uncovered many “ghost-teachers 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/7571903.stm>”, teachers who have died 
or left the school but continue to exist on paper, allowing schools to embezzle 
salaries worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. It now faces the challenge of
re-establishing schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/14/sierra-leone-back-to-school-after-ebola-crisis>
 closed due to the Ebola outbreak.

6. By 2012, all developing regions had achieved, or were close to achieving, 
gender parity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/jul/04/mdgs-girls-match-boys-primary-school-enrolment>
 in primary education enrolment.

7. In Afghanistan, 3.75 million girls 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/afghanistan/overview> were enrolled in 
school in 2014, compared with just 191,000 in 2002. Overall, school enrolment 
in Afghanistan has increased from 1 million to 8.2 million, and more than 
165,000 new teachers have been trained.

8. The adult literacy rate 
<http://www.uis.unesco.org/literacy/Documents/fs20-literacy-day-2012-en-v3.pdf> 
increased globally from 76% in 1990 to 84% in 2010. The globalyouth literacy 
rate <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.1524.LT.ZS> grew from 83% to 
89% over the same period.

9. By 2012, the number of out-of-school children worldwide had fallen to 58 
million, from 100 million in 2000.

10. In Bangladesh, “second chance” schools 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,contentMDK:23191379~menuPK:141311~pagePK:34370~piPK:34424~theSitePK:4607,00.html>
 provided primary education to more than 790,000 out-of-school children between 
2004 and 2012. More than half the students, who came from the 90 country’s 
poorest sub-districts , were girls.

11. In India, the percentage of primary school-age children out of education 
<http://www.globalpartnership.org/focus-areas/out-of-school-children> had 
fallen to just 1% by 2011, from 14% in 2000, and 22% in 1990.

12. According to the World Bank, the global primary school completion rate 
increased from 81% in 2000, to 92% in 2012 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.PRM.CMPT.ZS/countries?display=graph>.

Globally 92% of children completed primary school in 2012, compared with 81% 
in 2000

13. In the Caucasus and central Asia, eastern Asia and northern Africa, nine 
out of 10 pupils who started primary school completed the last grade.

14. The decrease in dropout rates has been reflected in more children 
continuing to lower-secondary education: the lower secondary enrolment rate had 
increased from71% in 1999 to 85% in 2012 
<http://en.unesco.org/gem-report/report/2015/education-all-2000-2015-achievements-and-challenges#sthash.n4jWeOe1.CGzGray8.dpbs>
. In Afghanistan, China, Ecuador, Mali and Morocco, lower secondary enrolment 
has increased by at least 25 percentage points.

15. Quality of education has also improved in many countries. By 2015, the 
number of teachers per pupil had increased in about 83% of countries with data, 
though significant challenges remain.

What would you add to this list? Are there any MDG2 success stories where you 
live? Post your thoughts in the comment thread below.

 * Northern Africa, as defined in the millennium development indicators’ 
regional groupings, is made up of Western Sahara, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, 
Libya and Egypt. The Caucasus and central Asia is Armenia, Kazakhstan, 
Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Georgia and Tajikistan
 