
Kyrgyzstan's cocktail of conservatism and apathy a bitter draught for women | 
Liz Ford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/26/kyrgyzstans-cocktail-of-conservatism-and-apathy-a-bitter-draught-for-women>
 * The number of female MPs globally has doubled over the past 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/mar/08/international-womens-day-number-of-female-lawmakers-doubles-in-20-years>
, according to theInter-Parliamentary Union <http://www.ipu.org/>.

 * By 2012, significantly more girls were enrolled in, or had attended, 
primary school, globally.

 * Southern Asia has made strong gains in getting more girls into primary 
school. In 1990, 74 girls for every 100 boys were enrolled in school. By 2012, 
equal numbers of girls and boys were enrolled.

 * Nepal has increased the percentage of seats held by women in national 
parliament from 6% in 1990 to almost 30% in 2014.

 * Benin, Burkina Faso, Senegal and Sierra Leone are among the countries in 
sub-Saharan Africa that have made the greatest improvements in enrolling more 
girls into school. Over this period, between 30 and 40 additional girls were 
enrolled in school for every 100 boys.

 * Rwanda has the most female lawmakers in the world. Women now make up 64% of 
MPs in the lower house.

 * More girls than boys are enrolled in secondary school across Latin America 
and the Caribbean.

 * The number of women employed in paid work in non-agricultural jobs 
increased, with the global share rising from 35% to 40% between 1990 and 2012.

 * Since 1990, Grenada and Zimbabwe have both registered a 20% increase in the 
number of female MPs in their lower and upper houses, respectively.

 * In 2012, Nicaragua recorded the most women holding ministerial positions in 
the world – 57% – ahead of Sweden, Finland, France and Norway.

 * Cameroon’s elections in 2013 resulted in 56 female deputies out of 180, up 
from 25 under the previous parliament.

 * In February, Malawi passed a bill that increased the age of marriage 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/02/16/uk-malawi-childmarriage-law-idUKKBN0LK1Y920150216>
 from 15 to 18. Early marriage is a prime reason why girls do not attend 
secondary school.

 * Bolivia has revoked laws that did not allow women to work at night.

 * According to the International Labour Organisation 
<http://www.ilo.org/gender/Informationresources/Publications/WCMS_348087/lang--en/index.htm>
 (ILO), the number of UN member states that have ratified the equal 
remuneration convention has risen from 126 in 1995 to 171 today.

 * The number of countries that have ratified the discrimination (employment 
and occupation) convention has risen from 122 to 172, according to the ILO.

What would you add to this list? Are there any MDG3 success stories where you 
live? Post your thoughts in the comment thread below.

 