
“I think pugs are actually the perfect dog for YouTubers, just because they’re 
lapdogs. YouTubers spend a lot of time at home, and they’re perfect companion 
dogs. When you need to work, they don’t mind. They love sleeping!”

Daniel Middleton, aka DanTDM from child-friendly YouTube gaming channel The 
Diamond Minecart <https://www.youtube.com/user/TheDiamondMinecart>, has been 
working a lot. He’s the most popular British creator on YouTube, with 12.7 
million subscribers and 8.3bn video views since 2012.

In July, the 24 year-old’s channel was the 13th most popular YouTube channel 
by views 
<http://www.tubefilter.com/2016/08/30/top-100-most-viewed-youtube-channels-worldwide-july-2016/>
 – just under 335m that month – and he’s reached the level of online fame where 
his pet pugs Ellie and Darcie are becoming four-legged celebrities in their own 
right, just like fellow YouTuber Felix “PewDiePie” Kjellberg’s pugs Edgar and 
Maya.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL1a2Y7FjLZY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL1a2Y7FjLZY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL1a2Y7FjLZY&media=>
Pugs aren’t all that DanTDM and PewDiePie share: Middleton has followed 
Kjellbeg into the publishing world thanks to a book deal with publisher Orion.

Trayaurus and the Enchanted Crystal 
<https://www.harpercollins.com/9780062574329/dantdm-trayaurus-and-the-enchanted-crystal>
 is a graphic novel based on the characters that feature in Middleton’s 
Minecraft videos on YouTube: scientist Dr Trayaurus; evil laboratory boss 
Denton and his elf sidekick Fin; DanTDM and his dog Grim; and a group of grumpy 
talking pigs.

Joseph Garrett, the children’s presenter with 7.8 million subscribers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/28/stampy-joseph-garrett-youtube-childrens-presenter-millions-of-viewers>
Middleton has been mulling a book for several years, but says he turned down 
the idea of an end-of-year annual in favour of something more story-led.

“I’m not a massive reader of traditional books. I’m a very visual person, 
which is probably why I make videos rather than write scripts. I wanted it to 
be a book that was not just interesting to read, but also very interesting to 
look at,” he says.


“It’s the kind of book that I would read, and maybe a way to transfer fans 
that maybe aren’t big readers either from my videos to the book. And in the 
videos these characters are pretty much [stock]Minecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/minecraft> characters, so this was a 
way to bring them into their own, outside the game, in a hand-drawn style 
that’s very important to me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bc4314a60c0631fcf0546ef73c701eb3aaa8270%2F0_0_3085_1955%2F3085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minecraft%2C%20books%2C%20panto...%20and%20pugs!%20YouTube%20star%20DanTDM%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minecraft%2C%20books%2C%20panto...%20and%20pugs%21%20YouTube%20star%20DanTDM%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bc4314a60c0631fcf0546ef73c701eb3aaa8270%2F0_0_3085_1955%2F3085.jpg>
 The first DanTDM book is a graphic novel rather than a standard annual. 
Accidental narrative

Those characters have been key to the growth of Middleton’s fanbase on YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube>. His young audience aren’t 
just watching him play Minecraft: they’re watching him tell stories using the 
game as the backdrop.

Middleton says his focus on narrative and characters was a “happy accident” 
that sprang out of his videos showcasing Minecraft mods – downloadable add-ons 
that customised the game. For one mod based on dinosaurs,Middleton used one of 
Minecraft’s villager characters to help him explore the world 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vb0QJVsnaKc>.

“People really connected with the story of Trayaurus going through that video: 
it made it less of a tutorial and more of a story, even though they were still 
learning about the mod. So I started introducing him into more videos, then we 
went into a lab and found Grim, and it grew from there,” he says.


The characters have evolved over time, with some of their traits generated by 
Minecraft’s quirks – Trayaurus’ clumsiness comes from the character’s habit of 
blundering into lava pits and other obstacles, out of Middleton’s control.

YouTube channels benefit as kids look beyond traditional TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/11/youtube-channels-kids-tv-minecraft-gamers-vloggers>
Middleton’s own back-story started as a viewer on animation website 
Newgrounds, which inspired him to start making his own stop-motion animations 
and uploading them to YouTube: “The only way to show other people your videos 
without literally sitting them in front of your screen!”

A keen gamer, he also started a Pokémon-focused YouTube channel in 2010 – Dan 
Plays Pokémon is still online <https://www.youtube.com/user/PokemanDanLv45> – 
before discovering Minecraft, which was initially a side-project channel. 
Although often described as a Minecraft YouTuber, Middleton now makes videos 
using other games too: Roblox and Nintendo’s Tomodachi Life for example.

“At one point, I was doing two Minecraft videos every single day, and while 
it’s kinda possible to do that, I wanted to expand, and my audience really 
wanted to see me play other games,” he says.


“I haven’t uploaded a Minecraft video for about a week actually. People have 
been starting to connect not just with my stories, but with me as a person. So 
the main story videos are still in Minecraft because that’s the perfect game to 
do them in, but it’s cool to also take those characters into other games.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0TgS-M-2vcY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0TgS-M-2vcY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0TgS-M-2vcY&media=>
YouTube-famous in the real world

Middleton and his YouTube gaming peers have a very specific kind of fame: they 
can walk down the street and most passers-by will have no idea who they are, 
but to many children (and some parents) he’s a bona-fide star.

“I get spotted more when I’m out now just because of the size of the channel. 
More so in school holidays. But even when I’m out and about in school or work 
hours, it’s the parents who’ll see me and say ‘I need to get a picture with you 
to show my kids’,” says Middleton.


“It’s nice though: the difference between traditional celebrities and the 
people who are popular on YouTube, I guess, is that we seem more accessible 
than traditional celebrities. They can seem completely inaccessible: they don’t 
walk the streets that everyone else does. But when people come up to me, even 
though I’ve not met them before, they feel like they’ve known me for years, and 
there’s a proper connection there.”

YouTube's latest hit: neon superheroes, giant ducks and plenty of lycra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/29/youtube-superheroes-children-webs-tiaras>
It must be quite strange, though. Especially as few YouTubers will receive 
formal training in what to expect as a celebrity in the same way that, for 
example, a boy-band member or teenage soap star would be expected to receive.

Not an idle comparison, by the way: if you go to a games convention or book 
signing, the fan excitement around online stars like Middleton is absolutely 
comparable to traditional celebrities.

Plus there’s the fact that while the default persona for a YouTuber is ‘HEY 
GUYS’ exuberance, that’s not always mirrored by their off-camera selves.

The last time I interviewed Joseph “Stampy” Garrett, another prominent 
child-friendly British YouTuber, he told me that he worries his real-life 
shyness might be misinterpreted as standoffishness by fans. Middleton is in a 
similar situation.

“It’s pretty weird to get used to. I wouldn’t even say I’m used to it yet. If 
people turn up to an event and are really excited to meet me, if I think about 
it properly it baffles me. I’m naturally quite an introverted person, so I’ve 
had to almost train myself to be able to deal with these situations,” he says.

“The security for me is that if I meet someone on the street or at a 
convention or signing, there’s that connection: we can have a chat about what I 
do, their favourite things, my favourite things. It’s not a weird situation 
after all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F425f74a1c371811114d72d4ee5964abb0ca8dd92%2F0_0_2400_883%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minecraft%2C%20books%2C%20panto...%20and%20pugs!%20YouTube%20star%20DanTDM%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minecraft%2C%20books%2C%20panto...%20and%20pugs%21%20YouTube%20star%20DanTDM%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F425f74a1c371811114d72d4ee5964abb0ca8dd92%2F0_0_2400_883%2F2400.jpg>
 The DanTDM tour has been selling out UK theatres. 
The long queues for meet’n’greets at games conventions is proving intensive 
training for DanTDM, Stampy and their peers, but Middleton is also meeting his 
public at his own live shows,which have been touring the UK 
<https://www.dantdmtour.com/>. Again, they’re led by storytelling: “A mix of 
maybe a panto and gaming. But not cheesy!” as he puts it.

“It’s about the adventures, but taking away me behind the computer and making 
it completely interactive, with the characters involved, and gaming running 
through it all as well,” he says. “It’s properly scripted and fully rehearsed, 
with a team of about 25-30 people behind it. A proper theatre show!”


Choosing YouTube over television

Middleton is keen to maintain a creative quality control of “passion projects” 
like the live show and book, which extends to his views on how his videos may 
develop. Like Garrett, who recently told the Observer that“YouTube isn’t a 
stepping stone” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/28/stampy-joseph-garrett-youtube-childrens-presenter-millions-of-viewers>
, Middleton doesn’t see his future in traditional broadcast television.

Minecraft costumes and bewildered parents: a YouTuber at the UK's biggest 
games event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/30/youtuber-yogscast-kim-insomnia-58-video-game-event>
“I feel that what we’ve got as YouTubers with our own channels is always going 
to be the perfect outlet. The content is completely ours: we decide how we 
create it, whether it’s with a team or by ourselves, and it’s free to consume 
for everyone,” he says.


“Say I created something really awesome, I’m not sure there’s many situations 
where I’d want to distribute it anywhere other than my own channel. The media 
often assume that the top level is TV for someone like me, but I don’t see it 
that way.”

Games? That’s another story. PewDiePie (and his pugs) are currently starring 
in a mobile game, PewDiePie’s Tuber Simulator, which was downloaded more than 
1m times in the first 24 hours after its release.US YouTube gamer Jordan 
“CaptainSparklez” Maron has co-founded a mobile games studio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/10/youtube-minecraft-captainsparklez-mobile-games>
.

What price a DanTDM game? “It’s definitely something I’m interested in, and 
something we’re going to pursue maybe next year,” says Middleton, who says 
“time constraints” are the only reasons he’s not already working on this kind 
of project. “It’s definitely something I’d like to do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6a15f6d4e79e64318d8b0eced78b6332b2d6d76%2F0_0_1700_1334%2F1700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minecraft%2C%20books%2C%20panto...%20and%20pugs!%20YouTube%20star%20DanTDM%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minecraft%2C%20books%2C%20panto...%20and%20pugs%21%20YouTube%20star%20DanTDM%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fminecraft-books-pugs-dantdm-youtube%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6a15f6d4e79e64318d8b0eced78b6332b2d6d76%2F0_0_1700_1334%2F1700.jpg>
 PewDiePie Tuber Simulator has been a hit: could DanTDM follow suit? 
The lessons from YouTubers’ ventures into publishing, games and live shows are 
being shared within the community, which has always had collaboration at its 
heart rather than traditional celebrity-style beefs.

You’re more likely to find DanTDM and Stampy collaborating on a Mario Kart 8 
video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LX1eo_O0F64> or horsing around on-stage 
at a Minecraft conference <https://vine.co/v/e1POt2BVdeE> than igniting any 
kind of Blur/Oasis-style rivalry.

“What’s cool about YouTube, unlike TV, is that there isn’t that competition 
element. I mean, you could make it into that, as there’s obviously numbers 
involved, but people are free to watch whoever they want,” says Middleton.


“You don’t have to make the choice to watch either me or Stampy. You can do 
both. And on a personal level, when we meet up at a gaming convention or 
wherever, it’s good to be able to talk to people who are in exactly the same 
situation as you.”


That support will be important as Middleton plots his continued career. Plus 
the support of his pugs, of course.

“The dogs have become their own characters: they’re a part of my live show 
now,” he says. “I just love the breed: they’re really suited to people, not 
just YouTubers but anyone who works from home, because of their temperament.”

 