
It is the sense of scale that hits you. Despite intentionally blocky visuals, 
the open-world building gameMinecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/minecraft> has always produced 
landscapes of great diversity and beauty. To stand on a hillside and see the 
plains extend out for miles in all directions remains a great pleasure, even 
four years after its release.

But visiting the game in virtual reality, actually standing among the craggy 
chasms, being able to look up at the looming mountains, seeing them extend into 
the sky far above you ... this is a new, rather breathtaking experience.

In September Oculus founder Palmer Luckey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/07/oculus-founder-apologises-to-vr-fans-over-rift-price>
 announced a new version of Minecraft would support his company’s VR headset, 
the Oculus Rift. The original Java version of the game has been unofficially 
running on the hardware for over a year thanks to the efforts of the fan 
community, but the results have been mixed. This one is being co-developed by 
teams at Mojang (the game’s original developer), Oculus and at Microsoft’s 
Redmond campus, using the new Windows 10 iteration of the game, which will be 
the default going forward.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e830034615eb708bf8c46bd301c042399cc3a64%2F42_0_1879_1128%2F1879.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minecraft%20comes%20to%20Oculus%20Rift%20%E2%80%93%20hands-on%20in%20the%20virtual%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minecraft%20comes%20to%20Oculus%20Rift%20%E2%80%93%20hands-on%20in%20the%20virtual%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e830034615eb708bf8c46bd301c042399cc3a64%2F42_0_1879_1128%2F1879.jpg>
 The sense of height and scale is accentuated in Minecraft Oculus. Tall 
mountains and buildings are a lot more daunting. Photograph: Microsoft 
“Just getting it on to the headset seemed hard to begin with, but that was 
just the start of the challenge,” says Mojang’s Tommaso Checchi. “We got it 
running in 2014, but then we had to go through and make the game actually work 
VR. It’s hard to hit a balance where the game is comfortable but still feels 
perfectly like Minecraft, and you can still play with other people on the same 
server. VR has one problem – it’s hard to pull off an experience where you can 
move and rotate freely in a vast open world.”

At the Xbox spring showcase in San Francisco, Microsoft is showing off a demo 
map, prepared especially to show off the potential of VR Minecraft. The first 
thing you see when you put on the consumer headset, is a Minecraft-esque room 
with a large TV screen showing the map you’ve just opened. You can actually sit 
down and play the game like this – on a 2D virtual display within the VR 
environment, as though you’re playing it on a normal TV. The development team 
sees this as a crucial part of the VR ‘on ramp’. “It’s overwhelming at the 
start,” says Microsoft’s Saxs Persson, who has also been working on theHololens 
version of the game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/24/minecraft-hololens-mixed-augmented-reality-microsoft>
. “That’s why we start it in a living room, with a screen which is showing you 
Minecraft – because throwing you in there freezes people. This way, you get a 
chance to situate yourself, and it calms down the sensory systems, otherwise 
being fully immersed and moving around ... it can be uncomfortable.”

What works in VR – and what doesn’t

A big part of the conversion process has been learning what works and what 
really doesn’t in a virtual reality experience. The VR development community is 
starting to establish a few basic rules, and one of them is that there can be 
no screen movement that isn’t instigated by the player – it’s a one way trip to 
nausea. “We’ve done a ton of user testing,” says Persson. “At first we just 
ported it over and put people in the world, and while it was technically 
Minecraft it wasn’t a good experience. I lasted about five seconds and then I 
was sick. It just isn’t made for VR: the controls, and simple things like 
screen shake when something his you – it throws you off kilter.”

According to Persson, the team went through and systematically tweaked how 
Minecraft works: “We changed the movement: how you jump and turn, how swimming 
feels and how hit reactions affect the screen. And we had to change the way 
boats and mine carts worked too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84d195006d34a02b14466656b0121812c4f657ce%2F42_0_1879_1128%2F1879.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minecraft%20comes%20to%20Oculus%20Rift%20%E2%80%93%20hands-on%20in%20the%20virtual%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minecraft%20comes%20to%20Oculus%20Rift%20%E2%80%93%20hands-on%20in%20the%20virtual%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84d195006d34a02b14466656b0121812c4f657ce%2F42_0_1879_1128%2F1879.jpg>
 In the the Oculus version of Minecraft, the development team has had to remove 
the screen shake that usually accompanies being hit by a sword or arrow. 
Photograph: Microsoft 
Some problems have been less expected though. “One thing we found out recently 
is that dimly lit caves can make you sick,” says Checchi. “We think it’s 
because people try to really focus on details, but things shift and blur in the 
darkness as you move. We’ve tried to fix that.”

Once you’re ready, you can select to enter the Minecraft map, and then you 
find yourself immersed in the blocky environment, able to look around in all 
directions, as though it’s a real place. The game works with anXbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> controller, which you use to move 
around and interact with objects in the usual way – it’s just that the very 
slick head tracking replaces the need to look around with the analogue stick. 
It takes a little while to get used to directing the cursor with your head, 
especially when trying to open a chest or use a crafting table, but you do 
eventually acclimatise.

The demo starts in a small field beneath a large mountain range. When you look 
up, you see a distant castle right at the top of a vast peak. For a second it 
seems almost impossibly distant and imposing – it feels like an epic journey 
away; when you play Minecraft on a 2D screen, the scale of the worlds, the 
heights, depths and lateral distances that the environment contains, are just 
numbers, but being inside the world, suddenly the distances are palpable.

Chris Smith, a Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> 
developer who spent a week designing this map, is an enthusiastic guide. He 
directs me to a minecart and when I clamber aboard the vehicle powers up and 
takes me very quickly up a steep incline along the mountainside. It feels like 
being on a rollercoaster simulator, and this was the only point where I began 
to feel a little bit of motion sickness (other journalists reported mild nausea 
at different stages in the demo). As you reach the top, you can look round in 
all directions and get this rather unsettling feeling of height – it’s 
something Smith plays with later, by featuring a high bridge created out of 
glass blocks: you look down as you walk and see the valley surface seemingly 
hundreds of metres below.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6R7m3CmV-0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6R7m3CmV-0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6R7m3CmV-0&media=>
Smith also shows off some impressive red stone machines he’s made; one fires 
TNT crates into an enormous target which explodes and reveals a massive 
sculpture of an enderman modelled out of obsidian. We walk for a while among 
the trees while chickens flutter about around us, looking ridiculously cute and 
tangible in their new virtual forms.

Inside the castle though, the mood is darker. I very quickly run into a 
skeleton, which is often a slight shock in the 2D version of the game, but in 
the virtual world, with those dead eyes staring at you as it fires arrow after 
arrow, it’s actually pretty scary. Later, I’m rescued by some of the game’s 
giant Iron Golems, which tower above my character. Again, it’s a whole new 
feeling of scale and immersion – you get a sense of yourself as a rather puny 
physical presence in the world rather than a demigod-like figure.

‘You can look each other in the eye’

That sense of embodiment is also going to make this game interesting from a 
social standpoint. Players will be able to access any Minecraft server and play 
against people using standard 2D screens onPC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> and smartphone. But it’ll be 
fascinating when groups of friends are using Oculus and meeting together in VR 
Minecraft.

“One thing we’ve seen when playing with multiple people in VR is the heads are 
so expressive now, you can look each other in the eye - and that has certain 
connotations,” says Persson. “Some competitive multiplayer mini-games are just 
more fun now. Digging out underneath your buddy and then watching them looking 
up at you as they fall with these pleading eyes. It’s so different. And acting 
out, doing choreographed moves together, it’s super fun. It feels like you’re 
there, so the sort of things you want to do are slightly different.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f63c87e52427758ade5fe654a544f2253553081%2F42_0_1879_1128%2F1879.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minecraft%20comes%20to%20Oculus%20Rift%20%E2%80%93%20hands-on%20in%20the%20virtual%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minecraft%20comes%20to%20Oculus%20Rift%20%E2%80%93%20hands-on%20in%20the%20virtual%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Fminecraft-comes-to-oculus-rift-hands-on-in-the-virtual-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f63c87e52427758ade5fe654a544f2253553081%2F42_0_1879_1128%2F1879.jpg>
 The world’s inhabitants feel a lot more tangible in virtual reality. While 
enemy mobs are more threatening, chickens increase in cuteness. Photograph: 
Microsoft 
One problem with VR Minecraft as a social platform is that it doesn’t support 
keyboard input so it’ll be hard for people to communicate via text chat. The 
team doesn’t see this as a barrier though. “It’ll be interesting to trying new 
ways to communicate,” says Checchi. “For example, streaming your voice out of 
the character’s mouth. It’s technically pretty hard, but the Oculus has a 
microphone in it, so I guess they’re looking at that.”

As this VR experience runs in Windows 10 – like the Pocket, Desktop and 
Education iterations – it means most of the thousands of fan-made mods 
currently available won’t work. This makes it all the more important for 
Microsoft to start nurturing a refreshed creative community around its new 
Minecraft era. There are amazing possibilities here for completely innovative 
mini-games and adventures, but these will mostly come from amateur teams rather 
than Microsoft or Mojang – and most of those teams are still working on Java.

But for Persson, this is still early days for Minecraft VR and for virtual 
reality games in general. “There’s still so much to learn about how to make a 
good VR experience,” he says. “You have to unlearn a whole bunch of the simple 
things that you used to just take for granted. Then it’s one step at a time – 
that’s the fun part of it.

“With VR you can give people a new way to experience a world - which is what 
we set out to do. Very few developers have attempted open-world navigation in a 
VR space like this, but we’ve been forced to with this game. It’s exciting to 
be blazing trails. I’m not sure we have the answers to anything, but we’re 
further along the path than most.

“Just getting people immersed in Minecraft is the big step. We’ll see what 
happens after that.”

• Keith Stuart attended a press event in San Francisco, with travel and 
accommodation costs met by Microsoft.
 