
The human services minister, Alan Tudge, says he is unaware of any Centrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> recipient who is 
“completely convinced” they have been given a debt notice they do not owe.

Tudge spoke on the Centrelink debacle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
 for the first time since his return from summer holidays on Wednesday morning, 
saying he was committed to maintaining the government’s controversial automated 
debt-recovery system.

He told ABC’s radio national that he did not believe the process was flawed, 
despite a flood ofcomplaints to media outlets, unions, politicians, lawyers and 
support agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/centrelink-crisis-people-targeted-with-inaccurate-debts-may-be-able-to-sue>
 of vulnerable Australians struggling to deal withinaccurate welfare debts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
, sometimes in the tens of thousands of dollars.

Centrelink drops flawed advice to welfare recipients to keep payslips for six 
months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/centrelink-drops-flawed-advice-to-welfare-recipients-to-keep-payslips-for-six-months>
“I’m not aware of individuals who are completely convinced that they don’t owe 
money but have been given a debt notice,” Tudge said.

“I have read all of the media reporting of this but as I said, people are 
given the opportunity to update their records when a discrepancy is found to be 
present,” he said.

The comments are likely to rankle the many welfare recipients who have shown 
that they have been giveninaccurate notices of welfare debts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/this-is-what-happened-when-centrelink-called-to-review-my-false-debt-accusation>
, only to have them dramatically reduced when challenged.

They are also likely to anger welfare recipients who have reported not 
receiving Centrelink’s initial letter due to a change of address, struggling to 
find years-old payslips, reach the agency through its overloaded phone system, 
or navigate its confusing online service portal to dispute the debt.

Tudge expressed surprise at reports that some people were having to call 
Centrelink up to 350 times before getting through.


“I’m very surprised by that figure. I know that the call wait time for 
Centrelink can be long, the average call wait time at present is about 12 
minutes,” he said.

“People can also go to a Centrelink office and typically they’ll be able to 
see a person, in person, within 10 minutes.”


Centrelink crisis: people targeted with inaccurate debts may be able to sue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/centrelink-crisis-people-targeted-with-inaccurate-debts-may-be-able-to-sue>
His comments are at odds with the reports of welfare recipients, who are told 
to go online or use the agency’s phone service when they attend a physical 
office.

It also belies the significant problems faced by users of Centrelink’s phone 
system, which in 2013-14, blocked 13.7m of 56.8m calls and saw 30% of users 
hang up before reaching call staff,according to the Australian National Audit 
Office 
<https://www.anao.gov.au/work/performance-audit/management-smart-centres-centrelink-telephone-services>
.

Tudge also said he had been taken out of context when he threatened to jail 
welfare recipients in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
, saying he was referring only to those who committed deliberate welfare fraud.


He repeated the claim that the government had “recovered” $300m since 
introducing its new compliance system, again seemingly at odds with the 
department of humanservices general manager Hank Jongen’s statement that $300m 
in debts had been identified 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-04/centrelink-defends-debt-recovery-scheme/8161822>
. Traditionally, there is a significant difference between the level of debt 
identified, or raised, and the level of debt recovered.

Last financial year, for example, $2.8bn was raised, but only $1.54bn was 
recovered.

Last week, the government’s former digital chief Paul Shetler described the 
Centrelink failure, and recent scandals involving the Australian taxation 
office and the census, as “cataclysmic”.

The government claims about 80% of the discrepancies identified by its 
automated system resulted in an individual paying money back, meaning 20% of 
cases were later shown to be wrong.

Shetler said that type of error rate would be unacceptable in any private 
industry, would constitute fraud, and would send companies broke.

Tudge rejected the criticism, saying Shetler had not worked on the Centrelink 
system.

He said claims of a 20% error rate were inaccurate. 

“That’s a completely inaccurate description of that figure, what the figure is 
simply saying, is that when we have asked for that information, people have 
provided that information, and we have cleared up the matter for them,” Tudge 
said.

Tudge was asked whether it was fair that politicians accused of misusing 
taxpayer’s money were given second chances while welfare recipients were 
hounded and threatened with jail.

He said those accused of having welfare debts were given multiple chances.

“If you deliberately seek to get more money than you were entitled to, then 
yes, that is a fraud,” Tudge said.

“If, however, you have may have inadvertently put in incorrect income records, 
we’re actually giving you that opportunity now, because we’re reviewing them, 
we’re sending you a letter and saying there is a discrepancy.”

“We actually give you a first opportunity, we give you a second opportunity, 
we give you a third opportunity.”
 