
The social services minister, Christian Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christian-porter>, has defended 
Centrelink’s automated compliance system as “about as reasonable a process as 
you could possibly derive”.

The system, which began in July, has been the subject of a string of 
complaints in the past month, as anger grows over its crude use of data-matching
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/centrelink-urged-to-stop-collecting-welfare-debts-after-compliance-system-errors>
 to compare income reported to Centrelink with information held by the 
Australian tax office.

Centrelink's debt mistake: 'there's no way I could explain to them'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/centrelinks-debt-mistake-theres-no-way-i-could-explain-to-them>
Roughly 169,000 Australians, including those with disabilities, have now 
received letters from the government,warning them the data-matching has 
detected a discrepancy in their income information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
.

Those individuals are given 21 days to prove they are eligible for welfare 
received up to six years ago, or they will incur a debt and a 10% “debt 
recovery fee”. If they fail to pay, individuals are referred to debt 
collectors, and the human services minister,Alan Tudge, has previously 
threatened them with jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
.

Porter defended the system on Tuesday morning, saying it was fair and 
reasonable, and that only 276 complaints had been received so far.

“I think that this is about as reasonable a process as you could possibly 
derive,” Porter told ABC Radio National.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcentrelinks-welfare-debt-mistake-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Centrelink's%20welfare%20debt%20mistake%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcentrelinks-welfare-debt-mistake-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Centrelink%27s%20welfare%20debt%20mistake%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcentrelinks-welfare-debt-mistake-video-explainer&media=>
Centrelink's welfare debt mistake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2017/jan/03/centrelinks-welfare-debt-mistake-video-explainer>
A formal complaint, however, is different from lodging a dispute against a 
welfare debt. Porter would not say how many disputes had been lodged against 
welfare debts.

He dismissed calls for the system to be suspended, saying it had now 
identified $300m of overpayments to welfare recipients.

Porter said individuals who disagreed with Centrelink’s notice had plenty of 
opportunity to contest it.

“Ultimately, if a real discrepancy does exist then eventually we raise a debt, 
and that happens much later than this initial letter, and even then, there are 
many days in which you can dispute that debt, if you think that a mistake has 
been made,” he said.

“Then, when a repayment is arranged, it is arranged in a way that is 
financially suitable to the individual.

“It really is an incredibly reasonable process, the question is why wasn’t the 
previous government, Labor, when they were in charge, engaging in this process.”


He sought to clarify that the initial letters sent out to welfare recipients 
were not “debt letters”, despite the fact that, if not responded to, they will 
automatically lead to a debt.

The data-matching process appears to suffer from two main errors. 

In some cases, it has been shown to have crudely averaged out ATO information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/centrelinks-debt-mistake-theres-no-way-i-could-explain-to-them>
 on a person’s yearly income across all of Centrelink’s 26 fortnightly 
reporting periods.

Queenslander Michael Griffin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/centrelinks-debt-mistake-theres-no-way-i-could-explain-to-them>
, for example, was taken to have earned $1,000 every fortnight because his 
annual income was $26,000.

That does not take into account circumstances where a person has only worked 
for part of year, and is otherwise eligible for benefits.

A Centrelink whistleblower previously told Guardian Australia that many of 
those contacted by the agencywere simply paying the debt without question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
.

The source, who reviewed hundreds of cases where disputes were lodged, said 
only about 20 had turned out to be genuine.

Legal Aid Victoria also fears that many individuals are not receiving 
correspondence fromCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink>, and are being lumped 
with the debt by default.

Others say long waiting times on Centrelink’s phone system or problems with 
its online portal have prevented them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/fears-centrelink-online-glitch-may-send-welfare-recipients-to-debt-collectors>
 from lodging a dispute within 21 days.
 