
Prada’s profits fell 25% in the first half of this year, while the status of 
MiucciaPrada <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada> as Italian fashion’s 
go-to intellectual finds itself under threat from Gucci’s newfound enthusiasm 
for “allegorical cartography and rhizomatic thinking”. (Me neither.)

But this Milan fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week> catwalk show – a 
film-meets-fashion showcase in collaboration with David O Russell, director of 
American Hustle and The Fighter – was a strong statement that Prada is not 
content to be yesterday’s brand.


Prada, which this summer became one of the very last luxury brands to enter 
e-commerce, is embracing modernity. After a series of collections in which 
Prada has sought to unpick femininity’s backstory in relation to contemporary 
fashion – the role of lace at formative moments in women’s lives, for instance 
– she said backstage after this show that she was finished with her “historical 
period”.

“Enough with talking about the past, about what women have carried on their 
shoulders all these years,” she said. “It is time now to talk about the 
present.”

The notion of a woman in the spotlight and in jeopardy – the Miuccia role, 
arguably – was played out in Russell’s film, projected above the metal mesh 
catwalk throughout. It showed the actor Alison Williams in a blond Marilyn 
Monroe wig being followed through an airport, and watched by a long lens 
photographer.

The clothes on the catwalk, too, had a sense of intimacy. These were not 
show-pony catwalk classics but clothes a woman might wear to go about her day, 
unaware of being observed.

Their hair combed flat and secured with kirby grips, their heels sensibly low 
and their skirts a non-fashion knee-length, the models seemed to parody 
everyday dressing. But this being Prada, there were twists: brown and green, 
colours most women shy away from in real life, pervaded the catwalk, while a 
simple trench coat featured maribou feathers at the cuff.


For fashion consumers of a certain vintage, the name Max Mara will always 
conjure up a camel coat. But for teens and twentysomethings, Max Mara is now 
most closely associated with the image of model of the moment, Gigi Hadid. 
Hadid opened and closed the Max Mara show, her first catwalk appearance in 
Milan, and was joined by her model sister Bella. The night before the show, the
Max Mara <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/max-mara> flagship store in the 
city was mobbed by fans who gathered for a glimpse of Gigi Hadid at the launch 
of the BoBag handbag.


The attention on Hadid took an unpleasant turn after the Max Mara show, when 
Ukrainian prankster Vitalii Sediuk, previously arrested in LA for a red-carpet 
scuffle in which he broke Brad Pitt’s glasses, seized the 21-year-old as she 
walked to her car, lifting her off the ground. Hadid freed herself by elbowing 
her assailant, and had to be held back by a security guard from pursuing him. 
Hadid later hit back at news reports which focused on her actions rather than 
Sediuk’s, tweeting that she “had EVERY RIGHT to defend myself. How dare that 
idiot think he has a right to man-handle a complete stranger.” Alluding to his 
retreat in the face of her vigorous self-defence, she signed off “he ran quick 
tho”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmax-mara-bombshell-glamour-with-intellectual-chops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb962653056cba81e0eb73bdb7cc78062105ea425%2F0_0_5163_3488%2F5163.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Miuccia%20Prada%3A%20'It's%20time%20to%20talk%20about%20the%20present'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmax-mara-bombshell-glamour-with-intellectual-chops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Miuccia%20Prada%3A%20%27It%27s%20time%20to%20talk%20about%20the%20present%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmax-mara-bombshell-glamour-with-intellectual-chops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb962653056cba81e0eb73bdb7cc78062105ea425%2F0_0_5163_3488%2F5163.jpg>
 Gigi and Bella Hadid backstage at Max Mara. Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
On the catwalk, however, all was serenity. The camel coat was nowhere to be 
seen on the catwalk, this being a spring collection. Instead, lush green palm 
prints and sultry pencil skirts, worn wriggled high onto the torso and belted 
tightly at the waist, starred in a homage to Lina Bo Bardi, the Italian-born 
modernist architect whose long career in Brazil included the design of São 
Paulo Museum of Art. The contrast of slick, hard-edged silhouettes and 
fauna-splashed prints was inspired by Bardi’s quasi-brutalist buildings in 
their lush Brazilian context. The pencil skirts and bright colours came from 
the Tropicalia countercultural movement of 1960s Brazil, which Bardi was 
associated with, and which drew on the iconography of Brazilian folk heroine 
Carmen Miranda.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmax-mara-bombshell-glamour-with-intellectual-chops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc7258a2cfa719cab8a215f8b8e491cecef03ee4%2F0_0_2215_3072%2F2215.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Miuccia%20Prada%3A%20'It's%20time%20to%20talk%20about%20the%20present'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmax-mara-bombshell-glamour-with-intellectual-chops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Miuccia%20Prada%3A%20%27It%27s%20time%20to%20talk%20about%20the%20present%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmax-mara-bombshell-glamour-with-intellectual-chops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc7258a2cfa719cab8a215f8b8e491cecef03ee4%2F0_0_2215_3072%2F2215.jpg>
 Max Mara Spring Summer show. Photograph: Matteo Bazzi/EPA 
This concept of bombshell glamour with intellectual chops runs through every 
collection which British designer Ian Griffiths creates for Max Mara. The first 
campaign for which Max Mara recruited Gigi Hadid in 2015 was based on Eve 
Arnold’s photographs of Marilyn Monroe reading Ulysses; other recent seasons 
have been inspired by Dorothy Parker, and by the Russian artist Lyubov Popova.


The look – dubbed “voluptuous modernity” on the programme notes – was 
accessorised with bucket-shaped handbags, a style which looks to be holding 
strong into 2016, and by high-heeled, perforated clogs that which resembled 
Crocs, stoking speculation that the plastic shoes, which starred in Christopher 
Kane’s London Fashion Week show, will be next summer’s cult footwear.The look - 
dubbed “voluptuous modernity” on the programme notes - was accessorised with 
bucket-shaped handbags, a style which looks to be holding strong into 2016, and 
by high-heeled, perforated clogs which resembled Crocs, stoking speculation 
that the plastic shoes, which starred in Christopher Kane’s London Fashion Week 
show, will be next summer’s cult footwear.
 