
There has been no shortage of criticism levelled at the UK government over its 
recent proposal to increase the limit on aid funding it can channelthrough its 
private sector arm, the CDC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>
.

The Department for International Development (DfID) has been under fire over 
issues ranging from lack of transparency to a failure to demonstrate 
development impact. The latter point was highlighted by aNational Audit Office 
(NAO) report published on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/28/uk-aid-watchdog-calls-for-clearer-picture-of-how-investments-benefit-poor>
.

UK watchdog calls for clearer picture of how aid investments benefit the poor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/28/uk-aid-watchdog-calls-for-clearer-picture-of-how-investments-benefit-poor>
These are valid and important concerns that should be dealt with, as any 
increase in money to development finance institutions should be subject to the 
same level of scrutiny and accountability as the rest of the aid budget. Yet it 
is also worth providing a balanced account on the amount of money the UK gives 
to the CDC, as well as the positive impact these institutions can have on 
development.

Governments increasingly channel aid funds through such bodies, which can use 
the money to address market failures and invest in private sector firms and 
funds in developing countries. In 1990, there were hardly any investments of 
this kind, but by 2015 they had grown to $65bn (£52bn), equivalent toroughly 
half of global aid ($132bn) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/aid-budgets-hosting-refugees-oecd-figures>
.

This is an ongoing trend, 
<https://www.csis.org/analysis/development-finance-institutions-come-age> and 
it is possible we will see annual investments by development finance 
institutions surpass annual aid within the next decade. It is no wonder that 
the global community has assigned specific roles to these organisations to 
address thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 through theParis climate change agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations>
 and theUN Financing for Development conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/13/addis-ababa-development-finance-summit-all-you-need-to-know-sustainable-development-goals>
 in 2015.

The move out of obscurity will bring new challenges for institutions like the 
CDC, including working more visibly with local communities, governments and 
NGOs in addition to dealing with the companies in which they invest.

It is important to recognise that most jobs are created by the private sector, 
and that working with the private sector is vital for inclusive growth. The 
CDC’s annual report suggests it contributed to the creation of more than1m jobs 
in 2015 <http://www.cdcgroup.com/Corporate-information/Annual-Review-2015/>: 
directly, in the companies in which it invested, and indirectly, in linked 
companies.

While the techniques used to arrive at such an estimate are well-established, 
we can make improvements 
<https://www.odi.org/publications/7371-role-development-finance-institutions-promoting-jobs-structural-transformation>
, as they do little to account for jobs created in the long term through making 
the economy run more efficiently. Overall, however, the CDC’s impact measures 
are among the best to be found among development finance organisations, aid 
agencies, businesses or NGOs – though they can and should be further improved.

Monday’s report rightly emphasises the need to examine attribution more 
closely. Whether investment would have taken place at all – or in a different 
way – without CDC involvement is a question that goes to the heart of impact 
analysis in development economics.

However, this is not a challenge the CDC can tackle on its own, and 
development agencies need to commission more and better evaluations.

Meanwhile, individual investments can and do improve the lives of many 
ordinary citizens. In 2001, Mo Ibrahim, the founder and chairman of pioneering 
mobile phone firm Celtel (previously MSI Cellular),spoke about the benefits of 
such funds 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200102/cmselect/cmintdev/1028/2070202.htm>
. “The CDC was our first investor,”, he said, “and their presence has helped 
MSI attract both other developmental finance and private sector money from the 
likes of Citigroup and AIG.”

The positive impact of mobile phone technology on African farmers and 
households is indisputable. Elsewhere, the CDC’s significant investment in 
renewable energy in Ugandahas extended the reach and improved the reliability 
of the network 
<http://www.cdcgroup.com/The-difference-we-make/Case-Studies/Umeme/>, which has 
helped many firms and households.

UK accused of lack of transparency over rise in aid funding to private sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>
Investments by development finance institutions are now so significant that 
macroeconomic impactshave become visible 
<https://www.odi.org/projects/2276-role-development-finance-institutions-dfis-addressing-global-challenges>
, well beyond the individual project level. Statistical evidence soon to be 
published by the Overseas Development Institute suggests that a £10bn increase 
in exposure of such organisations in Africa would raise average incomes and 
labour productivity by a quarter of a per cent. The economist Finn Tarp and his 
colleagueshave convincingly argued 
<http://www.un.org/en/ecosoc/newfunct/pdf/aid_effectiveness-finn_tarp.pdf> that 
aid overall has a long-term positive impact on the recipient country’s GDP. 
Interestingly, our evidence finds that the GDP increase from development 
finance institution investments is in the same range, or actually higher, than 
all aid together.

Of course, there are areas for improvements in the conduct of organisations 
such as the CDC, ensuring maximum transparency and due diligence. It also needs 
to be acknowledged, as the NAO did this week, that positive changes have been 
made.

Much better targeting is still needed to ensure that projects offering the 
most to the world’s poorest people – through increased job opportunities and 
the stimulation of economic growth – receive investment. However, even those 
that appear to have few direct effects on poverty can still have considerable 
indirect impact on jobs and development overall. The influence of development 
finance bodies is likely to grow. It would be better to work with them to get 
the best returns on transformation and poverty reduction.

• Dr Dirk Willem te Velde is a senior research fellow at the Overseas 
Development Institute

 