
The world’s largest mobile technology event kicks off on Sunday with more than 
86,000 salespeople, software engineers, chip designers, device makers and 
television crews arriving in Barcelona for the five-day event.

With Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg headlining, alongside Google rising star 
Sundar Pichai and the omnipresent Will.i.am, who has moved from recording music 
into designing electronic wristbands, theMobile World Congress 
<http://www.mobileworldcongress.com/> will fill the halls of two separate 
exhibition centres and take over countless unofficial venues around the Catalan 
capital.

Mobile World Congress 2015: location and programmatic in the spotlight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/feb/27/mobile-world-congress-2015-facebook-samsung-ad-tech>
Among the big themes this year will be 5G, the faster wireless internet 
successor to4G <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/4g>, and the challenges 
bringing the developing world online. Executives from Twitter, Facebook, 
Pinterest and Airbnb will ensure that the rise of social media remains a 
talking point.

But the event’s organisers have for the most part steered clear of the more 
controversial topics that have lit up online discussion forums since Edward 
Snowden’s revelations two summers ago. At MWC 2015, surveillance and the 
ethical dilemma presented by commercialising private data will for the most 
part remain off the agenda.

“We will have government officials and policy makers there and private 
companies there but no one speaking for the users, especially the most 
vulnerable,” says Peter Micek, policy counsel atdigital human rights campaign 
group Access <https://www.accessnow.org/about>. “The fact that civil society is 
not invited to the biggest mobile technology event in the world says something.”

With 2,000 exhibitors jostling for attention, corporations will be well 
represented. TheUS Agency for International Development <http://www.usaid.gov/> 
(USaid) is also taking part this year, but charities and campaign groups remain 
thin on the ground. There is a panel discussion on Monday about data 
protection, but the speakers all represent corporate interestests other than 
Mozilla, the not for profit maker of the Firefox browser.


Access <https://www.accessnow.org/> has worked closely with networks like 
Vodafone, whose Egyptian masts were temporarily shut down during the Tahrir 
Square uprising of 2011, to create guidelines for how mobile phone companies 
should respond when asked to implement a communications blackout. But Micek 
says blackouts are increasing. It recently filed evidence to the international 
criminal court on events in the Central African Republic, where Orange and 
three other networks were asked to suspend text messages and international 
roaming for a period last summer. The blackout coincided with reports of 
increased civil unrest.

Net neutrality, however, will be under discussion, both at the ministerial 
side-conference, where the UK’s telecoms minister Ed Vaizey will rub shoulders 
with his Rwandan counterpart Jean Philbert Nsengimana, and on the main stage.

The US Federal Communications Commission <http://www.fcc.gov/> (FCC) last week 
voted to grant itself the power to enforce net neutrality, for example by 
preventing cable and mobile phone companies from charging to deliver traffic 
more quickly for those that can afford the fee. On Tuesday evening in 
Barcelona, FCC chairman Tom Wheeler will explain in a keynote speech the 
decision which he has described as“a red letter day for internet freedom” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/26/net-neutrality-activists-landmark-victory-fcc>
.

Net neutrality is only the beginning of an open internet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/26/net-neutrality-is-only-the-beginning-of-an-open-internet>
Apple as always will be notable by its absence from Barcelona, but South 
Korea’sSamsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> and Taiwan’s 
HTC will use the trade show to unveil the latest editions of their flagship 
handsets.

The Samsung S6 and the HTC <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/htc> One 
(M9) will make their first public appearance within hours of each other on 
Sunday night. With every attendee offered a fitness band to track their 
activity levels, calorie burn should go off the scale as reporters and analysts 
dash across town to catch both events.

The S6 is Samsung’s big money spinner and the stakes are higher than ever this 
year, with the company sliding in profitability asApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> cements its dominance in the 
west and conquers new markets like China.

Samsung is expected to release two models, one with a screen that curves over 
three edges, and another more conventional handset. The practical benefits of a 
multisided screen aren’t entirely clear, although Samsung claims to be the only 
company able to produce them. But Samsung is likely to follow Apple’s lead by 
using a processor designed by its own engineers, instead of the Qualcomm chips 
of previous models.

The S6 has been conceived not only as a competitor to the iPhone, but to 
advertise Samsung’s ability to make components like screens and chips for other 
device manufacturers. Samsung’s latest numbers explain the shift in emphasis. 
According to Bloomberg, operating profit at the chip division surged 36% to 2.7 
trillion won (£1.6bn) in the fourth quarter, while mobile-phone unit earnings 
slumped 64% to 1.96 trillion won (£1.2bn).

With Apple Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/26/apple-announces-watch-launch-event-for-monday-9-march>
 launched on 9 March, a flurry of rival products are under development. 
Microsoft, which is expected to unveil mid range Lumia phones running its 
latest Windows 10 software on Monday morning in Barcelona, may have a wearable 
project in the pipeline and there are rumours of a smartwatch from HTC.

Telecoms <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/telecoms> analyst Kester 
Mann, of CCS Insight, is predicting “an avalanche of wearable devices”, but 
also many more gadgets with which to populate the much discussed Internet of 
Things. Stands projecting a future of smart cars, homes and cities will no 
doubt draw the crowds, but Mann says these inventions have implications that 
their creators must consider.

“Switching your lights off, your alarms, linking all this up to a cellular 
network … security is important and privacy is fundamental. That’s an area 
where the industry needs to tread very carefully as it moves into a new era.”
 