
Some of Britain’s top model agencies colluded to fix prices charged to 
retailers, fashion brands and other customers, the competition regulator has 
alleged. FM Models, Models 1, Premier, Storm and Viva agreed to exchange 
competitively sensitive information, including future prices, from April 2013 
to March 2015,the Competition and Markets Authority alleged 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/model-agencies-and-trade-association-alleged-to-have-broken-competition-law>
. In some cases, agencies agreed a common approach to pricing, the CMA added.

The allegations affect agencies at the pinnacle of the British modelling 
industry. Premier was the agency thatlaunched Naomi Campbell’s career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/15/carole-white-premier-supermodels-agency-naomi-campbell-kate-moss>
,Storm discovered Kate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jan/03/kate-moss-at-40-supermodel-profile>
 and Cara Delevingne. Models 1 have represented Sophie Dahl and Yasmin Le Bon 
while Viva’s models include Stella Tennant and Natalia Vodianova.

The agencies allegedly used the Association of Model Agents trade association 
as a vehicle for price coordination when their representatives controlled the 
AMA’s managing council. The association circulated regular “AMA alerts” 
encouraging agencies to reject fees offered by customers and negotiate higher 
payments, the CMA said.

The CMA published its provisional findings after an investigation that began 
in March 2015. The regulatorcarried out dawn raids on agencies’ offices, 
interviewed staff and seized computer hard drives and files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/17/top-model-agencies-investigated-over-cartel-allegations-kate-moss-naomi-campbell>
 last year in operations that stunned the industry.

If the agencies are found to have broken the law they could be fined up to 10% 
of annual global revenues. Their directors could be fined, barred from running 
a company for 10 years and, in the worst cases, jailed.

Stephen Blake, the senior director of the CMA’s cartels and criminal group, 
said: “The allegations concern prices charged to a range of customers, 
including high street chains, online fashion retailers and consumer goods 
brands. The CMA alleges that these five model agencies sought to achieve higher 
prices in negotiations with their customers by colluding instead of competing.”

The CMA said it would consider statements from the agencies and the AMA before 
deciding whether they had broken the law.

Kirsty McGregor, news editor at trade publication Drapers, said: “It’s a can 
of worms that has been opened up. Retailers could feasibly decide to sue 
whichever agency they were working with because the CMA has done the groundwork 
for them in gathering evidence.”

The investigation is the CMA’s first into Britain’s creative industries. It is 
more used to deciding on less glamorous matters such as the state of retail 
banking and whether Poundland’s takeover of 99p stores hurts consumers. Blake 
said the creative sector was an important part of the economy that needed 
vigorous competition to operate effectively.

A source at an agency not involved in the investigation said: “We are not 
supplying a commodity. You’re representing a model and they are all different 
and they are all human beings and they are self-employed so [fees are] not a 
straightforward proposition.”

The CMA spent six months gathering information before deciding in October to 
proceed with a full inquiry. The main investigation ended in March and the 
watchdog has spent the past two months assessing evidence before publishing its 
findings.

The agencies and the AMA have about three months to submit their responses. 
The CMA will hope that at least one agency decides to cooperate early in return 
for a more lenient punishment. It is also offering up to £100,000 to people 
whose evidence helps the investigation.

The AMA’s website 
<http://www.associationofmodelagents.org/about-the-ama/who-we-are.html> says 
its council meets regularly to discuss industry matters and promotes the 
interests of its members and their models. It operates a code of practice 
covering health, wellbeing and financial arrangements for models.

Models <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/models> 1, Premier, Storm and Viva 
did not respond to requests for comment. FM ceased trading this year. The AMA 
was based at FM’s address and is chaired by FM’s co-founder Laurie Kuhrt, 
according to its website. A phone number on the website did not work.

 