
Hanging from the curved ceiling of the old town hall in Brno in the Czech 
Republic, is the preserved body of a dragon. The beast was said to have 
terrorised the inhabitants of the city centuries ago, until it was poisoned by 
a brave butcher. This area of the country is synonymous with myths and 
monsters. Ivan Mládek’s popular songJožin z bažin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S3tG1X5ewAg> tells of a swamp creature from 
Moravia – the lush region of which Brno is the largest city – travelling to 
nearby Prague to eat its tourists. But that was just a song, and the monster 
hanging by chains in the town hall is actually a crocodile – probably a gift 
from a visiting king in the 17th century. The myths and legends, however, live 
on.

Venture beyond the city, into the surrounding forests, and you’ll often find 
Jakub Dvorský, founder of game development studio Amanita Design, exploring and 
foraging with his young family. It is here, where many of the city’s folk tales 
originated, that Dvorský draws his inspiration. Born in the region and a nature 
lover, he now brings his two small children out to pick mushrooms and wild 
fruits, to spot animals or to stargaze long into the night. He talks about 
investigating nature at every level, from microbes to landscapes, to the 
universe beyond Earth.

Dvorský pipes every scrap of information he learns into his video games. They 
play out like fairytales of microbiology, following tiny creatures into 
subterranean cities populated by woodlice and lazy beetles, operating 
plant-like machinery to solve wordless puzzles. This can be seen across the 
still-evolving Samorost series, surreal point-and-click adventure games – about 
a space gnome and the planets he visits – and the standalone title Botanicula, 
which saw five adorable friends saving their tree from nasty parasites.

The exception is Machinarium, yet another adventure game this time about a 
robot saving his friends from a band of criminals. But even that game’s rusted 
metal city has a similar organic quality: a tangled metropolis of crawlspaces 
and staircases, the interiors arranged like snail shell patterns, the clusters 
of spires like an autumn thistle. These games are populated by insects or 
insect-like beings; they are swathed in the magic that Dvorský sees when he 
holds a zoom lens to a tree knot.

It would be a clever thing from the state to support the games industry, but 
our politicians are not very smart people
Jakub Dvorský 
This passion has been rewarded over the years, too. Not only has Amanita been 
recognised by the BBC and Nike, making small games for each of them, the studio 
has picked up multiple awards from bodies such as Indiecade and theIndependent 
Game Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/jan/08/igf-finalists-announced>
. The success of 2008’s Machinarium, the studio’s first big game production, 
springboarded it into financial independence allowing the team to pursue a 
multi-project structure.

Founded in 2003, Amanita began as Dvorský’s theses project while studying 
Animation Film at the Academy of Arts, Architecture and Design in Prague. It 
has since expanded. Six people and an external sound engineer are working on 
Samorost 3, and there are three other small teams working on their own projects 
– all sharing a fascination with nature and ecology. Dvorský oversees all 
production but he believes in the concept of the auteur, and so each team is 
led by its own creative director.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Famanita-design-czech-studio-games-samorost-machinarium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2627dc5eaac97339676d8e0a72d8c260497da90%2F0_251_5616_3372%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Monsters%20and%20microbiology%3A%20the%20Czech%20studio%20turning%20nature%20into%20amazing%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Famanita-design-czech-studio-games-samorost-machinarium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Monsters%20and%20microbiology%3A%20the%20Czech%20studio%20turning%20nature%20into%20amazing%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Famanita-design-czech-studio-games-samorost-machinarium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2627dc5eaac97339676d8e0a72d8c260497da90%2F0_251_5616_3372%2F5616.jpg>
 Even sound effects are produced using natural materials. Photograph: Amanita 
Design 
It’s an approach taken from his education in Prague, where he studied animated 
film, sometimes under the wing ofCzech stop-motion animator Jiří Barta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/sep/27/artsfeatures1>. It was here that 
Dvorský established a connection with the Czech-Slovak surrealist group that 
Barta mingled with in earlier decades. Some Czech artists of Amanita’s 
generationhold disdain 
<http://www.surrealismcentre.ac.uk/papersofsurrealism/journal3/acrobat_files/Solarik.pdf>
 for their parents and their cohorts for collaborating with the communist 
regime that oversaw Czechoslovakia until 1989. However, Dvorský feels a 
connection with how the Czech surrealists and other eastern European artists 
operated clandestinely, circulating their artistic critiques of the regime as
samizdat <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samizdat>. 

The politics of the era may not have transposed to the work of Amanita Design, 
but the acquired skills and thematic interests – puppetry, bucolic stories, 
fairytales, and Švankmajer’s notion of tactile art – certainly have. Every 
member of Amanita Design has an academic degree, specialising in either visual 
or audio artistry. For Samorost 3, Dvorský works closely with painter Adolf 
Lachman and animator Vaclav Blín, while the sound production team consists of 
Tomáš “Pif” Dvořák and the musician Tomáš “Floex” Dvořák.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Famanita-design-czech-studio-games-samorost-machinarium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93c949adfd456f75dd721c1126a6c85e1b6bcafe%2F0_211_2968_1784%2F2968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Monsters%20and%20microbiology%3A%20the%20Czech%20studio%20turning%20nature%20into%20amazing%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Famanita-design-czech-studio-games-samorost-machinarium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Monsters%20and%20microbiology%3A%20the%20Czech%20studio%20turning%20nature%20into%20amazing%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Famanita-design-czech-studio-games-samorost-machinarium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93c949adfd456f75dd721c1126a6c85e1b6bcafe%2F0_211_2968_1784%2F2968.jpg>
 Character sketches from Amanita’s Samorost series. Photograph: Amanita Design 
Also passed on through this lineage, if only intuitively, is the importance of 
having the mentality of a collective, which is necessary to any underground 
group’s survival. Dvorský describes the studio as a “free gathering of 
friends,” even though most of them work from home in separate cities, and only 
a few ever attend the official Amanita offices; a cosy apartment in the middle 
of Prague with three rooms and a kitchen. Some may lunch together in the week, 
but most spend as much time as possible with their families, and there is only 
one annual get-together, which is typically held during the summer at Dvorský’s 
countryside cottage.

Czechoslovakia used to be an animation superpower. I hope Amanita and others 
can continue that great tradition
Jakub Dvorský 
Where Amanita’s collective mentality exists is in its support of local 
organisations: the team sends money to ecological groups that fight for 
wilderness conservation, but also helps the local game development scene 
through consulting, conferences, and talent recruitment. Dvorský says he does 
this as higher forces in theCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> won’t. “I really doubt 
anything will change in this regard in the near future,” he says. “It would be 
a clever thing from the state to support the games industry, especially young 
creative studios and individuals, but our politicians are not very smart people 
and the games lobby is weak if not existent.”

Dvorský mentions that there is one grant from the EU available to Czech video 
game talent, “but it’s difficult to fulfil all the requirements and it’s 
available only to already established companies, so it’s useless for young 
indie developers”. He hopes that if Samorost 3, due out later this year, is a 
success it could lead to the wider recognition and prosperity of Czech culture 
and arts.

 “Czechoslovakia used to be an animated film superpower, which is not true any 
more, but I hope Amanita and other Czech indie studios have a chance at 
continuing that great tradition,” he says. Dvorský also adds that, unlike the 
short films Czechoslovakia has become known for, video games have more chance 
of generating income. And, while other Czech game companies (Bohemia 
Interactive, Keen Software, Madfinger Games) have developed westernised 
approaches to design, Amanita has proven that none of the country’s home-grown 
influences, its pastoral landscapes or its surreal animated films, need be 
eschewed to achieve global recognition.
 