
More than a quarter of UK overseas aid will be spent by ministries other than 
the Department for International Development by 2019/20, according to figures 
that have sparked renewed concern about changes to Britain’s aid policy, and 
the risk of its coffers being raided by other parts of government.

The aid budget has long been eyed up by officials in other overstretched 
departments, including the Ministry of Defence,which has been involved in a 
campaign to draw millions from DfID 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/apr/30/ministry-defence-overseas-aid-patrols>
 by suggesting that its budget be used to pay for flights on military aircraft, 
some navy patrols and body armour.


UK development minister challenged over ‘wasted aid’ claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/14/uk-development-minister-challenged-over-wasted-aid-claim>
DfID has now released figures showing that the proportion of overseas 
development assistance (ODA) estimated to be spent by other departments will 
rise from 18% this year to 26% in 2019/20.

The figures were provided Rory Stewart, a junior DfID minister, in answer to a 
parliamentary question, and are based on the most recent expectations of ODA 
spending in the years ahead.

This comes against the backdrop of warnings by the new DfID secretary, Priti 
Patel, that she plansa radical shake-up of the way the aid budget is spent and 
manage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
d 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
, and that her approach will be based on “core Conservative principles”.


Members of the international development committee are to press DfID’s 
permanent secretary later this year for a breakdown of which other departments 
are expected to spend the aid money.


Stephen Doughty, a Labour member on the committee and the MP who lodged the 
parliamentary question, said: “This would be the first time that the amount of 
official development assistance spent by departments other than DfID is more 
than quarter.

“It’s worrying because other departments are not subject to the same level of 
scrutiny and quality checks as DfID, but it also suggests that there are
increasingly blurred lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/feb/21/david-cameron-aid-military-ngos>
 between the use of aid for poverty reduction and other purposes. There is 
clearly an overlap between certain aspects of work on security and climate 
change but such a significant shift suggests this is more about a political 
agenda to satisfy other ministers who have designs on DfID’s budget.”

Mark Lowcock, DfID’s permanent secretary, told the committee last week 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/international-development-committee/the-work-of-the-department-for-international-development/oral/38446.html>
 that internationally set rules governed what counted as aid, and that 
activities such as peacekeeping could count as such.

“Whether it passes through the MoD budget or the FCO budget or our budget is 
irrelevant to whether it scores as aid or not,” he added.

“The rules were broadened very slightly at the beginning of this year, because 
there was a wide agreement that there are some things that should appropriately 
be scored as development assistance, like training the military on human rights 
and sexual crime, which was not being scored as aid and was creating a perverse 
incentive. Both the MoD and we are doing more of that, but it only scores as 
aid because it fits within the rules.”

Saira O’Mallie, interim UK Director of the ONE Campaign, said: “British 
taxpayers must be assured that any department spending UK aid will adopt the 
same high standards of transparency as DfID, with a focus on the poorest 
countries.

“Without that guarantee we would exercise caution because ODA’s primary 
purpose is to tackle extreme poverty. Our aid budget cannot be diverted to 
countries or areas solely for our strategic interests.

“DfID spending is among the most transparent in the world, while the MoD and 
FCO have previously come under fire, having ranked poorly by international 
standards. With more aid being spent outside DfID it’s crucial that other 
departments raise their standards as a matter of urgency if we want to continue 
being a world leader in supporting the world’s poorest.”
 