
Businesses are failing to work on the UN’s sustainable development goals (SDGs 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-development-goals.html>), 
according to two new surveys, despite being billed as having a key role to play 
in achieving the ambitious goals.

With an estimated investment gap of at least $3tn annually 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/04/the-missing-development-trillions-where-will-they-come-from>
 across the SDGs for the next 15 years, private sector involvement is critical 
if countries are to succeed. Yet fewer than half of global companies plan to 
engage with the goals, according to Ethical Corporation’sState of Responsible 
Business 2016 <http://events.ethicalcorp.com/reports/SORB/index.php> report, 
which surveyed 2,045 sustainability professionals globally (36% of whom worked 
for a company or a brand).


Sustainable development goals: what business needs to know #SDGs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/sep/24/sustainable-development-goals-business-sdg-targets>
Meanwhile, a study 
<http://corporate-citizenship.com/our-insights/advancing-sustainable-development-goals-business-action-millennials-views/>
 from sustainability consultancy Corporate Citizenship found the lack of 
tangible business action on the SDGs is causing a trust problem among 
consumers, particularly so-called millennials. Findings showed that despite 81% 
of millennials believing business has a key role to play in achieving the SDGs, 
the majority of businesses are not yet acting.

This is not surprising, says Lord Mark Malloch-Brown, chairman of the Business 
and Sustainable Development Commission (a not-for-profit organisation focusing 
on sustainable business), and former deputy UN secretary-general.

“[Sustainable business] is a movement that’s still gathering momentum and 
authority,” he says. “There’s also a realm of difference [between] those who 
are trying to make sustainability part of their core business strategy and 
those who still see it as an ‘add-on’.”

US engagement low

Regionally, respondents in Africa, Latin America and the Middle East are 
engaging most with the goals, according to Ethical Corporation’s research, with 
the lowest level of engagement (37%) in North America.

US-headquartered businesses are sometimes slower than their counterparts in 
Europe to embrace UN-sponsored initiatives, says Aron Cramer, CEO of 
sustainability consultancy BSR, adding they “have a cultural preference to do 
first and talk later”. “That said, we see a great many [US] companies, such as 
Microsoft and others, embracing the goals and working towards integrating them 
into their business strategies.”

Developed regions are focusing primarily on climate action (SDG 13), the 
report finds, while developing regions are prioritising pressing development 
challenges. SDG four, quality education, came out top in Africa, for example.

Climate action was also the most supported goal among corporate and brand 
respondents (63%), followed by SDG eight, decent work and economic growth 
(52%), and SDG 12, responsible consumption and production (51%), which was 
particularly popular among apparel, fast-moving consumer goods and 
manufacturing companies. SDG one, no poverty, and SDG two, no hunger, were 
among the least supported goals, scoring 22% and 20% respectively.

Integrating the SDGs into business 

Although it’s too early for practical, widespread business action on the SDGs, 
companies are doing the groundwork to integrate the goals into their 
sustainability strategies, according to Malloch-Brown.

Building on a sound, established approach to human rights and environmental 
issues is vital, says Ole Lund Hansen, chief of leadership programmes at the UN 
Global Compact, before companies determine where their activities have an 
impact on people, economies or the environment, and prioritise specific goals.

From there, businesses need to consider which SDGs reflect their own purpose, 
review existing sustainable development work in the bigger picture context of 
the goals, and identify where they stand to make the most difference, says 
Cramer.

 Hansen says companies should incentivise every employee to achieve 
SDG-related targets, including through performance reviews.

A report 
<https://www.dnvgl.com/technology-innovation/spaceship-earth/index.html> by 
risk management firm DNV GL highlights 17 companies (including Unilever, 
Siemens, Marks & Spencer and Danone) taking action on specific SDGs, and 
concludes that businesses of this kind are ready to take “extraordinary action” 
to help achieve the goals.

The report says these firms are characterised by their ability to see the 
potential of combining growth and sustainability, form collaborations, use 
technology to achieve scale and reach, and see the SDGs as a way to achieve 
competitive advantage.

The business it highlights for SDG 10 (reduced inequalities), Kenyan 
telecommunications giant Safaricom, created the mobile money platform M-Pesa, 
which is now used by more than 25m people in Africa, Asia and Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbusinesses-ignore-un-sustainable-development-goals-survey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa78b170675ab6f74916c7387e0acc7ba8667bc6f%2F61_0_2631_1579%2F2631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20than%20half%20of%20all%20businesses%20ignore%20UN's%20sustainable%20development%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbusinesses-ignore-un-sustainable-development-goals-survey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20than%20half%20of%20all%20businesses%20ignore%20UN%27s%20sustainable%20development%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbusinesses-ignore-un-sustainable-development-goals-survey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa78b170675ab6f74916c7387e0acc7ba8667bc6f%2F61_0_2631_1579%2F2631.jpg>
 Safaricom headquarters in Nairobi Photograph: Thomas Mukoya/Reuters 
It allows people who struggle to access traditional financial services to send 
and receive money via their mobile phones, and has provided a springboard for 
further innovations in renewable energy, healthcare, food and agriculture. For 
example, off-grid solar company M-Kopa Solar is nowproviding solar energy 
<http://solar.m-kopa.com/about/company-overview/> to 400,000 customers in east 
Africa, who pay for the service using M-Pesa.

The carrot and the stick

Above all, the SDGs must become central to core business goals and investment 
decisions, according to Unilever CEO Paul Polman, who believes that the SDGs 
offer the “greatest economic opportunity of a lifetime 
<http://businesscommission.org/index.php?p=our-work/sustainable-development-isnt-just-doing-the-right-thing-its-good-business-sense>
”. He says Unilever’s “sustainable living” brands (which it defines as those 
that have integrated sustainability into their purpose and products) aregrowing 
30% faster 
<https://www.unilever.com/sustainable-living/sustainable-living-news/news/sustainable-living-brands-leading-unilever-growth.html>
 than the rest of the company.

Businesses can expect more laws incentives and deterrents on 
development-critical issues,says 
<http://www.ethicalcorp.com/sdgs-we-need-more-just-sunshine-stories> Malcolm 
Preston, global sustainability leader at PwC. Catalysing further progress on 
the goals will require a more balanced approach to regulations on investment, 
particularly renewable energy investments v fossil fuel subsidies, says 
Malloch-Brown. Policy-makers could also consider making corporate contributions 
to sustainable development mandatory,says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/03/the-missing-development-trillions-how-you-would-fund-the-sdgs>
 Ashoka’s Archana Sinha. India, for example, has obliged major organisations to 
donate at least 2% of their net annual profit to charity.

“Governments need to put their noses under the hood and understand the type of 
regulatory environment businesses require,” Malloch-Brown concludes. “If you’re 
going to let them in [to the field of development] because you need the 
finance, you can only let them through if they’re not going to be rapacious 
market-makers, if they’re going to invest in long-term business models.”
 