
Morocco’s king will switch on the first phase of a concentrated solar power 
plant on Thursday that will become the world’s largest when completed.

The power station on the edge of the Saharan desert will be the size of the 
country’s capital city by the time it is finished in 2018, and provide 
electricity for 1.1 million people.



Noor 1, the first section at the town of Ouarzazate, provides 160 megawatts 
(MW) of the ultimate 580MW capacity, helpingMorocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco> to save hundreds of thousands of 
tonnes of carbon emissions per year.

“At around 2pm, the king will press a button, the parabolic mirrors will start 
turning, the heat will begin to turn the turbines and the plant will come to 
life,” said Maha el-Kadiri, a spokeswoman for Masen, Morocco’s renewable energy 
agency.

Morocco poised to become a solar superpower with launch of desert mega-project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/26/morocco-poised-to-become-a-solar-superpower-with-launch-of-desert-mega-project>
King Mohammed VI will then lay the foundations for Noor 2, the next stage of 
the solar complex. Noor 1 had been due to open in December but was delayed by 
unspecified “agenda concerns,” el-Kadiri said.

After it is switched on, the plant will initially provide 650,000 local people 
with solar electricity from dawn until three hours after sunset.


“It is a very, very significant project in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>,” said Mafalda Duarte, the manager 
of Climate Investment Funds (CIF), which provided $435m (£300m) of the $9bn 
project’s funding. “Morocco is showing real leadership and bringing the cost of 
the technology down in the process.”

The north African country plans to generate 42% of its energy from renewables 
by 2020, with one-third of that total coming from solar, wind and hydropower 
apiece.

Morocco hopes to use the next UN climate change conference, which it hosts in 
November, as the springboard for an even more ambitious plan to source 52% of 
its energy from renewable sources by 2030.

“Between now and [the next conference], many projects will have come to light 
and we will prove that we can match our energy demands with renewables,” the 
country’s energy minister, Abdelkader Amara,said  
<http://www.thenational.ae/business/energy/morocco-sets-target-for-50-per-cent-renewable-energy-by-2030>
at a meeting during the Paris climate summit 
<http://www.thenational.ae/business/energy/morocco-sets-target-for-50-per-cent-renewable-energy-by-2030>
 in December.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmorocco-to-switch-on-first-phase-of-worlds-largest-solar-plant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb873b0902ffe061ff6121ed13b5ba395490a89ee%2F0_0_2364_1582%2F2364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Morocco%20to%20switch%20on%20first%20phase%20of%20world's%20largest%20solar%20plant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmorocco-to-switch-on-first-phase-of-worlds-largest-solar-plant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Morocco%20to%20switch%20on%20first%20phase%20of%20world%27s%20largest%20solar%20plant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmorocco-to-switch-on-first-phase-of-worlds-largest-solar-plant%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb873b0902ffe061ff6121ed13b5ba395490a89ee%2F0_0_2364_1582%2F2364.jpg>
 The first phase of the solar complex , Noor 1, located at the “door of the 
desert” in the south-central Moroccan town of Ouarzazate. Photograph: 
OLI/Landsat 8/Nasa 
Such a move would have regional implications. CIF estimates that if 
international banks and governments deployed another 5GW of solar energy, 
electricity production costs could fall by 14%. Scaling that up to 15GW would 
cut costs by 44%.

Some $3.9bn has been invested in the Ouarzazate solar complex, including $1bn 
from the German investment bank KfW, $596m from the European Investment Bank 
and $400m from the World Bank.

If the dreams of its architects are realised, the resulting energy will 
eventually be exported north to Europe, and eastwards to Mecca, as well as 
providing a secure source of energy at home.

“Morocco knew their demand for electricity was growing at 7% a year and that 
they were dependent on imports for 97% of that energy,” Duarte said. “They had 
a vision to promote renewables at a time when oil prices were high and they 
undertook regulatory reforms, put institutions in place, and they have done a 
great job.”
 