
As the host of this year’s COP22 <http://www.cop22-morocco.com/> climate 
change conference in Marrakech, Morocco has been keen to demonstrate its green 
credentials andmake this COP the “African COP” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/07/cop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference>
.

In the past year, Morocco has banned the use of plastic bags 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/07/green-morocco-bans-plastic-bags-160701141919913.html>
, launched new plans forextending the urban tram networks in Casablanca and 
Rabat <http://www.uitp.org/news/COP22-morocco>, started the process of 
replacing its dirty old fleet of buses and taxis, launched Africa’s first city
bicycle hire scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/nov/15/medina-bikes-africas-first-cycle-share-scheme-launches-in-marrakech>
, and launched a new initiative – the “Adaptation of African Agriculture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/07/cop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference>
” – to help the continent’s farmers adjust to climate change.

Related: COP22 host Morocco launches action plan to fight devastating climate 
change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/07/cop22-host-morocco-marrakech-action-plan-fight-devastating-climate-change-africa-farmers-un-conference>

But by far the most attention has been on the development of “mega” 
infrastructure projects in an ambitious plan to transform the country’s energy 
mix.

Morocco has no fossil fuel reserves so is almost entirely reliant on imports. 
In 2015 King Mohammed VI committed the country to increasing its share of
renewable electricity generation to 52% by 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/04/morocco-to-switch-on-first-phase-of-worlds-largest-solar-plant>
, aiming for the installation of around 10 gigawatts (GW). Of that, 14% is 
expected to come from solar, with plans to install2GW of new capacity by 2020 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/11/20/morocco-to-make-history-with-first-of-its-kind-solar-plant>
, as well as increases in wind power and hydraulic dams. Morocco has even 
opened the door to exchanging electricity produced from renewable sources with 
Europe.

Morocco’s INDC (Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
<http://www.iisd.org/project/morocco-intended-nationally-determined-contribution>
) plan submitted to the UNFCCC is equally ambitious and commits the country to 
cutting greenhouse gas emissions – particularly in agriculture –by 32% by 2030 
<http://www.moroccanembassylondon.org.uk/en/news.asp?num=680>, compared to 
business as usual. Morocco has also committed to planting200,000 hectares of 
forest 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0ahUKEwjrwcHT0q_QAhWKIcAKHXUYBZgQFggmMAI&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww4.unfccc.int%2Fndcregistry%2FPublishedDocuments%2FMorocco%2520First%2FMorocco%2520First%2520NDC-English.pdf&usg=AFQjCNE4KTnNg118--LrabJQSuKphupsOw&sig2=vyXD11Opiuy4AYrBXpD-HA&bvm=bv.139138859,d.ZGg&cad=rja>
 (pdf) and greatly increasing in irrigation. The commitment is dependent on 
accessing climate financing, but translates to a cumulative reduction of 401 
megatonnes of C02 over the period 2020-30. In 2015 Morocco completelyremoved 
subsidies on petroleum products 
<https://www.oxfordbusinessgroup.com/analysis/morocco-cuts-energy-subsidies>.

The first phase of the giant Noor solar complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/04/morocco-to-switch-on-first-phase-of-worlds-largest-solar-plant>
 near Morocco’s southern desert town of Ouarzazate is the 160MW Noor One plant, 
which was opened by the king in February. Instead of PV (photovoltaic) solar 
panels, Noor uses CSP (concentrated solar power) technology – giant mirrors to 
reflect the sun’s rays on to tubes containing liquid which is super-heated to 
drive turbines. CSP offers storage of electricity for up to three hours after 
the sun has set, which covers peak demand times.
 Renewables sites in Morocco  See the full visual 
Close to the site of Noor One, Noor two, currently under construction, will 
use the same CSP technology, but on a bigger scale with the hope of storing 
electricity for seven hours. Noor Three however will use a new variant on CSP 
technology – the solar tower, where the mirrors are directed at a central point.

Between them they will add another 350MW to the national grid 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=8&ved=0ahUKEwjIm5i_16_QAhXMB8AKHYU4CJMQFghIMAc&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.afdb.org%2Ffileadmin%2Fuploads%2Fafdb%2FDocuments%2FGeneric-Documents%2FNOORo_Press_Kit_Eng.pdf&usg=AFQjCNH0q3caEmR08M5bwUcqkuFU4SzaGg&sig2=-sLi7jBdXFQUv_mpg3B83A&cad=rja>
, and are expected to be completed by 2017/18. Noor Four will be constructed 
near the High Atlas town of Midelt and Morocco’s renewables agency, Masen, 
announced this week at COP22 that it would open the bidding for two 400MW 
combined PV and CSP plants in early 2017.

Morocco is also investing in wind. A consortium of Enel Green Power, Nareva 
(owned by King Mohammed VI’s investment company) and Siemenswon a bid in March 
<https://www.enel.com/en/media/press/d201603-enel-green-power-with-nareva-and-siemens-awarded-preferred-bidder-status-for-850-mw-of-wind-capacity-in-morocco.html>
 to build five new wind farms at different sites across Morocco – Midelt, 
Tangier, Jbel Lahdid, and Tiskrid and Boujdour in the disputed Western Sahara 
territory. Their combined capacity will be 850MW, a huge increase taking 
Morocco closer to its aim of producing14% of electricity from wind by 2020 
<http://www.embassyofmorocco.us/energy.htm>. The unit cost in the tender 
documents was one of the lowest in the world, at just $0.03 per kWh.

But while developing renewable power sounds good on paper, cost will be a big 
factor. The launch of the Noor CSP project has helped the price of electricity 
produced by CSP to come down to around $0.16 per kWh, but that looks expensive 
compared tosolar PV which has fallen as low as $0.03 per kWh 
<https://cleantechnica.com/2016/08/18/new-low-solar-price-record-set-chile-2-91%C2%A2-per-kwh/>
.

It remains to be seen whether the costs of CSP will fall low enough to be 
globally commercially competitive, and deliver cost-effective renewable power 
for Moroccan consumers. CSP also uses large amounts of water to keep the 
mirrors clean – a real problem in water-stressed Morocco. At the same time, 
Morocco has not totally kicked the fossil fuel habit –coal still makes up the 
biggest part of energy production today (35%) 
<http://www.cadtm.org/Le-secteur-de-l-energie> and is set to be expanded over 
the next five years. The new energy mix will include at least 3,900MW of energy 
from natural gas, and the search for hydrocarbon deposits on Moroccan soil 
continues.

 