
A strong Halloween, price cuts and a new premium range have helped Morrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> notch up its fourth 
consecutive quarter of like-for-like sales growth.

The Bradford-based supermarket chain continues its recovery, reporting a rise 
of 1.6% in like-for-like sales excluding fuel for the 13 weeks to 30 October.

Like-for-like sales have been growing for a year. Morrisons cut its prices by 
1% overall during the quarter – and introduced “The Best” premium range with 
hundreds of products. It plans to launch more The Best products in the run-up 
to Christmas.

Morrisons puts Marmite price up 12.5%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/morrisons-puts-marmite-price-up-unilever-fall-pound-brexit>
The supermarket group decided to offer more Halloween products after listening 
to customers. This year’s Halloween was its biggest ever, with sales up 20% 
year on year.

Total sales excluding fuel fell 1.2% during the third quarter, reflecting the 
impact of supermarket closures and thesale of 140 M local convenience stores 
<http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/20/morrisons-faces-20m-liability-over-struggling-my-local-group>
 last year.

The Morrisons chief executive, David Potts, said: “There is a lot more we plan 
to do. We will keep investing in becoming more competitive and improving the 
shopping trip, and I am confident we will serve our customers even better 
during the important trading period ahead.”

The era of price cuts at supermarkets may soon be over. Morrisons recently 
became the first supermarket to hike the price of Marmite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/morrisons-puts-marmite-price-up-unilever-fall-pound-brexit>
, by 12.5%, along with other Unilever goods, after the Anglo-Dutch consumer 
goods company raised its prices by an average of 10% on a wide range of 
products.

Unilever, one of the biggest suppliers to British supermarkets, blamed the 
slide in sterling since the referendum. This revived fears about food price 
rises as a result of the Brexit vote.

Morrisons’ new management team, most of whom hail from Tesco including Potts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/25/david-potts-from-tesco-to-morrisons-via-manchester-city-nearly>
, “are making the right decisions but in the coming months they will be facing 
margin pressure from Brexit and national living wage margin pressure,” said 
Phil Dorrell, partner at Retail Remedy consultants.

“Morrisons have productivity opportunities to pave their way but we are not 
sure they are best placed to be able to deliver the changes to achieve store 
efficiency without compromising the offer.

“Our prediction is that this will be the last cheap Christmas before prices 
are affected by inflationary pressure so we expect price to play its role in 
the Morrisons marketing message.”

 