
Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> was the FTSE 100’s 
highest climber after the supermarket chain reported its third consecutive 
quarter of sales growth.


Sales, excluding fuel, at stores open for more than a year rose 2% in the 
three months to the end of July, more than double the rate analysts had 
predicted. This helped lift underlying half-year profits at Britain’s fourth 
largest grocer by a better-than-expected 11% to £157m.


Total sales slid 0.4% to just over £8bn, with Morrisons saying it had shut 
down stores equivalent to nearly 5% of its total space. The closure of 
loss-making stores helped boost profits and led to Morrison’s first rise in 
sales at its physical outlets since 2012.


Morrisons finished the day as the biggest riser on the FTSE 100 on Thursday 
morning as investors reacted positively to its first-half results, with shares 
up 7.5% to 208p.

The retailer said it also expected cost savings to exceed its £1bn target by 
the end of 2016-17 after it cut head office jobs, rejigged its pensions scheme 
and made lots of small efficiency savings.

David Potts, the chief executive, said: “We are still in the foothills of our 
recovery programme. We’ve returned the business to core customers and sped the 
business up. We’re pleased with progress so far and there’s a lot more we can 
do and will do for customers and colleagues but so far so good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmorrisons-posts-another-quarter-of-growth-after-price-cuts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb33be855b943cd78c05b8a406145ce74f7202aa7%2F2373_173_742_928%2F742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Morrisons%20shares%20bounce%20after%20surprise%20sales%20growth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmorrisons-posts-another-quarter-of-growth-after-price-cuts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Morrisons%20shares%20bounce%20after%20surprise%20sales%20growth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmorrisons-posts-another-quarter-of-growth-after-price-cuts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb33be855b943cd78c05b8a406145ce74f7202aa7%2F2373_173_742_928%2F742.jpg>
 The chain’s chief executive, David Potts. 
The Bradford-based business said it was too early to know how the EU 
referendum result would affect the British economy, but “customers tell us 
their food shopping has not changed. We have seen no negative impact on 
customer sentiment or customer behaviour.”

However, it warned of some uncertainties, especially on the price of imported 
food, if sterling remained at its current lower level against the euro and the 
dollar.

Potts said that whatever the rise in costs and economic impact of the Brexit 
vote, it fell to Morrisons to “become increasingly competitive in the sector 
regardless of the prevailing circumstances”.

Morrisons’ strong sales performance comes after two rounds of price cuts in 
recent months. Earlier this month it trimmed prices on nearly 160 products by 
an average 12%,just a month after cutting the price of more than 1,000 products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/01/morrisons-to-cut-prices-of-over-1000-products>
, including toiletries and seasonal fruit and vegetables, by an average of 18%.


Potts added that introducing more takeaway foods and placing them in handier 
positions near its supermarket entrances. Potts said sandwiches had probably 
been the group’s top performing area, with sales of ready meals up 9% after it 
improved quality and reduced prices.

Before Christmas, the chain will double the range of its premium The Best 
range and also attempt to reduce costs with new initiatives including the 
installation of rapid self-scan tills that handle a trolley of shopping via a 
conveyor belt, without the need for a staff member.

Morrisons has begun selling fresh and frozen food via Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/amazon-is-to-start-selling-fresh-and-frozen-morrisons-food>
 as well as through its own website. During the six-month period, Morrisons 
said it had made £5m of additional profit from wholesaling food to Amazon and 
its petrol forecourt’s partner Motor Fuel Group as well as new services, 
interest and online improvements.

Potts said there was still room to introduce new services that would help 
attract people to Morrisons stores. The group recently installed about 100 
Amazon collection lockers at it stores and now plans hundreds more. It also 
wants to bring in other online collection services including Doddle and InPost 
as it tries to find a way to exploit the rise in online shopping.












 