
Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> is to close seven 
stores with the potential loss of nearly 700 jobs despite achieving a surprise 
increase in sales over Christmas.

Shares in the company soared nearly 9% to 165.5p as it revealed a 
better-than-expected 0.2% rise in sales at established stores in the nine weeks 
to 3 January, its first positive figure for four years.


City analysts had expected like-for-like sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/10/britains-biggest-supermarkets-to-reveal-falling-christmas-sales>
, which exclude the contribution from new stores or losses from store closures, 
to fall 2%.

The better-than-expected performance from Morrisons also lifted shares in 
other supermarkets, with Sainsbury’s, which reports its Christmas trading 
figures on Wednesday, up just over 3% to 251p and Tesco up nearly 9% to 155p.

Morrisons said customers were starting to return to its stores with 
like-for-like transactions up 1.3% in its core supermarkets during the period. 
The chain has been hit by competition from the German discounters Aldi and Lidl 
and has cut prices to compete.

The retailer also got a big boost from the internet with online sales double 
that for Christmas 2014. That contributed 0.9 percentage points to the 
like-for-like figure, offsetting a fall in sales at Morrisons’ supermarkets.

David Potts, Morrisons’ chief executive, said the contribution of online sales 
growth was less important than earlier in the year and the big improvement in 
Christmas performance was all about stores.

“While there is of course much more to do, we are making important progress in 
improving all aspects of the shopping trip, and our customers tell us they are 
pleased with the changes,” he said.

A rejig of the chain’s alcohol department including the introduction of deals 
on cases of wine during the Black Friday discount week made it the “standout 
department”,Potts said. However, a 25% uplift in sales of its Nutmeg clothing 
range, which it now plans to put in all stores, and improvements on its premium 
Signature range as well as fish, meat, fruit and vegetables all contributed to 
the dramatic step up in performance over Christmas.Morrisons reported a 2.6% 
slide in like-for-like sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/05/morrisons-drop-sales-stabilising-trading-volumes>
 in the three months to 1 November.

Potts said seven medium-sized supermarkets would be closed since they were 
unprofitable and he could not find a way to sufficiently improve performance. 
The company is consulting with 680 staff over potential redundancy. The latest 
closures come on top of 21 supermarkets shut last year and thesale of its 140 
convenience stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/09/former-secret-millionaire-heads-acquisition-of-morrisons-convenience-stores>
.

Potts said the strong performance over Christmas was important but there was 
still further to go to turn Morrisons around.

“I’m pleased with the performance over Christmas but Christmas is just one 
trading period and we go on from there,” he said. “This turnaround will not be 
in a straight line as we continue to learn about the business and how we might 
improve it. Every week in retail is a battle.”


He added: “We are the small guy in the squeezed middle, the British underdog.”

Potts said Morrisons was prepared to invest more in cutting prices as that was 
important to its shoppers alongside making baked goods and other foods in-house.

Morrisons is the first of Britain’s big four supermarkets to report sales 
figures for the vital festive period amid fierce competition and falling prices.


Retail Christmas: the winners and losers in the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/retail-christmasuk-uk-winners-and-losers>
Clive Black at Morrisons in-house broker Shore Capital said: “We feel that an 
improvement in trade from Morrisons may lead to a reassessment of the view that 
this is a sub-scale business than cannot compete with seemingly bigger fish.”

Duygu Hardman, analyst at Verdict Retail, said it was too early to be sure of 
a turnaround at Morrisons as the Christmas trading figures were set against a 
very weak sales period last year.

“Morrisons’ attempts to simplify its positioning, both around clearer pricing 
and a more considered store presence around its mid-sized heritage supermarket 
format were key to an improvement in performance over the crucial festive 
period. However, it is too early to call this a recovery,” Hardman said.
 