
Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> had its best 
Christmas for seven years after the supermarket chain revamped its premium 
ranges, opened more tills and cut fewer prices.


Britain’s fourth-largest retailer reported a 2.9% increase in sales excluding 
fuel in the nine weeks to 1 January, with fresh fruit and vegetables, beers, 
wine and spirits, and its new upmarket The Best range faring well. Sales of 
Morrisons’ Nutmeg clothing range were up by 30%, while performance was lifted 
by a 0.6% rise in online sales, partly thanks to itstie-up with Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/amazon-is-to-start-selling-fresh-and-frozen-morrisons-food>
.


It was Morrisons’ biggest quarterly sales rise at stores open for more than a 
year since Christmas 2009, and well ahead of the 1.6% growth reported in the 
previous quarter.

Total sales excluding fuel went up by 2%, the first rise since November 2013, 
despitestore closures over the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/morrisons-sales-rise-over-christmas-trading-period>
.


David Potts, the chief executive of the Bradford-based supermarket, said 
stores had been more prepared to meet demand than in previous years, with 
better-stocked shelves and improved service.

“We are delighted to have found our mojo,” he said. “Every year does bring its 
challenges, but so far we haven’t seen any change in consumer sentiment. 
Customers splashed out over Christmas and wanted to trade up.”

He said the company had sold 50,000 packs of “shimmering macarons” and sold 
out online of a Christmas tree-shaped chocolate gateau before it could reach 
stores, as shoppers snapped up 100 new premium festive products. “The Best was 
a gamechanger for us this Christmas,” Potts said.


But he insisted that Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>
 had done better “across the board”, and the sales increase was to do with more 
than premium food and cheap alcohol.

“We are becoming more relevant to more people as we turn the company around,” 
Potts said.

 David Potts, the chief executive of Morrisons, hailed its extra Christmas 
preparation and improved service for the results. Photograph: Mikael Buck 
Morrisons’ figures were also underpinned by a big drop in price deflation. The 
company said its prices were down by only 0.2% during the Christmas period, 
compared with a 1% fall in the previous quarter.

The squeeze on prices was felt across the whole market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-grocery-prices-tesco-kantar>
, with grocery prices rising by 0.2% in the 12 weeks to 1 January, the first 
inflation in just over two years, according to market data released by Kantar 
Worldpanel on Tuesday.

But Trevor Strain, the Morrisons chief financial officer, said: “Despite 
commodity pressures, our Christmas basket was still very competitive.”


Morrisons is thought to have outperformed its major competitors, but smaller 
chains including Aldi, Iceland and the Co-operative also did well over the 
Christmas period.

The Co-op announced on Tuesday that sales increased by 3.5% at stores open 
more than a year in the three weeks to New Year’s Eve. The convenience store 
group said its biggest-selling line was own-label prosecco, but frozen ready 
meals and fresh produce also sold well.

Phil Dorrell, a partner at consultancy Retail Remedy, described the Christmas 
sales jump at Morrisons as “quite remarkable”.

“Potts has turned this ship around and while navigating a big tanker like this 
takes time, his grip on the tiller is both clear and strong. Morrisons’ 
Christmas marketing campaign was fresh and delivered a relevant food quality 
feel,” he said.

Bruno Monteyne, an analyst at Bernstein, said: “This strong result reflects 
good execution by Morrisons as customers lost over the past few years come back 
to stores.

“We also expect it to reflect an overall strong Christmas by UK food 
retailers, with this result boding well for Sainsbury’s and Tesco results later 
this week.”

Potts said: “This Christmas we made further improvements to the customer 
shopping trip. We stocked more of what our customers wanted to buy, more tills 
were open more often, and product availability improved as more than half of 
sales went through our new ordering system. Both like for like and total sales 
grew, which was very encouraging.”

The company raised its full-year guidance following the better than expected 
festive trading season. It expects underlying pretax profit for the full 
2016-17 year to be between £330m and £340m, ahead of analysts’ expectations of 
about £326m.

Morrisons maintained its guidance that net debt would be about £1.2bn at the 
end of the financial year.

Morrisons’ share price rose by nearly 4% following the upbeat update, which 
also helped boost Tesco’s shares by nearly 6% and Sainsbury’s by 1.6%.
 