
A mother who cannot breastfeed her baby for medical reasons has said she was 
“guilt-tripped” byTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> for buying 
baby formula. Laura Leeks said staff refused to let her park for free because 
she bought only the formula during a visit to a store in Essex.

She said she was told at a Tesco in Braintree that in order to qualify for the 
free parking voucher she had to buy another product. The voucher is classed as 
a promotion and the law prohibited promotions on products including formula and 
tobacco.

Plunging pound puts Irish mushroom farmers in the shade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/plunging-pound-puts-irish-mushroom-farmers-in-the-shade>
“I am delighted that you as a company support breast feeding. However, I 
cannot accept that your policies lead to your staff shaming women who, for 
whatever reason, are using baby formula. I also cannot accept the comparison of 
formula feeding with the harmful effects of smoking,” she wrote on the firm’s 
Facebook page.

“I remain sad that I could not solely breast feed [my child]. However, I am 
reassured that, due to the nutritious formula, he is happy, healthy and growing 
well. I do not, however, need to be ‘guilt-tripped’ by a Tesco employee who has 
absolutely no knowledge of my circumstances,” she added.

“I applaud your commitment to support breastfeeding. However, this does not 
mean you should abuse women who do not breast feed.”

The Department of Health said the relevant rules are enshrined in UK law as a 
result of an EU regulation on the sale of baby formula. “These rules are 
currently in place because of EU law,” a spokesman said. “But our great repeal 
bill means that when we leave the EU, laws such as these will be debated and 
controlled by the UK parliament.”

UK legislation specifically bans advertising formula, giving away free samples 
and “any other promotional activity to induce the sale of an infant formula”, 
among other things.


While the relevant EU regulation bans “any … promotional device to induce 
sales of infant formula directly to the consumer at the retail level, such as … 
discount coupons”, UK government guidelines on its application do not 
specifically mention parking vouchers.

They say the law bans “multi packs (bulk packs), loyalty/reward card schemes, 
free formula, price reductions, discounts or mark downs and buy one get one 
free” offers.

A spokesperson for Tesco said: “We always strive to provide the best possible 
service for our customers and we understand Ms Leeks’ request. However, due to 
UK law we cannot promote baby formula in any way, including the offering of a 
parking voucher.”
 