
Clubbing <https://www.theguardian.com/music/clubs> in Greece has come a long 
way since the days of drinking ouzo and climbing partially lit mountain trails 
to listen to Cretan music in ancient ruins. This summer, there are quality 
electronic music festivals taking place, with lineups including DJ Harvey, 
Midland and Jeremy Underground. You can snorkel in the day, party on the beach 
at night and even hike down a gorge to recover if you want.

Could Greece’s music scene restore its reputation as a tourist hotspot after 
years of economic downturn, social unrest and the human crisis that has led to
overcrowded refugee camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/28/greece-refugee-warehouses-not-fit-for-animals>
?

Sean Tipton, from the Association of British Travel Agents, says yes. “More 
than 2 million visits were made to Greece from the UK last year and so far 
bookings for 2016 are looking set to overtake this figure,” he explains. “It is 
really positive for Greece after some years of decline.”

Seven festival pitfalls and how to avoid them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/13/seven-festival-pitfalls-and-how-to-avoid-them>
One explanation is to be found in the revival of dance music. The electronic 
music scene is the driving force behind a whole host of events this summer such 
asOdyssia festival <http://www.odyssiafestival.com/> in Alepokhóri, Attiki, 
Rhythmatic open air festival <http://rhythmatic.eu/> in Pelion and Reworks 
festival <http://reworks.gr/en/> in Thessaloniki.

“There are lots of great festival spots in Greece and more and more young 
people are getting involved with electronic music,” says Panos Karatzas, the 
Thessaloniki-based editor ofUrbanStyle magazine <http://www.urbanstylemag.gr> 
and manager of Claap Records. “People are searching for new music and 
collecting vinyl. A lot of youngsters are producing their own stuff too.”

Since the economic downturn, locals have been forced to reconsider pricing and 
young tourists are now finding the country affordable. Tipton says: “The growth 
has been partly driven by the fact that the economic situation in Greece has 
led to hotels, restaurants and bars taking a more realistic attitude towards 
pricing.”

He adds: “There is currently fairly good availability around the country but 
the islands of Kos, Samos and Lesbos offer particularly good value.” He says 
tourists are put off by “an inaccurate perception” that these islands are 
particularly badly affected by the refugee crisis.

The Greek calendar is full of festivals and Greeks are always up for a 
celebration
Anna K, Greek DJ 
With around 60% of young people unemployed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/jul/26/greece-youth-unemployment-debt-crisis-eurozone>
 in Greece, promoters are careful to keep prices down for locals too and most 
parties have free entry, something that is quite rare elsewhere in Europe. 
Dimitris Rokos, a promotor and resident DJ in Athens, says: “It’s become clear 
over the last few years that young Greek people still want to go out and party 
but almost always with the lowest possible cost.”

However, Aristides Hatzis, associate professor of economics and law at the 
University of Athens, says, in general, the Greek economy is not improving. 
“There is no investment, no private sector, the reforms are going to be 
half-baked and the privatisation process will be turbulent,” he says. “Tourism 
is the only exporting industry that works.”

Last year a record of 23.5 million tourists visited Greece and more are 
expected this year, especially from Germany and Russia. However, Hatzis is 
unsure if there will be a similar substantial increase in British tourists and 
he says tax evasion in tourist destinations is still rife.

One way in which festivals might help the local economy is that unlike many 
European dance music festivals, where the sole focus is on music and partying 
and revellers are encouraged to spend their money on site, Greek organisers are 
keen to show off the surroundings. Odyssia, which is held in early September 
with a lineup that includes Gilles Peterson and Francois K, is located close to 
one of Europe’s largest wild flower gardens and a thermal spa, and attendees 
are encouraged to visit the nearby trekking, cycling and climbing hotspots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fgreece-electronic-dance-music-festivals-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e7a2957b96c96ce6b86a3829f0829b0e7ea37f7%2F0_85_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Croatia%2C%20this%20year%20festival%20goers%20are%20heading%20to%20Greece&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fgreece-electronic-dance-music-festivals-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Croatia%2C%20this%20year%20festival%20goers%20are%20heading%20to%20Greece&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fgreece-electronic-dance-music-festivals-tourism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e7a2957b96c96ce6b86a3829f0829b0e7ea37f7%2F0_85_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 The landscape of Alepokhóri, Attiki, adds to Odyssia festival’s appeal. 
Photograph: PR 
“In Croatia, there are massive and crowded festivals with great lineups. But 
the Greek festivals will offer you a spot right by the Aegean sea, with good 
prices, nice food and a good lineup, too,” says Karatzas.

Pedro Papaeleftheriou, founder of the Odyssia festival, is equally keen that 
the music scene helps restore Greece’s fortunes. “With the incredible climate, 
beautiful and versatile landscape, Greece’s tourist industry is still the Greek 
economy’s main pillar,” he says.

There is no question that Greece is still struggling to get back on its feet 
and many young people are moving abroad to find better job prospects. “The 
economic situation is hard for everybody,” says Papaeleftheriou. “Things have 
been going wrong for a long time and everybody knows about it. So many sad 
things have been happening and still are. But in order to come out the other 
side, us Greeks need to stay optimistic recreate a tourist product that is 
popular again.”

Unlike Croatia, which has long been a destination for rave tourists and now 
has more than 20 major events throughout the summer, the Greek police and local 
authorities are not making it easy for music fans. Parties get closed down and 
this, combined with the decline in social structures for young people, is 
making it tricky for the festival industry to grow as fast as it has in other 
countries.

Student festival startups: 'too much fun to feel like work'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/festival-ready/2016/may/19/student-festival-startups-entrepreneurs>
Jacob Martin, aka Hodge, who recently played in Athens for the first time at a 
Dimensions Festival <http://www.dimensionsfestival.com/#> launch, says the 
party was held at an outdoor space in the centre of the city but the police 
shut it down by midnight. “However, in under an hour, the promoter had managed 
to find a different club nearby where we could move to,” he says. “We packed up 
the decks, jumped in the car and, in under an hour, loads of people from the 
outdoor event were in this little basement dancing.”

Despite the difficulties, Martin says he isn’t surprised that the country 
appeals to British electronic music fans. “The promoters I worked with have 
booked people such as Shackleton, Pinch, Peverelist – and the location could 
easily rival any other place I’ve been for parties,” he says.

Unlike some foreign festivals, which are run by Brits, the Greeks seem to be 
doing it their way. “I wouldn’t want to see English promoters going there and 
starting a big festival. These guys know what they’re doing,” Martin says.

Most of all, the comeback is being driven by the Greek love of a good party, 
says Greek DJ, Anna K. “The Greek calendar is full of festivals, and Greeks are 
always up for a celebration. This is the country where you get two birthdays – 
the day of your birth and the official day of the saint you are named after. 
And individual islands and villages often have their own celebrations.

“After all,” she adds, “this is Greece, the birthplace of drama, performance 
and entertainment.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 