
BEST FOR AUTUMN SUN: CADIZ

The old town poking into the Atlantic like a finger is (famously, 
photogenically, obviously) ancient, but thanks in part to entrepreneurial
Gaditanos (Cadiz natives) returning home after the crisis, the place has an 
invigorating, youthful, playful spirit and some cute retro bars. It may be 
synonymous with waves of cruise-ship daytrippers, but you don’t have to arrive 
by boat: Seville and Jerez airports are 1½ hours and 40 minutes’ drive away 
respectively, and it linked by rail as well.

Where to eat

A flurry of inventive gastronomic activity has earned Cadiz a place among Rick 
Stein’s latest Long Weekend destinations. The availability of fine food served 
in tapas-sized portions – at tapas prices – is a major plus. Food is exquisite 
art atCódigo de Barra <https://www.facebook.com/codigodbarracadiz>: avoid 
agonising decisions by opting for the eight-coursedegustación menu (€30) at an 
outdoor table on Plaza de Candelaria. AtUltramar&Nos 
<http://www.ultramarynos.com/>, old favourites get the reverence they deserve 
in the industrial setting of an oldultramarino, or grocery store. Yes, there 
are the usual oysters, and squid with seaweed salad, but also spicypatatas 
bravas (€3.75), butter-soft chicharrones or scratchings (from €5) and a guiso 
(stew) of the day (€6.80).

Where to drink
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6778d96058fa5bb3bf9778968b33cadac2216f91%2F0_92_1129_823%2F1129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6778d96058fa5bb3bf9778968b33cadac2216f91%2F0_92_1129_823%2F1129.jpg>
 Taberna la Sorpresa 
Cadiz is in the middle of the sherry triangle, so finos, olorosos and other 
nectars from El Puerto, Sanlúcar and Jerez fill the barrels and bottles on 
dusty shelves in dark bars and wine shops in the old town’s narrow streets.
Taberna la Manzanilla <http://www.lamanzanilladecadiz.com/> has the air of an 
apothecary; drinking here is an initially daunting, though ultimately pleasant 
business. Once just old,Taberna la Sorpresa <http://www.tabernalasorpresa.com/>
, is now stylishly retro. Local wines are the star attraction, but there’s much 
to try from all over Spain, along with vermouth and food, most notably 
variations of tuna, fresh from nearby Barbate. For €1 house white and cold beer 
with a sea view, stick to the old town periphery, thechiringuitos (beach bars) 
and seafood restaurants with canopied terraces along Playa Victoria, or the 
scruffy but popularBar Club Caleta 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Bar-Club-Caleta/183180935032651>, on the sea 
wall between castles Santa Catalina and San Sebastián, framing Playa la Caleta.

Where to stay

Imbued with the relaxed conviviality of a surf camp, Casa Caracol 
<http://www.casacaracolcadiz.com/en/> offers pancake breakfasts, home-cooked 
dinners, mojito nights, bike rentals and even yoga classes on the beach. 
Accommodation is in hammocks (from €10 with breakfast), dorms (from €18) and 
private doubles (from €39). Even closer to the great baroque landmark isHotel 
La Cathedral <http://hotellacatedral.com/> (doubles from €88 B&B). Its crowning 
glory is a small terrace and rooftop pool separated only by a perspex wall from 
the cathedral facade. The plaza below is crisscrossed by all Cádiz, and the 
hotel’s cafe tables are ideally placed for a lazy afternoon of people-watching.

If you do just one thing …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75de1b7fd0af5c7d59f907192057a90b162e8746%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75de1b7fd0af5c7d59f907192057a90b162e8746%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 Roman Theatre of Cadiz opened to the public last June. The tower of the 
cathedral is to the right and the belfry of the church of Santa Cruz to the 
left. Photograph: Alamy Stock 
Cadiz has a burgeoning underground scene. Ten metres below Teatro de Títeres 
la Tía Norica is theGadir archaeological site 
<http://www.andalucia.org/es/turismo-cultural/visitas/cadiz/museos/yacimiento-arqueologico-gadir/>
, the extensive excavated remains of one of the oldest cities in the world, 
which opened to the public two years ago. A few minutes’ walks away, are the
Catacumbas del Beaterio <http://www.catacumbasdelbeaterio.com/>, part of a 
network of tunnels used for nefarious and religious purposes: short tours began 
last year. And theRoman Theatre of Cadiz 
<http://turismo.cadiz.es/en/rutas-y-visitas-en-cadiz/roman-theatre> (actually 
no longer underground following 36 years of digging), opened to the public last 
June. It’s been 2000 years since the last show, although there is an 
audiovisual exhibition.
Sorrel Downer

BEST FOR DESIGN: HELSINKI
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc52f32d96b2b3c0c18a88eb9c49e01a687eccc%2F0_0_4928_3264%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc52f32d96b2b3c0c18a88eb9c49e01a687eccc%2F0_0_4928_3264%2F4928.jpg>
 The Kamppi Chapel (Chapel of Silence) in Helsinki. Photograph: Alamy 
With by the Baltic to the south and forest in every other direction, Helsinki 
is firmly rooted in its natural surroundings. It’s also the beating heart of 
Finland’s legendary design scene – and with careful planning it needn’t be 
extortionately expensive. A visit to the home of famed architect and designer
Alvar Aalto’s <http://www.alvaraalto.fi/aaltohouse.htm> offers a crash course 
on his architecture and the Finnish lifestyle in general. TheDesign District 
<https://designdistrict.fi/en/> (designdistrict.fi) in the centre is the place 
to head for a creative hit – it’s choc-a-bloc with shops from jewellery to 
antiques. Even better than theDesign Museum <http://www.designmuseum.fi/en/>, is
Artek furniture store <http://www.artek.fi/contacts/stores/1>, where design 
gems such as chairs by Aalto and Ilmari Tapiovaara can be tried out. Newly 
opened concept storeTre <http://blog.worldoftre.com/blog/> showcases young 
award-winning Finnish fashion from the likes ofSamuji <http://www.samuji.com/>, 
R&H and R-Collection and objects by independent design studios.

Where to eat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15632a377122c78b4fb72fab2ac81a0abceaa22a%2F0_133_1377_826%2F1377.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15632a377122c78b4fb72fab2ac81a0abceaa22a%2F0_133_1377_826%2F1377.jpg>
 Fine dining at Elite 
The hip Kallio district is full of new restaurants and boasts a great variety 
of affordable options, from vegan cafes to cosy bars and distinctive fast food 
joints.Tenho Restobar <http://www.ravintolatenho.fi/en/> is a 
restaurant/bar/music club serving pizza (€13, try pickled herring or parsnip) 
and small plates with a Finnish twist (€8-€11) and has regular gigs. Fancier 
restaurants often offer great-value lunch menus.Elite 
<http://www.elite.fi/fi/menu/lounas/> (meal of the day €10.20, set menu €51) 
opened in 1932 and used to be the favourite of the city’s cultural and artistic 
circles. The decor is still art deco, the menu consists of Finnish traditional 
dishes (lots of salmon andvorschmack – ground herring or meat with onion) and 
service is old-school.


Where to drink

Teurastamo, Helsinki’s own meatpacking district, opened four years ago and is 
fun for a night out. Recently the B-Smokery restaurant expanded and opened a 
cosyB-Side Bar <https://www.facebook.com/bsideHKI/>, the perfect place to start 
the evening, with a changing selection of beers and all sorts of American 
whiskeys. From Teurastamo, it’s a short walk to the block locals call the 
“party triangle”. A former matchstick factory has been transformed into three 
bars. Start upstairs atSiltanen <http://www.siltanen.org/siltanen/>, and then 
descend to a concert atKuudes Linja <http://www.kuudeslinja.com/> or to party at
Kaiku <http://clubkaiku.fi/>.

Where to stay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51751ee6b7e0d09844c8c2be8cfe4f896a708a37%2F0_0_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51751ee6b7e0d09844c8c2be8cfe4f896a708a37%2F0_0_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
 Suomenlinna hostel in autumn. Photograph: Arttu Kokkonen/Governing Body of 
Suomenlinna 
Rents in Helsinki are high and the tourism season short, which means a lack of 
cosy and reasonably priced hostels. Luckily for budget travellers, Airbnb 
offers over 2,000 rooms and apartments at average of 50€ a night. High living 
standards mean you’ll find lots of nicely decorated places. To stay in a unique 
historical setting, theHostel Suomenlinna 
<http://www.hostelhelsinki.fi/en/services/hostel/> (dorm beds €24, doubles from 
€65) is a former Russian schoolhouse on the world heritage island of the same 
name, a 15-minute ferry ride (€3,50) from the main market square. In this 
clifftop setting in the south-west corner of the island, it is hard to remember 
you are in a capital city.


If you do just one thing …

Visit a sauna. Before modern bathrooms, neighbourhood saunas were the way to 
keep clean in Finland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jun/28/finland-helsinki-lapland-health-spa-sauna>
. There are still a few original saunas left, and lately several new public 
saunas have opened. A real gem isKulttuurisauna <http://kulttuurisauna.fi/> 
(€15). Architect Tuomas Toivonen and illustrator Nene Tsuboi built the 
minimalist house during Helsinki’s World Design Capital year (2012). The 
wood-pellet-heated sauna is in a concrete brutalist district, Merihaka, and 
offers a great view over the icebreakers. After the heat of the sauna, take a 
dip in the sea – even in winter they maintain a hole in the ice.
Ida Kukkapuro

BEST FOR FOOD: PARMA
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e4441d2bd3baa23869ddc1959ded0c6fe71961%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e4441d2bd3baa23869ddc1959ded0c6fe71961%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Tower of the Church of Saint John the Evangelist. Photograph: Alamy 
Parma has been voted the city with the best quality of life in Italy. When you 
tell people you live here, the response is immediate: “Parma, che bella!”. Then 
they’ll tell you that the Parmigiani are aloof and unfriendly. The city is 
compact and easy to navigate by foot, and you can travel further afield by bike 
or on the reliable, cheap bus network. A tour of the historic centre – starting 
with the duomo, baptistry, and painted ceiling at San Paolo convent, then 
heading over the river via Palazzo della Pilotta to the Palazzo Ducale – is 
fascinating and not too demanding.

Where to eat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d9e2afa7b564239dd6b28a8e510a1b267064811%2F0_73_5119_3071%2F5119.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d9e2afa7b564239dd6b28a8e510a1b267064811%2F0_73_5119_3071%2F5119.jpg>
 The platter of tiny meats … a plate of salumi di Parma. Photograph: Alamy 
Whether it’s prosciutto, pasta or parmesan cheese, this city is defined by its 
food. Even the United Nations says so – last year Unesco declared Parma a 
Creative City of Gastronomy. Yes, you can find gourmet burgers, sushi bars and 
street food – but Parma is not really cut out for food fads. The best way to 
see how food is celebrated here is to visit one of thesagre (festivals) that 
take place all year round.Gola! Gola! <http://www.golagolafestival.it/>, a 
slickly organised event with TV chefs and celebrity authors, launched in June 
this year on the back of the Unesco stamp, and is likely to become an annual 
fixture. In autumn the action moves beyond the city to theprosciutto festival 
<http://www.festivaldelprosciuttodiparma.com/programma/>, the mushroom 
festivals in the nearby Val di Taro 
<http://www.fieradialbareto.it/la-fiera/programma/>, black truffle month 
<http://www.tartufonerofragno.it/> in Calestano and November Porc 
<http://novemberporc.it/it-IT/home-page.aspx>, four weekends of pigging out in 
theculatello towns <http://www.consorziodelculatellodizibello.it/index_eng.html>
 along the river Po. Most can be reached easily by bus or train for a handful 
of euros. If you don’t have time for an excursion, join the queue of students 
and office workers for a blow-out sandwich atWalter Clinica del Panino  
<https://www.facebook.com/clinicadelpanino/>or the legendary Pepen 
<https://www.facebook.com/Pep%C3%A8n-Official-1394613000797861/>, both a few 
metres from the central Piazza Garibaldi. Another €20 will get you a plate of
salumi di Parma (cured ham, cooked shoulder of pork, salame, pancetta, lardo…) 
followed by fresh tortelli (pasta stuffed with squash or chard) atTrattoria 
Corrieri <http://www.trattoriacorrieri.it/> or Osteria dello Zingaro 
<http://www.osteriadellozingaro.it/>. Da Antonia 
<https://www.facebook.com/Trattoria-DA-Antonia-253596378057641/>, a 10-minute 
walk from the centre, is one of the few surviving traditional workers’trattorie
. Always packed and with a great atmosphere, it’s only open at lunchtimes and 
serves fresh, affordable (€15-20) three-course meals. And of course, if in 
doubt, roll it out: the best pizzeria in town,Orfeo 
<http://www.pizzeriaorfeo.it/> does a simple but delicious thin-crust pizza of 
tomatoes and mozzarella di bufala with prosciutto crudo (€8).

Where to drink
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50b13745387864e4f5a75ab10d7ea88b86af5871%2F0_0_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50b13745387864e4f5a75ab10d7ea88b86af5871%2F0_0_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Bastian Contrario. Photograph: Roberto Perotti 
At some point in the recent past the Italians started drinking beer. Then they 
started making it. Now it seems they can’t stop doing either. Parma has two 
thriving breweries –Ducato <http://www.birrificiodelducato.it/default?lng=en> 
andFarnese <http://www.birrificiofarnese.it/le_nostre_birre.php> – both of 
which produce beers frombionda (lager) to IPA, pale ale and stout. And there 
are now several decent bars in which to drink their products, mostly west of 
the river in the Oltretorrente, whereVecchie Maniere 
<http://www.birreriavecchiemaniere.it/> and Bastian Contrario 
<http://www.bastiancontrarioparma.it/> lead the way.

For a decent spritz Campari (Aperol? Don’t. Please don’t.), just walk into any 
café or bar, hand over €4-€5 then sit down, sip and laugh at the memory of the 
dreadful, overpriced bathwater you were served in Shoreditch last week. Then 
there is lambrusco. Therebirth of the fizzy red 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/05/lambrusco-uk-wine-review-fiona-beckett>
 is not big news any more, but if you want to see where the revolution was 
hatched, Parma is a short bike ride from the organic vineyards ofCamillo Donati 
<http://www.camillodonati.it/index.php?filosofia> and Azienda Quarticello 
<http://www.quarticello.it/en/>, where they will sell you a bottle for €6-€7.

Where to stay

Hotel Torino <http://www.hotel-torino.it/> is bang in the centre with doubles 
from around €90. A few minutes north of the city is theAbbazia di Valserena 
<http://www.locandabbaziaparma.it/en/index.html>, better-known as the 
Charterhouse of Parma, where you can stay in a converted monk’s cell (but with 
worldly comforts such as air-con and Wi-Fi) from €100 a night.

If you do just one thing …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd480c3b17e9bbea13898bb403303ee321e7eb69f%2F0_0_5100_3392%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd480c3b17e9bbea13898bb403303ee321e7eb69f%2F0_0_5100_3392%2F5100.jpg>
 See the city by bike using the La Cicletteria di Parma scheme. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Stroll the Oltretorrente, starting with the recently restored memorial 
<http://turismo.comune.parma.it/en/thematic-channels/discover-the-area/art-and-culture/artistic-works/monument-to-the-barricate>
 to the Parmigiani who fought off the fascist assault on the city in 1922, and 
finishing in Piazza Picelli, named in honour of the man who led the defence of 
the city and was shot dead 15 years later in the Spanish civil war. Then raise 
a glass to their memory in theVecchie Maniere brewery 
<http://www.birreriavecchiemaniere.it/> nearby. Or do the whole thing by bike: 
La Cicletteria di Parma 
<http://www.infomobility.pr.it/index.php?page=default&id=4806&lang=it&sezione=elenco_verde_block>
. High heels? Check. Umbrella? Yup. Mobile phone? Uh-huh. Ciaooooo!


BEST FOR NIGHTLIFE: HAMBURG
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9be9059147ee5f5050a87ac9fd56c46952e6eb32%2F0_0_5400_3600%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9be9059147ee5f5050a87ac9fd56c46952e6eb32%2F0_0_5400_3600%2F5400.jpg>
 St Pauli’s piers and the port of Hamburg. Photograph: Alamy 
With its many waterways and parks, Hamburg is undoubtedly a pretty city. But 
there’s a vibrant “alternative” scene behind its conservative facade. The 
Reeperbahn is its infamous party and red light district, but just a few streets 
away is a rich bistro and street food scene as well as cool cafes, bars and 
clubs. Dig further and there are lots of hip hangouts such as the occupied 
former theatre Rote Flora in the Sternschanze district, the artists’ quarter
Gängeviertel <http://das-gaengeviertel.info/>, or the Golden Pudel Club 
<http://www.pudel.com/> (pudel.com), recently resurrected after a fire.

Where to eat

Hamburg is still Germany’s most important port, and with international trade 
have come international cuisines. Try the Indian bistro Badshah (Bremer Reihe 
24, no website) in colourful St Georg. It’s not romantic, but the paneer and 
lentil curry is a must (€6.50). Din Hau, on the other side of Hamburg’s main 
station, is a simple place, but serves possibly the best Cantonese roasted duck 
you’ll ever taste (€8.50). For street food, brothers Koral and Onur Elci opened
Focacceria Bonassola <http://www.focacceria-bonassola.com/> earlier this year 
close to Altona station– just looking at the golden foccacia with spinach, 
gorgonzola or spicy salsiccia is a sensual experience.

Where to drink
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46e793e0b5bd4e8daca66b592dec245fabc437f3%2F0_0_1486_1024%2F1486.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46e793e0b5bd4e8daca66b592dec245fabc437f3%2F0_0_1486_1024%2F1486.jpg>
 Clockers bar 
The practice of “cornering” has been around for a couple of summers now: 
crowds gather by kiosks or in front of bars to start the night off by downing a 
€1.50 beer. Try the Tabakbörse kiosk in Sternschanze. If the weather’s bad, the 
streets between Sternschanze and St Pauli are full of great bars, such as the
Walrus Bar <http://thewalrusbar.de/>) or Clockers <http://www.clockers.hamburg/>
, a tiny gin bar that has a tree growing in the middle and moss on the walls, 
and produces its own spirits. AtToast Bar 
<https://www.facebook.com/Toast-Bar-814570931916720/>, a few blocks away, 
people crack peanuts until late in the night and listen to changing DJ sets. 
Have a last drink at theGolem bar 
<https://www.facebook.com/GOLEM.BAR/about/?entry_point=page_nav_about_item&ref=page_internal>
 on the other side of the Reeperbahn then climb down the secret stairway behind 
the bookshelves to the club below. On Saturday nights, it’s fun to stay there 
till sunrise then sober up with a mackerel bun from the nearbyfish market 
<http://www.fischauktionshalle.com/fish-market/?L=1>, which opens at 5am on 
Sundays.

Where to stay 

The 25hours hotels <http://www.25hours-hotels.com/en/hamburg-hotels.html>, are 
good options (doubles from €90), with sails, storm lamps and other vintage 
accessories adding to the seafaring atmosphere. For a more youthful (and 
cheaper) option, the simple but beautifully designed rooms atSuperbude Hostels 
<http://www.superbude.de/> in St Pauli and St.Georg (dorm beds from €16, 
doubles from €60). They’re decorated with recycled furniture and framed quotes 
from visiting bloggers, authors and journalists.

If you do just one thing …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9458b0273d42d1defe54d95c9dca775e0532425%2F0_0_2048_1360%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Barcelona%3A%20four%20great%20alternative%20city%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Falternative-city-breaks-parma-cadiz-helsinki-hamburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9458b0273d42d1defe54d95c9dca775e0532425%2F0_0_2048_1360%2F2048.jpg>
 The Hanseatische Materialverwaltung, a huge repository of old theatre and 
cinema props 
Walk from the main station along the Kunstmeile – “Art Mile” – towards 
HafenCity, pass theDeichtorhallen – House of Photography 
<http://www.deichtorhallen.de> and step into the Oberhafen quarter 
<http://www.oberhafenkantine-hamburg.de/>. The former trainyard – with the old 
brick warehouse walls that characterise the city – is full of surprises like the
Hanseatische Materialverwaltung <http://hanseatische-materialverwaltung.de/>, a 
huge non-profit repository of old theatre and cinema props and equipment, where 
the curious can rummage among giant noses, Godzilla costumes, jukeboxes and 
more.
Malte Brenneisen and Urs Spindler are the editors of Gentle Rain 
<http://gentlerainmag.com/> magazine
 