
The federal government is defending recouping questionable debts from welfare 
recipients as many of its parliamentarians and ministers come under fire for 
taxpayer-funded travel coinciding with glitzy social functions and personal 
business.

The string of parliamentary travel expense controversies has grown longer, 
with revelationsSussan Ley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley> took $13,000 of 
chartered flights between capital cities and Julie Bishop charged $2,700 to 
attend a polo event on the Mornington Peninsula.

Parliamentary expenses: government to clarify what ‘official business’ means
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/parliamentary-expenses-government-to-clarify-what-official-business-means>
The announcement on Tuesday that the government plans to clarify the 
definition of “official business” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/parliamentary-expenses-government-to-clarify-what-official-business-means>
 has not stemmed damaging reports of taxpayer-funded travel claims.

On Wednesday the human services minister, Alan Tudge, said the Centrelink debt 
recovery system is working despitereports welfare recipients are being wrongly 
accused of owing debts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/centrelinks-debt-mistake-theres-no-way-i-could-explain-to-them>
 due to data anomalies.

Tudge distinguished threatening Centrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> notices warning welfare 
recipients of possible prison time for fraud offences from the lack of 
punishment for politicians’ questionable expense claims.

Asked about the expenses scandals, Tudge said: “I don’t think, in relation to 
some of the examples that I have seen in recent times, that people have 
deliberately sought to defraud the system.”


Tony Abbott attended Santo Santoro’s party on trip charged to taxpayers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/tony-abbott-attended-santo-santoros-party-on-trip-charged-to-taxpayers>
He told Radio National welfare recipients who had “inadvertently put in 
incorrect income records” had a chance to rectify records to avoid claims they 
owe Centrelink a debt.

Sussan Ley, who stood aside as health minister on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 pending an investigation including into trips on which she bought a $795,000 
apartment and attended two New Year’s Eve eventsat the invitation of 
millionaire businesswoman Sarina Russo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-used-taxpayer-money-for-gold-coast-events-with-multi-millionaire>
, now faces claims she used charter flights when cheaper domestic fares 
existed. Ley offered to pay back expenses relating to four trips to the Gold 
Coast.

Finance department records show that Ley chartered a $7,000 flight from 
Canberra to Adelaideon 1 May, 2015 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P36_LEY_Sussan.pdf> and $6,300 
for a flight from Canberra to Melbourneon 22 July, 2014 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P35_LEY_Sussan.pdf>.

A spokesman for Ley told Guardian Australia that Ley, who is a licensed pilot, 
had not flown the charter flights afterFairfax Media reported 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/sussan-ley-charges-taxpayers-13000-for-capital-city-charter-flights-20170110-gtosl7.html>
 that “social media accounts indicate she was in the cockpit”.

Ley reportedly took the flights for official ministerial business to attend to 
childcare policy meetings and talks with GPs.

But ministerial guidelines state that charter flights can only be used under 
special circumstances “such as where no scheduled commercial services exist or 
a minister would be unduly delayed by the use of scheduled services”.

Cheaper domestic flights serve the two capital city routes, with two Canberra 
to Adelaide flights a day costing as little as $190 for economy and hourly 
flights from Canberra to Melbourne on Qantas starting at $180.

There are lessons to learn from the Centrelink data-matching fiasco | Helen 
Hodgson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/there-are-lessons-to-learn-from-the-centrelink-data-matching-fiasco>
On Tuesday the ABC reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-10/julie-bishop-charged-taxpayers-for-trip-to-polo/8173542>
 that Bishop attended Portsea Polo as guest of Peroni and Jeep on 9 January, 
2016 on the Mornington Peninsula.

A Department of Finance document 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P38_BISHOP_Julie.pdf> shows 
Bishop spent $2,177 on flights to Melbourne, $416 on a car and claimed a $123 
travel allowance.

In response to the ABC, a spokesperson for Bishop said: “The minister was 
invited and attended in her official capacity as minister for foreign affairs 
and deputy leader of the Liberal party.”

The same report revealed two government ministers and a Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> senator claimed 
thousands of dollars for a trip to the AFL grand final in 2013. Among them was 
the finance minister, Mathias Cormann, whose department oversees politicians’ 
entitlements.

A spokesman for Cormann said he had “official commitments before, during and 
after the AFL Grand Final weekend”.

“As well as portfolio-related meetings on Friday, the minister had 
Melbourne-based media commitments both on Saturday and Sunday morning, as well 
as a series of other portfolio-related commitments in Melbourne.”

Fairfax media reported cabinet minister Darren Chester settled on an 
investment property 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/cabinet-minister-darren-chester-picked-up-keys-to-investment-property-on-taxpayerfunded-melbourne-trip-20170110-gtozl8.html>
 while on a taxpayer-funded trip to Melbourne, where he also attended the 
Australian Open tennis.

A spokeswoman said Chester’s official business included representing the 
government at an Australian Defence Force enlistment ceremony at the Shrine of 
Remembrance on January 27.

The Australian reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/labor-frontbenchers-spent-10000-on-family-trips-to-darwin/news-story/45c67e516a09ed8ef25cb3b426cdc2a5>
 that Labor frontbenchers Chris Bowen and Brendan O’Connor charged taxpayers 
more than $10,000 each to take their families to Darwin during the 2015 July 
school holidays.

Both said the travel was within the rules as they undertook “official 
business” including inspecting the Inpex LNG gas facility and meetings with 
business owners and unions.

MPs are entitled to family reunion travel in limited circumstances to allow 
their spouse and dependent children to join them on parliamentary, electorate 
or official business and help “balance their work and family responsibilities”.

A spokesman for Ley said the charter flights were “within the rules and being 
independently reviewed” by the departments of finance and the prime minister 
and cabinet.

“Ley is co-operating fully with these reviews and will await their outcomes.”

On Tuesday Guardian Australia reported that Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> charged taxpayers more 
than $3,000 for travel thatcoincided with his attendance at Santo Santoro’s 
60th birthday party in Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/tony-abbott-attended-santo-santoros-party-on-trip-charged-to-taxpayers>
 and has cited a party event and a lecture as reasons for his travel.
 