
Ministers are preparing to back the idea of extending the governance code for 
stock market-listed companies to large privately-owned businesses, in response 
to public anger ata string of scandals  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/13/bhs-scandal-dominic-chappell-arrested-amid-tax-investigation>
including the collapse ofBHS. <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>

The proposal to extend the City’s governance code to the private sphere was 
first put forward by theFinancial Reporting Council 
<https://www.frc.org.uk/About-the-FRC/FRC-structure.aspx>, an independent body 
that regulates City behaviour, including adherence to corporate behaviour codes 
for public companies.


The code for public companies was introduced in the 1990s in the wake of the 
Polly Peck scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/22/asil-nadir-fraud-380m-sfo>, 
when the business empire of disgraced tycoonAsil Nadir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asil-nadir> folded with debts of £1.3bn. 
The code recommends that public companies are overseen by a board of directors, 
the majority of whom are independent from the company and its executives. Other 
aspects of the code are designed to ensure proper scrutiny of a company’s 
executives and their pay, as well as to bolster accountability to shareholders.


Ministers are expected to suggest the FRC also be invited to oversee 
governance rules for private firms, which could include well known companies 
such asJCB <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jcb> and Dyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/james-dyson> as well as firms with 
large workforces that have been acquired by private equity funds, often using 
large amounts of borrowings.Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is under pressure to prevent 
further scandals such as the failure of BHS, the retailer whose collapse has 
sparked criticism from MPs of its former owner,Sir Phillip Green. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fmps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video-&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs%20support%20stripping%20'billionaire%20spiv'%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20of%20his%20knighthood%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fmps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video->
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%20support%20stripping%20%27billionaire%20spiv%27%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20of%20his%20knighthood%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fmps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video-&media=>
MPs support stripping ‘billionaire spiv’ Sir Philip Green of his knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/oct/20/mps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video->
The green paper, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careandsupportreform/what-green-paper> from the 
department for business, energy and industrial strategy, is also expected to 
confirm the prime minister has lost her appetite for putting worker 
representatives on company boards — apledge she made in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-force-firms-appoint-workers-boards-cbi>
 as part of her pitch to succeedDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> as Conservative leader.

Shadow business secretary Clive Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/clive-lewis> said: “Following a 
disappointingautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/charts-autumn-statement-obr-spending-deficit-gdp>
 [on Wednesday], all the signs point towards these proposals lacking teeth.


“The government have already ditched their flagship policy to put workers on 
boards. They try to sound radical, but this is a government whose warm words 
are closely followed by broken promises.”

Iain Wright, <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/iain-wright> Labour MP for 
Hartlepool and chair of the business select committee, welcomed the idea of 
increased corporate governance for large private firms. “The BHS andSports 
Direct committee inquiries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sports-direct-international> highlighted 
weaknesses in corporate governance in both public and private companies,” he 
said. “Getting corporate governance right isn’t a hindrance; it should be the 
starting point for supporting long-term success.”

He added that the committee looked forward to also questioning business 
secretaryGreg Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/greg-clark> on other 
areas — including executive bonuses and boardroom diversity — when he appears 
before the MPs next month.


Next week’s green paper will see ministers first formal efforts to address the 
topic of executive pay at stock market-listed companies. According to areport 
on Sky News 
<http://news.sky.com/story/private-company-bosses-face-clampdown-under-may-blueprint-10671131>
, it is expected to stop short of more radical measures such as imposing a firm 
cap on pay — asproposed recently by City investment group Hermes Investment 
Management. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/14/executive-pay-business-hermes-investment-managment-theresa-may>

Instead, the green paper will reportedly suggest shareholders be given annual 
binding votes on the pay of company executives. Former business secretarySir 
Vince Cable <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable> had introduced 
rules in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/29/executive-pay-bonuses-corporate-governance>
 requiring such a vote every three years.


Earlier this year MPs on the business select committee began examining the 
idea of extending governance codes from public companies to large private 
firms. In a submission to the committee, the FRC suggested law makers consider 
“a tailored code or guidance or regulated disclosure”, but stress that this 
should “take into account the specific circumstances of large private 
companies, which are not uniform in their ownership arrangements.”

 