
Well I said to Mummy at a guess Sarah Govey has now sent 50 texts that go hey 
Sam I do hope our boys won’t spoil our friendship, u R my bff for ever, Sam I 
promise I am not really bffs withMarina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/10/boris-johnson-eu-marina-wheeler-david-cameron-deal-renegotiation>
, just pretending untilJune 23rd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, btw you look super gorge 
on the FROW 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/london-fashion-week/samantha-cameron-wears-mary-katrantzou-dress-at-london-fashion-w/>
 do u get a discount at Burberry, Marina’s clothes are well tragic!!!! If you 
see the stuff in the Mail pls tell Dave sozDacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre> made me, so blame him, btw Sam if 
you have last week’s Grazia can I have ur free gift plus Michael needs his 
bongos back, Mr Lebedev luvs bongos PS his beard is real he says he luvs my 
work!!! luv u lots Sarah.

OMG it’s Boris! Must run and flatter him | As seen by Catherine Bennett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/19/mrs-camerons-diary-london-fashion-week-refugee-look-moment>
Mummy’s like how SWEET, I’m like, excuse me, Dave is beyond devastated, have 
you actually tried finding cheap & reliable babysitting, she’s like, but 
darling I thought you already dropped them? I’m like, demi-dropped, they were 
totally on call for date nights, school runs & any difficult homework, I mean, 
being chucked by the Johnsons it’s like, whatevs, I mean *shudders*, having to 
kiss Mr Lebedev’s naked foot, I do not care if it is a Russian thing, but the 
Goveys? Dave is like, I totally MADE Govey, it is literally like when
Frankenstein <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0021884/> tries to get James Fox 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0057490/>’s part in All About Eve 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0042192/?ref_=nv_sr_1>, can you believe his bongos 
are still in our utility room #betrayal?

Mummy’s like, well at least it is not the first time #Hilto #Rebekah #Coulson 
#Murdoch #Clarkson #Crosby, I’m like, except they did not do Elwen’s Latin 
unseens & do not forget netball, Nancy is like excuse me mother, at least he 
does not go to their kid’s actual SCHOOL, & poor Florence has female Govey for 
a godmother? Mummy’s like, bright side darling, she is not Tony Blair, just get 
Welby to do an excommunication, I’m like, you mean exorcism, do not get me 
started on their hideous TASTE,Dave’s mother always said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/08/david-camerons-mother-signs-petition-against-cuts-to-childrens-services>
 never trust a person who buys oneelephant lamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/15/michael-gove-mps-expenses>, 
let alone 12 - Mummy’s like *OKA voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/oct/11/conservatives.comment>* 
EXCUSE ME? I’m like *hastily* because they are obviously just doing it to show 
off, she’s like, well don’t say it didn’t work, everyone we know simply adores 
dear Govey :(((
 