
Mulberry <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/mulberry> has slipped into the 
red after investing more in products, but sales rose strongly as the British 
handbag maker’s new collection helped it win back customers.

The company announced it was setting up a new business in Asia, a key luxury 
goods market, as it reported a loss before tax of £500,000 for the six months 
to 30 September, compared with a profit of £100,000 a year earlier. The firm 
blamed increased product investment of £1m and additional foreign exchange 
costs on overseas subsidiaries.

Mulberry launched its first collection masterminded by its new creative 
director, Johnny Coca, with the full range going on sale in August. There are 
nine new bags, including a revamped Bayswater, one of its bestselling bags. It 
has alsocut prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/11/mulberry-sales-show-signs-of-recovery-after-difficult-year>
 towin back customers alienated by a disastrous move upmarket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/16/mulberry-bags-larger-profits-after-price-cuts>
 in recent years.

Christmas shoppers to spend over two hours on online delivery problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/christmas-shoppers-lost-parcels-citizens-advice>
Money spent on creating the new collection, with modern totes and bucket bags, 
had a negative impact on gross margins but it attracted more customers and 
turned Mulberry’s wholesale business around, where revenues rose 10% against an 
11% decline a year earlier.

As Mulberry opened a new store in Covent Garden in central London, retail 
sales climbed 10% to £55.4m in the first half, with like-for-like sales up 7%. 
UK retail sales rose 7% on a like-for-like basis to £45m, while international 
sales were up 10%.

The chief executive, Thierry Andretta, said the investment in product design 
was paying off. “Mulberry’s new collection under the creative direction of 
Johnny Coca has been well received by our existing customers and a new audience 
… The new business announced today in north Asia will progress our strategy of 
developing our retail and omni-channel model in key luxury markets.”

Mulberry struck a deal with its majority shareholder Challice to form a new 
venture to run its business in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Mulberry Asia is 
expected to be lossmaking for two years before moving into profit.

Andretta warned that the UK and global outlook had “become more uncertain 
since we last reported”.


The weaker pound has drawn more tourists to London, boosting Mulberry’s sales 
in the capital, but demand from UK customers has softened in recent weeks.

The sharp drop in sterling has also translated into higher raw material costs 
for Mulberry’s UK production and higher running costs of overseas subsidiaries. 
Its two factories in Somerset, south-west England, manufacture half its bags. 
Mulberry reiterated its “made in England” strategy.

For the full year, Mulberry expects additional costs of £1m due to currency 
movements and £2m for investments in north Asia.

Aside from handbags, Mulberry is investing in shoes and ready-to-wear products.

Honor Strachan, lead analyst at consultancy Verdict Retail, said the new 
collection appealed a “new, younger shopper demanding more on-trend innovative 
pieces but with the craftsmanship and quality credentials that the brand 
continues to leverage and showcase”.

She added that “investment in product design and creativeness must continue so 
that Mulberry stands out in the increasingly difficult and crowded Asian 
market”.
 