
Q I want to sell my terraced house. It is valued at £45,000 but my mortgage is 
over £65,000 so if I sold my house would I be able to carry the amount over to 
a new mortgage? What is the best way to go forward? I have talked to mortgage 
advisers but don’t seem to get anywhere and feel like I’m stuck.CS

A Because your house is worth less than your mortgage – and so you are in 
negative equity – you can’t sell it without your lender’s permission. But it is 
worth talking to your lender as it may be one of those which will allow you to 
carry the shortfall to a new mortgage. There will be conditions. For example, 
Nationwide says that if you are an existing Nationwide borrower in negative 
equity who wants to move home, your application for a new mortgage will be 
considered. However, you’ll be eligible only if you need to move – because 
you’ve got a new job elsewhere in the country, for example – you are in 
permanent employment and you can afford the new borrowing. Even if you are 
eligible, Nationwide says that you won’t be allowed to move to a new build 
property or shared ownership or shared equity property and take your mortgage 
with you. In addition, you will need to have enough cash to put down a deposit 
on the new home.

If your lender won’t allow you to sell, you are not eligible to take your 
mortgage with you and you haven’t got enough money for a deposit on the new 
home, you could consider taking out a loan to cover the shortfall on the 
mortgage to be able to pay it off in full. However that would be an expensive 
option and the monthly repayments would be taken into account in any 
application for a new mortgage.
 