
It’s 11 years since Suite Française 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/mar/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview2>,
Irène Némirovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/books/irene-nemirovsky>’s novel 
about France under German occupation, became a literary sensation. Critics 
called it a masterpiece. The New York Times ranked it with the “greatest, most 
humane and incisive fiction” of the second world war.The surprising thing is 
that it has taken so long to come to the screen – but the film, directed bySaul 
Dibb <https://www.theguardian.com/film/saul-dibb> and starring Kristin Scott 
Thomas <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kristin-scott-thomas> and Michelle 
Williams, <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michelle-williams> was worth 
waiting for. It’s both faithful to the book and a clever distillation of its 
sprawling narrative, pared down to a touching and believable story.

Review: Suite Française by Irène Némirovsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/mar/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview2> 
Némirovsky was 39, with many successful books behind her, when, in 1941, she 
started work on a novel she envisaged as a symphony, but of five parts, 
modelled onBeethoven <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ludwig-van-beethoven>’s 
Fifth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/sep/16/symphony-guide-beethoven-fifth-tom-service>
. In the increasingly antisemitic 1930s, her family converted to Catholicism. 
With the arrival of the Germans, they went into hiding. Even so, she had a 
premonition that time was running out for France’s Jews. “Just let it be over,” 
she wrote in her diary, “one way or another.” By July 1942 she had written the 
first two parts of her novel, “Storm” and “Dolce”, and an outline of the third, 
Captivity, when the French police came for her. She died a month later in
Auschwitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/27/auschwitz-short-history-liberation-concentration-camp-holocaust>
 of typhus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmy-highlight-suite-francaise-film-irene-nemirovsky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426164305902%2Fc38da14c-5a03-44cd-8deb-d3779b09a145-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20highlight%3A%20Suite%20Fran%C3%A7aise%20by%20Caroline%20Moorehead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmy-highlight-suite-francaise-film-irene-nemirovsky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20highlight%3A%20Suite%20Fran%C3%A7aise%20by%20Caroline%20Moorehead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmy-highlight-suite-francaise-film-irene-nemirovsky%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426164305902%2Fc38da14c-5a03-44cd-8deb-d3779b09a145-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kristin Scott Thomas as Madame Angellier inSuite Française. Photograph: Allstar
But her two daughters survived, and preserved her notebooks, not knowing what 
they contained. It was only in the 1990s, having decided to donate them to an 
archive, but to transcribe them first, that Denise, the elder, discovered the 
novel. There were also “Notes on the State of France”, in which Némirovsky 
railed at the cowardice of the collaborators.

The most memorable part of Suite Française – movingly rendered in the film – 
was its depiction of the greatexode, when 6 to 8 million people took to the 
roads to escape the advancing Germans, in a river of cars, bikes, carts and 
prams. The flight was well known to historians, though it had never been 
portrayed with such passion. But it’s “Dolce” and events in the outline of 
“Captivity” that form the heart of this excellent film: the touching 
relationship between an unhappy young French woman and the German officer 
billeted with her family, with all its ambiguous, troubling echoes of 
collaboration. Némirovsky was a superb storyteller, and the film has done her 
justice.

• Suite Française is out on general release.
 