
When I arrived in Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> on 29 
October 1994, I could never have guessed how the experience would change my 
life.


I was deployed by the UN to conduct investigations and ghostwrite reports for 
the UN security council’s Commission of Experts on Rwanda. In the aftermath of 
the violence that year, the commission, appointed by the then UN 
secretary-general Boutros Boutros-Ghali set out to determine the facts and 
responsibilities relating to the violations andto recommend measures 
<http://www.refworld.org/docid/3b00f16034.html> the security council should 
take to restore the rule of law and accountability.

When I arrived, the country was one of the world’s worst crime scenes: during 
thesummer, between 500,000 and 1 million 
<http://www.rwandadocumentsproject.net/gsdl/collect/usdocs/index/assoc/HASH4dba/8424e756.dir/3300.pdf>
 Tutsi and politically moderate Hutu civilians had been wiped out from Rwanda’s 
population of 7 million.

What I saw

Aid workers speak out about mental health: 'I was afraid they would think I 
couldn't handle it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
The first place I visited was Nyamirambo, a neighbourhood in the south-west 
part of Kigali. A few months earlier, around6,000 people had been killed 
<http://www.refworld.org/docid/3df4bea40.html> there over a three-day period. 
Buildings showed heavy machine-gun and rocket damage. Mass graves containing 
hundreds of men, women and children were found close by and not far down the 
road, stood a convent with blood-stained walls where nunswere gang-raped and 
massacred <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/dec/19/rwanda-united-nations>
. We encountered a woman with her 10-year-old son who was grossly disfigured 
from a full force machete blow to his face. The mother showed us machete hack 
wounds at the back of her skull.

The days that followed, as we visited and investigated different sites, were 
harrowing. In Gikondo, another area of Kigali, we walked along the road 
surveying extensive damage to a mosque and a Methodist church from machine-gun 
and rocket fire. In the town parish, run by Polish Catholic Frères Pallottins, 
blood-stained ropes and pockmarks in the concrete floors were evidence of 
torture and summary executions. More than a hundred were killed there. Outside, 
the ground was dotted with mass graves, filled with half-burnt remains.

The next day, we travelled by helicopter to Ntarama, landing 70 metres 
downhill from a church where around400 out of 5,000 bodies still lay unburied 
<http://proof.nationalgeographic.com/2014/04/02/revisiting-the-rwandan-genocide-how-churches-became-death-traps/>
 after an attack five months earlier. It was in that serene place where I first 
experienced the stench of decomposed human flesh; a sickly, sweet smell that is 
difficult to forget.

My colleague guided me across the threshold into Ntarama church and steadied 
me on the first-row pew. Rotting corpses filled every row of the church. It 
felt like the fear, panic and extreme distress of men, women and children in 
their final moments still hung in the air. The forensic team removed 252 bodies 
from that room alone and assembled a macabre arrangement of baby skulls for 
further analysis. Many trees stained with blood and rope pointed to where 
individuals were tortured and murdered. Witnesses told us how they had seen 
militia returning twice to the massacre scene within a few hours to wipe out 
any survivors.

Two kilometres away, we visited a medical dispensary run by a religious 
mission. In the corner of one room were the remains of a small boy, crouched 
with his back to the corner with a two-metre spear still stuck through his 
throat from front to back. His terrified expression and posture portrayed how 
he had been cornered, taunted and then speared.

On and on it went at massacre sites at Nyarubuye, Gafunzo, Cyangugu, Sake, 
Mbazi and others too numerous to count. When we returned to Kigali we trod 
carefully to avoid landmines and unexploded weapons – mindful of the many 
one-legged children we saw hobbling around the city. I plugged my nostrils with 
alcohol-soaked hand wipes, but it couldn’t block out the stench of death. 
Walking alone behind the team on one trip I found myself treading on large, 
crunchy, dead scarab beetles that had eaten away human flesh: a carpet of the 
dead feasting on the dead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmy-journey-back-to-rwanda-confronting-the-ghosts-of-the-genocide-21-years-later%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe37d5ef0081152fa53985a22717f09523d9153a6%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20journey%20back%20to%20Rwanda%3A%20confronting%20the%20ghosts%20of%20the%20genocide%2021%20years%20later&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmy-journey-back-to-rwanda-confronting-the-ghosts-of-the-genocide-21-years-later%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20journey%20back%20to%20Rwanda%3A%20confronting%20the%20ghosts%20of%20the%20genocide%2021%20years%20later&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmy-journey-back-to-rwanda-confronting-the-ghosts-of-the-genocide-21-years-later%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe37d5ef0081152fa53985a22717f09523d9153a6%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 The skulls of victims at a memorial to over 11,000 Tutsi men, women and 
children (also buried here in a mass grave) who were killed while seeking 
refuge in the catholic church of Kibuye. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
Returning home to Geneva: ‘I felt terribly alone’

After leaving Rwanda in 1994, I tried to forget what I had seen, but the 
horror of what I had witnessed during these 10 days of intensive investigations 
was impossible to shake. Immediately after I returned to Switzerland I 
struggled to get out of bed and go to work – the contrast between home and what 
I had seen was too much. I lay in bed wondering how the international community 
could have failed to halt the genocide. I felt terribly alone in the feeling 
that strangers on the street must have had little idea what had happened in the 
country people called the “Switzerland of Africa”. You try to forget, then 
without any warning something you hear, see or smell unleashes the memories: 
fear, panic and then profound sadness soon follow.

And yet I was aware that my flashbacks, mercifully few and far between, 
provide only a fleeting glimpse into the enormous suffering of hundreds of 
thousands of victims and survivors. In late 1994 many people throughout Rwanda 
were fearful of the neighbours who had joined in on the murderous onslaught. In 
the months following the genocide many villagers had to live month after month 
among the dead, too numerous to be buried. Who among them could board a plane 
to rich and peaceful Switzerland like I did?



‘I returned to the same church I stood in 21 years before’

The security council acted swiftly on the commission’s findings and 
recommendations on 8 November 1994 by establishing theInternational Criminal 
Tribunal for Rwanda <http://www.unictr.org/> (ICTR) to prosecute those 
responsible for genocide and other serious violations of international 
humanitarian law in Rwanda committed during 1994.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmy-journey-back-to-rwanda-confronting-the-ghosts-of-the-genocide-21-years-later%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e5412dcc4ac900892d6af60456a7753dff17d75%2F0_0_922_995%2F922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20journey%20back%20to%20Rwanda%3A%20confronting%20the%20ghosts%20of%20the%20genocide%2021%20years%20later&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmy-journey-back-to-rwanda-confronting-the-ghosts-of-the-genocide-21-years-later%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20journey%20back%20to%20Rwanda%3A%20confronting%20the%20ghosts%20of%20the%20genocide%2021%20years%20later&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fmy-journey-back-to-rwanda-confronting-the-ghosts-of-the-genocide-21-years-later%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e5412dcc4ac900892d6af60456a7753dff17d75%2F0_0_922_995%2F922.jpg>
 21 years after his first visit, Lyal returned to the Ntarama church in 
December 2015. Photograph: Mona M’Bikay Boin 
Last month, after 21 years of investigations and trials, the ICTR closed, 
ending an important chapter in international efforts to enforce criminal 
responsibility for the atrocities. The tribunal hasindicted 93 individuals and 
convicted 61 <http://unictr.unmict.org/en/cases/key-figures-cases>. But not all 
of the thousands of perpetrators went through Rwanda’s customary gacaca trials 
that ended in June 2012, and so Rwanda, together with other countries, still 
has to hunt down the remaining suspects, provide them with a fair trial and 
punish the guilty.

On 1 December I attended the ICTR’s closing ceremonies in Arusha, Tanzania, 
less for the proceedings themselves than for the chance to seek closure from 
what I saw in Rwanda 21 years ago. After the event, instead of returning 
directly home, I headed for Rwanda. I had to find out whether a country could 
recover from such violence. Could justice, economic development, political 
inclusiveness and the rule of law somehow vanquish ghosts of the past?

I returned to Ntarama church to stand for a moment on the same pew where I had 
stood 21 years before. The bodies of hundreds of massacred children, women and 
men had long since been moved into caskets. This time, I didn’t have to watch 
my every step for fear of treading on human remains, for now a neat, clean path 
led visitors around the massacre site.

The pain of leaving communities you love burns a hole in your heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/24/the-pain-of-leaving-communities-you-have-come-to-love-burns-a-hole-in-your-heart>
People were alive, working, talking, and smiling, and the gently reassuring 
hum of traffic replaced the silence and human stench of 1994. A guide led me to 
the entrance of another much smaller structure where human remains, a reminder 
of the tragedy, lay similar to the way I had seen them over two decades ago, 
tangled up in tragic embrace. What I saw reminded me too much of what I saw 21 
years ago: I turned away and quickly re-entered the sunlight.

Ignoring personal ghosts, or those of an entire country traumatised by war and 
genocide, is futile and even dangerous. On returning to Rwanda, and seeing how 
the country has progressed, I was reassured of the power of confronting the 
past. But to properly heal, the fight to restore justice, preserve the rule of 
law and democratic governance, must continue.



Lyal S Sunga is head of the Rule of Law programme at the Hague Institute for 
Global Justice in The Netherlands, and visiting professor at the Raoul 
Wallenberg Institute for Human Rights and Humanitarian Law in Lund, Sweden.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 