
Afua Hirsch on São Tomé e Principe, Africa

At first I felt critical of the many Africans I spoke to who had never heard of
São Tomé e Principe <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/sao-tome-and-principe>. 
It is after all an African country, albeit one of the smallest (population 
194,000) and remotest – an archipelago of tiny islands nestled in the watery 
armpit of west and central Africa, deep in the Atlantic, with Gabon to the east 
and Nigeria to the north.

Then I realised how difficult it was to get there. Back then, in 2002, there 
was one flight a week from Gabon, and one from Lisbon which ferried the 
children of Portuguese aristocrats to secretive resorts in pristine bays at the 
foot of volcanos carpeted in the country’s endless virgin rainforest.

I had graduated from university just months before and in my shiny new NGO job 
chose São Tomé as the location for an international conference I was 
organising. But getting hundreds of dignitaries there meant chartering planes, 
training hotel staff and even having new phone cables laid. I arrived 
exhausted. My VIP guests were in a strop, not because the plane I’d chartered 
looked ripe for the scrap heap, but because it had no business class seats. I 
was not in the mood to fall in love.

But I did. I’d never seen volcanoes so alive with forest or the Atlantic such 
a seductive, sleepy blue. I’ve never felt so close to a history I thought much 
older – no African language is spoken in São Tomé, but, rather a creole version 
of Portuguese. The inhabitants are all descended from slaves, Portuguese 
outcasts and Jewish children dumped on the islands hundreds of years ago.

People lived in the ruins of decayed colonial palaces as if the plantation had 
collapsed the day before. It felt separated at birth from another part of the 
world – the Caribbean or South America – with its palatial palms and crumbling 
façades, ridgeback mountains and Portuguese towns.

But it’s Africa all right. Billions of barrels of oil have achieved what 
natural beauty and human charm never did and placed it firmly on the map. The 
oil workers have been streaming in since São Tomé and I had our first 
encounter: I hope people seeking Africa’s greatest beauty will, too.

Fly to São Tomé e Principe from London via Lisbon with TAP Portugal from £457 (
flytap.com <http://flytap.com>). Stay at Omali Lodge, doubles from £106 (
omalilodge.com <http://omalilodge.com>)
Afua Hirsch is the former West Africa correspondent for the Guardian

Lyse Doucet on New Brunswick, Canada
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd02438f354354f6dd7a77503c41e0db91353e64%2F376_845_3532_2119%2F3532.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd02438f354354f6dd7a77503c41e0db91353e64%2F376_845_3532_2119%2F3532.jpg>
 Good old times: the Acadian historic village of Caraquet in New Brunswick, 
Canada. Photograph: Philippe Renault/Hemis/Corbis 
I’ve heard it time and time again. New Brunswick? “Oh, I drove through it to 
get to Nova Scotia.” Acadians? “Hmm…” Cajuns? “Oh… Cajun cooking… Music… 
Louisiana!”

But New Brunswick in eastern Canada is much more than a place to drive 
through. And its northeastern coast will not just delight but enlighten you 
about a people who survived a British colonial expulsion from here in 1755 and 
returned to establish a vibrant culture and proud sense of self.

The Acadians are the descendants of the French who colonised the region from 
the 17th century, and if you visit on 15 August, Acadian national day, you’ll 
be loudly reminded of that by thetintamarre. At 17.55, on the dot, people dance 
in the streets, beating pans and blowing horns, to make as much noise as 
possible to let the world know they’re still here. A dark day in imperial 
history, when thousands were forced to flee south – including to Louisiana, 
where the term Acadian became “Cajun” – is now a vibrant celebration of 
survival.

A drive along the winding shore takes you through a picturesque landscape of 
simple cottages hugging the coastline and rambling farmhouses set back on 
rolling green fields (except in the freezing depths of winter, when all is 
snowy white).

Lobster traps and the Acadian flag are ubiquitous – a tricolour to honour 
French ancestry, with a bright yellow star, representing the Stella Maris, the 
star of the sea, that guides sailors in storms.

To know even more about this charming corner on the sea, visit the Acadian 
village, a functioning replica of life through the late 18th to the mid-20th 
centuries. Inside the original wooden houses of the first Acadian families they 
are carrying on with daily chores, but are never too busy to warmly welcome 
visitors.

History comes alive in the evening at the elegant L’Hôtel Château Albert 
<http://www.villagehistoriqueacadien.com/en/hotel-chateau-albert>, where you 
can tuck into an old- fashioned meal while being entertained by a trio of 
traditional fiddlers. On my last visit there, a female fiddler recounted how 
she had to practise in secret as a young girl. Fiddling was only for men then.

And do drop by the Doucet farm in the historical village, where you may find 
them baking bread.

Fly to Moncton from London via Toronto or Montreal with Air Canada from £532 (
aircanada.com <http://aircanada.com>). Stay at L’Hôtel Château Albert, doubles 
from £70 (villagehistoriqueacadien.com <http://villagehistoriqueacadien.com>)
Lyse Doucet is the BBC’s chief international correspondent

Ed Vulliamy on Sfântu Gheorghe, Romania
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b0d32766e66546b6c0b753ba6413648bf56041e%2F0_86_5577_3347%2F5577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b0d32766e66546b6c0b753ba6413648bf56041e%2F0_86_5577_3347%2F5577.jpg>
 Rowing home: fisherman on the Danube. Photograph: Alamy 
The Sfântu Gheorghe arm of the Danube Delta is gratifyingly hard to reach: by 
ferry from the river port of Mahmudia, which departs between two and five hours 
late, laden with essential goods that folk in Sfântu Gheorghe on the Black Sea 
shore cannot buy in their village shop. The boat navigates bends in Europe’s 
mightiest river, past oxbow lakes and through newly dug channels. A small crowd 
makes its way through the mud to the jetty with donkeys to collect the shopping.

There are two cars in Sfântu Gheorghe: one belongs to the policeman, the other 
to the government environmental officer. During my first visit in 1995, they 
had crashed and were being repaired.

I frequent Sfântu Gheorghe thanks to an ornithologist friend from Bucharest. 
His metier – along with caviar from local sturgeon – is the ostensible reason 
to be there: a wonder of eagles, egrets, vultures, cranes, ibises, cormorants 
and pelicans. Fishermen weigh their wares on iron scales in a market that has 
not changed for centuries. They say that when the sea howls it means a life 
lost in revenge for man’s abuse of the oceans. Sure enough, last time it 
howled, the bodies of a father and son washed ashore.

I was supposed to catch the dawn boat, but the captain was dancing on the 
table, drinking vodka

One day the ornithologist took me out on the river in his little boat. And 
there it was: the howl, a heart-stopping scream, and the river heaved. The 
ornithologist’s jovial face was suddenly terrified and intense as he gripped 
the outboard motor to carve a way through the current and driving rain. After 
50 minutes of thinking that any of them could be my last, we made it to the 
bank.

On the night they return, the fishermen gather, after a brief visit home, at 
the only bar in town: a window cut into a brickwork house. Outside which they 
sit to drink vodka that comes in bottles the size of a standard beer – that’s 
the unit per round, and I confess it’s tough going.

In keeping with the vulgarisation – and invasion by tourism – of anything 
authentic in Romania (as everywhere else), there is now a Green Village Resort 
in Sfântu Gheorghe: some people on TripAdvisor seem to have had horrendous 
experiences there, which can only be a good thing.

On one final night in Sfântu Gheorghe, the ornithologist and I were supposed 
to have gone to bed early, to catch the dawn boat back to Mahmudia, but the 
captain was dancing on the table, drinking vodka, so there didn’t seem to be 
much hurry.

When the ferry did leave, I was as ever sad to leave with it, into the 
quickening eastern sky and the brave dawn of newly capitalist, tourist-friendly 
Romania.

Fly to Bucharest from London with Ryanair from £22.99 (ryanair.com 
<http://ryanair.com>). Mahmudia port is roughly four hours’ drive, then take 
the ferry to Sfântu Gheorghe. Stay at the Green Village, doubles from £40 (
greenvillage.ro <http://greenvillage.ro>)
Ed Vulliamy is a writer for the Guardian and Observer and was was New York 
correspondent for the Observer and Rome correspondent for the Guardian




Kate Connolly on Hiddensee, Germany
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72b2f43c5631e3975eeb2227afd44d14032146cb%2F354_475_5076_3045%2F5076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72b2f43c5631e3975eeb2227afd44d14032146cb%2F354_475_5076_3045%2F5076.jpg>
 Artists’ escape: a lighthouse at the Dornbusch on Hiddensee island. 
Photograph: Heinz Wohner/Getty Images 
As a hideaway it could hardly be better named. The island of Hiddensee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/11/10-best-european-islands-holidays-greece-italy-france-spain>
 sits on Germany’s north-eastern tip and is one of the country’s sunniest, 
windiest locations. Despite being just under 11 miles long and, at its broadest 
point, only two miles wide, even in the height of summer it is surprisingly 
easy to find a spot in the dunes or in its expansive heathland to escape the 
daytrippers who arrive en masse from neighbouring Rügen. While to English ears 
at least its name sounds like a clever reference to its remoteness, it is in 
fact a nod to the legendary Norwegian king, Hedin, who is believed to have 
fought here. Whether for a love interest or for gold, opinions are divided, but 
in any case Hedin’s Oe – or Hedin’s Island as it was named while under Danish 
rule – has more or less stuck.

In the 1920s the Baltic island was a magnet for intellects and artists. The 
families of writers Thomas and Heinrich Mann, Günter Grass (whose wife was a 
Hiddenseer), sculptor Käthe Kollwitz and the Freuds were among the regulars, as 
was Danish film starAsta Nielsen <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0003425/>, who had 
a playful circular holiday home, thekarusel. The Freud connection endures to 
this day thanks to Esther Freud’s 2003 novelThe Sea House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jul/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview13>
, which recalls the holidays her great-grandfather Sigmund and his family 
enjoyed on the island before they and many Hiddensee residents were banned by 
the Nazis. The family found some sort of solace in the village of Walberswick 
on the Suffolk coast which, with its grassy sand dunes, large skies and a home 
they called “Hidden House”, reminded them of the beloved Baltic island they 
were forced to forsake.

I’ve been coming here regularly for more than a decade, and it has never lost 
its appeal as an ideal place for escape. It is car-free, with no golf courses 
and, at around six hours by train and ferry from Berlin, close enough for a 
long weekend. Aside from swimming, walking and biking, there are three 
bookshops, a theatre, some pubs and a tent cinema. Otherwise there’s little 
more to do than ask locals to teach you how to fish for pieces of amber after a 
storm, or literally “milk” the bright-orange buckthorn berries for their 
vitamin C-rich juice.

It continues to be a draw for writers and artists, too. Lutz Seiler’s 2014 
novelKruso, which won the German Book Prize (out in English this year), is set 
in Hiddensee during the heady days before the fall of the Berlin Wall. It’s a 
poetic tribute to the island as well as offering an insight into life here 
during the East German dictatorship for those wanting to flee to the west 
(Denmark is hardly more than an energetic swim away) as well as those who 
simply sought internal exile amid the wind and the waves from the every day 
strains of the GDR. Hiddensee has never lost its appeal as an ideal place for 
escape.

Fly to Berlin from London with EasyJet from £29.49 (easyjet.com 
<http://easyjet.com>). Regular trains are €44 from Berlin (bahn.com 
<http://bahn.com>) to Stralsund, from there take a ferry to Hiddensee (
reederei-hiddensee.de <http://reederei-hiddensee.de>). Stay at Hotel Godewind, 
doubles from £92 (hotelgodewind.de <http://hotelgodewind.de>)
Kate Connolly is the Guardian and Observer’s Berlin correspondent




Peter Beaumont on Hosh Jasmin, West Bank
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9f71c15e16bda00abf62d6d9f80117624e97cd5%2F0_408_3803_2281%2F3803.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9f71c15e16bda00abf62d6d9f80117624e97cd5%2F0_408_3803_2281%2F3803.jpg>
 A table with a view: the patio at Hosh Jasmin overlooking the hills. 
Photograph: Luke Pyenson 
The hills just beyond the outskirts of the Palestinian town of Beit Jala – 
Bethlehem’s other half, though never say that to a native – are a special 
place. Ancient limestone terraces descend towards Battir and the cool valley of 
Wadi Refaim, with its fig trees and gazelles. Small apricot orchards hem in the 
old stone farms that dot the slopes. Just outside the town is where you find
Hosh Jasmin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/14/middle-east-holidays-countryside>
, an organic farm and restaurant opened in 2012 by filmmaker, sculptor and 
restaurateur Mazen Saadeh.

Fifteen minutes’ drive from the western edge of Jerusalem, Hosh Jasmin is both 
circumscribed by – and defies – Israel’s continuing occupation of the West 
Bank. Located in Area C, under Israeli security and administrative control, it 
is reached – for us at least – through the Walajah checkpoint, passing the 
Israeli settlement of Har Gilo. The Israeli separation wall is visible from 
Hosh Jasmin in the distance, a snaking line of grey concrete.

Despite the reminders, it is a place to escape for a while from the continuing 
violence and tensions, popular with Palestinians from the neighbouring town, 
Jerusalemites and internationals. Visiting on a “blue moon” last year, a group 
of musicians had been assembled. The waiters, encouraging us to stay, suggested 
if everyone was drunk enough a midnight walk would be initiated. Named for the 
Syrian-stylehosh compounds, tables are set on rough-hewn wooden platforms under 
the trees, areas designed for sprawling on cushions, although there is a small 
indoor area for when it rains and a fire pit for the winter chill of the 
Jerusalem hills. Elsewhere there are hammocks and swing seats.

Below is Saadeh’s farm, including olives that Hosh Jasmin presses for oil, 
fruit trees, hives and rabbit runs and the restaurant’s arak distillery. Its 
location is a double-edged sword. The lack of building permits for Palestinians 
in Area C has preserved the area’s rustic feel, and it also means that the 
accommodation Saadeh provides for those who stay beyond when the fire burns 
down is a treehouse and several tents.

This Christmas those of us in the press corps celebrated lunch outdoors with 
turkey and Palestinian starters and Taybeh, the Palestinian beer. On other days 
the food is dictated by the seasons, although there are no actual menus. 
Specialities include rabbit zarb, a tagine-like dish cooked in an underground 
oven, Palestinian dumplings and chicken musakhan with flatbread in its rich 
sauce of onions and sumac served on a flat bread.

For me, the best time is the late afternoon and evening, watching the hills 
bruise purple into night as the fire starts. Then, Hosh Jasmin is a place to 
forget – for a while at least – all of the area’s troubles.

Fly to Tel Aviv from London with British Airways from £304 return (ba.com 
<http://ba.com>). Eat and camp at Hosh Jasmin organic farm (facebook.com/HoshJas
 <https://www.facebook.com/HoshJas>; +972(0)599 868 914), which can be reached 
from Jerusalem by taxi or hire car (europcar.co.uk <http://europcar.co.uk>). 
You will need your passport to cross the Walajah checkpoint
Peter Beaumont is the Guardian’s Jerusalem correspondent




Emma Graham-Harrison on the Jalori Pass, India
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d88c480fcd246b7637b6172107398bee486fc33%2F0_663_10799_6481%2F10799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d88c480fcd246b7637b6172107398bee486fc33%2F0_663_10799_6481%2F10799.jpg>
 Touching the sky: a distant view of the mountains from the Jalori Pass near 
Kullu. Photograph: Getty Images 
The sound of cymbals, drums and song followed us the whole morning, across 
hillsides of wild iris and through deodar forests, the musicians hidden and the 
music sometimes thinning to silence but always returning again when mountain 
paths brought us and the mysterious band back within earshot.

We met them at last outside a tea shack on the Jalori Pass, more than 3,000m 
high, villagers escorting a goddess swathed in gold and scarlet to the Dussehra 
festival in Kullu town, two days’ walk away.

She would be jostled and photographed there by thousands of tourists, but we 
met her almost alone, our paths crossing at just the right moment.

We asked one man why he had turned down the chance of a lucrative city life. 
‘I missed these mountains,’ he said

It seemed like serendipity but our guide, Prem Singh Bodh, had known more or 
less when the group would arrive, after decades hiking trails in this corner of 
north India.

Friends got to know him while living in Delhi, and had invited me to join them 
on a 10-day trip to an area that is little visited by tourists, but full of 
life and natural beauty.

We met pilgrims at ruined hilltop forts that have become windswept temples. 
Kids raced up to one campsite from the nearest village and convinced us to lose 
a game of cricket on an impossible slope.

Their teacher was a postgraduate with a taste for Victorian literature – 
“Thackeray, Kipling, Dickens” – who grew up the other side of a nearby peak. We 
asked why he turned down the chance of a more lucrative city life after 
graduating. “I missed these mountains,” he said simply.

Between those meetings, we had the forests, fields and temples to ourselves 
for hours at a time. We slept in tents on high meadows beside a woodland lake 
and spent a couple of nights in spartan but charming lodges built for colonial 
administrators more than a century ago.

We were camping, but it felt luxurious, with air mattresses, ponies to carry 
gear so we travelled with just a small day pack, and even a cook.

A few bars of coverage would occasionally appear on the phones of people 
trying to keep in touch with home. But most of us were happy to be out of 
contact and suspended in time.

It was often surprising, always beautiful and entirely special, and because we 
arranged the trip directly with Bodh’s company, Zingaro, it was a relatively 
affordable £50 per person per day – including tents and lodges, food and 
guides. We spent nothing else because there was nothing we needed and nothing 
to buy. Zingaro also arranges trips to higher altitude areas, for those seeking 
an even more remote getaway.

Fly to Dharamsala (aka Kangra or Gaggal) from London via Delhi with Air India 
from £495 (airindia.in <http://airindia.in>). Zingaro treks can organise treks 
across northern India (zingarotreks.com <http://zingarotreks.com>). Ask Zingaro 
for advice, but they will usually meet you with a 4x4 or minibus at the edge of 
the mountains
Emma Graham-Harrison is international affairs correspondent for the Guardian 
and Observer and was Afghanistan bureau chief for Thomson Reuters





Matilda Temperley on Kaokoland, Namibia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e10c6e68339e6afe78117af1caeb59234ec7d62%2F0_219_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e10c6e68339e6afe78117af1caeb59234ec7d62%2F0_219_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Under African skies: a young Himba woman. Photograph: Matilda Temperley 
Five hundred miles north-east of Windhoek, the dusty town of Opuwo is nestled 
into the edge of Kaokoland’s arid hills. The local inhabitants are 
bare-breasted, clad in goatskin and covered in ochre. These are the Himba. They 
live alongside Herero women wearing dresses reminiscent of 19th-century German 
colonialists with hats shaped to resemble cow horns. Unusual characters arrive 
in this small trading hub to replenish their supplies at the area’s only garage 
and supermarket before disappearing back into the surrounding desert.

Opuwo is the entrance to the remarkable Kaokoland that lies to the east. This 
is an area so empty and vast you can drive for days without seeing another 
soul. I picked up a local guide in Opuwo and set off in the 4x4 (complete with 
camping gear and roof tents) I had rented in Windhoek. Within an hour, a sandy 
riverbed stalled our progress and throughout the day the roads became ever more 
dubious. It doesn’t take long until you are obliged to stop being precious 
about your vehicle and surrender to the inevitable punctures, scrapes and 
scratches and the hundreds of kilometres of unknown terrain that stretch before 
you. As you drive, red rocks give way to white deserts, plains become mountains 
and colours evolve with the day.

The fact that I was childless at 33 never failed to cause mirth among the 
villagers

After two days of driving, we came across the first sign of human habitation 
and were surprised to see a rusty petrol drum on a rocky outcrop with signs 
advertising cold drinks and fuel. It turned out the attendant Himba women had 
nothing to sell and were rather hoping we could give them some food. It was 
undoubtedly the oddest petrol station I’ve ever seen. The occasional villages 
we then passed were welcoming, perhaps because the Himba’s ancestral land 
rights and autonomy are well recognised and the increasing cultural tourism in 
the area is largely on their terms.

When I visited last February, the villages were mainly populated with women 
and children as the men were with the herds looking for pasture. The villages 
were full of laughter, most of which was at my expense. The fact that I was 
childless at 33 never failed to cause mirth. In the first village I camped in, 
I was given a live chicken that they insisted I leave with. At the next 
village, I was made to dance out stories. There was something magical in being 
innocently teased in this matriarchal society.

Kaokoland stretches for many hundreds of kilometres from the Hoanib river 
north to the Kunene river, which is the border with Angola, and one of the 
least-populated places on earth. In Kaokoland, you cannot fail to marvel at 
your insignificance. Kaokoland stole my heart on my first foray and I have been 
looking for an excuse to return ever since.

Fly to Windhoek from London with South African Airways from £615 (flysaa.com 
<http://flysaa.com>). Car rentals from Camping Car Hire (camping-carhire.com 
<http://camping-carhire.com>). A 4x4 with full camping equipment is available 
from £45 a day
Matilda Temperley is a photographer and writer


Helena Smith on Koufonisia, Greece
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad388d93b85001e690bed3fc3d9b66b8c8dc90fe%2F1146_726_4470_2682%2F4470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad388d93b85001e690bed3fc3d9b66b8c8dc90fe%2F1146_726_4470_2682%2F4470.jpg>
 Open water: an empty beach on the islands of Koufonisia. Photograph: Alamy 
Greece has always been about the light. The shadows lie in its luminosity. For 
years I have tried to swim into the sun, a day’s fading rays made sweeter still 
by water’s brush. The quest for light can take you places that you might 
otherwise never know; beaches you might never see. In the summer of 1984, on a 
whim propelled by adventure, I holidayed on Naxos, crossed it by bike and got 
into a little cargo ship that took me to a place that at the time seemed so 
ethereal, so elemental, so remote, it has remained with me ever since.

That place was Koufonisia, an isle made up of parts – upper Koufonisi and 
lower Koufonisi – and over the course of a spring and summer I would come to 
know both. Before the internet, before mass travel, before Greeks got fat on EU 
funds, upper Koufonisi had a smattering of white, flat-roofed houses, one fish 
tavern, one meat tavern, one tourist (a French painter), one road and a girdle 
of virgin beaches, ornamented by turquoise sea. In the spring its was carpeted 
with poppies – just as Naxos to its west and Amorgos to its east; and in summer 
covered by herbs carried on a breeze. But although perfect, it was to be 
trumped by the discovery of lower Koufonisi: uninhabited (bar the odd 
shepherd), with even bluer seas, better shorelines and a pure light that began 
at the end of the cave I swam into with the passing of each day.

Several years later I returned to upper Koufonisi, this time making my home a 
rented villa looking out to sea on the isle’s southern extremity. The water was 
aquamarine, as seductively translucent as it had been all those summers ago, 
but it was a world away – a world discovered by Greeks who had built second 
homes, Italians who went for the tourist season and beach bars that served 
cocktails to the dulcet tones of Icelandic composers.


Lower Koufonisi had changed, too: its cave no more (thanks to a landslide), 
its beaches the preserve of the droves who descended from fishing boats now 
busily crossing the 200m channel that separated the isle from upper Koufonisi. 
But the light was still there, the sky and sea co-joined by a brilliance that 
was unbeatable and blue. And, as I had done all those years before, I swam into 
the sun at the end of the day, backstroking through the flat blue, eyes fixed 
on the brilliant skies and the rocks they framed, knowing I had arrived where I 
had begun, in the magic of Greece.

Fly to Athens from London with British Airways from £104 (ba.com 
<http://ba.com>). Blue Star Ferries on the (Athens) Piraeus Amorgos route stop 
at Koufonisia three times a week (euroferries.com <http://euroferries.com>). 
Sea jets also makes the trip in summer (seajets.gr <http://seajets.gr>). 
Travellers passing through Athens can also book tickets through Grecian travel (
grecian.gr <http://grecian.gr>)
Helena Smith is the Guardian’s correspondent in Greece, Turkey and Cyprus 




Stephen Gibbs on Playa Bacunayagua, Cuba
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4188f0921d63a8f8b80e275f182aa4fc0b78b0ae%2F0_207_5198_3119%2F5198.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20secret%20hideaway%3A%20foreign%20correspondents%20reveal%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsecret-hideaway-foreign-correspondents-holiday-escapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4188f0921d63a8f8b80e275f182aa4fc0b78b0ae%2F0_207_5198_3119%2F5198.jpg>
 Crossing the divide: the Puente de Bacunayagua, completed in 1959, takes you 
to the beaches of Bacunayagua. Photograph: Buena Vista Images/Getty Images 
“Go to that bar that serves the piña coladas, cross the bridge, then the road 
to Bacunayagua is on the left.” Those were typical driving directions in Cuba 
in the early 2000s. Then, it was a country without road signs. The reason was 
never clear. One theory was that every time a sign was put up it was stolen so 
that its metal could be turned into car parts. Another was that Fidel Castro, 
determined that the nation remain on a constant military footing, was convinced 
that road signage would help invaders. It made travelling a challenge. And 
arriving especially rewarding.

The directions were good enough the first time I went to Bacunayagua in 2005. 
There were three of us: two Cuban friends, one of whom was a scuba dive 
instructor, and me. The piña colada stop was memorable. Alongside the road 
Marco, in a crisp white guayabera shirt, prepared cocktails for thirsty 
motorists from palm-fresh coconuts, cream and pineapple. He agreed, 
reluctantly, to go easy on the rum.

After that we crossed the spectacular Puente de Bacunayagua, the tallest 
bridge in Cuba, completed in 1959. A couple of kilometres later, almost hidden 
by trees, there on the left was an unmarked, steep concrete road. It dived 
through a forest towards the sea, bringing us to a complex of run-down 1970s 
bungalows. In front was the clearest water, framed by an elegant peninsula, and 
a perfect little hidden beach.

This particular stretch of coastline was also a notorious pick-up point for 
the cigarette boats that come from Florida and smuggle Cubans back to the US. A 
few bored young soldiers were there on watch; they were surprised to see us. 
The offer of a cold drink turned their frowns into smiles. They kept an eye on 
the car while we explored the pristine waters below.

I returned to Bacunayagua a few weeks ago. A gleaming blue sign now clearly 
marks that turnoff to the bay. It is as beautiful as ever, but a little 
noisier. A Cuban family, complete with relatives from Miami, had rented the 
house the military once occupied. Silence has been replaced by reggaeton.

On the way back to Havana, I stopped at the roadside bar. Marco was still 
there. “Estás perdido,” he said to me. That delightful Cuban greeting perhaps 
best translated as: “Where have you been?”, offered with equal feeling whether 
someone hasn’t been seen for a few days or a few years. Cuba may be changing, 
but it still moves at its own pace.

Fly to Havana from London with Virgin Atlantic from £559 (virginatlantic.com 
<http://virginatlantic.com>). Hire a car using the concierge at one of the 
bigger hotels, or contact Cuba Diving Now (cubadivingnow.com 
<http://cubadivingnow.com>) to be guided
Stephen Gibbs covers Venezuela for Chinese TV and The Economist



 