
Nairo Quintana is poised to win the Vuelta a España 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/vuelta-a-espana> after protecting his lead 
over Chris Froome in a gruelling penultimate stage through Spain’s southern 
mountains between Benidorm and Alto de Aitana on Saturday.

Barring an accident or incident on the flat final stage – a flat 105km ride 
from Las Rozas to Madrid – the Colombian Movistar rider will add the 2016 
Vuelta to the 2014 Giro d’Italia on his Grand Tour list of honours.

Pierre-Roger Latour of France won the 193km (120 mile) stage, traversing three 
category-two ascents from Benidorm before a summit finish at Alto de Aitana in 
five hours, 19 minutes. Latour, who rides for AG2R La Mondiale, edged Darwin 
Atapuma at the line for his first win at a major race.

Bradley Wiggins: 'I don't want to be remembered as just the cyclist with the 
sideburns'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/bradley-wiggins-remembered-cyclist-with-sideburns>
Froome had reduced Quintana’s lead by more than two minutes by winning 
Friday’s time trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/vuelta-a-espana-chris-froome-quintana>
, moving to within 1min 21sec of his rival. Quintana kept Froome in check 
throughout Saturday’s ride, responding to his repeated attacks on the final 
21km (13 mile) climb and passing him just before the finish. Froome applauded 
as Quintana pulled past him, following the last of several one-on-one climbing 
duels the two stars had during the three-week Grand Tour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fnairo-quintana-vuelta-a-espana-chris-froome-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e71bcd281d8fe15d4dfc0183fc00196e5b3b778%2F0_65_2127_1276%2F2127.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nairo%20Quintana%20repels%20Chris%20Froome%20and%20moves%20to%20verge%20of%20Vuelta%20a%20Espa%C3%B1a%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fnairo-quintana-vuelta-a-espana-chris-froome-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nairo%20Quintana%20repels%20Chris%20Froome%20and%20moves%20to%20verge%20of%20Vuelta%20a%20Espa%C3%B1a%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fnairo-quintana-vuelta-a-espana-chris-froome-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e71bcd281d8fe15d4dfc0183fc00196e5b3b778%2F0_65_2127_1276%2F2127.jpg>
 Chris Froome applauds Nairo Quintana as he crosses the finish line at Alto de 
Aitana. Photograph: Jose Jordan/AFP/Getty Images 
“I want to congratulate him. He is a great rival,” Quintana said after 
Saturday’s stage. “He had a great time trial and he made me suffer. Riding 
against the greats like Froome and Alberto Contador gives this win so much more 
importance.”

“My team defended all the attacks of the other teams, above all Sky,” Quintana 
added. “I am grateful to them.”

Froome lies 1min 23sec behind Quintana in the general classification, while 
Esteban Chaves moved past Alberto Contador into third place after making up 
time with a long-distance attack. A three-times Tour de France winner, Froome 
is set to finish the Vuelta as runner-up for a third time, having finished 
second in 2011 and 2014. Quintana has twice finished runner-up to Froome at the 
Tour de France, the last time in July whenFroome and his Sky team were dominant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/team-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome>
.
 