
Nairo Quintana won the Vuelta a España on Sunday, adding the title to the 2014 
Giro d’Italia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jun/06/nairo-quintana-giro-ditalia-richard-williams>
 on his Grand Tour list of honours.

The Movistar climbing expert had cemented his commanding lead over Team Sky’s 
Chris Froome inSaturday’s decisive mountain stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/nairo-quintana-vuelta-a-espana-chris-froome-cycling>
.

Following custom, Froome did not challenge Quintana on the traditional ride 
into the Spanish capital on the 21st and final stage. The Colombian finished 
1min 23sec in front of the Tour de France winner.

“It’s been tough, I won’t lie, especially on the back of the Tour de France 
and then going to Rio for the road race andtime trial at the Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/10/froome-fails-to-add-gold-medal-in-time-trial-to-tour-de-france-title>
,” Froome told Eurosport. “Coming here, it means I haven’t had much time at 
home for the last three months. I’ve had a lot time away from the family.”

Quintana completed the gruelling three-week race that covered 3,315.5km in 
83hr 31min 28sec.

Esteban Chaves finished in third place and more than four minutes off the 
pace. He was followed by the three-times Vuelta winner Alberto Contador in 
fourth.

“I woke up this morning feeling like the winner but I couldn’t raise my arms 
in celebration until I crossed the finish line,” Quintana said. “This is 
probably the most important win for me, considering the scenario and who I was 
racing against. Froome is a great rival.”

Vuelta a España: Chris Froome wins stage 19 to slash Quintana’s lead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/vuelta-a-espana-chris-froome-quintana>
Magnus Cort Nielsen of Denmark won the flat 105km ride starting in Las Rozas 
before making loops through Madrid’s centre. It was his second stage win of 
this race.

At 26 Quintana has established himself as one of the top riders in the world 
and the main rival to the three-times Tour de France winner Froome. Quintana 
has twice finished runner-up to Froome at the Tour, most recently in July when 
he could not mount a serious challenge tothe dominant Sky team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-2016-predictable-race-still-brings-joy-to-a-battered-france>
.

Froome finished second at the Vuelta for a third time, after also coming close 
in 2011 and 2014. “Nairo was great this Vuelta. Team Movistar was great this 
Vuelta ... they really rode well and deserve the victory,” Froome said.

Quintana, who became the second Colombian to win this race after Luis Herrera 
in 1987, said winning the Tour remained his main goal. “It’s a dream that is 
still with me and I hope one day I can make it come true,” he said. “I will 
keep working toward it.”
 