
At the age of just 12, Natalie Portman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman> was easily the best thing 
about Luc Besson’s powerful thriller Leon – and we’re talking about a film 
where Gary Oldman plays a Beethoven-obsessed junkie cop.

It was a star-making performance, with depth and genuine emotion, catapulting 
her into Hollywood and kicking off a career of mixed fortunes. She may have 
picked the wrong franchises (thankless roles in the Star Wars prequels and Thor 
films), but she’s won an Oscar and plaudits as both a producer and director.

Jane Got a Gun – but most women in westerns still don't
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/jane-got-a-gun-most-women-in-westerns-dont>
This week sees the release of her troubled western Jane Got a Gun, which has 
gained more column inches for its tortured production than its quality (the 
Guardian’s Jordan Hoffman dismissed it as “dull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/31/jane-got-a-gun-review-big-nat-no-cattle-as-portman-western-fires-blanks>
”). But let’s remember fonder times and look back on the actor’s finest 
performances …

Leon
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFJQ6ILcR528&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFJQ6ILcR528>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFJQ6ILcR528&media=>
After turning down offers to become a child model, Portman landed a role in 
arguably Luc Besson’s finest film. As Mathilda, an orphan who befriends a 
hitman, she was confident without being precocious, likable without being 
cloying and effortlessly involved us in the poignant climax. The original 
script had Leon and Matilda becoming lovers, a bizarre shift which was happily 
removed from the final film.

Beautiful Girls
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4K8M2EVnoKc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4K8M2EVnoKc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4K8M2EVnoKc&media=>
A small role in Heat followed, but it was this more low-key indie that gave 
Portman the chance to expand her youthful repertoire. The starry comedy (well, 
starry for 1996) also starred Uma Thurman, Matt Dillon, Rosie O’Donnell and 
Mira Sorvino, but it was Portman who gave the film’s strongest turn as a 
teenager with an “old soul”.

Garden State
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg46IxT3MGP8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg46IxT3MGP8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg46IxT3MGP8&media=>
While Zach Braff’s rather grating indie might have aged quite badly, Portman’s 
performance has managed to stay just on the right side of cute. As the 
under-written object of his failed actor’s affection, she’s warm, engaging and 
steals the film from Braff’s grasp.

Closer
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVv57gssfuBU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVv57gssfuBU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVv57gssfuBU&media=>
In Mike Nichols’ talky relationship drama, performance was key and helped to 
break the film out of its inevitable staginess (it was based on a play after 
all). Portman’s character was arguably the hardest to play, given the mystery 
that surrounded her, but she went from intriguingmanic pixie dream girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/16/why-the-manic-pixie-dream-girl-must-never-return>
 to bile-spewing heartbreaker with ease and deservedly picked up an Oscar 
nomination.

Black Swan
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOaD5cZNw0E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOaD5cZNw0E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOaD5cZNw0E&media=>
But victory was just six years away and arrived courtesy of Darren Aronfosky 
and his deliriously unhinged melodrama. Like her character Nina, Portman has 
been more closely associated with the white swan roles in Hollywood, so there 
was pleasure in seeing her transgress here, something she does mesmerisingly 
well, as her character slowly unravels.
 