
Protesters have read aloud more than 2,000 leaked incident reports published 
by Guardian Australia of the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/nauru-files> during a 10-hour vigil 
outside Australia House in London.

The protest at the Australian high commission 
<http://naurufilesreading.blogspot.com.au/> was organised by members of the 
International Alliance Against Mandatory Detention 
<http://london.carpediem.cd/events/779738-close-the-camps-now-at-australia-house-the-strand/>
.


The files, totalling more than 8,000 pages, include allegations of sexual 
abuse, torture and humiliation inflicted on children held by Australia in 
offshore detention.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drbm_vZnNBwc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drbm_vZnNBwc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drbm_vZnNBwc&media=>
“We want Australia to be internationally shamed,” said Sarah Keenan, who 
co-organised the event with seven other members of the alliance. “We want 
everyone to hear these documented incidents of abuse, self-harm, humiliation 
and squalor that is the everyday life for refugees on Nauru.

“The duration, monotony and repetition entailed in the reading of each file 
echoes the normalisation of the violence and tedium endured by refugees in 
indefinite detention.”
Fabien Cante (@FabienCante) 
#naurufilesreading <https://twitter.com/hashtag/naurufilesreading?src=hash> 
kicks off@australiahouse <https://twitter.com/AustraliaHouse> - 10h performance 
documenting detention horrorpic.twitter.com/0JVsDsbFYw <https://t.co/0JVsDsbFYw>
 <https://twitter.com/FabienCante/status/769146330249826305> August 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/FabienCante/status/769146330249826305> Kim Simpson 
(@AmatoryAnon) 
If you're in central, come and join #naurufilesreading 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/naurufilesreading?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/OCt2RiCIpW <https://t.co/OCt2RiCIpW>
 <https://twitter.com/AmatoryAnon/status/769155093312724992> August 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AmatoryAnon/status/769155093312724992> 
Nadine El-Enany, another alliance organiser, said: “These detainees must be 
settled in the Australian community as is their right under international law.

 “We have chosen to read the report out in front of Australia House because 
this narrative of abuse directly contradicts the image the Australian high 
commission seeks to convey of Australia as a progressive nation and a desirable 
destination for tourists, students, highly skilled workers and international 
investors.


“Nauru Files reading embodies the ongoing racist violence that has defined the 
settler colony of Australia since its inception.”

The Nauru files: the lives of asylum seekers in detention detailed in a unique 
database – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
Dr Stewart Motha, a reader in law and deputy dean at Birkbeck, University of 
London, grew up in Australia with his Tamil family after fleeing persecution 
from the Sri Lankan civil war when he was 14.

“I witnessed the transformation in Australia from a place that embraced 
multiculturalism to one which was extremely fearful of outsiders,” said Motha, 
whose research includes Australia’s immigration system and its treatment of 
refugees.

But Motha, who is writing a book about state violence, admitted Australia 
might welcome the fact that the protest is highlighting the conditions in its 
immigration centres.

 “Australia wants to deter refugees,” he said. “The cruelty of its detention 
camps is an intentional part of its immigration system: it’s something 
Australia wants to happen and to be known to happen, so those considering 
fleeing to its shores hear about it.

“Nevertheless, Australia’s actions are in breach of the country’s 
international obligations and they must be held to account for that by other 
signatories, including Britain,” he added.

Australia’s opposition Labor party says it will move to establish a 
parliamentary inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/13/the-nauru-files-labor-to-call-for-parliamentary-inquiry-into-abuse-allegations>
 into allegations of sexual assault and child abuse at Nauru. However, the 
governing Liberal and National party Coalitionsays there is still public 
support for the policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/21/offshore-detention-still-has-support-after-nauru-files-says-coalition-minister>
 to detain asylum seekers offshore.

The Australian immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, has attacked news 
organisations, refugee advocates and Save the Children Australia, accusing the 
child rights agency of leaking the more 2,000 incident reports published as the 
Nauru files.

El-Enany said: “The Australian government detains refugees indefinitely [on 
these islands] as part of its offshore detention policy designed to deter 
refugees from arriving in Australia by boat.

“More than 500 refugees are detained on Nauru, including many children. 
Refugees on Nauru are regularly subjected to abuse, violence, sexual assault 
and rape. Self-harm and suicide attempts are common.”
 