 The Dutch population of Cape Colony has been hardly treated. It would have 
been hard for them if they had had to see a war waged against their own kith 
and kin across the seas.
But in South Africa they have too often been left without protection and their 
own lands have been made the cockpit of the war. It is often said that they had 
no political excuse for rebellion, but practically there was no political issue 
in South Africa but the racial difference.

Time would have cured this, as it has cured it in Canada, where at one time 
the racial feud was much more bitter and it was our obvious duty, even granting 
that war on the Dutch Republics was necessary, to conduct it in such a way as 
not needlessly to offend the sentiment of our subjects in the colony.

Their sentiment has not only been offended but lacerated by a war which soon 
took the form of a struggle for racial supremacy. The cruelties of the 
concentration [camp] systems lost nothing in the telling in Cape Colony and on 
the top of all this came the second invasion, and Cape Colony was once more 
overrun by the Boers.

Since then constitutional rights have been everywhere suspended, and in many 
districts economic ruin has followed the track of war. Instead of adequate 
military protection the Dutch have too often been subjected to the asperities 
of a martial law which it is never possible to administer without great 
injustice.

Sir W Hely-Hutchinson's despatch of December in the last Blue book on South 
Africa gave us a melancholy picture of the condition of Cape Colony. "Most of 
the country" outside the towns and villages "cannot be considered safe for 
travellers, and portions of it are, in the absence of our troops, temporarily 
at the mercy of the enemy."

When this state of affairs is laid at the door of the Dutch colonist it should 
be remembered that he never asked for the war; he has rarely gone out of his 
way to give assistance to his own kith and kin and though great numbers have 
joined the enemy, the vast majority have only done so when they have been left 
at the enemy's mercy through the absence of our troops in the war further north.

Rebellion is always a crime, but it is a crime that should only be punished by 
the King or by his representatives. It is the King the rebels have offended, 
and it is by regular British officers not by "loyalists" that their offences 
should be dealt with.

Â· The Boer war ended in May 1902
 