
Six months after an earthquake devastated Nepal, the emotional and financial 
repercussions for survivors continue. There is fear of a surge in child 
trafficking as struggling families are left vulnerable. According to estimates, 
between 12,000 and 15,000 girls are trafficked from Nepal each year, with the 
majority ending up in Indian brothels. Many others are trafficked to orphanages 
in Kathmandu. Global development correspondentSam Jones reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/25/nepal-earthquake-six-month-anniversary-children-orphans-people-traffickers>
 from Sindhupalchowk.

The World Bank’s approach to human rights is disingenuous, outdated and 
“deeply troubling”, according to Professor Philip Alston, the UN special 
rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights. Alston said the Bank’s view 
that development financing can be kept separate from human rights was troubling.
Read what he had to say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/22/world-bank-human-rights-un-special-rapporteur-philip-alston>
, complete with the World Bank’s response.

And the UN has hailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/23/philippines-typhoon-koppu-un-hails-model-response-disaster-risk-reduction>
 the Philippines’ rapid response to Typhoon Koppu. The death toll has risen to 
more than 50, but aid agencies say the country saved lives thanks to applying 
the lessons learned from super typhoon Haiyan, which struck in November 2013.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Solar power to light the way for Africa as low-carbon campaign launches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/22/solar-power-energy-africa-low-carbon-campaign-kofi-annan-bob-geldof-richard-branson>
 * Two-thirds of world’s illiterate adults are women, report finds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/20/two-thirds-of-worlds-illiterate-adults-are-women-report-finds>
 * Cambodia’s battle against malaria put at risk as expenses row holds up funds
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/20/cambodia-battle-against-malaria-at-risk-global-fund-government-expenses-row>
 * Uzbekistan accused of brutal crackdown on activists investigating forced 
labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/21/uzbekistan-forced-labour-cotton-harvest-violent-crackdown-activists>
 * South Sudan faces ‘concrete’ famine risk and needs urgent help, warn experts
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/22/south-sudan-faces-concrete-famine-risk-and-needs-urgent-help-warn-experts>
Opinion

Is it possible to achieve peace without justice? Will Bennett and Thomas 
Wheeler, conflict and security advisers at Saferworld,argue that the two are 
inextricably linked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/26/justice-peace-conflict-affected-societies>
. “Separating peacebuilding from the promotion of justice undermines both,” 
they write.

In response to Oscar Pistorius’ move into house arrest after serving 11 months 
of his sentence for shooting and killing his partner Reeva Steenkamp, Womankind 
Worldwide’s Bethan Cansfield reminds us the case is only unusual in the profile 
of the perpetrator. “Behind every statistic are individual women and girls 
whose names and stories will never be mentioned by the media or spark a public 
outcry,”she writes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/16/oscar-pistorius-case-women-violence-reeva-steenkamp>
.

Multimedia

Gallery: Daredevil doctors: medical care on the humanitarian frontline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/oct/26/extreme-medicine-msf-daredevil-doctors-humanitarian-frontline>

Gallery: Boom town: Abidjan flourishing as Ivory Coast heads to polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/oct/23/abidjan-flourishing-ivory-coast-election-in-pictures>

Gallery: Syrian refugees living in darkness in a derelict factory in Lebanon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/oct/21/syrian-refugees-live-in-near-darkness-in-a-derelict-soft-drinks-factory-in-lebanon-in-pictures>

Interactive: Portraits of lives in flux: Nick Danziger journey across four 
continents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/sep/27/nick-danziger-portraits-lives-flux-revisited-journey-10-years-four-continents>

Take part

As discussions on the sustainable development goals move to how they will be 
implemented, how will wealthy countries take them on board? If you’re a 
student, we’d like to hear your views on the role rich nations should play in 
delivering the goals. Submit a response of up to 250 words and we’ll publish 
the best.Read more about the challenge and how you can contribute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/19/students-speak-what-role-rich-countries-global-goals-sustainable-development>
.

What you said

On the piece Tanzania sugar project leaves bitter taste for farmers caught up 
in land disputes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/21/tanzania-sugar-project-small-farmers-land-disputes-agro-ecoenergy-sida#comments>
,rojorojo wrote:

Can’t agree more. Africa’s agriculture has hardly moved from the age of the 
wooden ploughs. Innovations, mechanisation, improved farming methods, 
irrigation and so on which have changed global agricultural output virtually 
everywhere else, seem to have bypassed most of sub-Saharan Africa.

Instead of embracing new technology, which today can be tailored to be least 
harmful to the environment while increasing productivity by a sizeable factor, 
the continent seems paralysed by all sorts of negative fears.

Instead we get conference after conference, report after report on the 
long-awaited African green revolution while whole swathes of land turn brown 
and useless through desertification. The only real progress in output and 
therefore incomes and quality of life for smallholders has come from private 
firms who are putting their money where their mouths are and instead of talking 
endlessly about ‘modernising’ agriculture in Africa, are actually doing so.

Highlight from the blogosphere

International institute for environment and development: Climate 
negotiations—the last stop before Paris 
<http://www.iied.org/climate-negotiations-last-stop-paris>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 