
Jaya Luintel has a vision: to see the history of Nepal retold through the eyes 
of women.The Story Kitchen <http://thestorykitchen.org/>, a project she helped 
set up, aims to do just that.

The initiative uses community radio and workshops to offer an outlet for women 
to tell their life stories, particularly their experiences during the country’s 
decade-long civil war.

Luintel hopes the project will give women new skills, a safe space to talk 
and, crucially, increase their confidence so that they feel able to testify 
before Nepal’struth and reconciliation commission <http://www.trc.gov.np/>, set 
up to investigate rights abuses during the conflict.

“We want people to look at armed conflict through women’s eyes,” explains 
Luintel, the organisation’s president and CEO.

War disproportionately affects women, so why so few female peacekeepers? | 
Fiona Hodgson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/07/war-disproportionately-affects-women-female-peacekeepers-fiona-hodgson>
“When my granddaughter reads about the history of Nepal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> and the history of conflict I really 
don’t want her not to know about what women faced.”

The Story Kitchen was established in 2012, but money from the UN Trust Fund to 
End Violence Against Women <http://untf.unwomen.org/en> and the Governance 
Facility - an initiative launched in 2014 by the embassies of Denmark and 
Switzerland, and the UK’s Department for International Development (DFID), with 
the Nepalese government - enabled the project to step up its work last year.

Luintel has worked in radio for years, reporting on issues facing women and 
lending a female perspective to all the stories she has sourced. She hosted a 
Saturday morning show about women’s rights and social justice.

When Luintel began working for an NGO she recognised that the “internet and 
new media technology can bring people together and provide a platform for 
people to share stories”. The seed of an idea for the Story Kitchen was planted.

Through the project, women who survived violence in 10 districts – some among 
those most affected by the conflict – have been trained as “justice reporters”, 
learning audio and interviewing techniques that allow them to record the 
testimonies of women in their communities. The journalists have been paired up 
with women’s rights activists to offer support “if they [journalists] face 
problems or threats” in their work.

“The women get recognition for being justice reporters and go door to door. 
They know who in their communities have survived violence. That is the best way 
to reach women,” says Luintel.

Cultural taboos surrounding sexual violence and fear of reprisals mean it is 
hard to determine how many women and girls were abused during the conflict, 
whichran between 1996 and 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/nov/23/nepal>.


In 2014, a tribunal 
<http://apwld.org/womens-tribunal-in-nepal-hears-from-survivors-of-sexual-violence-in-armed-conflict/>
, organised by Nepalese women’s groups and the national human rights 
commission, confirmed that rape and other acts of sexual violence were 
committed against women during the conflict. The tribunal also heard that when 
violence was reported, no action was taken.

Despite the Nepalese government prioritising the issue of gender-based 
violence since the war, legislative changes – including outlawing marital rape 
and introducing a law against domestic violence – often go unenforced. In 2014, 
it was reported in theSocial Institutions and Gender Index 
<http://www.genderindex.org/country/nepal>, published by the Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development’s development centre, that the notion of 
women being subservient to men in Nepal was so rooted in society that “neither 
the violence nor the failure to complain about it is unusual”.

So far, 94 stories have been collected and documented by the justice 
reporters. Some of the women who shared their stories have since attended a 
follow-up workshop to meet with other survivors, find support, and receive 
encouragement to seek justice for the crimes committed against them.

Some of the testimonies have been broadcast on Nepalese radio. Written 
summaries have been collated to provide a body of evidence that organisers hope 
will feed into the truth and reconciliation process, to ensure women’s 
experiences are given prominence.

“We are also working with some radio stations at district level to help 
journalists to be more sensitive about violence against women … so they can be 
aware … and be sensitive when reporting stories about women who experienced 
violence,” says Luintel. The media in Nepal is dominated by men.

“We want to boost the confidence of women, so they can testify and not feel 
alone, so they can come forward and seek justice,” adds Luintel. “We want to 
put a microphone in the hands of women – that is powerful.”

Funding for the Story Kitchen, which in December won the Tomorrow’s 
Peacebuilders award <https://www.peacedirect.org/tp/>, runs until the end of 
2017. Hopeful that they can widen the project to include more women, Luintel 
and her team are busy trying to secure more money.

She admits changing perceptions about women in Nepal is still very 
challenging, but hopes the work they are doing will make men more sensitive to 
the needs and experiences of women.

“We really want them [men] to own these issues, to be in the shoes of those 
women and think about what would have happened to their mother, grandmother at 
that time. We have all gone through this armed conflict.”
 