
Duberney Arias Agudelo

Duberney’s family acquired Corea farm at the end of the 1990s. The 15-hectare 
(37-acre) plot is situated on the slopes of the Andes in Caldas, a region in 
Colombia famed for producing some of the finest coffee in the world. Caldas is 
situated between the western and central cordilleras (mountain ranges) and the 
valleys of the Magdalena and Cauca rivers. Duberney (38) was in charge of 
day-to-day management and upkeep of the farm, and jumped at the chance when he 
heard about the Nespresso AAA Sustainable Quality™ Program from his local 
coffee co-operative in Pacora. Duberney’s farm dedicates nine hectares to 
coffee production, and he has welcomed the opportunity to find a partner to 
help sustain his business and help with management while also ensuring that the 
quality of the coffee he produces is maintained.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnespresso-discover-sustainable-quality-coffee%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnespresso-growing-talent-not-just-coffee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdf4ea4e92ebc276a6727971e33887cc8ab1e59b%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nespresso%3A%20growing%20talent%2C%20not%20just%20coffee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnespresso-discover-sustainable-quality-coffee%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnespresso-growing-talent-not-just-coffee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nespresso%3A%20growing%20talent%2C%20not%20just%20coffee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnespresso-discover-sustainable-quality-coffee%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fnespresso-growing-talent-not-just-coffee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdf4ea4e92ebc276a6727971e33887cc8ab1e59b%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Nespresso farmer Jamie Eraso Photograph: Nespresso 
Jaime Elias Eraso

Jaime (53) bought his farm, ‘Piedra Grande’, with his wife Blanca 25 years 
ago, in the highlands of Nariño, Colombia. At that time, the land was used for 
grazing, but slowly they diversified into maize, sweet potato and yucca, before 
adding coffee to two of their 10 hectares (24.7 acres) of land. Nariño is in 
south-western Colombia, with the Pacific Ocean to the west and Ecuador to the 
south, and offers perfect terrain for coffee production, with abundant sunshine 
at high altitudes, ideal rainfall, and rich volcanic soil, warmed by the humid 
winds rising up from the valley. Joining the Nespresso AAA Sustainable Quality™ 
Program in 2007 changed Jaime’s life. “Thanks to the increase in income paid 
for the sustainable quality of our green coffee we have been able to do things 
like fix up our house, and I bought another plot for growing coffee.”

Discover Nespresso’s journey to coffee perfection here 
<https://www.nespresso.com/au/en/coffee-expertise?cid=BAE_B2C_AUen_LOC_Dec16_TheGuardian_TheGuardian.Growing.talent.not.just.coffee.article>
 