
For many, Christmas means movies. For the analog generation, who grew up 
before the home-entertainment revolution, iTunes, DVDs or even VHS rental, 
Christmas was that super-special time when you could see top films on 
television and drawing a red circle around the 5pm James Bond slot in your 
festive double-issue of the Radio Times. The standing joke used to be that the 
topChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> film on other 
less important days was The Great Escape, because that always seemed to be on 
TV about that time; a Hollywoodised but not-especially-Christmassy story of a 
mass PoW breakout during the second world war.

Films actually about Christmas are prized for comfort-food verities: 
picturesque fantasy, sentimentality, optimism, images imported from northern 
Europe via the Coca-Cola Santa ads of the 20th century. They also have a fierce 
streak of sadness, as if to contrast our childhood memories of wonder with the 
disillusionment of adulthood. There is a sharp pang of loneliness and 
desperation amid the tinsel – otherwise how could we appreciate the dramatised 
comforts of family? Just as the freezing snow of bleak midwinter is best 
enjoyed from behind a window, with a lovely open fire, so the sadness of a 
Christmas movie tends to come with a crackle of sentimental human warmth. All 
these things have hyperevolved into the annual John Lewis TV ad, but a 
Christmas film comes with more humour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchristmas-film-special-2016-peter-bradshaw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a3e5877c4456c0fe62fcd4311b0e21a895bc44b%2F0_102_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20baubles%3A%20why%20the%20best%20Christmas%20films%20are%20darker%20than%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchristmas-film-special-2016-peter-bradshaw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never%20mind%20the%20baubles%3A%20why%20the%20best%20Christmas%20films%20are%20darker%20than%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchristmas-film-special-2016-peter-bradshaw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a3e5877c4456c0fe62fcd4311b0e21a895bc44b%2F0_102_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Bob Newhart and Will Ferrell in Elf 
The great ancestor of the Christmas film is Charles Dickens’s A Christmas 
Carol, which laid down the template for personal crisis and miraculous 
redemption around Christmastide. It is no accident that the most famous 
Christmas film is Frank Capra’s 1946 picture It’s a Wonderful Life, which has 
an overtly Dickensian fantasy theme: James Stewart’s suicidal family man is 
assigned a guardian angel who shows him how everything would be different if he 
did not exist.

The two other great Christmas films are Billy Wilder’s The Apartment (1960) 
and John Landis’s Trading Places (1983). In The Apartment, poor, pathetic 
office worker Bud (Jack Lemmon) is bullied into letting his boss use his 
apartment for extramarital liaisons. He falls in love with elevator operator 
Fran (Shirley MacLaine), whose heart is being broken in this very apartment by 
the same sleazy boss. Bud and Fran reach their crises of loneliness and 
humiliation at the Christmas party, but it is here, with the catastrophe that 
Christmas precipitated, that their lives are turned around.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchristmas-film-special-2016-peter-bradshaw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7182bd15befcb50f44c89cfcfe5ab99a0f53cb14%2F0_151_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20baubles%3A%20why%20the%20best%20Christmas%20films%20are%20darker%20than%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchristmas-film-special-2016-peter-bradshaw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never%20mind%20the%20baubles%3A%20why%20the%20best%20Christmas%20films%20are%20darker%20than%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchristmas-film-special-2016-peter-bradshaw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7182bd15befcb50f44c89cfcfe5ab99a0f53cb14%2F0_151_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
 Trading Places 
Landis’s Trading Places is Dickensian in spirit and Shavian in form. Two 
malign old billionaires, played by Don Ameche and Ralph Bellamy, have a bet 
that money is everything: a rich man deprived of money will degenerate into a 
feral bum; a poor man elevated to the plutocracy will become a respectable 
defender of ruling-class privilege. They conspire to swap the roles of Dan 
Aykroyd’s yuppie Louis and Eddie Murphy’s street hustler Billy Ray. Poor 
Louis’s nadir comes at Christmas time, but everyone realises that Christmas is 
precisely the time to realise their common humanity and take action against 
these horrible old bores.

Christmas movies, then, are partly about comedy, but with a strong taste of 
sadness and emotional catharsis. Laughter has to dry the tears. There are 
obviously great Christmas comedies – and by this I mean Jon Favreau’s Elf and 
Terry Zwigoff’s Bad Santa – both of which came out in 2003. In Elf, Will 
Ferrell plays a bizarrely big man in an elf costume accidentally carried back 
to the north pole, where he has grown up in the elves’ ranks since infancy. In 
Bad Santa, Billy Bob Thornton gives the performance of his career as a drunk, 
depressive department store Santa obsessed with anal sex who conspires to rob 
the outlets where he is employed. However entertaining these two are, there is 
an argument that they are not truly Christmas films – they don’t have the 
glassy-eyed note of serious sentimental exaltation.

Richard Curtis’s heartwarmingly soppy Love Actually is a very Christmassy film 
that came out the same year as Elf and Bad Santa. An ensemble piece about 
different people preparing for Christmas, I didn’t care for this much when I 
saw it first, but its sheer corniness has grown on me. Love Actually is like 
the awful Christmas jumper that Mark Darcy is forced to wear in Bridget Jones; 
self-conscious silliness is a distinct part of the Christmas film.

In real life, it is Christmas morning and Christmas Day that provide the 
anticlimactic ending to our experience of the festive season; the placid 
conclusion to all the organisational build-up and retail foreplay. In the 
Christmas film, it is gentle snowy daylight, rather than the night-time mystery 
of Christmas Eve that denotes the happy ever after. Having said that, my 
favourite Christmas movie ending runs absolutely counter to this: the cult noir 
40s classic Christmas Holiday, directed by Robert Siodmak, written by Herman 
Mankiewicz stars Gene Kelly as Robert Manette, who is – of all things – a 
vicious killer. The climax comes on Christmas night when Robert’s wife realises 
she has been freed from the abusive emotional hold he had on her. The clouds 
miraculously part to reveal a lovely starry sky. Is it a reference to the 
Christmas star? Who knows? But it is a great Christmas film ending.



 