
What do the women at Vogue wear? That’s all anyone really wants to know – or, 
at least, that’s why you’ll be watching, hawk-eyed, throughout a newBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> series about the magazine, Absolutely 
Fashion: Inside British Vogue. It’s been shot by seasoned director Richard 
Macer, who observes the magazine’s daily life over nine months with a keen eye 
and a dry sense of humour, hence the title. It will show what Vogue wears, and 
what Vogue eats.


Related: Cara Delevingne, tracksuits and ‘shawling’: how the September issues 
weigh up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/09/vogue-elle-september-cara-delevingne-editions-fashion-magazines>

Naturally, the office landscape features many clothes and little in the way of 
food. Rails of Victoria Beckham and padded jackets and Gucci sit alongside all 
the takeaway coffees (so many!) which appear at desks (white Formica, cluttered 
with binders, pens and Macs) or on the frow at the fashion shows. Much of the 
action takes place outside of the office because the fashion industry is a 
proactive one and as for the coffee, well you need to dosomething with your 
hands when a show is delayed by traffic – a phenomenon well documented by Macer 
– and what with the smoking ban and all ...

Regrettably, there is no sign of Vogue’s fabled “snack table”. Possibly 
because it’s empty, or doesn’t actually exist. An early cameo from a nectarine 
(or peach, we’re down to the stone by the time filming starts) blindsides us. 
Fiona Golfar, editor-at-large, friend to the stars, and the woman who procures 
the big names, nibbles it very slowly, with the caution of an animal emerging 
from hibernation. Then we’re back to the coffee.

For the most part, the Vogue style is unfettered. Of course it is – they’re 
being filmed – and the glamour moves in hierarchical fashion. The 
editor-in-chief, Alexandra Shulman, moves between brights and darks, a 
multicoloured striped Gucci jumper (Alexa Chung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> owns the same) one day, 
oatmeal cashmere and Gola trainers another. Fashion director Lucinda Chambers 
is flightier with her style: a lot of Marni, Jil Sander and massive earrings. 
If you’ve seen the notorious/acclaimed film about US Vogue,The September Issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/10/the-september-issue-review>, 
where the fashion director,Grace Coddington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/21/from-going-freelance-to-cats-11-minutes-with-grace-coddington>
, stole the show from US editorAnna Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour>, it’s hard not to escape the 
feeling that Chambers has been cast in the Coddington role here.
 Lucinda Chambers, fashion director. Photograph: Linda Brownlee/BBC/Lightbox 
Entertainment/Linda Brownlee 
Meanwhile, Sarah Harris, fashion features director and rising star of Vogue who
let her hair go grey 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/beauty/hair/how-to-go-grey-gracefully/>, is more 
open, giving us a tour of her wardrobe in the second episode. Millions of pairs 
of jeans. Céline and Manolo Blahnik shoes. Ditto Julia Hobbs, fashion news 
editor. Her most expensive item? She leans in: “My Prada. Red. Shearling. 
Coat.” It cost as much asa secondhand Mini. Jaime Perlman, the creative 
director and breakout star, is far more cool. She talks back to Shulman, wears 
an exaggerated eyeliner flick, and dresses for herself rather than the cameras. 
Note the Chloé tracksuit top in the second episode: one of the mostdiscussed 
pieces <http://www.vogue.co.uk/gallery/chic-tracksuits> of last season. 
Otherwise the looks are familiar ones: Bardot tops, Breton tops, printed 
blouses, smart shirts (mainly worn by Shulman’s “gatekeeper” PAs). Take note: 
there are few Stan Smiths, a staple of other fashion offices.

Shulman dresses like a woman in charge without the bizarre mythology of her US 
counterpart. Wintour herself appears briefly, and is filmed putting her 
sunglasses onbefore being interviewed. Inside. As Macer notes, “appearances can 
be deceiving” at Vogue. And while it is possible that the Devil might wear 
Prada, she only does if she can get from A to B in it.

• Absolutely Fashion: Inside British Vogue starts on BBC2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> on 8 September at 9pm
 