
She was a late-blooming artist who mingled with London’s intellectual elites 
in an age when celebrity meant names like Alfred Lord Tennyson and Charles 
Darwin.

But the face that pioneering photographer Julia Margaret Cameron kept 
returning to was that of her niece Julia Jackson, a young woman she bathed in 
light with the same reverence she usually reserved for her eminent male 
subjects in the arts and sciences.

In Cameron’s short but prolific career, she would photograph Jackson, later to 
become the mother of Virginia Woolf, almost 50 times, all the while refining 
her distinct style of portraiture.

The results can be seen in a major exhibition of Cameron’s work on now at the 
Art Gallery of New South Wales, which showcases her earliest success and the 
maturation of her practice through more than 100 works.

The gallery’s assistant curator of photographs, Isobel Parker Philip, has 
helped to bring the exhibition from London’s Victoria and Albert Museum to 
Sydney and says the works offer a rare opportunity to see a historic vision of 
experimental beauty and imagination.

“The stoic power and strength and gracefulness that are in the images of Julia 
Jackson are quite remarkable,” Parker Philip says. “The way Cameron has used 
light to skim her profile demonstrates her masterful command of light, because 
when you are working with natural light, that’s a very difficult thing to 
achieve.”

At the time Cameron’s subject was well known as a classical beauty, with many 
of the pre-Raphaelites using her as a model. Some reportedly even proposed to 
her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-culture%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Fnew-agnsw-exhibition-captures-the-power-of-photographic-pioneer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6977fafa957ab84f4e4d0eb0383d633e12afe3d4%2F0_0_2615_3543%2F2615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20AGNSW%20exhibition%20captures%20the%20power%20of%20photographic%20pioneer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-culture%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Fnew-agnsw-exhibition-captures-the-power-of-photographic-pioneer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20AGNSW%20exhibition%20captures%20the%20power%20of%20photographic%20pioneer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-culture%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Fnew-agnsw-exhibition-captures-the-power-of-photographic-pioneer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6977fafa957ab84f4e4d0eb0383d633e12afe3d4%2F0_0_2615_3543%2F2615.jpg>
 Julia Margaret Cameron Mrs. Herbert Duckworth 1872 © Victoria and Albert 
Museum, London Photograph: Supplied/ Art Gallery NSW 
 She did accept the proposal of Herbert Duckworth, but her happiness was 
short-lived. In Cameron’s 1872 portrait, the face staring back at us is not 
that of a glowing bride. Rather it is the image of Julia as a young widow and 
mother of three small children still mourning the sudden death of her barrister 
husband.

“The deep emotional cadence in her eyes in that stare is incredibly powerful,” 
Parker Philip says. “The works have an emotional register but are quite unique 
in terms of their composition and aesthetic, and coax a kind of intimacy 
between the sitter and the viewer.”

Cameron was born in Calcutta in 1815 and travelled extensively before settling 
in England in 1848, where she soon established herself within the literary and 
intellectual life at salons like Little Holland House.

She took up photography at the age of 48, after she was given a camera by her 
daughter in December 1863, and quickly moved from hobbyist to career artist.

Cameron’s portraits of Jackson are distinct from other pictures she shot of 
women playing characters in allegorical tableaux taken from literary or 
Biblical works.

“While she photographed all these eminent men with their rugged faces, she was 
quite restrictive in the way she would approach women,” Parker Philip says. 
“She had a very famous line: ‘A woman should only be photographed before they 
were 18 and after they were 70’, so nothing in between.”

The reasons for this were Cameron’s deeply religious outlook as she staunchly 
upheld the conservative values of her time. While we have images of the poet 
Tennyson, Cameron’s neighbour when she was living on the Isle of Wight, there 
are none of his wife Emily, nor any of Emma Darwin.

But of all the eminent men Cameron photographed, none had more influence on 
her than the astronomer and chemist Sir John Herschel, a man who was 
instrumental in the development of the photographic medium itself. Herschel 
made a number of improvements to photographic processes including inventing the 
cyanotype process - the precursor to blueprints - and was the first to apply 
the terms negative and positive to photography.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-culture%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Fnew-agnsw-exhibition-captures-the-power-of-photographic-pioneer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa065c1fa4bf78f6996f9d5780ae846b8c7ef7c61%2F0_0_1594_2084%2F1594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20AGNSW%20exhibition%20captures%20the%20power%20of%20photographic%20pioneer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-culture%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Fnew-agnsw-exhibition-captures-the-power-of-photographic-pioneer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20AGNSW%20exhibition%20captures%20the%20power%20of%20photographic%20pioneer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-culture%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Fnew-agnsw-exhibition-captures-the-power-of-photographic-pioneer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa065c1fa4bf78f6996f9d5780ae846b8c7ef7c61%2F0_0_1594_2084%2F1594.jpg>
 Julia Margaret Cameron Portrait of Herschel 1867 © Victoria and Albert Museum, 
London Photograph: Julia Margaret Cameron/Supplied / Art Gallery NSW 
Cameron had met Herschel in South Africa when she was just 21 and the pair 
stayed in contact throughout their lives.

In 1867 she visited the scientist at his Kent home in a pilgrimage to, as she 
called him, her “teacher and high priest” carrying all the weighty photographic 
apparatus of the day.

The resulting image has Herschel’s face isolated in an amorphous background 
and lit from above to create a halo effect.

“As with most of her portraits of eminent men there is an austere dramatic 
tension,” Parker Philip says. “There’s a heroic stature to Herschel but there’s 
also almost a tenderness. The subtleties of his facial expression are legible. 
The way she would create all these almost transcendent halos is wonderful.”

This year marks the bicentenary of Cameron’s birth and 150 years since her 
first exhibition was held at the South Kensington Museum, now the Victoria and 
Albert museum.

The current touring exhibition also features a series of letters and select 
photographs sourced from Australian institutions.




Julia Margaret Cameron: from the Victoria and Albert Museum London runs until 
25 October 2015. Assistant curator Isobel Parker Philip gives a talk on 
Cameron’s photographic practice and her affiliation with Australia on Wednesday 
7 October at the gallery, from 7.15pm to 7.45pm.
 