
A fresh slump in clothing sales at Marks & Spencer will push its new boss to 
reveal how he plans to turn around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/02/challenges-facing-marks-spencers-new-chief-steve-rowe>
 the serially underperforming division when he faces the City for the first 
time this week.

Steve Rowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/steve-rowe-new-m-and-s-marks-and-spencer-boss-profile>
, who has spent more than 25 years working at the high street retailer, 
succeededMarc Bolland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/marks-spencer-chief-executive-marc-bolland>
 on Saturday. He is due to present trading results to the City on Thursday. 
Rowe is already familiar with theM&S clothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/07/can-steve-rowe-save-ms-fashion>
 and homewares business as he has been in charge of general merchandise since 
last summer.

Fashion retailers have reported a weak start to 2016, with analysts estimating 
clothing and homewares like-for-like sales at M&S dropping more than 3% in its 
fourth quarter. Its food arm is expected to have eked out underlying sales 
growth of around 0.3% in the 13 weeks to 26 March.

Rowe is not expected to give a detailed overview of his vision for M&S until 
the company’s full-year results in May. He stands to reap the benefits of his 
predecessor’s multibillion-pound modernisation programme, which involved 
restructuring its warehousing and a new website. However, while the food 
business thrived under Bolland, the clothing business went downhill.

M&S won’t miss Bolland’s dress sense
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/03/marc-bolland-marks-spencer-floods-services>
Rowe’s leadership could face headwinds after mid-market rival Next last week 
warned fashion retailers itcould be facing the toughest trading conditions 
since the financial crisis in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/next-warns-of-toughest-trading-since-financial-crisis-and-cuts-sales-forecast>
, with Britons opting to spend spare cash on eating out and holidays rather 
than clothes.

Despite concerns about a downturn, analysts at HSBC think M&S’s nascent 
recovery will accelerate under Rowe. “With the high-risk investment phase of 
the M&S turnaround complete we expect the new chief executive to focus on a 
low-risk strategy based on better execution and commercial policy.”

“We expect greater focus on driving general merchandise top line growth via 
better product … improved product allocation and replenishment to store and 
where commercial to do so, margin investment in price.”

Under Bolland, M&S also started an overhaul of how it buys clothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/03/marc-bolland-marks-spencer-floods-services>
, cutting out middlemen and working with new suppliers, to improve profit 
margins. These gains are expected to buoy profits this year. Rowe can do more 
in this area while analysts also point to opportunities such as closing high 
street stores in favour of larger stores at out-of-town retail parks.
 