
As the fashion world waits to draw a line under a season that has seen an 
economic and creative recalibration, a new wave of millennial designers are 
poised to take the reins atLondon fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week>.

Of the eight new designers handpicked for the the British Fashion Council’s 
NewGen mentoring scheme – whose previous recipients include Alexander McQueen 
and JW Anderson – seven are female. “We have had a strong cohort of female 
designers in NewGen, which is fantastic to see,” says Caroline Rush, chief 
executive of the British Fashion Council.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7867eb29f7cffbddcf9ecd1799754a40e4a4e594%2F0_0_5701_3710%2F5701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20wave%20of%20female%20designers%20to%20take%20reins%20at%20London%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20wave%20of%20female%20designers%20to%20take%20reins%20at%20London%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7867eb29f7cffbddcf9ecd1799754a40e4a4e594%2F0_0_5701_3710%2F5701.jpg>
 Caroline Rush, centre, at an LFW runway show. Photograph: James 
Shaw/Rex/Shutterstock 
Two will open fashion week: Polish-born German-raised Marta Jakubowski, whose 
aesthetic showcases a tenure spent on film sets and at opera houses, as well as 
interning for Alexander Wang, with extravagantly flowing fabric and precise 
cutouts that are halfway between atelier and caped superhero; and Ashley 
Williams, who continues to mixathleisure, the trend that will not die 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/03/athleisure-threatens-to-put-jeans-out-of-fashion-kanye>
, with cartoon gothic imagery.

Elsewhere, Alexa Chung and the label Shrimps have turned their brand of street 
style into businesses. Chung, who is previewing her second Archive by Alexa for 
Marks and Spencer’s collection on Friday, which is due in stores on 1 November, 
and Shrimps’s creative director, Hannah Weiland, have put the emphasis on 
wearability.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30f404bd8f4ce6ae3f9dac26062db99e0dab187b%2F0_0_5480_3288%2F5480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20wave%20of%20female%20designers%20to%20take%20reins%20at%20London%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20wave%20of%20female%20designers%20to%20take%20reins%20at%20London%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30f404bd8f4ce6ae3f9dac26062db99e0dab187b%2F0_0_5480_3288%2F5480.jpg>
 Models backstage sporting athleisure wear. Photograph: Tristan Fewings/Getty 
Images 
What effect will this new generation of female designers have? “I think it 
will inspire young women to go into business,” says Rush. “And it will also get 
them thinking about starting their own careers in fashion.”

Theresa May shows Britain is still open for business at London fashion week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/15/theresa-may-shows-britain-is-still-open-for-business-at-london-fashion-week>
But industry turmoil has threatened to overshadow this season’s fashion weeks. 
There has been a record number of creative directors moving on from 
high-profile roles: Maria Grazia Chiuri from Valentino to Dior, Raf Simons to 
Calvin Klein, Jonathan Saunders to Diane von Furstenberg and Grace Coddington 
announcing her retirement from American Vogue.

The business is also having to reconfigure to move with the times. Runway to 
retail, the idea that clothes can be bought immediately after they debut on the 
catwalk, which Tom Ford did at New York fashion week – and the merging of male 
and female collections as seen at the Burberry show this week – have happened 
not just out of economic necessity but from an understanding that consumers 
have changed the way they shop.

One of the most significant shocks to the industry was the result of the EU 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
 in June. “The majority of us wanted to remain,” says Rush. “Since [the vote] 
we’ve been conscious of massaging our international relationships.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf38af25090eeccf34c0736da7d33b07b128f98e%2F0_0_2639_4096%2F2639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20wave%20of%20female%20designers%20to%20take%20reins%20at%20London%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20wave%20of%20female%20designers%20to%20take%20reins%20at%20London%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Flondon-fashion-week-female-designers-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf38af25090eeccf34c0736da7d33b07b128f98e%2F0_0_2639_4096%2F2639.jpg>
 British designer Vivienne Westwood arrives at Downing Street for the London 
fashion week reception. Photograph: Hannah Mckay/EPA 
At the prime minister’s reception at No 10 on Thursday, the focus was also on 
the business of fashion. “The government I lead will do everything we can, 
including providing the right investment in training and skills to help 
everyone, whatever people’s backgrounds, to go as far as their talents can take 
them,”Theresa May said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/15/theresa-may-shows-britain-is-still-open-for-business-at-london-fashion-week>
.

Her comments were echoed by the mayor of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> at an event to mark the start of 
fashion week. “London is open to the world and is an international leader of 
creativity and entrepreneurship,” Sadiq Khan said. “The fashion industry 
epitomises all that is great about the capital.”
 