
A proposed open-range zoo in Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia> would provide an 
“essential piece of conservation infrastructure” and allow Perth zoo to build 
on its internationally renowned captive breeding programs, the environment 
minister, Albert Jacob, has said.

The 700ha zoo is proposed for a nature reserve at Lower Chittering, next to 
the Avon Valley national park, about 70km north-east of Perth, and would be 
managed as a second site of the 19haPerth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/perth-news> zoo, located in the 
city.

It was announced as the likely site in November, and on Sunday the WA premier, 
Colin Barnett, said early environmental assessments had deemed it “absolutely 
almost perfect for an open-range zoo.”

Orangutan escapes from Perth zoo enclosure and mingles with visitors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/27/orangutan-escapes-from-perth-zoo-enclosure-and-mingles-with-visitors>
However, the estimated cost of the zoo has doubled in the intervening three 
months, from $50m-$100m in November to $100m-$200m.

No money has been allocated in the state budget.

Jacob said in November that both the cost and the estimated timeline for the 
project, which is anticipated to take between five and 10 years to develop, 
were “a broad guestimate”.

The Perth zoo chief executive, Linda Hunt, said limited space at the South 
Perth site meant the zoo was no longer getting breeding recommendations for a 
number of open-range species such as sun bears, and the new site would allow 
them to build on their breeding programs.

“This site is still absolutely fine for tropical animals, for some of our 
Australian breeding programs, but for large open-range species such as 
rhinoceroses and elephants, we are not getting breeding recommendations 
anymore,” Hunttold the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-01/perth-zoo-losing-breeding-recommendations/8156678>
.

The zoo runs successful breeding programs for native WA species such as the 
numbat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/perth-zoo-to-release-numbats-into-predator-free-wild>
,dibbler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/10/remote-western-australia-island-to-host-colony-of-endangered-dibblers>
 andWestern Swamp tortoise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/17/australias-rarest-tortoises-get-new-home-to-save-them-from-climate-change>
, which have been used to build up wild populations.

Perth zoo to release numbats into predator-free wild
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/perth-zoo-to-release-numbats-into-predator-free-wild>
It also has a globally recognised Sumatran orangutan breeding program, and is 
the only zoo in the world torelease them into the wild 
<https://perthzoo.wa.gov.au/article/perth-zoo-orangutan-released-wild>. 

Hunt said the zoo had the expertise “to really make a difference for wildlife 
conservation” and that an open-range zoo would allow them to get breeding 
recommendations for animals such as sun bears and rhinos.

“We will get the recommendations when we’ve got larger spaces, when we can 
have a herd of rhinos and a herd of zebras,” she said. “We will make a real 
difference.”

The announcement has already attracted attention, Jacob said: bear rescue 
foundationFree The Bears <http://www.freethebears.org/> contacted Perth zoo 
after the plan was announced in November to suggest moving rescued bears there 
from its south-east Asian sanctuaries.

“This would mean a better life for the bears, a great visitor experience, and 
showcase a strong Western Australian partnership between the group and the 
zoo,” he said.

Barnett, who is also tourism minister, first proposed the idea in 2013 
<http://www.perthnow.com.au/news/western-australia/premier-colin-barnett-to-announce-open-range-zoo-at-chittering-valley/news-story/08992f53f36da051ded05d1aaee93f3b>
, saying that the public expected to see larger African plains species in an 
open-range environment.

In a video posted on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/ColinBarnett/status/815444851994935296> by Barnett on 
Sunday, Jacob said WA was “already globally positioned at the forefront of 
threatened species conservation” and the proposed open-range zoo was the next 
step.
Colin Barnett (@ColinBarnett) 
Delighted to see so many families starting the new year with a visit to 
@PerthZoo <https://twitter.com/PerthZoo> where we announced the latest on WA's 
open range zoo planspic.twitter.com/PWkmkWZd7C <https://t.co/PWkmkWZd7C>
 <https://twitter.com/ColinBarnett/status/815444851994935296> January 1, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/ColinBarnett/status/815444851994935296> 
“And quite simply, with the animal standards of the 21st century, an 
open-range zoo is an essential piece of conservation infrastructure,” he said.

Sydney’s Taronga zoo has an open-range zoo at Dubbo, as does Zoos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zoos> Victoria with both Werribee Open Range 
zoo and Healesville wildlife sanctuary. South Australia has Monarto open-range 
zoo, partnered with Adelaide zoo.

In a statement, Barnett said the site was suitable for both large exotic 
animals and native Australian animals, and also appropriate for visitor 
infrastructure such as viewing platforms.

“People prefer to see large animals in big open areas similar to their natural 
habitat,” he said. “While Perth zoo remains excellent for smaller or tropical 
species, the establishment of an open-range zoo will allow Perth zoo to 
continue its important breeding and conservation work for the larger open-range 
animals whose numbers are dramatically declining in the wild.”
 