
Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> will be able to 
extend online deliveries into south London, Scotland, East Anglia and the 
north-east of England next year after signing a new deal with Ocado.

The expansion comes after Ocado, which has been running the technology and 
delivery network for Morrisons’ online businesssince it launched in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/10/morrisons-price-cuts-online-service>
, agreed to develop a new IT system to allow the supermarket to serve online 
shoppers from its stores as well as Ocado’s central warehouse in Dordon, 
Warwickshire.


It has also agreed to deliver thousands more non-food items not currently 
offered on Morrisons’ website.

David Potts, chief executive of Morrisons, which has been struggling to fight 
back against rising competition from discounters Aldi and Lidl as well as 
online shopping, said: “The new investments in online growth are further 
examples of Morrisons building a broader business.”

Under the new arrangement Morrisons will halve the amount it pays towards 
Ocado’s research and development to £4m a year from 2018 and will no longer pay 
a 25% cut of any future profits from its online business for the next 15 years.

UK supermarket sales suffer worst fall for at least two years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/uk-supermarket-sales-fall-poor-july-weather>
In return, Morrisons has agreed to help fund 30% of the costs of developing 
Ocado’s new distribution centre in Erith, south London, which is due to open in 
2018. It has also allowed the online specialist to run branded online services 
for other retailers potentially including Marks & Spencer and the Co-op. It 
continues to be blocked from providing similar services to major Morrisons 
competitors – Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Asda, Aldi and Lidl.


Under its new deal with Morrisons, Ocado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> could also renegotiate its tie-up 
with Waitrose. The upmarket grocer currently sells goods via Ocado’s own online 
service but the supermarket operates Waitrose.com deliveries itself from stores.

Analysts said the new deal was good news for both Ocado and Morrisons. The 
terms of the continuing relationship are clearly better for the supermarket 
than the widely-criticised deal it originally cut with Ocado.Morrisons paid 
£140m to buy the Dordon site and equipment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/may/17/ocado-deal-morrisons-online-waitrose>
 as well as £16m towards expanding capacity on top of a licence and integration 
fee of £30m.

 * The deal offers access to about 60,000 orders per week or £350m of new 
online business out of the Erith distribution centre by 2020 for a lower sum, 
although the details were not revealed on Tuesday.

 * 

For Ocado, analysts said the agreement bolstered the online specialist’s 
attempts to find new clients for its services which it now calls the “Ocado 
Smart Platform”. Analysts at Goldman Sachs said in a note: “The deal represents 
the first OSP client it has signed and the reduced exclusivity opens the door 
for providing OSP solutions to other UK grocery retailers.”

Ocado promised the City that it would sign up a new overseas partner before 
the end of last year but its share price has dived by more than 28% since 
Novemberas it failed to finalise any such agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/15/ocado-jump-sales-no-news-overseas-partnership-online-grocer>
.
 