
Welfare advocates have criticised reports claiming tens of thousands of 
welfare recipients are refusing job offers or leaving employment without reason 
as misleading and exaggerated.

News Corp on Monday reported that 35,000 “shameless layabouts” on unemployment 
benefits either refused to take or hold a job in the 12 months to October, 
calling it a “slacker crisis”.

Father furious after working daughter labelled 'Aussie bludger' by News Corp 
tabloid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/22/father-furious-after-daughter-labelled-aussie-bludger-by-news-corp-tabloid>
The data came from the human services minister, Alan Tudge, who said Jobactive 
providers reported toCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> that there were 35,576 
instances reported of job seekers refusing to take or hold down a suitable job.

The vast majority, more than 27,000, were then cleared by Centrelink because 
they had good reason or promised to re-engage.

Publicly available data on jobseeker compliance, published by the Department 
of Employment, appears to show the number of jobseekers being punished for 
breaching welfare obligations is decreasing.


In 2015-16 government data shows there were 36,224 non-payment periods 
<https://docs.employment.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/job_seeker_compliance_data_-_june_qtr_16.pdf>
 for jobseekers who failed to comply with their obligations, the lowest level 
in four years.

Advocates say the majority of those cases do not relate to a person turning 
down work or refusing to stay in a job.
ACOSS (@ACOSS) 
FACTCHECK: Official data shows only 589 serious failures last year or 0.18% of 
people seeking workhttps://t.co/9XZJi8JcpD <https://t.co/9XZJi8JcpD> 
@dailytelegraph <https://twitter.com/dailytelegraph>
 <https://twitter.com/ACOSS/status/808112867236978688> December 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ACOSS/status/808112867236978688> 
Only an absolute minority of the cases were described as serious failures 
involving the turning back of a suitable job (589) or choosing not to commence 
suitable work (458).


About 23,130 of those cases, or 63%, related to “persistent non-compliance”, 
which is an accrual of three smaller penalties in six months. Persistent 
non-compliance could, for example, stem from missing three appointments with an 
employment service provider.

There were roughly 12,000 penalties for voluntary unemployment or unemployment 
due to misconduct.


National Welfare Rights Network executive officer, Matthew Butt, said it was 
misleading to use “persistent non-compliance” to gauge the willingness to work 
or stay in a job.

He said those cases disproportionately involved Indigenous people in remote 
communities, where jobs were few and far between.


“At least in published data, if we use the number of penalties as a way of 
measuring how prevalent people actually avoiding work actually is, the numbers 
are very, very low, and don’t suggest there’s a widespread problem,” Butt said.

“Given the very low rate of Newstart allowance, I think that common sense 
would tell you that few people would actually choose that level of 
impoverishment,” he said.

“It is not the experience of our organisation or our members that people 
choose to be on a poverty-level income support payment. People want to work and 
they want to participate in the community.”


The Australian Council of Social Service (Acoss) also questioned the data, 
saying compliance data clearly showed that very few people turned down work.

Acoss policy director Jacqueline Phillips said current Newstart rates were at 
$38 per day, the lowest in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD).

“People are much better off in employment than living on Newstart and the vast 
majority of job seekers move into paid work when they find a suitable job,” 
Phillips said.

“It’s unclear what data the Daily Telegraph is relying on, but the publicly 
available compliance data show that very few people are turning down work,” she 
said.


The government has repeatedly stated its intention to reduce unnecessary 
welfare expenditure, largely through debt collection.

Press Council rules against Daily Telegraph story on pension 'bludgers'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/14/press-council-rules-against-daily-telegraph-story-on-pension-bludgers>
OECD data, however, shows Australia’s spending on unemployment benefits is 
actuallylower as a percentage of GDP than it was in 2000 
<https://data.oecd.org/chart/4GXj>, and is still well below the OECD average.

News Corp’s report also claimed that “about half” the people aged 18 and over 
in the New South Wales electorates of Cowper and Blaxland received welfare 
payments.

The Australian bureau of statistics lists only four areas in Australia having 
more than 50% unemployment– all remote Indigenous communities. Acoss believes 
the Cowper and Blaxland claim may rely on the high number of age pensioners in 
those electorates.

“Where there are regions with high numbers of income support recipients, most 
recipients are age pensioners,” Phillips said. “In Cowper, age pensioners alone 
comprise 20% of the electorate, while people on Newstart comprise just 6% of 
the electorate. In Blaxland, age pensioners and carers make up 21% of the 
electorate.”

News Corp also published a report over the weekend alleging Centrelink was 
paying spousal benefits to Muslim families with multiple wives.

Treasurer Scott Morrison said on Monday the government needed to look closely 
at the allegations.


“The law and its implementation cannot condone polygamy, it’s against our 
values, it’s 100% wrong,” Morrison said.

“So the extent that there needed to be changes here and I think from what we 
have heard we have to look really closely at this, but you don’t want to jump 
out of the frying pan and into the fire.

“You cant have people claiming single parent benefits and they are supported. 
Our rule is clear - polygamy - not on, against our values, against our culture.”

 