
Yesterday, Chris Grayling MP, the person responsible for transport in this 
country, showed an astonishing lack of knowledge regarding cycling on the road. 
He implied in parliament thatcyclists don’t count as road users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/cyclists-dont-count-as-road-users-argues-transport-secretary>
. While this was incredible to hear, it was – sadly – far from surprising, and 
is symptomatic of a lack of insight and understanding on this issue from our 
elected representatives.

If Grayling has any understanding of the concerns of the 7 million people who 
regularly cycle on Britain’s roads, then he would know that the vast majority 
of cycle lanes are inconvenient, poorly maintained and often dangerous. It is 
why most cyclists choose to cycle in the road. It is also the reason why just2% 
of journeys are cycled 
<http://www.cyclinguk.org/resources/cycling-uk-cycling-statistics>, despite 
British Cycling having evidence that two-thirds of people would cycle if it 
were made safer.

As Grayling must be aware, people are – and always have been – free to use the 
roads in many ways: driving, cycling, walking, horse riding, rollerblading – 
and we all have a duty to use our roads safely, no matter how we travel. This 
is enshrined in law and backed up by the highway code, which also tells 
cyclists that they don’t have to use cycle lanes.

I would like to take Grayling on a typical London commute from zone 2 to his 
office in Westminster

I – and I’m sure the same goes for the 7 million other people who get around 
by bike – would love there to be a convenient segregated cycle lane on every 
main road so that my family and I didn’t have to share the road with motor 
traffic. However, without intelligent thinking and smart investment this won’t 
happen, and Grayling’s own government’s target todouble the number of journeys 
being cycled 
<https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/search/article/20160504-campaigning-Making-cycling-the-natural-choice-for-journeys---part-two-0>
 will never materialise.

It won’t be easy to achieve, and our political leaders undoubtedly need to be 
brave, decisive and committed in order to meet even their own modest targets. 
But for a country in danger of being crippled by societal issues such as 
congestion, pollution and an obesity epidemic, sustainable transport has never 
been more crucial.

How much, for example, are failed pollution targets likely to cost us? How far 
could we go if we cleaned up our act on sustainable transport, met these 
targets and freed up this money to be spent elsewhere? If an affordable, 
alternative answer to all of these problems were presented, I would gladly 
advise Grayling and his colleagues to take that option. However, as we stand at 
the moment, cycling presents the only viable, cost-effective and proven 
solution, yet our government still seems unwilling to commit to it.

Related: Cyclists don't count as road users, argues transport secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/cyclists-dont-count-as-road-users-argues-transport-secretary>

We need major investment in cycling networks in communities across the 
country, along with better integration with public transport and supportive 
policies to improve safety on the road. At present, investment in cycling 
infrastructure is set to fall. For example thecycle cities ambition programme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/nick-clegg-announces-multi-million-pound-boost-for-cycling-in-8-major-cities>
, which has provided funding for cycling in eight cities, is due to finish in 
2018 with no new funding in place. When it ends the Department for Transport’s 
spending on cycling will be less than £1 per head of the population compared 
with the £15bn being invested in roads and £50bn in HS2. It is clear this is 
about priorities, not money.

Grayling needs to get on a bike and experience the roads for himself. Only 
last month hecomplained 
<http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/latest-news/cycle-lanes-cause-problems-for-road-users-says-transport-secretary-303276>
 about the hugely successful new segregated cycle lanes in London, now found on 
the Embankment and Blackfriars Bridge. They have increased the number of people 
cycling on these roads by over 70%, giving people safe, secure routes across 
central London, as well as getting people out of their cars and off public 
transport, and easing congestion on the roads and overcrowding on the London 
Underground.

I would like to take Grayling on a typical London commute from zone 2 to his 
office in Westminster. We would experience cycling on busy roads without safe 
cycle lanes before feeling the difference made by the new segregated routes. He 
would see thousands of other people doing the same and see how it is quicker, 
more reliable and less stressful thanbeing stuck in Clapham Junction 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/transport-secretary-chris-grayling-pictured-battling-to-get-to-work-at-clapham-junction-during-a3436691.html>
 during a rail strike, as he was this week. Then he will know what it really 
means to be a road user.
 