
The boss of the high street chain Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> has said its clothing prices could 
rise by up to 5% next year after the pound collapsed in the wake of the Brexit 
vote.

Lord Wolfson said the cost of buying goods from abroad in sterling had jumped 
by 9% for next year’s fashions but that some of that hit would be mitigated as 
other currencies, such as the yuan, had also weakened against the dollar and it 
would also be able to secure better deals from suppliers.

“We’ve always taken the view that if our costs go up then our selling prices 
will go up and vice versa,” Wolfson said. “Although it is very early in the 
buying cycle, we currently estimate that cost prices in 2017/18 will rise by 
less than 5% on like-for-like products.”

Wolfson promised to give more details at its half-year results update next 
month as it would have “greater visibility” of the retailer’s spring and summer 
contracts.

The warning on prices came as Wolfson said trading would remain tough this 
year. In March,he predicted 2016 would be the most difficult since the 
financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/next-warns-of-toughest-trading-since-financial-crisis-and-cuts-sales-forecast>
, pointing to weak consumer confidence and the trend for people spending spare 
cash on eating out and other leisure experiences rather than new clothes.

The Conservative peer, a prominent Vote Leave supporter, said he did not 
expect Thursday’sexpected interest rate cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/31/uk-interest-rates-set-to-be-cut-bank-of-england-growth-forecasts>
 to make much difference to the UK’s cooling economy as the base rate was 
already so low.

The government could, however, boost the economy by tackling his bête noire, 
the country’s “slow” planning system, he said. The decision to delay the 
Hinkley Point nuclear plant had been a “sensible” one, he added, suggesting 
that investment in roads and aviation capacity, as well as energy reform, would 
be more productive.

In its trading update, the retailer said full-price sales edged up 0.3% in the 
three months to 30 July, an improvement on the 0.9% fall in the first quarter. 
The sales picture was “extremely volatile”, with big swings dictated by the 
weather rather than political upheaval as Britons bought summer clothes during 
shortlived hot spells. “The market is being driven by need,” said Wolfson. “If 
the sun comes out and you need summer clothes, people are buying them. This 
volatility is indicative of the underlying weakness of consumer demand for 
clothing.”

Nicla di Palma, analyst at Brewin Dolphin, said: “We do not think Next will be 
able to increase its selling prices due to the competitive situation in the UK 
clothing market and the weakness of the UK consumer. These results are 
reassuring, although there remains a big question mark on the strength of the 
consumer in the next few months.”

Next has cut its guidance for annual profit twice this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/next-warns-on-sales-profits-cold-weather>
, blaming consumer caution, less enthusiasm for clothes shopping and bad 
weather in early spring. The outlook improved during the quarter and it revised 
its guidance to a 2.5% fall or rise in full-price sales. Pre-tax profits for 
the year would now be at least £775m, up from the £748m figure pencilled in in 
May. As a result, Next shares were among the biggest risers in the FTSE 100, 
closing up 4% at £53.40.
 