
Next <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> lowered its annual sales 
forecast following a tough third quarter when the retailer struggled to sell 
full-price clothing.

The company said a bigger than usual end-of-season sale in July, as well as 
stronger trading a year earlier, had affected its performance in August and 
September. Sales fell 3.5% in the third quarter.

“In September, we gave guidance that trading in the third quarter would be 
difficult. In August, full-price sales were subdued following the much larger 
end-of-season sale in July, and in September we traded against our best month 
last year. October sales improved significantly, as comparative weeks last year 
became less challenging.”

Next was one of the FTSE 100 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse>’s 
biggest risers in early trading, with shares up 2.2%.Lord Wolfson, Next’s chief 
executive, had previously warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/next-retail-profits-slide-as-consumers-shun-full-price-clothes>
 that the retailer had seen no post-referendum recovery in sales and that 
trading remained difficult.

Nick Bubb, an independent retail analyst, said there was relief that the 
trading update was not more gloomy.

He said: “Ahead of the much-awaited third quarter update from mighty Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next>, the City has grown nervous about 
what the company would say, despite the evidence of much improved October 
trading, on the back of colder weather. The issue is how bad August and 
September were and so it is some sort of relief that overall full-price sales 
were only 3.5% down in the period.”

Next lowered its guidance for full-price sales in the year to January 2017, 
predicting a drop of 1.75% in the worst-case scenario, and a 1.25% increase in 
the best-case scenario.

The fashion retailer said it expected pre-tax profit to be between £785m and 
£825m, compared with a previous range of between £775m and £845m.

Freddie George, an analyst at Cantor Fitzgerald, said: “The brand is, in our 
view, not broken even if it has lost its edginess against some of the 
mainstream competitors. It is being impacted by a more competitive and 
difficult market, which we had expected would have been more robust in the 
lead-up to Christmas.”
 