
What's got into the water at Next <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next>? 
The retailer with one of the most stable boardrooms among all FTSE 100 
companies has now announced two departures in the space of three weeks. First, 
finance director David Keens decided to retire after 23 years in the post. Now 
group product director Christos Angelides, who joined the company 28 years ago, 
is off.

The timing is coincidence, of course. Angelides has been poached to be "brand 
president" of US clothing group Abercrombie & Fitch. That's a decent job offer: 
A&F is huge and underperforming. Angelides is 50 and, though he earned more 
than Next chief executive Simon Wolfson in each of the last two years, there is 
probably little point in hanging around in the hope of succeeding the boss. 
Wolfson is 46 and very likely to go on and on.

Like most Next executives, Angelides has a low profile but many retail 
watchers regard him as the power behind the throne. Certainly, Next has had an 
astonishingly good run with him in charge of the product. Fashion snobs sneer 
at "school uniforms for the office" in every shade of cappuccino but Next has 
been the dominant force in the middle market for years. Marks & Spencer's 
shareholders look on in envy.

This is a new challenge for Wolfson. Keens and Angelides have been at his side 
ever since he became chief executive in 2001. The succession-planning worked 
smoothly in the case of Keens – long-serving brand finance director Amanda 
James will take over. But there is no ready-made replacement for Angelides – 
his duties will probably be divided among senior colleagues outside the 
boardroom. Next is a master of collegiate management, say its fans. This is the 
first test in ages of that reputation.
 