
Next <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> said it had seen no 
post-referendum recovery in sales and that trading remained difficult after 
profit fell in the first half of the year.

The fashion retailer said it had strong sales in July but that this was the 
result of a bigger end-of-summer sale than the year before. Lord Wolfson, 
Next’s chief executive, said the pound’s fall could push up inflation and 
squeeze consumer spending power.

Wolfson said the pound’s fall could increase the wholesale cost of buying 
garments by up to 5%. He said he would sooner lose some sales than take a big 
hit on profit margins, suggesting prices are likely to rise in stores.

The company’s shares were leading the FTSE 100 fallers on Thursday morning, 
down 5% at £49.52.

UK retail sales rise 1.4% in July as shoppers shrug off Brexit gloom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/uk-retail-sales-rise-july-shoppers-shrug-off-brexit-gloom>
The Tory peer said consumers had continued to switch spending away from 
clothing to leisure items such as eating out and holidays. He said the current 
quarter was likely to be the toughest of the year for Next but that business 
would pick up if there was a cold winter.


He said: “Full price sales in July remained subdued, so we do not believe that 
July trading represented any change in underlying consumer spending patterns. 
Trading since July, which to some extent may have been affected by the sale, 
has remained challenging and volatile.”

Next’s pre-tax profit for the six months to the end of July fell 1.5% to 
£342.1m as full-price retail sales fell 4%. Retail profits fell 16.8% to 
£133.9m but group results were supported by a recovery at the Directory home 
shopping division where sales rose 10.9% to £204.2m.

Retail sales rose in July after falling in June, according to official figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/uk-retail-sales-rise-july-shoppers-shrug-off-brexit-gloom>
. The numbers appeared to suggest shoppers had shrugged off the Brexit vote as 
warmer weather boosted trade though economists warned the snapshot could have 
little bearing on the longer term health of the high street.

Wolfson warned in March that the high street would suffer the most difficult 
trading conditions this year since the financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/next-warns-of-toughest-trading-since-financial-crisis-and-cuts-sales-forecast>
. He blamed a general consumer slowdown and a growing trend for people to spend 
on experiences rather than material goods, as well as unseasonal weather.

Wolfson stuck to guidance for annual profit published in August, which said 
annual profit could fall as much as 5.6% or rise by up to 2.9% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/next-expects-higher-profits-despite-tougher-trading-conditions>
. He said the wide range reflected economic uncertainty and volatile consumer 
demand.

 