
I took this in 2001 for an exhibition to celebrate John Galliano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/john-galliano>’s first five years at Dior. 
John wanted to showcase his couture collections: there were 10, and each one 
was to be represented by a single dress, and each dress by one girl.Erin 
O’Connor <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/erin-oconnor> did this one. The 
show was to take place at the Design Museum in London but it never happened 
because of 9/11.

I like the cocktail of ideas. First, you have how Erin looks: she’s topless, 
she’s got pink plasters across her nipples, and she has a Clockwork 
Orange-style false nose on. She’s wearing the Marie Antoinette dress, which is 
embroidered with scenes from the French Revolution including her own beheading. 
The piano-smashing is a reference toKarlheinz Stockhausen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/karlheinz-stockhausen>, the experimental 
musician. He wrote a string quartet to be played in helicopters and I had this 
idea of a piano being pushed out of one of them.

Erin is fantastic: she looks like a 1950s couture model. She has this 
incredible six-foot-something frame, so when she poses she looks incredibly 
graphic and structural. She also has a very good understanding of what it takes 
to make an image, and loves all the drama and performance of a shoot. I just 
said: “OK, here’s a piano, here’s a sledgehammer, off you go.”

When making an image, you don’t say: “Let’s put a nose on her because that’ll 
symbolise this and this will mean that.” But you do do an awful lot of playing 
around and invention, in a spirit of freedom. There’s a real group psychology 
to it: we work in teams of four, five, six people, with hair and makeup and 
stylist and art director all participating. They all have exciting and 
different things to say – and that’s true of all the people I work with, from 
John Galliano to Alexander McQueen, from Kanye West toBjörk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/31/bjork-build-bridges-technology-somerset-house-london-virtual-reality-vulnicura>
. These are people I’m excited by.

We are going through huge cultural changes at the moment, what with Brexit and 
things like that, which is causing a lot of fear. People always look to the 
past and make themselves small when they are scared. That’s why I like this 
image so much. To me, it represents freedom and an optimism about the future.

 * Nick Knight: Image <https://www.daelimmuseum.org/eng/index.do> is at the 
Daelim Museum, Seoul, South Korea, until 26 March.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fnick-knight-photograph-erin-o-connor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09fbd13caa37414e77ff1debc1bad0c8ce9f93cd%2F0_92_3854_4814%2F3854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Knight%E2%80%99s%20best%20photograph%3A%20Erin%20O'Connor%20smashing%20a%20piano%20in%20a%20false%20nose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fnick-knight-photograph-erin-o-connor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Knight%E2%80%99s%20best%20photograph%3A%20Erin%20O%27Connor%20smashing%20a%20piano%20in%20a%20false%20nose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fnick-knight-photograph-erin-o-connor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09fbd13caa37414e77ff1debc1bad0c8ce9f93cd%2F0_92_3854_4814%2F3854.jpg>
 Nick Knight. Photograph: Jon Emmony SHOWstudio 
Nick Knight’s CV

Born: London, 1958

Training: Bournemouth and Poole College of Art 
<http://www.thecollege.co.uk/what-to-study/curriculum-areas/art-and-design>.

Influences: “The complexity of life.”

High point: “Always the future.”

Low point: “Always the past.”

Top tip: “Never give up.”
 