
Independent senator Nick Xenophon has called on the major parties to agree to 
a more transparent parliamentary entitlement scheme as parliamentarians await 
the release of the review in the wake of theBronwyn Bishop choppergate scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/bronwyn-bishop-travel-expenses-scandal-how-it-unfolded>
.


Tony Abbott instituted the review 
<https://pmtranscripts.dpmc.gov.au/release/transcript-24664> in August last 
year when Bishop was forced to step down from the speaker’s role after it was 
discovered she chartered a helicopter at the cost of $5,000 from Melbourne to 
Geelong to attend a party fundraiser.

Politicians’ expenses post-Bronwyn Bishop: four reforms gaining traction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/03/politicians-expenses-post-bronwyn-bishop-four-reforms-gaining-traction>
The review committee 
<https://www.dpmc.gov.au/taskforces/review-parliamentary-entitlements> is 
headed by the former secretary of the finance department David Tune and the 
president of the remuneration tribunal, John Conde. It also includes the former 
Liberal leader Brendan Nelson and the former Labor speaker Harry Jenkins.

Xenophon urged the committee to put in place a more transparent system, which 
would see monthly entitlements published and tougher penalties to force MPs to 
pay back twice the amount claimed for cases of abuse.

He said if the review recommends a “bit of window dressing”, parliamentary 
entitlements would become an election issue.

“If this is going to lead to a bit of tinkering or a bit of window dressing, 
it won’t cut it for most Australians, who don’t like different standards for 
MPs than for everyone else – and I am only talking about normal tax office 
standards,” Xenophon told Guardian Australia.

Xenophon came up with the scheme after his office mistakenly claimed a night 
of travel allowance in Brisbane, not knowing he came home because a speech 
finished early. The finance department accepted the claim based on an 
electronic signature.

When Xenophon realised the mistake – he paid back double the amount and gave 
instructions that any Freedom of Information (FOI) request regarding the claim 
should be approved.


He said doubling the repayment in the case of mistake or abuse would “focus 
the minds” of MPs.


“Transparency and larger penalties would make a real difference in terms of 
avoiding abuse and would also increase the public confidence in the system,” 
Xenophon said.

But it has been reported by Fairfax 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/politicians-to-keep-perks-in-wake-of-bronwyn-bishop-choppergate-report-20160311-gnh7s2.html>
 that the review would not recommend a major overhaul in the system but rather 
a new framework to review and monitor claims.

Bronwyn Bishop told by Tony Abbott’s office 'not to give helicopter apology'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/06/bronwyn-bishop-told-by-tony-abbotts-office-not-to-give-helicopter-apology>
The report was expected in the first half of 2016. It is understood the 
investigation into some MPs expenses, including the former speakerBronwyn Bishop
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bronwyn-bishop>, went back 10 
years.

The timing of the report is tricky for the government given Bishop faces a 
preselection battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/firm-blue-ribbon-ground-of-mackellar-under-bronwyn-bishop-starts-to-crack>
 for her seat of Mackellar. Bishop has to defend her seat from fellow Liberal 
candidates Walter Villatora, Jason Falinski and former Wallaby Bill Calcraft.

A preselection date has yet to be set even as the government appears to move 
closer towards a possible double dissolution election.

The finance minister’s office has been contacted for comment.
 