
With Nigeria’s parliament poised to extend a controversial law banning the 
“menace of street begging” throughout the country, campaigners are warning the 
policy has already resulted in the persecution of tens of thousands of disabled 
and mentally ill citizens.

Street begging is illegal in Lagos, Nigeria’s most populous city, and carries 
fines of around N15,000 (£38) and up to three months’ imprisonment. Those who 
fail to pay the fine are incarcerated until they are able to pay up.

Reach out, raise money or remove: how should cities deal with street begging?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/29/how-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness>
But due to poor medical support, the people begging on Lagos’s street are 
disproportionately made up of mentally ill and disabled citizens, and human 
rights activists say tens of thousands of vulnerable people have been detained 
over the past five years as a result of the ban.

Megan Chapman, a human rights lawyer and director of the local NGO Justice and 
Empowerment Initiatives (JEI), said the “scale of human rights violations is 
massive and extremely concerning”, and added the treatment may be illegal under 
the country’s constitution.

Though campaigners from JEI acknowledged that begging is also banned in other 
cities across the world, they claim the ban is policed brutally and without 
transparency in Lagos. “It’s hard to find a city enforcing the ban in as 
inhumane a way as Lagos is,” Chapman said.

Despite widespread calls from NGOs and activists for the state to reconsider 
its policy, theNigerian senate is now considering a bill to ban begging 
nationwide <http://punchng.com/senate-proposes-law-ban-street-begging/>. 

The bill, proposed by Senator Isah Misau, has substantial backing in the 
senate, with lawmakers claiming the increase in begging is caused by criminal 
exploitation rather than poor economic conditions inNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, which is now officially in 
recession.

I dream of a utopian Lagos – but here's what African cities really need to 
prosper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/13/utopian-future-lagos-what-african-cities-really-need-un-habitat-3>
Speaking in support of the proposed legislation, Misau said: “Street begging 
affects not only the geographical and social structure of urban areas; it also 
portrays the country in a bad light to tourists and foreign visitors.”


Lagos state’s governor, Akinwunmi Ambode, has backed the crackdown on street 
begging. “We’ve had security reports on the activities of persons who pose as 
beggars, especially in traffic, but their sole aim is to perpetrate evil,” he 
said in July.

The state government said in April 
<http://www.lagosstate.gov.ng/2016/04/26/lagos-evacuates-1-340-beggars-destitutes-in-one-year/>
 that 1,340 beggars, destitute and “mentally challenged persons” had been 
“rescued” from the streets of Lagos in the past year. During this period, it 
said 590 “rehabilitees” had been released and reunited with their relatives for 
re-integration, while 1,228 people were rehabilitated at what it referred to as 
a “rehabilitation and training centre” in Majidun, on mainland Lagos.

In addition, according to a leaked memo cited on the Nigerian site PM News 
<http://www.pmnewsnigeria.com/2016/07/26/lagos-evacuates-413-beggars-deports-31-others-to-niger/>
, 413 beggars and “lunatics” were reportedly evacuated from Lagos’s streets by 
government officials between March and July this year.

Most of those detained for begging are taken to the holding facility by the 
so-called “rescue team” from the Lagos State Youth and Development Ministry, 
which enforces the ban.

The centre was opened as part of a drive to clean up the city in the 1970s. 
State officials claim it is used to help and treat beggars and people who are 
physically or mentally ill, yet reports from former detainees paint a different 
picture.

Men and women held there have described torturous conditions, claiming to have 
been denied basic rights and medical attention, held in confined spaces, often 
for years, without a fair hearing.

“We have met dozens of people arrested for begging who have been made to pay a 
hefty bribe, who have been deprived of their liberty for months or even years. 
Not one of them has ever been taken before a court of law. It is a serious 
violation of their rights under the Nigerian constitution,” she said.

“What we’ve been pressing the state government to do is to have a root and 
branch overhaul of the system; stop the mass incarcerations that impact on the 
health and well-being of the beggars.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnigeria-crackdown-begging-raises-fears-over-human-rights-violations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd1b1566963fd933c0d6b31cc11efcbc50ed8360%2F6_187_3491_2094%2F3491.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigeria's%20crackdown%20on%20begging%20raises%20fears%20over%20human%20rights%20violations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnigeria-crackdown-begging-raises-fears-over-human-rights-violations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigeria%27s%20crackdown%20on%20begging%20raises%20fears%20over%20human%20rights%20violations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnigeria-crackdown-begging-raises-fears-over-human-rights-violations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd1b1566963fd933c0d6b31cc11efcbc50ed8360%2F6_187_3491_2094%2F3491.jpg>
 A man disabled by polio begs at a petrol station in Kebbi state, northern 
Nigeria. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Workers from JEI, along with the Physically Challenged Empowerment Initiative 
(PCEI), a grassroots organisation campaigning against the detentions, have 
looked after several people after their release from the centre.

Among them was 25-year-old Yakubu Idris. After his arrest and 20-month 
detention at the Majidun facility, his health deteriorated. Interviewed hours 
after his release, he said: “Now I cannot walk – I cannot even stand up from 
the floor.”

Despite suffering from extensive infections and a respiratory problem, Idris 
said he was denied medical treatment by officials at the facility. “In the cell 
I totally forgot how long I was there because I was never let out. Then one day
theoga [boss] took two of us and released us,” he said. 

A week later, tests for tuberculosis came back positive, but Idris died before 
he could receive treatment.

From hawkers to criminals: how the Lagos ban on street selling hurts the city
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/03/hawkers-criminals-lagos-ban-street-selling>
Chapman said calls for change by local NGOs were slowly being heeded, but the 
proposed bill threatened to undermine years of work to change attitudes towards 
beggars.

“We have pointed out that current practices are completely unconstitutional 
and fail to address the social problems of destitution and street begging. The 
focus should be on helping the poor and people living with disabilities to find 
alternative livelihoods,” she said.

Under the previous Lagos state governor, scores of beggars were routinely 
deported to their states of origin. In 2011, 3,029 people were deported from 
Lagos. Dolapo Badru, a state government spokesman at the time, defended the 
measures, arguing that “beggars and destitutes constitute a social nuisance 
towards the development of Lagos as a mega-city”.

Muhammed Zanna, one of the founders of the PCEI in Lagos said negative 
perceptions of the poor had led to widespread apathy about the way they are 
treated by the state.

“Governor Ambode wants to create a modern city and the poor don’t fit into 
that vision,” said Zanna.

“The state doesn’t see beggars as real people, just as people to hide or to 
send away. People who have no interaction with the poor or disabled have this 
idea that they are really criminals and drug dealers, so even when the state 
services maltreats them people don’t show any concern,” Zanna said.

State officials at the youth ministry did not respond to requests for comment. 

Officials at the facility in Majidun denied detainees were kept in harsh 
conditions indefinitely or denied basic rights, and claimed a doctor was 
available to provide treatment. They also say it is merely “a temporary holding 
site” until fines are paid or a hearing takes place.

Forty-year-old Binta Muhammadu was arrested in February with her two children, 
aged two and four. When she couldn’t pay the fine, she was detained at Majidun 
for nine months, with her children held elsewhere. “In that time I only saw my 
children three times,” she said.

According to Binta, “there were about 50 of us in the same room, where we 
bathed, ate and slept. We were never let out,” she said.

“I don’t know what I will do now that I am free,” she added. “I don’t have 
anything and I can’t walk well any more. This has just made things worse for me 
than it was before.”
 