
The sand is still hot under our feet. The oil thieves must have run the 
illegal oil refinery – hidden from the sea by thickets of mangrove – until just 
a short while ago. “Destroy everything, boys,” orders the commander of the
Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> Security and Civil Defence 
Corps (NSCDC) unit, Helen Amakiri.

Her job is to combat oil theft, estimated to cost Nigeria a tenth of its 
annual oil production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/oct/06/oil-theft-costs-nigeria>
. It’s a rate of loss that hasdethroned the country as Africa’s largest oil 
producer <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-36301835> – Angola now has a 
bigger output.

A paramilitary NSCDC trooper obeys Amakiri by firing his automatic weapon into 
the rusty oil containers at close range, setting them on fire. The flames stink 
sweetly of diesel. It’s pouring with rain as we surge away in speedboats, the 
rising column of black smoke smudging the sky.

“My strategy is pretty simple,” the commander shouts above the boat’s roaring 
engine. “It is to set fire to stolen oil.”


Half of her men are wearing life jackets, the other half bulletproof vests. 
She says proudly they have destroyed more than 1,800 illegal bush refineries in 
the almost two years she has been operating in the creeks, the narrow waterways 
criss-crossing the mangrove swamps of the Niger Delta region.

Will Nigeria be left to repent at leisure if national assets are sold due to 
recession? | Oluseun Onigbinde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/01/nigeria-recession-repent-at-leisure-national-assets-sold>
Nigeria’s oil minister recently announced a $10bn (£7.9bn) investment plan 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-37797905> for the delta, “to ensure 
zero militancy in the area”. It offers a mix of social programmes, 
infrastructure investments and security spending, but no one is certain that it 
will work.

For a start, oil theft 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/102188/crude-awakening-can-oil-benefit-people-niger-delta>
 is a long-standing and lucrative business. The environmental consequences are 
clearly visible in the delta. For an hour we shoot through the creeks at high 
speed without seeing one mangrove shrub that hasn’t had its roots coloured 
black by oil pollution up to the level of high tide.

Not all of this is the work of the oil thieves. Foreign oil companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/ogoni-king-shell-oil-is-killing-my-people>
, working under weak government regulation, also bear some guilt for turning 
the area into one of the most polluted in the world.

With traditional industries such as farming and fishing severely damaged, for 
many, the most obvious occupation is to steal oil. But there is a difference 
between local refining, and the really big money to be made from oil 
“bunkering”.

The refiners meet a local need within communities cut off from commercial 
suppliers, but also make money smuggling their cheap diesel and kerosene 
throughout southern Nigeria. Bunkering is a different order of magnitude. In 
this case, barges full of unrefined, stolen oil is transported to waiting 
tankers off the coast in an operation worth millions, which requires serious 
connections.

The battle against criminality has intensified under President Muhammadu Buhari
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/muhammadu-buhari>. The NSCDC has stepped up 
its patrols, and the army has launched Operation Crocodile Smile against armed 
militants – young men who claim they are fighting for a greater share of the 
wealth generated from their region. The gunmen have responded with attacks on 
oil installations, the kidnapping of oil workers and assassinations. The 
military, so far, has avoided the heavy-handed clampdowns that were its tactics 
in the past.



Between 2010 and 2015, Nigeria earned something like $1.5tn from oil 
<http://firstperson.oxfamamerica.org/2015/07/where-does-oil-money-go-i-went-to-nigeria-to-find-out/>
. Nobody knows for sure, because the accounting is so opaque.

Africa and the tech revolution: what's holding back the mobile continent? – 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/jul/26/africa-tech-revolution-whats-holding-back-mobile-continent-podcast>
There is little in the delta to show for all the money that’s been made. The 
neglect gave rise to an armed revolt, which the government eventually chose to 
placatethrough an amnesty scheme, begun in 2009 
<https://www.today.ng/opinion/166215/amnesty-programme-good-news-niger-delta>, 
and lavish spending on development programmes. The policy coopted militia 
leaders, and created a new class of wealthy young men with a sense of impunity.

Buhari, who was elected last year on an anti-corruption ticket, tried to put 
an end to themoney drain 
<http://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2015/04/09/oil-rich-delta-poses-first-big-test-nigerias-new-leader>
. Militants again targeted oil production to convince him of the need to 
reinstate the old system.

Many experts fear that the government’s $10bn investment plan will repeat the 
mistakes of the past. It will benefit a new elite, and fail to reach those most 
in need. “It is a difficult war to win, because almost everyone has a share in 
the oil theft,” Amakiri acknowledges, while we wash sticky oil off our toes. We 
then move on to the informal riverside settlement of Elechi Beach, where she 
has received reports that stolen oil is being stored.

Her convoy speeds through the delta’s largest city, Port Harcourt, with sirens 
wailing. Some streets are flooded. There are stacks of burning waste by the 
roadside. Everywhere are advertisements for salvation and miracles, suggesting 
people prefer to rely on “Sunday services” and “salvation ministries” than the 
government and politicians.

At Elechi Beach, Amakiri’s men get to work. They yell at people, search their 
small wooden homes, and soon find a warehouse with oil drums – they poke holes 
in them with long iron picks.

“Quite a lot of children live here, so we do not set fire to the oil barrels. 
We care about people,” the commander says. In a similar situation in this 
neighbourhood in 2012, the NSCDC blew up an oil storage facility in the middle 
of the dense settlement.

The soldiers find a young boy, who has been hiding inside a crane, which they 
believe is used to handle stolen oil. They kick him and then arrest him. “I 
just want a job,” he says, covering his head. Amakari denies that he has a 
point. Locals steal mainly because they are greedy, she insists.

After some effort, I get an interview with three suspected oil thieves. 

“We could really only choose between starvation or stealing … We are speaking 
with you because we do not believe we have anything to be ashamed of,” says 
one. “We are not oil thieves, because it is our oil. It does not belong to the 
foreigners. We were born on top of it.”

The oil thieves’ abiding argument is that they are the true owners of the oil. 
Their most famous champion was the charismatic non-violence campaignerKen 
Saro-Wiwa <http://mosop.org/>. He led the Movement for the Survival of the 
Ogoni People in the 1990s, which created some common ground among the delta’s 
multi-ethnic inhabitants in the fight for environmental protection and a fairer 
distribution of oil revenues.

He was hanged by the then military government in 1995 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1995/nov/11/fromthearchive>. Before 
his execution, he reportedly said: “The ashes will rise again 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/08/19/oil-wealth-hasnt-just-bypassed-people-in-the-niger-delta-its-made-their-lives-worse/?utm_term=.2375a904479d>
” – implying that a just cause survives the death of its leader. This held true 
for a while. But over the years, those words have gained a more sinister 
connotation. Today, it’s extremely difficult to find local leaders who truly 
fight for the welfare of their communities. It seems that criminals have 
benefited from the struggle.

This year alone at least 10 dubious new rebel groups have emerged, with names 
such as the Niger Delta Avengers, the Reformed Niger Delta Avengers and the Red 
Egbesu Water Lions. They typically consist of a mix of criminals and members of 
former militant groups.

But, despite the military’s promise to use special forces and “surgical 
strikes” in the delta, no one is under any illusion that it will be civilians 
and creek-side communities that would pay the price of any new offensive.

 * This article originally appeared in Irin 
<https://www.irinnews.org/feature/2016/10/31/bribes-and-bureaucracy-myanmar%E2%80%99s-chaotic-citizenship-system>
 