
President Buhari has accused the UN and aid agencies of creating “hype” and 
exaggerating the humanitarian crisis in north-easternNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> in order to encourage more 
donations.

A crisis in states severely affected by the Boko Haram insurgency has been 
escalating in Nigeria over the last 12 months. On Friday,the UN warned 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=55702#.WENSr1WkqnM> that next 
year, 5.1 million people would be likely to face serious food shortages if more 
aid to the north-east of the country does not arrive.

Tens of thousands of children at risk of starvation in Nigeria crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/displaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram>
Peter Lundberg, the deputy humanitarian coordinator for the UN in Nigeria, 
described the crisis as the worst on the African continent, appealing that 
without more aid, the situation is set to worsen.

In an appeal for a $1bn (£800m) humanitarian response plan launched in 
partnership with the Nigerian government on Friday, Lundberg claimed, “the 
narrative on this humanitarian crisis can no longer be ignored. We are 
appealing to the international community to help us prevent the deaths of 
thousands of innocent civilians over the coming 12 months.”

According to Unicef, a UN agency providing humanitarian aid for children and 
mothers in Nigeria, about400,000 children under five will suffer from severe 
malnutrition <https://www.unicef.org/nigeria/media_10671.html> in the country 
this year, with more than 65,000 people living in famine-like conditions.

But Nigeria’s president has now accused the UN and aid agencies of 
deliberately exaggerating the situation in the north-east to increase the 
amount of aid. “We are concerned about the blatant attempts to whip up a 
non-existent fear of mass starvation by some aid agencies, a type of hype that 
does not provide a solution to the situation on the ground but more to do with 
calculations for operations financing locally and abroad,” the president said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fnigeria-president-claims-un-united-nations-hyping-up-north-east-crisis-for-1bn-appeal-buhari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6e82bd053935bf05b86b2b2f446ad857e04542e%2F0_0_4528_3014%2F4528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigeria's%20president%20accuses%20UN%20of%20hyping%20up%20humanitarian%20crisis%20for%20%241bn%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fnigeria-president-claims-un-united-nations-hyping-up-north-east-crisis-for-1bn-appeal-buhari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigeria%27s%20president%20accuses%20UN%20of%20hyping%20up%20humanitarian%20crisis%20for%20%241bn%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fnigeria-president-claims-un-united-nations-hyping-up-north-east-crisis-for-1bn-appeal-buhari%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6e82bd053935bf05b86b2b2f446ad857e04542e%2F0_0_4528_3014%2F4528.jpg>
 President Muhammadu Buhari, who accuses aid agencies of making hyperbolic 
claims to increase donations. Photograph: Bertrand Guay/AFP/Getty Images 
Buhari accused aid agencies of giving the impression that the government was 
incapable of dealing with the humanitarian crisis. “The hype, especially that 
which suggests that the government is doing nothing is, therefore, uncharitable 
and unnecessary,” Buhari stated, claiming that although the UN had done an 
“immeasurable amount” in helping the relief effort, “we do not, however, see 
the reason for the theories and hyperbolic claims being made ostensibly to draw 
donor support by some of the aid agencies. The situation on the ground, as it 
exists, provides sufficient motivation to all well-meaning donors to come and 
do a decent part.”

Reports in the Nigerian press on Sunday reported on alleged UN claims that 5.1 
million people were set to die of hunger in 2017, which the UN Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairsdenied as inaccurate 
<https://twitter.com/OCHANigeria/status/805460357212999680>. 

At the height of Boko Haram’s seven-year insurgency in northern Nigeria the 
terrorist group occupied territory across Borno, Yobe, Adamawa and Gombe 
states, directly affecting more than 15 million people and displacing2 million 
<http://www.unhcr.org/uk/news/latest/2016/9/57e51e574/fear-shortages-boko-haram-displaced-return-ruins.html>
. But in the last 18 months, military successes in pushing back the insurgency 
have helped free occupied areas. As Boko Haram’s presence in Nigerian 
communities has decreased, the scale of the humanitarian crisis has become 
increasingly clear.

Boko Haram’s insurgency has destroyed farmland in Borno, leading to what will 
now be the region’s third year without a harvest.

According to the Nigerian government, more than 400,000 people remain in 
formal displacement camps. In the last year, Nigerian officials have been a
ccused of stealing food meant for the people in the camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/13/nigerians-facing-desperate-hunger-accuse-officials-of-stealing-food-un-brink-famine>
.

Nigerian media reports 
<http://allafrica.com/stories/201609070425.html?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
 in September stated that 6,500 people from a shelter known as the Arabic 
College camp took to the streets saying they been given so little food that 
their children had died. Protestors pleaded that they wanted food to be handed 
to them directly as opposed to through state committees present at the camps.

A number of domestic newspapers and other agencies have carried reports 
<http://www.vanguardngr.com/2016/08/borno-food-crisis-malnutrition-prostitution-rock-idps-camp/>
 of corruption by camp officials andIDPs being raped and sexually assaulted 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/10/31/nigeria-officials-abusing-displaced-women-girls>
 in exchange for food.

The president in September ordered that officials caught stealing food should 
be arrested, with the Nigerian Senate launching an investigation.

The president’s official spokesman today insisted that despite a recession in 
Nigeria, the government is meeting the challenges in the north-east, with the 
help of international aid agencies. “At all the camps, the Nigerian government 
is supplying food to IDPs [internally displaced people], and where there are 
gaps, of course the aid agencies can help us to fill them.

“But if you say that 1 million people will die or 7 million will go hungry – 
are they really accurately taking cognisance of the entire situation? Our sense 
is that there is no need for hype.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fnigeria-president-claims-un-united-nations-hyping-up-north-east-crisis-for-1bn-appeal-buhari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09ac95860be463c98e93ffbe5cffef36127a41c5%2F74_279_3426_2055%2F3426.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigeria's%20president%20accuses%20UN%20of%20hyping%20up%20humanitarian%20crisis%20for%20%241bn%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fnigeria-president-claims-un-united-nations-hyping-up-north-east-crisis-for-1bn-appeal-buhari%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigeria%27s%20president%20accuses%20UN%20of%20hyping%20up%20humanitarian%20crisis%20for%20%241bn%20appeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fnigeria-president-claims-un-united-nations-hyping-up-north-east-crisis-for-1bn-appeal-buhari%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09ac95860be463c98e93ffbe5cffef36127a41c5%2F74_279_3426_2055%2F3426.jpg>
 United Nations agencies’ heads attend the launch of the 2017 humanitarian 
response plan for Nigeria’s northeast region in Abuja on 2 December 2016. 
Photograph: Afolabi Sotunde/Reuters 
Responding to the president’s criticisms, Lundberg said the UN would continue 
to work closely with the government, but that there was a need for more 
assistance.

“The reality is that if we don’t receive the funding we require, many 
thousands of people will die. When Boko Haram was forced out of areas and we 
were able to assess the humanitarian situation, the scale of the needs became 
more apparent.

“It is in part because of the Nigerian armed forces’ success that we realised 
the sheer scale of the humanitarian situation and are making best efforts to 
respond to those needs to ensure that the worst-case scenario will not happen.”

President Muhammadu Buhari, a former military ruler, was elected last year in a
historic election victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/31/opposition-candidate-muhammadu-buhari-wins-nigerian-election>
. The Muslim leader won on a manifesto promising to defeat Boko Haram and 
tackle corruption. Since then, the Nigerian military have made progress in 
defeating the terrorist group, although they remain a deadly threat. But the 
president has had a difficult second term governing Nigeria, with the 
predominantly oil-producing economy now in recession after a collapse in oil 
prices and severedamage to its pipelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/10/niger-delta-oil-pipeline-vandalism-estimated-to-cost-14bn-a-year>
 by Delta militants. The deepening humanitarian crisis and the government’s 
difficulty in addressing it has also undermined the progress by the Nigerian 
military, whose allegedhuman rights violations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/nigeria-army-denies-killing-150-at-biafra-demonstrations>
 have continued under Buhari’s regime.
 