
With its flower boxes, cycle lanes and fairy light-strewn canals, Amsterdam 
provides a blissfully pleasant backdrop for a big night out. But behind the 
quaintness is a progressive nightlife scene, which culminates each October in 
one of the world’s biggest electronic music showcases,Amsterdam Dance Event 
<http://www.amsterdam-dance-event.nl/> (ADE).

Ahead of next week’s five-day festival and conference – which draws more than 
2,000 international electronic artists, who can be found performing in any 
corner of the city that can fit a sound system – I dropped by for a snapshot of 
the after-dark experience. I recruited local DJ and producer Marco Sterk, 
better known asYoung Marco <http://www.youngmarco.com/>, to take me on a tour 
of his favourite spots that tell the story of how, over the past two decades, 
Amsterdam has grown into one of Europe’s most important dance music 
destinations.

We meet in the city centre, in an alley outside Red Light Radio 
<http://www.redlightradio.net/> – a former brothel that’s now an important hub 
for local DJs – before cycling over to another historic base for the city’s 
electronic scene;Rush Hour Records <http://www.rushhour.nl/>. “If you don’t 
know what to do for the night, this is the place to find out what’s going on,” 
says Marco, handing me a slickly designed flyer for the last party he played 
at. “For the last fifteen years it’s been the most important thing for 
underground dance music. It’s been a platform for people to come up through, 
like local heroesSan Proper <https://soundcloud.com/san-proper> and Tom Trago 
<http://tomtrago.com/>, and even myself.” 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412864576188%2Fab1727b2-0fc0-4b9d-b1f3-e2f6db3fc59d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Amsterdam's%20bar%20and%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Amsterdam%27s%20bar%20and%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412864576188%2Fab1727b2-0fc0-4b9d-b1f3-e2f6db3fc59d-1020x612.jpeg>
 Cafe Belgique may be small, but it hasn’t stopped them cramming in a DJ booth. 
Photograph: PR 
As it reaches 7pm we nip over to Café Belgique <http://cafe-belgique.nl/> for 
our first drink. Vintage beer signs fill the walls of the tiny pub, and a giant 
pair of red lips hangs from the ceiling in the corner. “I think the tourists 
are scared to walk in, it looks too local,” says Marco. The pub may be one of 
the smallest in the city, but that hasn’t stopped it squeezing a set of decks 
in, providing a tiny yet atmospheric stage for undergound DJs. I ask Marco what 
makes his city’s nightlife special. “It’s an extremely concentrated city,” he 
says. Then he adds what, for me at least, will always be the clincher: “And you 
can always be home in five minutes on your bike.”

 Tolhuistuin is Amsterdam Noord’s latest hang out. Photograph: PR 
We take a detour, via the IJ ferry, over to the ever cooler Amsterdam Noord to 
drop in onTolhuistuin <http://www.tolhuistuin.nl/>, a chic venue with an 
outdoor stage enclosed by trees and twinkling lights that is one of the city’s 
newest cultural spots. By 2016 the Noord district will host an even bigger, 
more commercial venue: theAdam tower <http://adamtoren.nl/>, once a Royal Dutch 
Shell office block, which is being renovated into a complex “for creatives”, 
that will include basement club, bar, restaurant and viewing platform.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412865018098%2Fb475e1e3-8356-4ba9-a4a0-a3477c9f4df4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Amsterdam's%20bar%20and%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Amsterdam%27s%20bar%20and%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412865018098%2Fb475e1e3-8356-4ba9-a4a0-a3477c9f4df4-1020x612.jpeg>
 Outside Melkweg - which translates as Milky Way - one of Amsterdam’s major 
music venues. Photograph: ADE 
Back in the main city, we head south to the Leidseplein area for a drink at 
one of the city’s long-running bars,Cafe Lux <http://weberlux.nl/>, which Marco 
tells me is “the only non-seedy late night bar in the city”. Lux and Weber (a 
neighbouring sister bar run by the same people) have been favourite drinking 
spots for the city’s creative types – or indeed anyone who doesn’t need to get 
up early during the week – for almost 30 years. A relaxed door policy (“anyone 
is welcome as long as they behave”, the manager tells me) means both are 
crammed full most nights. It’s also the perfect bouncing-off point for two of 
Amsterdam’s biggest venues: the elegantParadiso <http://www.paradiso.nl/> 
concert hall andMelkweg <http://www.melkweg.nl/nl> housed in a former dairy. 
And not too far away, mid-way up the Overtoom, is former squatOT301 
<http://www.ot301.nl/page=site.home> – an arts venue with a cube-like interior 
that hosts regular club nights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412865537093%2Fc28e9d4a-e5ed-47c5-a1c5-1dd8160a6473-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Amsterdam's%20bar%20and%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Amsterdam%27s%20bar%20and%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412865537093%2Fc28e9d4a-e5ed-47c5-a1c5-1dd8160a6473-2060x1236.jpeg>
 House party vibes: inside retro bar De Nieuwe Anita Photograph: Wilmar Dik/REX 
Next up is another old favourite, De Nieuwe Anita 
<http://www.denieuweanita.nl/>. Dressed up like a vintage living room, with 
stylish retro furniture, patterned wallpaper and a jam jar of single cigarettes 
for sale on the bar, it’s an easy-going venue popular with the art school 
crowd. “It’s like a party in someone’s house,” says Marco, as we walk down the 
staircase into the basement club, where DJAlex Figueira  
<https://www.facebook.com/alex.figueira>is playing a selection from his funk 
and afro-beat collection. “You can have any kind of night here.”

Ready to hit a club, we cycle to Studio 80 <http://www.studio-80.nl/> on 
Rembrandtplein. Hidden but for a dark doorway and the queue outside, it’s a 
small, old-school venue – “like a black box,” says Marco. The club has been 
around for a few years, but has a new, young, programmer who keeps the line-ups 
fresh and uncompromised. Inside, young clubbers dance to thumping house music 
from its bespoke sound system, surrounded by flashing strip lights.
 Underground, overground: the industrial interior of Trouw. Photograph: © De 
Fotomeisjes/De Fotomeisjes 
Our final stop is at one of Amsterdam’s most important underground dance music 
venues,Trouw <http://www.trouwamsterdam.nl/en/>. Filling a former newspaper 
printworks in the east of the city, the minimalist concrete rectangle is packed 
with a crowd who have come to see localJoris Voorn <http://www.jorisvoorn.com/> 
DJ tech-house all night long (literally), with label partnerEdwin Oosterwal 
<http://www.edwinoosterwal.com/> holding up the basement room. The blinds on 
the long windows are down and Voorn is hard at work behind the decks, almost 
lost in the sea of people dancing on the stage behind him.

“Trouw and ADE have made the biggest contribution to getting Amsterdam to take 
itself seriously as a clubbing city,” says Marco. “Trouw created a crowd, 
educated a crowd.”

The work was continued by ADE, which started in 1996 with 300 delegates and 30 
DJs: “People probably wouldn’t have thought Amsterdam was a good setting for a 
dance music conference ... until ADE tried to do it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F10%2F1412943112498%2F0d295a19-11b3-4085-9889-05e063d90084-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Amsterdam's%20bar%20and%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20a%20tour%20of%20Amsterdam%27s%20bar%20and%20clubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2F-sp-amsterdam-clubs-nightlife-dance-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F10%2F1412943112498%2F0d295a19-11b3-4085-9889-05e063d90084-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rooftop bar Canvas is a new addition to east Amsterdam’s nightlife scene. 
Photograph: C Raymond van Mil/Canvas 
But the clubbing landscape of Amsterdam is due to change: with the lease 
running out at the end of the year, Trouw is closing. After a final year spent 
turning up the intensity Berlin-style, bagging the city’s first 24-hour 
licence, banning photographs in the club and ending pre-booked tickets on most 
of its nights, the club is going out with the “absolute climax” its team 
wanted. Founder Olaf Boswijk is vague about the exact details but promises me 
there will be a follow-up. But after six years the club leaves behind a changed 
area; this summer theVolkshotel <http://volkshotel.nl/>, with rooftop club 
Canvas <http://www.canvasopde7e.nl/>, opened opposite, joining a number of new 
bars and restaurants around the Wibaustraat. And even the Trouw building, which 
will be turned into another hotel, may still retain its clubbing heritage under 
a new moniker.

As a cold day begins to dawn, we head out of Trouw, leaving the crowd in the 
sound-infused time warp that makes the place so special. The night has jumped 
between vintage bars, Belgian pubs and underground clubs, and we’ve mingled 
with students, professionals, tourists and ravers, but somehow it still feels 
cohesive.


“Everything’s very mixed,” says Marco, “but that’s what Amsterdam represents – 
a mix of influences. The city is too small to have separate clubs for everyone. 
People have to interact with each other, and that’s what creates an exciting 
dynamic.”

• Amsterdam Dance Event <http://www.amsterdam-dance-event.nl/> runs from 15-19 
October. Flights were provided by KLM (klm.com <http://www.klm.com/>), which 
flies to Amsterdam from £18 UK and Irish airport from £89 return. Accommodation 
was provided byVolkshotel <http://volkshotel.nl> , doubles from €79 room only) 
whose Club Canvas <http://volkshotel.nl/en/canvas/#club-canvas> and Doka 
cocktail bar host a range of club nights during ADE

Amsterdam Dance Event: key nights

Rush Hour
The Amsterdam label has called in Chicago-based DJs Ron Trent and Traxx to 
head their night, with backup from local hero San Proper.
• Trouw Amsterdam, 15 October, from 10pm, €18, amsterdam-dance-event.nl 
<http://www.amsterdam-dance-event.nl/program/2014/rush-hour-ade-special/15007/>

Warp x LuckyMe showcase 
Expect some seriously buzzed up electronic swagger at this big-name night 
headlined by Scottish “aquacrunk” producer Rustie, with support from Mount 
Kimbie and Benji B.
• Paradiso, 17 October, from 11pm, €20, amsterdam-dance-event.nl 
<http://www.amsterdam-dance-event.nl/program/2014/rush-hour-ade-special/15007/>

Mason presents Animal Language 
Alt-ravers Mason are hosting what will inevitably be a groove-filled night of 
nu-disco and house, featuring Alex Metric on the decks.
• Club NYX, 17 October, from 11pm, €15, amsterdam-dance-event.nl 
<http://www.amsterdam-dance-event.nl/program/2014/rush-hour-ade-special/15007/>
 