
Friday night in Barcelona. It’s still warm, of course, and the city is getting 
ready to party. A pair of skateboarders, beers in hand, clatter down Carrer de 
Ferlandina to join the crowd of kids congregating outsideMACBA 
<http://www.macba.cat/en/> – the city’s contemporary art museum/skate spot – 
and the streets are picking up that humid late-night energy that northern 
Europeans dream of.

Down the road at the Discos Paradiso 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Discos-Paradiso/348947805132856> record store, 
I’m waiting for Gerard López, the shop’s co-founder and a central figure in 
Barcelona’s close knit nightlife scene. The clean, white-walled store, lined 
with neat wooden shelves of records, has just celebrated its fifth birthday; 
during that time it has played a big role in supporting local DJs, producers 
and promoters.

Like everyone else in the city, the shop and its DJ collective, Discos 
Paradiso Crew, are already gearing up for the city’s annual electronic music 
takeover,Sónar <http://sonar.es/en/2015/>, which takes place 18-20 June. The 
festival, which also sees countless spaces across the city converted into event 
venues for the unofficial Off Sónar fringe, may last just for one weekend, but 
the Catalonian capital is a beautiful place to party in all year round, and 
López is here to point me in the right direction.

During the five years Discos has been open – and since vibrant deep house 
producerJohn Talabot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/19/john-talabot-fin> rose to global 
acclaim – Barcelona has become home to a growing number of major electronic 
artists, with Sinjin Hawke, Zora Jones and Alizzz among them. This, combined 
with Sónar (plus a tidal wave of tourists), means for some time there’s been a 
growing interest in Barcelona as a clubbing city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsonar-barcelona-clubbing-nightlife-reports-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434036284676%2Fcd17a170-e067-452d-8fb4-ff34edbaf0e5-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Clubbing%20in%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsonar-barcelona-clubbing-nightlife-reports-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Clubbing%20in%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsonar-barcelona-clubbing-nightlife-reports-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434036284676%2Fcd17a170-e067-452d-8fb4-ff34edbaf0e5-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Discos Paradiso played a big role in supporting local DJs. 
Top 10 budget hotels, hostels and B&Bs in Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/17/barcelona-spain-budget-hotels-hostels-guesthouses>
“Compared with other cities – Berlin, Detroit – it doesn’t have a consistent 
sound,” says López. “But it’s a city that’s fast moving: people are looking 
around at what’s going on and seeing how we can do it here. Sónar has helped 
put Barcelona on the map, but during the year there are loads of independent 
things – people should come check them out.”

We head through the Raval neighbourhood – via beautiful, classic, 
gold-shimmering barLa Confitería 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/La-Confiter%C3%ADa/113771252024815> – to a 
small venue and community space,Freedonia <http://www.freedonia.eu/>, where 
Discos is hosting one of its monthly nights. The low-key space has a vintage 
feel: brick walls, deep red colours and a small stage backed with neon strip 
lights. You have to sign in as a member on entry. As López explains, strict 
licensing means it’s hard to get permission for parties or to open new clubs in 
Barcelona – this remains an obstacle for the ambitious scene. Inside, the bar 
is friendly and bustling – a place for an easygoing night, or in our case, a 
warm-up.
 The ‘beautiful, classic, gold shimmering bar’, La Confiteria. Photograph: 
Alamy 
That night we’re heading to one of Barcelona’s flagship clubs, Nitsa 
<http://www.nitsa.com/>, housed inside the grand Sala Apolo 
<https://www.sala-apolo.com/en/>. Run by Fra Soler – one of the team behind 
Barcelona’s other big festival,Primavera Sound 
<https://www.primaverasound.com/?lang=en> – the club has been programming 
underground line-ups for 30 years. “Nitsa in the 1990s is where my generation 
discovered electronic music,” says López. Music that evening is courtesy of The 
Monkey Bar, another collective whose rise has run parallel to the opening of 
Discos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsonar-barcelona-clubbing-nightlife-reports-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434038730041%2F43767db7-8d38-4fcd-8617-719b5c2b747b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Clubbing%20in%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsonar-barcelona-clubbing-nightlife-reports-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Clubbing%20in%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fsonar-barcelona-clubbing-nightlife-reports-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434038730041%2F43767db7-8d38-4fcd-8617-719b5c2b747b-1020x612.jpeg>
 Inside long running Nitsa Club, Barcelona. 
Food, beauty, anarchy: new guided tours of Barcelona by the locals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/dec/04/trip4real-barcelona-guided-tours-locals>
As the club fills up, Detroit techno head Mike Huckaby takes to the decks. The 
large, glamorous venue is a traditional theatre-style space, with a huge stage 
and a balcony level circling overhead. It stays full till 6am (Barcelona always 
feels “up”), with the crowd dancing till the lights are turned on before 
spilling out into the street to find an after-party.

The next evening begins (gently) at 33/45 <http://3345.struments.com/>. As the 
name suggests, the bar is run by another DJ collective in the city, Struments, 
making it a popular hangout for the music scene (I bump into some people I met 
at Nitsa, quietly recovering in a corner). The front bar features big windows 
opening on to the street, with low-slung bulbs, while the back room is full of 
comfy sofas with vintage radios for decoration. On Sunday afternoons it hosts 
vinyl markets and live music to accompany your vermouth; in the evening it’s a 
place to get a gin and tonic and whirr back into gear.
 Nitsa Club takes place in the grand Sala Apolo venue. 
Barcelona’s biggest club is Razzmatazz <http://www.salarazzmatazz.com/>, a 
five-room multiplex in the developing Poblenou district. Residents including 
Baldo and Toner hold the fort, which has a club for everyone – there’s a techno 
room, a pop room, an indie room... Of course, it’s also the place where you’ll 
find the biggest names – Buraka Som Sistema,Pendulum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pendulum>, Ben Klock. Another venue worthy 
of mention isBeCool <http://www.salabecool.com/en/>, though rumour has it it’s 
due to close its doors later this year. So that evening I opt to swing by two 
of the city’s smaller spots, starting withMoog <http://www.masimas.com/moog>.

Just behind Las Ramblas, signposted by a rabble of people drinking and smoking 
in the narrow street outside, Moog is a long-time champion of dance music in 
the city. Consistency is key: the club has been open every single night for 21 
years.
 A party at Razzmatazz, Barcelona’s biggest club. Photograph: Xavi 
Torrent/Redferns via Getty Images 
Top 10 free things to do in Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/17/top-10-free-things-to-do-in-barcelona>
“People go crazy in there,” says López. “It doesn’t matter what’s playing – 
everyone there is familiar and you enjoy the music as a family.” Inside it’s a 
Polybius Trax label night, and acid house and techno are thumping through the 
room (really more like a dance pit) with the DJ in a cage-like booth. The crowd 
is friendly, dancing like mad in the thick smoke. I have a weird moment in an 
upstairs room, where Toxic by Britney Spears is playing at full pelt to a 
completely different group of partygoers.

If Moog felt small, the final stop for the night is even smaller. Its sound 
muffled by an airlock door,Macarena <http://macarenaclub.com/> is a tiny yet 
distinguished one-room club, with space for around 120 people. They encircle 
the DJ booth, while disco balls of varying sizes bounce green dots around. 
Given the club’s diminutive size, it’s a bit like being in a laser disco snow 
globe. Tuneful, upbeat house music is coming through the Funktion One set-up; 
it’s the kind of club you feel lucky to be in.

The same can be said for Barcelona in general, but it’s a city of mixed 
blessings. The recession continues to be a challenge – as López says: “During 
these last years people don’t have work... it’s hard to spend money on clubs, 
beers, records ...” – but there’s a sense of optimism among the young 
generation of DJs and producers, who are enjoying a rise in collaboration.

Pau Roca <https://soundcloud.com/paur>, another star producer I bump into, who 
is tipped to follow in John Talabot’s footsteps, backs that sense of unity. 
“Five years ago if you played at one club you couldn’t play at another. Nitsa, 
Apolo, Razz … they had a lot of fights. But now is a really good moment. Sónar 
is booking new artists from the city and the nightclubs have become better too 
... They’re believing more in the local scene.”

• Flights were provided by Monarch <http://www.monarch.co.uk/>, which flies to 
Barcelona from Birmingham, Gatwick, Leeds Bradford and Manchester from £68 
return. Accommodation was provided byairbnb.com <https://www.airbnb.co.uk/>. 
Ignasi’s apartment <https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/951780> sleeps two from £112 
a night
 