
You wouldn't think that a tropical party in a carpark on a Sunday afternoon 
would represent the nouvelle vague of Parisian clubbing, but if the queue 
outsideAlter Paname <https://www.facebook.com/AlterPaname80> - the city's 
newest alternative venue - is anything to go by, the appetite for all day (and 
all night) partying in the French capital has never been bigger.

The event - programmed by the creative OTTO10 
<http://www.otto10.fr/index.php#events> collective – is a small part of a fast 
moving nightlife scene that's been evolving over the last few years with new 
venues, new promoters and new sounds spreading round the city.

I'd arrived in Paris earlier that weekend to explore a scene that hasn't 
always been on track. Four years ago, the capital was being decried as "the 
city of sleep", while club owners and promoterspetitioned the city council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/nov/04/paris-france> to give the night 
time economy space to breath. Fortunately, the party scene has changed for the 
better – those involved still talk of the "revolution" it's going through.

One person who's been at the centre of the French electronic music family for 
more than a decade is DJ and producer Jean-Baptiste de Laubier AKAPara One 
<https://soundcloud.com/para-one>. I got in touch with him to see if he would 
take me on a night out in Paris, to get a snapshot of the clubbing scene.

While our night ended up in the industrial suburbs, it started out very much 
in the centre atSocial Club <http://www.parissocialclub.com/> on Saturday night 
– the club that Jean-Baptiste describes as "home", and the place where his 
Institubes <http://institubes.tumblr.com/> label used to put on nights. "A few 
years ago the nightlife in Paris did seem to be a bit preset because the sound 
was always the same," admits Jean-Baptiste. "There was one sound and one group 
of people – I was part of it but it was a blessing and a curse. Now a new 
generation is coming up. People are putting on really mixed nights and really 
freaky parties."
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F5%2F1401969126115%2F575395b6-4566-4630-a3ea-450db9abbf7e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F5%2F1401969126115%2F575395b6-4566-4630-a3ea-450db9abbf7e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Social Club in Paris draws a young, energetic crowd. Photograph: Elvis 
Paris/Social Club 
Social Club is a small but buzzing club with a reputation for drawing a young, 
lively crowd. It's barely midnight and the dancefloor is already busy with 
French kids dancing to techno. Perhaps fittingly, the signature drink is a shot 
of mint vodka – apparently you can't go there without drinking one. (So you 
know, it's flouro green and tastes like mouthwash).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlHQ-Gv-Gaeo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlHQ-Gv-Gaeo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlHQ-Gv-Gaeo&media=>
 Footage of Clek Clek Boom's two year anniversary party, held at suburban venue 
Le 6B in March 
As Jean-Baptiste explains, it's been three years since Institubes ended. Now 
newer labels are pushing things forward -Clek Clek Boom 
<http://www.clekclekboom.com/>, Bromance  <http://bromancerecords.com/> and 
Marble <http://marble.fm/> (founded by Para One and other former Institubes) 
continue to fuel a distinctively eclectic party sound. As for promoters, dozens 
of collectives are putting on events each with their own distinct feel.
Débrouï'art <https://www.facebook.com/debrouiart.event> and Cracki 
<http://www.crackirecords.com/> are two which formed in 2010 and are known for 
their artistically-curated events (Cracki are putting on theirfirst festival 
<https://www.facebook.com/mackimusicfestival> this year with fellow promoters 
Mamie's <https://www.facebook.com/pages/La-Mamies/158154794312805> in locations 
around Paris and its suburbs), while newer crews worth following includeMagie 
Noire, <https://www.facebook.com/pages/MAGIE-NOIRE/423175971131383> who 
programme solid techno nights in the city's more traditional venues.
 A video report of Motor City Drum Ensemble's headline show for Magie Noire at 
Zigzag club this year

"With all the revolutions we’ve been through, we’ve come back to where we were 
10 years ago," says Jean-Baptiste. "A really exciting time with lots of 
different people doing their own thing. But I think that’s maybe a side effect 
of the new era for clubs, too. It's opening up again - you just have to be 
curious."
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F5%2F1401969356271%2F8e30e712-b756-4d42-9123-ef3529404231-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F5%2F1401969356271%2F8e30e712-b756-4d42-9123-ef3529404231-1020x612.jpeg>
 Zigzag club might be new but it has an old school feel with the DJ taking 
centre stage. Photograph: Gaëtan Tracqui/Zigzag 
One of those recent openings is ZigZag <http://zigzagclub.fr/>. Situated near 
the Champs D'Élysées, the club – whose Funktion One soundsystem whirred into 
action last December – is already drawing big crowds. Despite being geared up 
for the glamorous location, the VIP sections when we visit are largely empty, 
but the big dancefloor, surrounded by concert hall balconies, is full. The 
stage – graced that night by a lineup of Parisian house DJs includingGrego G 
<https://soundcloud.com/grego-g> – is backed by a wall of lighting and flanked 
by two illuminated screens. It might be new but it's got an old school feel 
that comes to life every time the smoke machines blast white dust over the 
front of the crowd from above.
 Spinning tracks: DJ Jeff Mills takes to the stage at a recent party at La 
Machine. Photograph: /La Machine 
Those looking for a real fix of old-school clubbing will undoubtedly find 
themselves drawn to the likes ofRex Club <http://www.rexclub.com/> and La Java 
<http://www.la-java.fr/>. Founded by Laurent Garnier 
<http://www.laurentgarnier.com/> in the early 90s, Rex is Paris' original dance 
music institution. While Rex understandably draws a mainstream audience, La 
Java, which occupies a barely changed art-deco building in Belleville, should 
attract more discerning clubbers seeking the kind of "freaky" parties 
Jean-Baptiste is describing. Over in Pigalle, the immersive three-floor venue 
with an Alice in Wonderland-themed decorLa Machine 
<http://www.lamachinedumoulinrouge.com/> (owned by and next door to the Moulin 
Rouge) is another stalwart for electronic music parties, with a history as La 
Loco, one of Paris' classic techno clubs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F5%2F1401969605521%2F79bb1c11-4558-4293-be26-aeb9ee719981-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F5%2F1401969605521%2F79bb1c11-4558-4293-be26-aeb9ee719981-1020x612.jpeg>
 Showcase: the place to find big headliners backed up by underground names. 
Photograph: Jacob Khrist/Showcase 
But as the evening progresses, we head to Showcase <http://www.showcase.fr/> - 
a huge, slickly designed club conveniently soundproofed beneath the arches of 
Paris' historic Pont Alexandre III (you may have seen this bridge in a perfume 
advert). The programmers mix up big names with underground acts. That night pop 
megamix stars 2 Many DJs are followed by the raucous, juddery beats of Belgian
DJ Slow <https://soundcloud.com/djslow>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F29%2F1401362911679%2Fe9b8871c-6e58-4734-9210-3a1cb7d10805-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F29%2F1401362911679%2Fe9b8871c-6e58-4734-9210-3a1cb7d10805-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Worth staying up for: the view from Pont Alexandre III at dawn. Photograph: 
Will Coldwell/The Guardian 
Stepping out of the doors of Showcase at the end of the night, you're met with 
dawn views of the Eiffel Tower. The party doesn't have to end there, though.
Concrete <http://www.concreteparis.fr/index.php?page=Home>, which opens at 7am 
and runs until 2am the next evening, is only just getting started. Since 
opening in 2011, two years after the city's nightlife was being described as 
"dead", it has shaken up the scene in Paris more than any other venue. "It 
changed a lot of things," says Jean-Baptiste. "It marked the return of 
after-hours Paris."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De-0upDbArcU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De-0upDbArcU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De-0upDbArcU&media=>
 Laurent Garnier drops a set at Concrete last November 
Located on a boat docked on the Seine, Concrete's all-day parties have an 
almost cult following. That hasn't stopped new venue Alter Paname competing for 
the same time slot, offering a very different type of party, with a wild, 
inclusive and carefree attitude that feels more like Berlin, or East London, 
than Paris. And as Alter Paname demonstrates, some of the best parties are 
increasingly happening in alternative venues in the suburbs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F6%2F1402066963177%2Fac1bcccc-85b3-46ba-8897-9cc6f02ea91c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F6%2F1402066963177%2Fac1bcccc-85b3-46ba-8897-9cc6f02ea91c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Blank held their epic debut party this April at the cavernous venue La Cité du 
Cinéma in St Denis. Photograph: /Blank Paris 
Le 6b <http://www.le6b.fr/>, which opened in 2010 in St Denis, is a huge 
studio space and venue which often puts on all-nighters in conjunction with 
some of the city's best underground labels and promoters. This year, the team 
behindDie Nacht <http://www.die-nacht.fr/> – a group of promoters who put on 
events in obscure locations such as old aircraft hangers, swimming pools and 
theatres – launchedBlank <http://blankparis.com/>, a ambitious new project that 
hopes to produce similar events with even more of a festival feel. "Nowadays, 
the old fashioned Parisians are starting to move their butts out of the 
centre," explains OTTO10 collective member Grégoire Mounier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F5%2F1401969721311%2F63970aa6-89a4-4008-b583-23a14a4ec026-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Paris%20with%20Para%20One&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjun%2F20%2F-sp-paris-nightlife-clubbing-para-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F5%2F1401969721311%2F63970aa6-89a4-4008-b583-23a14a4ec026-1020x612.jpeg>
 Not your usual Parisian party: OTTO10 kick things off at Alter Paname in 
Bobingy. Photograph: Charlotte Gonzalez/OTTO10 
And (after a brief disco nap) it's to OTTO10's party that we're heading that 
Sunday, up in the north-eastern suburb of Bobigny. The road there is bleak, but 
broken up by flashes of colour as revellers make their way past the grey 
concrete and industrial buildings. A girl in a gold wig and an African print 
two-piece swigs wine out of a bottle while her friend rolls a cigarette on the 
curb, and we know we're near. Inside is a beach-themed festival – sparkling 
tinsel and inflatable flamingos fly around the air as the party whirs into 
action for the next 12 hours.

"A city's nightlife is healthy when the underground scene is healthy," says 
Jean-Baptiste. "And in Paris, you can feel things prepping in the underground. 
There’s not so much money in it ... but there’s such a blossoming of ideas."

 * Para One's forthcoming album "Club" will be released in the UK on July 28 on
Marble <http://marble.fm/>/Because <http://www.because.tv/en/>

Travel was provided by Eurostar (eurostar.com <http://www.eurostar.com/>) 
Eurostar operates up to 18 daily services from London St Pancras International 
to Paris Gare Du Nord with return fares from £69.


Accommodation was provided by Mama Shelter (mamashelter.com 
<http://www.mamashelter.com/en/paris/>). Mama Shelter may be a strikingly hip 
design hotel, but it's also a surprisingly friendly one. Located near Père 
Lachaise Cemetery it has a sleek cocktail bar to kick your night off in and its 
very own pizza restaurant to sooth your hangover the next day. Doubles start at 
£72

 