
“Never underestimate Nintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo>
,” runs the maxim, repeated by many a rival video game executive across the 
decades. By 1991 the company, founded in 1889 to manufacture playing cards, had 
replaced Toyota as Japan’s most successful company, earning around $1.5m per 
year per employee. In the early 90s, its earnings exceeded that of all the US 
movie studios combined. That success filled a war chest on which the company 
has relied in leaner times – which recently have been frequent.

Nintendo has struggled to match the boisterous success of the Wii console, as 
well as with its identity as a game-maker. In December, after years of 
equivocation, it finally sent its Super Mario mascot on to the iPhone (a debut 
that Nintendo resisted for years. “If we did this,” the company’s late president
Satoru Iwata <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/14/satoru-iwata> 
said in 2011, “Nintendo would cease to be Nintendo.”).
 Super Mario Run, the mobile phone offering of Nintendo’s mascot game. 
Photograph: Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters 
Related: Why only Nintendo understands handheld gaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/29/nintendo-handheld-gaming-sony-playstation-vita>

Despite criticism over its comparatively high price for a mobile phone game 
(£9.99), Super Mario Run was downloaded 40m times in four days, and earned a 
reported $21m. The result will go some way to countering Nintendo’s miserable 
financial results in early 2016. Poor sales of the disastrously namedWii U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii-u> (which implied the console was a 
minor upgrade, or, worse, a U-turn, rather than a new machine) led to an 
operating loss of ¥5.13bn (£36m) up until June.

All of that, Nintendo hopes, will change in 2017. Scheduled for launch in the 
spring, the Nintendo Switch is the company’s bid for that hypervalued patch of 
real estate beneath the television. It is an invention rather than a evolution: 
a hybrid portable console that people will be able to play on their TV before 
packing the system’s tablet-like extra screen into a bag to continue playing on 
the bus. With the Switch, Nintendo has chosen, once again, the road less 
travelled. While Sony and Microsoft chase technological supremacy with 
PlayStation and Xbox One,Nintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> has favoured a fidgety design 
conceit.


It’s a machine that seeks to fit the structure of our contemporary lives, 
erasing the lines between home andhandheld gaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/29/nintendo-handheld-gaming-sony-playstation-vita>
. The latter is an area where Nintendo has particularly lost market share to 
mobile phones (it’s far more convenient for a parent to pass their iPhone to a 
fussing child in the back seat of the car than to dig out a DS). With the 
company’s usual defiance, Nintendo is even turning away from the optical discs 
typically used for games, plumping instead for cartridges, as used by video 
game machines throughout the 80s and early 90s.


The past decade has shown that, no matter how ingenious its designs, Nintendo 
struggles to succeed alone. As soon as other game-makers abandon one of the 
company’s consoles – as they did en masse early into the Wii U’s life – the 
machine’s prospects wither. This is where the Switch is most vulnerable. It’s 
unlikely that third-party publishers will flock to the console with its 
idiosyncratic specs and demographic. It is likely it will be too expensive for 
others to tailor their games to.
 Visitors to the E3 expo in 2012 dance to a Wii Fit U game. Photograph: David 
McNew/Reuters 
But Nintendo is not so much an industry competitoras a cohabiter. Nintendo 
will never try to compete with Microsoft and Sony in the traditional console 
market as it doesn’t have operating systems, online stores or content 
portfolios to sell in the same way. It could never take bites out of Sony and 
Microsoft’s market share, and knows it would lose the technological arms race 
if it tried.

Nintendo’s more gimmicky approach springs from the company’s winding history 
as a toy-maker. This kind of mad inventor-like attitude accounts for hits and 
misses. And while theWii U <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii-u> was a 
colossal fail, the Wii and DS handhelds were hits. Switch is a curious 
proposition that may struggle to find a place for itself, squeezed as it is by 
consoles and tablets. But it stands out from the identikit crowd (try 
explaining the difference between a PlayStation 4 and an Xbox One in two 
sentences), something wild and unexpected.

Iwata was Nintendo’s best-loved president and started at the company as a 
junior programmer. His fingerprints are all over the Switch. “If we continue 
down the same path as we have in the past,” he once said, “people may become 
tired of gaming.”
 