
The first big update for No Man’s Sky gives almost everyone a reason to come 
back. “Foundation <http://www.no-mans-sky.com/foundation-update/>” includes 
features carefully selected to deal with each of the main resolvable complaints 
from those who were disappointed with the original release. And for those of us 
who werealready happy with the game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/12/no-mans-sky-review-hello-games>
, the new modes provide a way to start a new, and entirely different, journey 
through the procedurally generated galaxy without having to give up on your 
first.

My original journey, which must have occupied me for at least 100 hours, is 
now under “Normal” mode, but two new modes lie empty, beckoning me to start 
afresh.

Survival mode promises “limited resources, increased hazards, and stronger, 
more aggressive enemies”. I load it up and find myself on a beautiful snowy 
world looking up at the clouds. Many of the Foundation Update patch notes are 
dedicated to visual improvements: better lighting and anti-aliasing, improved 
colour selections and distribution of plant life, “increased proportion of 
vibrant blue skies”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadf2d96a6c46da2f9af7e0e294be9762bdb2317e%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadf2d96a6c46da2f9af7e0e294be9762bdb2317e%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Want to try building a base? Creative mode plants you next to a base location 
with a working spaceship, everything unlocked, and no need to pay for anything. 
Photograph: No Man's Sky 
Unlike in my first journey, my broken-down spaceship is nowhere to be seen. My 
radar tells me it’s five minutes away. Small white arrows – a new UI feature – 
tell me my hazard protection against the cold is falling fast and definitely 
won’t hold out for a five-minute hike. There’s a shelter nearby, but that 
doesn’t protect my life support. And no longer can you refill hazard protection 
and life support with abundant iron and carbon respectively, in any mode.


Once I’ve repaired my scanner, it tells me that Survival mode’s promise was 
true: resources are scarce. The new UI does at least label what the scanner 
finds – Th for thamium, Pt for plutonium, Zn for zinc – but an increased 
cooldown makes the search slower. It’s gone from a habitual button-press to an 
actual tool.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7af7e88a33dd87331501ddb92f4113aecf5962a%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7af7e88a33dd87331501ddb92f4113aecf5962a%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 In Survival mode, taking off completely empties the tank of plutonium.
 Photograph: No Man's Sky 
Survival mode will change the way you play. On the journey to my ship I have 
to duck into caves to let my hazard protection recover. I find myself running 
past the local wildlife without stopping to add it to my database, because it 
feels like a waste of precious time. Once I’ve found my ship and am trying to 
repair it, I spot some of the heridium I need in a clearing and decide it’s too 
exposed (though eventually I remember that you can carve out a shelter within a 
resource like that and mine it – carefully – from the inside).


And then a sentinel drone catches me mining, and I die.


I’m revived, but, unlike when I died in my original journey, there’s no grave 
with my carefully hoarded precious resources. Some of my tools are broken, and 
my shields and life support are down. I run for the hills in the hope of 
stumbling across some thamium, but I die again.

I start a new Survival game. This time I begin on a hot planet, not nearly as 
pretty but much more manageable. I soon discover that I can go out at night 
without my hazard protection going down. In this more relaxed environment I 
realise, thanks to the little arrows in the new UI, that life support only goes 
down when you’re moving, and more quickly if you run, which is probably why I 
kept dying before.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78e02a2dbfaca618a133b19574d586db4fbf228c%2F51_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78e02a2dbfaca618a133b19574d586db4fbf228c%2F51_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Resources are now gated: to mine yellow shards of titanium, you require an 
‘advanced mining laser’, which you unlock by building a base, recruiting staff, 
and carrying out quests. Photograph: No Man's Sky 
This time, my ship is 15 minutes’ walk away, but with the ability to go out at 
night I’m able to stock up on resources. I find myself crafting things I never 
bothered with before: power gels and shielding shards. I set out as evening 
approaches, and make it two thirds of the way to my ship before the morning, 
stumbling across a shelter just in time for sunrise. I fix my ship, find just 
about enough plutonium to fuel it, and take off, which in Survival mode totally 
empties the tank.


I head for a waypoint on another planet, and halfway there am told that 
pirates are scanning my meagre cargo. They attack. I die.


I’m revived in my space station, inventory empty. I try to return to the 
planet and the pirates find me again. I die.

Back in Normal mode, life is easier. Hazard protection and life support 
decrease more slowly, and your ship’s launch thruster will only use up 25% of 
its fuel at once. But still some things have changed. As the game warns you 
when you load up the new update for the first time, the universe has been 
regenerated, and everything looks different. Plutonium, for example, is much 
rarer even in Normal mode, no longer decorating every horizon with tall red 
shards.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F486fef035b14263073a9e042903fe8cd686894c4%2F68_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F486fef035b14263073a9e042903fe8cd686894c4%2F68_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 A hydroponics lab. Photograph: No Man's Sky 
Other resources are now gated; to mine yellow shards of titanium, for example, 
you require an “advanced mining laser”, which you unlock by building a base, 
recruiting staff, and carrying out quests. This, then, is where the new 
crafting system comes in: in normal circumstances you can use it to place 
things like save points and beacons, which help you find your way back to a 
specific place in a way you couldn’t before, but in certain allocated locations 
you can also create a sprawling base to your own design.


If you want to test out the base-building tools without working through the 
series of quests that unlocks all the options, Creative mode plants you next to 
a base location with a working spaceship, everything unlocked, and no need to 
pay for anything. But with no threat, there seems no point to having a roof 
over your head, and with no need for resources why bother with a hydroponics 
lab? With no goals, Creative mode seems best suited for those who want to play 
at being a space photographer, making use of the new ability to hide the UI.


In Normal mode, you can find these base-building locations by scanning from 
space. Once you’ve found one you like, step inside and claim the planet as your 
home. You’ll be guided through tasks: add a corridor,then a room, install a 
workstation, hire an alien to operate it, carry out fetch quests for your new 
employee, some of which require resources only found in specific star systems 
(thank goodness you can now scan individual planets from space).

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7042cdcbadc1b39f09de625ac69fe4ffc97c380%2F394_198_1137_682%2F1137.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7042cdcbadc1b39f09de625ac69fe4ffc97c380%2F394_198_1137_682%2F1137.jpg>
 An armourer workstation. Photograph: No Man's Sky 
Particular species seem stuck in certain roles – gek are builders and farmers, 
korvax are scientists, vy’keen are armourers – so you’ll likely have to fly to 
multiple star systems to recruit a full staff. Luckily, a new teleporter lets 
you travel back to your base (and from your base to a maximum of four space 
stations, which seem to be your most recent) without the need for a warp cell. 
And you’ll often find three or four aliens to one space station, which 
immediately makes the game feel less lonely.


You can also house your staff in the now purchasable freighters, and since you 
can only have one of each kind of employee it might feel like a choice between 
mobile and immobile home. The freighters cost money – starting at around 7m 
units – while the bases are free, but they can also travel with you, and add to 
your storage capacities so that you can save stockpiled resources (a simpler 
prospect now that you can stack items you couldn’t before) for a star system in 
which they sell for a higher price.


While you can teleport back to a planetary base, it feels strange to do so if 
you’re several star systems ahead on that journey to the centre. The freighter 
might not have the same pretty views, but it’s still customisable, and feels 
like a good – if expensive – alternative. Maybe it’s just my millennial mind, 
but I don’t think I’ll put down roots just yet. There’s too much left to see.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be68d4aa67dcda634b0cef5704eedd7c21ae0f5%2F255_198_1139_683%2F1139.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%3A%20Foundation%20update%20%E2%80%93%20a%20solid%20base%20to%20build%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fno-mans-sky-foundation-play-update%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be68d4aa67dcda634b0cef5704eedd7c21ae0f5%2F255_198_1139_683%2F1139.jpg>
 You’ll often find aliens in a space station, which immediately makes the game 
feel less lonely. Photograph: No Man's Sky 
As with the original game, different features of this update will appeal to 
different kinds of players. With such an anticipated and high-concept game, the 
player base for No Man’s Sky was inevitably fractured in their expectations, 
and different people had vastly different criticisms, but this update goes some 
way to address many of them (at least of those that are actually addressable).


Those who felt the trading system was lacking will appreciate the ability to 
cart goods from system to system with a freighter, those who felt lost in the 
vastness of space will be happy to ground themselves with a planetary base. 
Those who resented the need to top up their life support will enjoy the freedom 
of Creative mode, and those who wanted more of a challenge can try their luck 
in Survival. There’s still room for improvement – combat is still no fun, for 
example, which is exacerbated in Survival mode – but this is the Foundation 
update after all, a solid base on which to build.


 * No Man’s Sky is Elite for the 21st century. Pointless? Maybe – but also 
sublime <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/19/no-mans-sky-elite>
 