
When I was 13 I took the game Elite very seriously. The seminal space 
exploration and trading simulation, which presented the player with a ship and 
a vast galaxy and then left everything else up to them, was an utterly crucial 
piece of escapism for me. I had a cardboard overlay that I put on my Commodore 
64 keyboard, which showed all the functions of the various buttons in the game; 
I saved up and bought a Quickshot II joystick because it looked a bit like 
something you might see on a flight deck in Star Wars. I cleared my desk of 
action figures, toys and comics so that it felt like a serious space ship. I 
turned the lights off in the little dining area where we kept our computer, so 
that I wasn’t distracted by all the domestic detritus of the kitchen. I 
pretended the hum of the fridge freezer was my life support system.

Then I played.

I grew up in Cheadle Hulme, near Stockport in Greater Manchester. This was 
1985, and it was proper grim. I lived in a very respectable middle-class area, 
but the national news was all Cold War nuclear paranoia, while the local media 
agenda was dominated by the mass closures of local heavy industries. There was 
unemployment and unrest; the world was unfathomable. So I spent great chunks of 
my time in space, in Elite’s second galaxy (the game had eight), trading 
between three planet systems. In the game’s financial mechanic, there were 
multiple items to buy and sell when you landed on space stations, and prices 
would differ depending on the economic conditions of the neighbouring planet. 
Agricultural goods sold strongly on densely populated industrialised planets, 
while you could get excellent returns on luxury goods in systems where there 
was cash but little urbanisation.

I took lengthy notes about planets and their economies. I plotted my own maps 
when I took forays into unclassified areas. In Elite, you could be attacked by 
pirates at any time, or you might be drawn out of hyperspace by a Thargoid 
invasion fleet which would trap you until you defeated them in battle. I lived 
in fear of this random encroachment on my habits and routines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a77e0fc78a84571e6941af82b63dd3656151543%2F0_0_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%20is%20Elite%20for%20the%2021st%20century.%20Pointless%3F%20Maybe%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20also%20sublime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%20is%20Elite%20for%20the%2021st%20century.%20Pointless%3F%20Maybe%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20also%20sublime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a77e0fc78a84571e6941af82b63dd3656151543%2F0_0_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 There was no point to most of Elite. But it wasn’t about that - it was about 
the experience. Photograph: Firebird 
There was no point to any of this. If you got rich you could upgrade your ship 
with better weapons and defence systems, and as you did that, you became more 
formidable in battle, increasing your rank. But it wasn’t really about that, it 
was about the experience. I’d drift in space for hours, scooping fuel from 
suns, mining asteroids, watching the vector-based planets withdraw into the 
distant nothingness behind my craft. I’d pretend to be in Alien, world-weary 
and skittish, terrified of passing too close to LV-426. When I bought a docking 
computer, I’d listen to the game’s simple but beautiful rendition of the Blue 
Danube as my craft spiralled delicately toward the space station entrance. I’d 
imagine myself leaving the ship, wandering the white, brightly lit corridors of 
the station, finding trading partners, discussing deals. In the game, you never 
left your ship, and the space station interior was depicted as a series of 
trading lists. You never saw anything. You had to create it all. The game was 
the backdrop, the words on the page.

I have of course been reminded of all this playing No Man’s Sky, which is in 
effect Elite for the 21st century (yes, I know there is an actual Elite for the 
21st century – Elite: Dangerous – but it is much more of a serious simulation, 
and, as a massively multiplayer game, is constructed in a very different way). 
Like the original Elite, there’s little point to No Man’s Sky, beside the 
promise of some narrative event at the centre of the universe. You drift from 
planet to planet, mining, selling and buying; there are little compulsion 
systems that prod you toward increasing your inventory size and following 
astral paths through the glittering cosmos, but you don’t have to. I like 
floating just above the surface of a planet, watching the details bubble into 
life below me; the ship’s engine makes this dull clunking sound, which seems 
brilliantly anachronistic in a craft capable of faster than light travel, but 
it adds a sort of workmanlike feel to travel. It brings back that sense that 
Elite provided – that you’re a lonely and vulnerable traveller, in a puny rust 
bucket only ever one dramatic incident away from destruction. The universe 
won’t care when you’re gone. The universe barely knows you’re there.

Some people have reacted badly to this. Used to being told they’re the centre 
of the galaxy, gamers are furious about the lack of direction in the game, the 
lack of point, the lack of meaning, the lack of recognition. It has occurred to 
me while watching the controversy unfold that many of the angry comments about 
the game are expressing existential angst. There’s no point and no direction. 
You hear this a lot about life in general when you spend time in online forums. 
I think the internet and the vast cynical, largely anonymised community it has 
engendered, has allowed a kind of nihilism to form and propagate. The people 
dismissing the No Man’s Sky creators as liars and thieves because some of the 
potential features they talked about haven’t yet materialised in the game, are 
having trouble coming to terms with the vagaries of the creative act – and of 
life itself. They think everything has to work and operate in a predictable 
way; whether that’s a game, a movie franchise or other human beings. When 
things don’t work like that they feel cheated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46201e4145b84abe5707ece954d38ecf620a8f33%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%20is%20Elite%20for%20the%2021st%20century.%20Pointless%3F%20Maybe%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20also%20sublime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%20is%20Elite%20for%20the%2021st%20century.%20Pointless%3F%20Maybe%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20also%20sublime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46201e4145b84abe5707ece954d38ecf620a8f33%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Some gamers have been furious about the lack of direction in No Man’s Sky. 
Photograph: The Guardian 
I mean, I don’t know what’s changed in the 30 years since Elite. Is it simply 
about technology? Is it that we require more detail and direction from our 
games now? That makes sense I suppose. Or is it a wider sociocultural 
phenomenon – that we have been taught to expect some sort of cogent journey, 
some carefully scripted satisfaction, from every single thing we engage with? 
We are certainly very impatient when the decisions we make don’t generate the 
rewards we expect. And now social media has allowed us to revel in and 
communicate our fury.

I just know that I didn’t expect Elite to provide me with much. My life in 
that game was 90% cruising through space with a full cargo hold, hoping not to 
attract attention from either the police or the authorities. The other 10% was 
terrifying and desperate space battles that would often see me jettisoning in 
an escape pod and starting my empire from scratch once again. The game had 
missions, but they were randomly allocated and dangerous. I rarely bothered 
with them.

Video games are still very tricky to define. They are not technological 
objects in the same way as printers or smart watches or Bluetooth speakers. But 
they are not art in quite the same way as cinema or literature. Instead, they 
are works of complex creative endeavour, they are imaginative machines, but the 
players themselves must complete the circuitry; you have to bring something 
with you – and with some games that requirement is greater. The clash over No 
Man’s Sky is a clash between people who see games as an entertainment product 
and the people who see them as an experience. As a product the game falls short 
in many practically understood ways. As an experience it can be utterly 
transcendental.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9e040e3ec4e725cf06acaee01182dda56ffbdc5%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man's%20Sky%20is%20Elite%20for%20the%2021st%20century.%20Pointless%3F%20Maybe%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20also%20sublime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%27s%20Sky%20is%20Elite%20for%20the%2021st%20century.%20Pointless%3F%20Maybe%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20also%20sublime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-mans-sky-elite%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9e040e3ec4e725cf06acaee01182dda56ffbdc5%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Do we expect more from our games now? Photograph: Publicity image 
The problem we face now, in a consumer marketplace utterly saturated with 
choice, is that value is both a defining and an ambiguous factor. In order to 
commit to something, be it a TV series, YouTube channel or video game, we apply 
all sorts of criteria in the fear that we’re committing to the wrong thing. But 
those criteria can be misleading especially when money is involved. Can No 
Man’s Sky be worth £45 when it has no point to it; when you may get bored after 
12 hours? This seems like a sensible question, but when we’re talking about 
experience, it really isn’t. A gorgeous meal, a trip on the London Eye, a night 
at the theatre, a Champions League play-off ticket – these are all hugely 
expensive propositions, that may only yield seconds of truly memorable 
entertainment. But those seconds may live with you forever. How do you place 
value on those things?

I still remember the hours I sat at that desk, the Blue Danube softly playing, 
clicking between the different views from my space ship, watching the stars 
dart by, watching the empty circle planets rotate. I paid £15 for Elite and 
another £15 for the joystick. It was so much money to me back then. But while 
there were other games that looked better and were more exciting, I don’t 
remember many of them now. I guess I’m old, that’s the thing: I’ve learned how 
much moments matter, and how, when the context fades, the joy often remains, 
like a pinprick of light in the blackest sky.
 