
Sean Murray is sweating in an Uber cab as it lurches to the staccato rhythm of 
Los Angeles traffic. The 34-year-old video game programmer is anxious. His 
meeting at SpaceX with Elon Musk, the American business magnate who hopes to 
put a human on Mars within the next two decades, overran and Murray and two of 
his colleagues are perilously late for their next appointment. It is, if not 
the most important meeting of his life, then almost certainly the most notable 
(and this in a week of notable meetings; before Musk, Murray met the rapper 
Kanye West). In five minutes Murray and his colleague, David Ream, are due to 
showNo Man’s Sky <http://www.no-mans-sky.com>, the video game he and a dozen or 
so friends are creating half a world away in Guildford, to the film director 
Steven Spielberg.

Like Murray, Spielberg is in town for E3 <https://www.e3expo.com>, the video 
game industry’s largest annual gathering, held in boiling LA each June, where 
publishers show off their forthcoming titles to baying crowds of fans. The cab 
pulls up at the Los Angeles Convention Centre, where the event takes place over 
three days. The building is draped in advertising for next year’s blockbuster 
titles. Murray exits the car with a slam and begins to weave through the crowd, 
clustered around screens and fingerprint-smeared controllers. He arrives at one 
of Sony’s cool private meeting rooms, just as Spielberg and his entourage 
arrive. Inside, Murray, with an apologetic press of a button, loads up the 
universe.

No Man’s Sky will tick and function regardless of human interaction.

As early as 1984, a computer game called Elite 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UmCaNwBwXoQ>, created by two Cambridge 
University students, David Braben and Ian Bell, allowed us to explore the 
furthest reaches of the galaxy from the relative comfort of a desk chair. And 
yetNo Man’s Sky is unprecedented. The game presents a traversable cosmos of 
unimaginable scale: 18 quintillion life-size planets by the studio’s latest 
count. Murray claims that, were you to visit the game’s virtual planets at a 
rate of one per second, our own sun would have died before you’d seen them all. 
These worlds were created, not by the hand of an artist or designer, but by 
algorithms. As inMinecraft <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FaMTedT6P0I>, 
another gigantic video game world created by an improbably small team, every 
rock, flower, tree, creature and scene is generated rather than, as in most 
video games, drawn or shaped by hand.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRaETTn_V6Hk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRaETTn_V6Hk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRaETTn_V6Hk&media=>
 The No Man’s Sky trailer released in Feb 2015. 
In No Man’s Sky, you play as an astronaut, piloting the kind of nimble craft 
that once flew on the covers of Isaac Asimov paperbacks. Like those airbrushed 
visions of space travel, the game offers a curiously nostalgic vision of the 
future. Every player will start their journey on an undiscovered planet; they 
will be the only person to have walked its surface. From there, you can board 
your ship, take off, break the atmosphere and begin to tour the galaxy (all 
without the interruption of a loading screen). The stars you see in the 
unfathomable distance aren’t a mere illusion, like fairy lights studded into a 
black curtain of a stage backdrop, but real orbs. Travel in their direction for 
long enough and you can touch them. “We are attempting to do things that have 
never been done before,” Murray told me, last year, when the project had only 
just been made public. “No game has made it possible to fly down to a planet, 
and for it to be planet-sized, and feature life, ecology, lakes, caves, 
waterfalls, and canyons, then seamlessly fly up through the stratosphere and 
take to space again.”

What's next for Minecraft? Developer Mojang talks future features
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/05/whats-next-for-minecraft-mojang-future-features-minecon-2015>
While you might expect a universe created by mathematical rules rather than an 
artist’s eye and imagination to be bland and samey,No Man’s Sky boasts 
tremendous depth and variety. One planet is carpeted by bright orange tall 
grass, through which antelope-esque creatures plod. The trunks of tall palm 
trees reach upwards into a green sky, before exploding into a splay of crimson 
fronds. Another planet is wet with mist; only the tips of a few conifers manage 
to break the murk. There is biodiversity then, but in this game only relatively 
few planets sustain life. The conditions will, as with Earth, need to be ideal.

For example, there is a specific distance from a star at which it is likely 
there will be moisture. From this information the game decides that there will 
be rivers, lakes, erosion and weather, and every aspect (including the sky’s 
hue) is dependent on the type of liquid that forms the atmosphere. Many planets 
will be deserted, some entirely barren. As new places are discovered, 
information such as whether they’re toxic or radioactive, or whether they 
contain life, will be uploaded to the game’s servers along with the name of the 
player who made the discovery. These intrepid names will be forever associated 
with the location, like a space-bound Christopher Columbus.

Unlike many video games, which are rigged to respond only to inputs and 
otherwise rest dormant, like a musical instrument awaiting a player,No Man’s Sky
 will tick and function regardless of human interaction. Animals have daily 
routines that they follow. They might drink in the lowland lakes during the 
daytime before retreating to the hills to graze. Heavy freighters will plod 
through space to their own timetable, following trade routes and visiting 
planets where smaller ships will peel off to gather resources. As with the 
game’s terrains and atmospheres, all of this behaviour is based on mathematics: 
fractal patterns that are followed with clockwork reliability.

People don’t like to be told that we don’t know what will happen in our game, 
but that’s what is exciting to us.
Sean Murray 
The overarching goal for players is to head toward the centre of the universe. 
This common destination will increase the chance that people will encounter one 
another on their journey (even if the game sells millions of copies, when your 
playground consists of 18 quintillion planets, a single encounter is 
statistically unlikely). But it’s an optional objective. “We don’t know whether 
people will congregate or disperse,” said Murray. “I know that people don’t 
like to be told that we don’t know what will happen in our game, but that’s 
what is exciting to us.” Indeed, it’s entirely possible that a player will roam 
for years and never meet another soul. Others may never leave their home 
planet, instead choosing to chart its terrain, month by month. While it will be 
possible for players to mine, trade or fight with others,No Man’s Sky will also 
accommodate the lone, nomadic wolf.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436277095857%2F0af64b34-d858-49c9-92ee-4f24d1e350a4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436277095857%2F0af64b34-d858-49c9-92ee-4f24d1e350a4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hazel Mckendrick and Sean Murray build worlds at the Hello Games studio in 
Guildford. Photograph: Rob Monk/Future/REX Shutterstock 
For Murray, this kind of solitary existence defined his early childhood. His 
“eccentric” family travelled a great deal when he was a child. He was born in 
Ireland but, from the age of four, lived on a million-acre farm in the 
Australian outback. The family was responsible for its own electricity, water 
and survival. The farm was a 400-mile drive on a dust track from the nearest 
main road. “We were completely cut off,” Murray said. This remote existence had 
an impact that he carries, he says, through life. For one, it seeded in Murray 
a fascination with the galaxy. “At night you could see the vastness of space,” 
he said. Later, when his parents bought him a computer, he’d playElite as a way 
to explore stars similar to those that he’d watch outside his window.

Murray’s interest in games blossomed into a career with the multinational 
video game publisher Electronic Arts. He formedHello Games 
<http://www.hellogames.org> with three friends, each of whom also worked at 
major studios, in 2009. When the team began to discuss what kind of game they 
would like to make, Murray returned to those formative memories under the 
stars. “Those emotions started to surface, the feelings you had as a child but 
which are rarely displayed in video games,” he said. “We talked about wanting 
to explore the vocations that we wanted to be when we were kids.”

Hello Games’s first project, Joe Danger 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MZP-UG8cOCg>, explored the life of one such 
aspirational career of childhood: stuntman. The game was a major success (it 
made its money back within an hour of release) but it also locked the 
developers into a cycle of sequel-making that Murray and the others had formed 
the company to escape.

“We went on to make four games in the series across seven platforms,” he said. 
“Each time you sit down to embark on a new project you start to run the 
calculations: will this be the next five, seven, 10 years of my life working on 
this game? It changes your mindset when a single game’s development represents 
a significant chunk of life. You end up thinking: how many games do I have 
left?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436277408277%2Ff92d8edf-3d8a-4d79-ba5a-2b3467b90603-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436277408277%2Ff92d8edf-3d8a-4d79-ba5a-2b3467b90603-1020x612.jpeg>
 A new still from No Man’s Sky released at E3 in Los Angeles. Photograph: Hello 
Games 
With this existential crisis in mind, Murray decided it was time to embark on 
the project he’d dreamed of as a child, a game about frontiership and existence 
on the edge of the unexplored. One night, alone in the office, he began to 
program the big bang that would lead toNo Man’s Sky’s universe. He wanted to 
evoke the imagined feeling of landing on a planet and being the first person to 
discover it, the sense of awe and trepidation at not knowing what secrets lay 
within a place’s geographical folds and spires.

We wanted a game where, even if you watched every YouTube video, it still 
wouldn’t be spoiled for you,”
Sean Murray 
“In this era, in which footage of every game is recorded and uploaded to 
YouTube, we wanted a game where, even if you watched every video, it still 
wouldn’t be spoiled for you,” he said. “And we wanted those discoveries to be 
meaningful in the sense that they could be shared with other players, all of 
whom existed in the exact same universe, rather than inside their own random 
dimension.”

Years later, the game’s scale remains vast. But now it is matched by the 
weight of expectation. In an industry that values bankable sequels made by 
teams of hundreds, this is a new name in a new genre made by an implausibly 
tiny team (it started as four and has now ballooned to 13). In both 2014 and 
2015Sony <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> made No Man’s Sky the 
centrepiece of its E3 press conference, held in the cavernous Los Angeles 
Memorial Sports Arena.

“People say to me: there’s never been a game that’s had this much hype and 
hasn’t disappointed everyone,” Murray said. The team at HelloGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> has been careful not to 
over-promise, or to suggest that there are elements to the experience that 
aren’t present.

“We’ve always ensured that every video and demo we put out is raw gameplay,” 
Murray says. “Every time you seeNo Man’s Sky, it’s literally me playing, 
wearing headphones, trying to film things that go well with the music. It’s the 
most genuine way in which we can show the game.” Despite these efforts, people 
seem to let their imagination run away. “They project their own idea of the 
game onto what we’re doing. Maybe that is the nature of hype: runaway 
excitement that can never be matched?”

The team has remained true to its vision (the design hasn’t changed much since 
the game’s inception, Murray claims) rather than seeking to accommodate the 
endless requests from players who want to see certain features implemented. 
While showing the game to members of the enthusiastic press, Murray has fielded 
requests that they make it possible for players to create buildings, 
communicate with aliens or implement land vehicles into the game. “It’s the 
reason we haven’t done things like Kickstarter,” Murray said. “There could be 
so much feature creep. A lot of other companies would have taken the interest, 
taken loads of investment, grown the team massively and so on. And of course, 
we did talk about things like that. But it felt like it wouldn’t work. We had 
an idea for a game and we may never be able to deliver on the hype. But we can 
deliver the game we set out to make. That has to be enough.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436448343824%2F57de9132-5f9a-444a-b253-5ab5731806b6-1020x574.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436448343824%2F57de9132-5f9a-444a-b253-5ab5731806b6-1020x574.jpeg>
 A new still from No Man’s Sky released at E3 in Los Angeles. Photograph: Hello 
Games 
Murray is, at least in part, culpable for the gale of hype. Sony, whose 
successful video game division is dedicated to funding and nurturing game 
development talent, offered Hello Games financial support. Murray turned down 
the funding, instead requesting a prime segment during the Japanese company’s 
E3 2014 press conference. It was an unprecedented request for an unproven, 
independently produced title. “I’ve worked on games that sold millions of 
copies that were never given the chance to have a showing at E3,” Murray told 
me. Before he took to the stage, Murray was, according to a colleague, 
“catatonic” with fear. The fretfulness was, as is often the case for the man in 
whom ambition and anxiety are yoked, unwarranted. Murray introduced a video 
showing footage of the game: spaceships loop-the-looping over red planets, 
procedurally created fish flashing across reefs, armadillo traipsing along 
cliff edges, all played to a euphoric soundtrack composed by the band
65daysofstatic <http://65daysofstatic.com>. The response from the audience – 
5,000 in the room and millions more who were watching online – was ecstatic.

“Personally, I don’t find the attention motivating,” said Murray. “When I’m 
not attending these trade shows to demonstrate the game, I make a real effort 
to block everything out. But it’s a constant hum of expectation, or like 
something hanging over you. Sometimes something will make me aware of it and I 
do a little shudder.”

The attention can, at times, become too much. Murray recently cancelled an 
invitation to speak at the SXSW music, film and interactive festival in Austin, 
Texas. He deleted Twitter from his phone. “You’d think people saying ‘I’m 
excited for your game’ would be motivational,” he said. “But actually, 
creativity and hard work is driven by ambition. And ambition isn’t helped by 
constant affirmation. You have to almost get to a place where you’re unhappy 
with everything.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtuatlzRxKVQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtuatlzRxKVQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtuatlzRxKVQ&media=>
 Sean Murray’s presentation at the E3 conference in June 2015 
The insatiable curse of perfectionism was in full display at this year’s E3. 
Again Murray took to the stage during Sony’s press conference. But this time, 
he was playing live on stage, a ballsy move with unfinished software. “We 
decided that I was just going to stand up and play the game,” he said. “There 
was a lot of pressure on us to do something bombastic. I didn’t want to do 
that. I wanted to go: this is the kind of experience you’ll have. If you’re 
excited by that, then it’s real and we can match that. And if not, well, maybe 
that’s OK…” As part of the demonstration, Murray wanted to show off the game’s 
scale in more concrete terms. In front of the audience he pressed a button and 
the world shrank into a single point on a sprawled galactic map. Another, and 
the galaxy folded into a dot, now just a pinprick in a constellation of bright 
markers. The crowd drew a collective breath.

After he left the stage at 8pm, chased by the sound of applause, Murray 
returned to the hotel suite Hello Games had hired across the road from the E3 
show floor. It had become an impromptu development studio, complete with 
networked computers and a shantytown of plastic connectors and wires. “It 
should have been this triumphant moment,” Murray said. “Nothing had crashed! 
Instead, I started working on the game through the night, trying to get it into 
the best possible shape to show the press the next day. The stuff we worked on 
that night? Nobody noticed. But, I couldn’t sleep. There’s always more to be 
done.”

The team is yet to announce a release date for No Man’s Sky, which will debut 
simultaneously on Sony’sPlayStation 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> and PC, probably next 
year. Most blockbuster video games, like movies, announce their arrival years 
in advance, with launch dates carefully planned to reduce the threat of 
competition. Murray, despite pressure from fans, has opted to wait. “Ultimately 
we will pick the date when we have a finished game,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436277677007%2F16ac3734-5ac4-493d-b079-8904688e8397-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436277677007%2F16ac3734-5ac4-493d-b079-8904688e8397-1020x612.jpeg>
 A new still from No Man’s Sky released at E3 in Los Angeles. Photograph: Hello 
Games 
“The team is so small that it’s the way it has to work. I used to work on 
teams where 200 people were working together; it would be much more like an 
assembly line. We’d have one level and it’s February and we’d know we’ll have 
10 levels by May and 20 levels by August and so on. It was tightly controlled. 
For us, we’re building this game where unless all systems work in harmony, 
nothing really works at all.”

Two days after his appearance on stage at E3 last month, Murray began the 
private demonstration with Spielberg. The director is currently working on the 
film version ofReady Player One, a science fiction novel by Ernest Cline in 
which most humans spend their time playing a never-ending game inside a digital 
utopia. In the story, players compete to find a trinket hidden by the game’s 
late creator, concealed somewhere within the virtual expanse.

For many, the quest has become an obsession. For Spielberg, it is No Man’s Sky
’s lack of a similarly focused goal that makes Hello Games’s project so 
interesting. “He picked up on the sense of wonder,” Murray recalled. “He said 
the game provides something close to a meditative experience. Our game has 
various aspects to it. Something that sometimes resonates with players is the 
appeal of virtual tourism.”

Perhaps the greatest appeal of No Man’s Sky is the way it provides us with the 
opportunity to make the unknown known.

Video game designers often seek to propel us through their worlds, laying down 
a crumb trail of objectives designed to hold our attention. But sometimes the 
worlds they create cause us to put down the to-do list, to stop and stare at 
this forest, that horizon, those fields, these spaceships. Games allow us to 
enter into the roles and vocations of people unlike us – the racing car driver, 
the international football star, the marine – but they also enable us to visit 
and explore places that would be unreachable any other way. Perhaps the 
greatest appeal ofNo Man’s Sky is the way it provides us with the opportunity 
to make the unknown known. It is the same urge that launched Elizabethan 
explorers around the world in fat galleons, the promise of the strange animals 
that they might find, the unpredictable tribes they might meet, the unseen 
sights they would see, and the extraordinary pleasure of filling in a 
previously obfuscated area of a map.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436277730184%2F048d640d-c0b8-4bf2-a6da-97fce2e847f5-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Man%E2%80%99s%20Sky%3A%20the%20game%20where%20you%20can%20explore%2018%20quintillion%20planets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fno-mans-sky-18-quintillion-planets-hello-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436277730184%2F048d640d-c0b8-4bf2-a6da-97fce2e847f5-1020x612.jpeg>
 A new still from No Man’s Sky released at E3 in Los Angeles. Photograph: Hello 
Games 
Today, our own, meticulously charted world rarely offers such thrills. The 
ubiquity of the mobile phone, the terrain-gobbling tenacity of Google Earth’s 
satellites and the way in which all of this data can be shared instantly has 
made Earth smaller than ever.

Yet video games offer to make explorers of us all again. From familiar 
building blocks (quite literally, in the case ofMinecraft’s brick-like 
construction) they create unfamiliar places with unfamiliar vistas that are, 
nevertheless, somehow real. The latest game consoles have the built-in ability 
to take and share in-game photographs, an acknowledgement that visitors will 
want to capture a scene or a moment for posterity, to make their discoveries 
public and shared.

The game hopes to offer similar jolts of elemental wonder, all without the 
drag of real-world travel. These vivid places are compacted into the 
television, facilitating a kind of tourism and exploration that is both 
convenient and peril-free. Can virtual discovery match the thrill of real-world 
exploration? Perhaps not. But the imitation is nevertheless powerful, 
compelling and, crucially, cheaper and more accessible than the real thing.

The game hopes to offer jolts of elemental wonder, all without the drag of 
real-world travel.

A fortnight after Murray’s meeting with Elon Musk, a SpaceX Falcon9 rocket 
carrying food and supplies to the International Space Stationexploded minutes 
after takeoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/28/nasa-spacex-launch-international-space-station-wrong>
 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. “Space is hard,” tweeted American astronaut 
Scott Kelly in reaction to the disaster. Although, less so when encountered on 
a widescreen television.

One of Murray’s friends writes science fiction novels. The writer conjures 
worlds from his imagination, a landscape of the future and the technology by 
which humans will interact with that place.No Man’s Sky is also involved in 
this long-running tradition (the alien landscapes; the hyper-drives), and yet 
the game represents its own futuristic miracles. It squeezes 18 quintillion 
planets on to a hard drive. It summons life from algorithms and allows 
humanity, together, to explore and discover in a collective project.

Murray caught up with his author friend recently. “He bemoaned the fact that, 
these days, a lot of science seems quite normal,” he says. “Something he said 
has stayed with me: ‘It’s harder to be futuristic than ever before.’”
 