
In a newspaper article in January 1975, Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> described private 
property as “one of the main bulwarks of individual freedom”. So it seems 
appropriate that her handbags, suits and necklaces will be sold for cold, hard 
cash to the highest bidder, rather than being saved for the nation.

V&A rejects offer to showcase Margaret Thatcher's clothing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/03/va-rejects-offer-to-showcase-margaret-thatchers-clothing>
But is the V&A right to have turned them down? The museum’s somewhat steely 
statement argued thatThatcher’s wardrobe falls outside its remit of 
“fashionable dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/03/va-rejects-offer-to-showcase-margaret-thatchers-clothing>
”. The clothes, say the museum directors, do not warrant a place in the 
collection because, while they have social-historical significance, they are 
not of intrinsic aesthetic value. Instead,an auction at Christie’s next month 
<http://www.christies.com/features/Mrs-Thatcher-A-sale-offering-unique-insights-into-the-trajectory-of-the-Iron-Lady-6727-3.aspx>
 will see well-known pieces from Thatcher’s wardrobe go on sale. Highlights 
will include a royal-blue double-breasted Aquascutum skirt suit with gold 
buttons from her time as PM, and her midnight-blue wedding outfit, complete 
with matching velvet muff and ostrich feather-trimmed cap, which was said to 
have been inspired byGainsborough’s portrait of Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire
 
<http://www.wikiart.org/en/thomas-gainsborough/portrait-of-georgiana-duchess-of-devonshire>
. The wedding outfit is expected to attract bids around £10,000, with minor 
pieces in the sale starting at £200.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fno-style-icon-but-an-image-maker-why-margaret-thatcher-was-the-wrong-fit-for-the-va%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bc110f90208b9405d20e6629e6f9b45808b729d%2F133_198_2015_3024%2F2015.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20style%20icon%20but%20an%20image-maker%3A%20why%20Margaret%20Thatcher%20was%20the%20wrong%20fit%20for%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fno-style-icon-but-an-image-maker-why-margaret-thatcher-was-the-wrong-fit-for-the-va%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20style%20icon%20but%20an%20image-maker%3A%20why%20Margaret%20Thatcher%20was%20the%20wrong%20fit%20for%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fno-style-icon-but-an-image-maker-why-margaret-thatcher-was-the-wrong-fit-for-the-va%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bc110f90208b9405d20e6629e6f9b45808b729d%2F133_198_2015_3024%2F2015.jpg>
 Thatcher’s wedding outfit from 1951. Photograph: Christie's 
Thatcher never aspired to be a fashion plate, as she might have phrased it. 
Her mantra for dressing – “never flashy, just appropriate” – made it crystal 
clear that she did not dress for the joy of wearing beautiful clothes. No lover 
of design for its own sake, Thatcher doesn’t necessarily belong among the 
aesthetic purists who make up the V&A’s hardcore fans.

But fashion is broader than pure aesthetics. Thatcher’s look may never have 
been fashionable, but it was enormously effective as a tool for projecting 
power and influence. She was an early adopter of simple sartorial diplomacy: 
she wore Tory-blue skirt suits on many key occasions – including her first 
Downing Street photocall as prime minister – and knew to choose red (a lucky 
colour for the country) for an official visit to China as far back as 1982.

Margaret Thatcher: her fashion legacy – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2013/apr/10/margaret-thatcher-her-fashion-legacy-in-pictures>
But what is most striking about Thatcher’s clothes is how effectively they 
constructed and consolidated her brand several decades before the notion of 
having a personal brand even existed. Thatcher’s image was so strong that her 
look is almost indivisible in the public mind from her actions. Pussy-bow 
blouses are spliced with milk-snatching, boxy handbags with the miners’ strike. 
She was no style icon, but she was a gifted image-maker and clothes paid a key 
part in this. The daughter of a dressmaker, she cared about tailoring. 
Aquascutum employees of her era recall how minutely particular she was about 
the shape of the shoulders on her coats and jackets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fno-style-icon-but-an-image-maker-why-margaret-thatcher-was-the-wrong-fit-for-the-va%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1265e4dc82976f36866487f194eed03568c1a56c%2F0_221_3464_2079%2F3464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20style%20icon%20but%20an%20image-maker%3A%20why%20Margaret%20Thatcher%20was%20the%20wrong%20fit%20for%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fno-style-icon-but-an-image-maker-why-margaret-thatcher-was-the-wrong-fit-for-the-va%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20style%20icon%20but%20an%20image-maker%3A%20why%20Margaret%20Thatcher%20was%20the%20wrong%20fit%20for%20the%20V%26A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fno-style-icon-but-an-image-maker-why-margaret-thatcher-was-the-wrong-fit-for-the-va%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1265e4dc82976f36866487f194eed03568c1a56c%2F0_221_3464_2079%2F3464.jpg>
 Thatcher rides a tank in Germany, 1986. Photograph: REX Shutterstock 
Has the V&A rejected Thatcher because she is not – and never will be – cool? 
Two years ago, the museum deviated from its conventional remit to stage ahuge 
exhibition about David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
. That exhibition was as much about social and cultural changes as it was about 
pure aesthetics. But the museum would argue that Bowie is, himself, a fashion 
icon – after all, the Aladdin Sane lightning streak wasreproduced, on Kate 
Moss, as a Vogue cover 
<http://media.gingerstyle.se/2012/01/DavidBowie-AladdinSane-628x386-600x368.jpg>
.

Margaret Thatcher left a lasting legacy on fashion by fusing femininity with 
power dressing. This was entirely deliberate. (She once said she wore pussy-bow 
blouses when making speeches for their “softening” effect.) Think of her riding 
a Nato tank, in a cream Aquascutum trench and ivory silk headscarf, like a 
figurehead at the prow of a ship. (That coat and headscarf will be auctioned 
together in the forthcoming Christie’s sale, in a lot expected to fetch 
£10,000-£20,000.) These sartorial tactics were entirely lacking in subtletly – 
and it is perhaps this lack of refinement and sophistication that, in the end, 
has excluded her from the V&A.
 