
Recently I had a first-hand account of the housing crisis affecting so many 
young people. A relative – a professional on good money – was telling me how 
she’s spending half her salary renting a small room in a house. She has to 
perform contortions to fit into the tiny shower she shares with the other 
tenants. But it did lead her to offer some helpful financial advice for the new 
year. With so much money to be made, she suggested that Ilet out my own spare 
room <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/13/rent-out-your-spare-room>.

Why renting your spare room could be a nice little earner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/13/rent-out-your-spare-room> 
It’s a tempting prospect, although naturally I prefer to think of it as 
helping to solve the accommodation problem rather than an opportunity to fleece 
a hapless young person. But I have my doubts, and I suspect most crime writers 
would.

In books and films, the prospective lodger who appears on the doorstep in the 
pouring rain, clutching a suitcase and wearing a haunted look, is a familiar 
figure. As fans of the thriller genre will know, this rarely ends well. Whether 
it’sSingle White Female 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/11/jennifer-jason-leigh-five-best-moments>
 orThe Hand That Rocks the Cradle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/07/huntsman-winters-war-couple-hole-why-cinema-demonise-grieving-mothers>
, appearances are always deceptive. Even the lodger who pegs out early can 
still bring trouble, as those who enjoyedShallow Grave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jan/24/ewan-mcgregor-five-best-moments-august-osage-county>
 will remember. And writing these kinds of stories can make you even more 
paranoid about stranger danger than watching or reading them.

I’m still in two minds about a new career as a landlady. I’m aware that you’re 
allowed to specify “non-smoker preferred” in ads for rooms. But are you also 
allowed to insist that prospective tenants must undergo a full-body search for 
guns, drugs and anything that might be used to dismember a corpse? You know, 
just to be on the safe side.

The DIY deficit


If I do let a room to a serial killer, I’ll have to get my radiators fixed 
first.Bleeding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jan/18/bleed-a-radiator> them 
hasn’t helped and neither has watching those helpful videos on YouTube. So it 
looks like I’ll need to blow the first month’s rent getting somebody in to sort 
it out.

If experience is any guide, that will probably mean watching the repairs and 
thinking, “I could have done that myself” after I see the bill. I don’t think 
I’m alone. And it’s not just simple household problems that baffle many of us 
either. I don’t drive, but I know car owners who still leave changing the oil 
or cleaning the spark plugs until the service is due.

When I finally become minister of education, I’ll be instructing schools to 
spend an hour a week teaching pupils how to do basic home and car maintenance. 
Not only will it save them a lot of money over the years, it’ll also spare them 
the embarrassment of a man with a van telling them: “Er … actually, I think you 
just needed to replace the fuse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fno-smokers-serial-killers-frisking-lodgers-renting-out-spare-room%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54604936acf261d2dbbac02dc5afe7bb9c05e763%2F407_0_5038_3024%2F5038.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20smokers%2C%20no%20serial%20killers%3A%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20frisking%20the%20lodgers%20%7C%20Dreda%20Say%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fno-smokers-serial-killers-frisking-lodgers-renting-out-spare-room%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20smokers%2C%20no%20serial%20killers%3A%20why%20I%E2%80%99m%20frisking%20the%20lodgers%20%7C%20Dreda%20Say%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fno-smokers-serial-killers-frisking-lodgers-renting-out-spare-room%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54604936acf261d2dbbac02dc5afe7bb9c05e763%2F407_0_5038_3024%2F5038.jpg>
 Astral weaklings: Astrologers didn’t see 2016 coming. Photograph: Alamy Stock 
Photo 
Sign of the times


It might just be me but I’ve noticed that astrology seems to have gone into 
steep decline lately. The new year used to see endless articles on what the 
stars were holding in store for us over the coming 12 months and it made some 
of the soothsayers famous. That seems not to be the case so much these days. It 
also seems a long time since any new acquaintance asked me what star sign I was 
born under, to see if we would be compatible. My view was that if you believed 
in this stuff, we probably wouldn’t.

No doubt the somewhat predictable nature of the astrologers’ forecasts didn’t 
help. Most of us probably guessed that the planets were favourably aligned for 
a holiday in August. But perhaps the cynicism has been overdone. It might be 
true that astrologers didn’t see the course of 2016 coming – but then neither 
did most other forecasters.
 