
More than a dozen fellow Nobel laureates have criticised Aung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi>, Myanmar’s de facto 
leader, for a bloody military crackdown on minority Rohingya people, warning of 
a tragedy “amounting to ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity”.

Burmese military killed seven of my children, says Rohingya refugee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/burmese-military-killed-seven-of-my-children-says-rohingya-refugee>
The open letter 
<https://www.facebook.com/Professor.Muhammad.Yunus/posts/996372943802283:0> to 
the UN security council from a group of 23 activists, including Archbishop 
Desmond Tutu and Malala Yousafzai, warned that the army offensive had killed of 
hundreds of people, including children, and left women raped, houses burned and 
many civilians arbitrarily arrested.

It was delivered as Bangladesh announced around 50,000 Rohingya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya> Muslims have fled the violence 
across its border.

“Access for humanitarian aid organisations has been almost completely denied, 
creating an appalling humanitarian crisis in an area already extremely poor,” 
reads the letter, whose signatories include current and former political and 
business leaders and campaigners such as Yousafzai, theyoungest winner of the 
Nobel peace prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/10/malala-yousafzia-nobel-peace-prize-attack>
.

“Some international experts have warned of the potential for genocide. It has 
all the hallmarks of recent past tragedies – Rwanda, Darfur, Bosnia, Kosovo,” 
the letter reads.

“If we fail to take action, people may starve to death if they are not killed 
with bullets.”

The government of predominantly Buddhist Myanmar says it is responding to 
several attacks carried out by Rohingya militants thatkilled nine police 
officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/myanmar-nine-police-killed-insurgents-bangladesh-border>
 on 9 October.

But the signatories to the letter said the army’s response had been “grossly 
disproportionate”.

“It would be one thing to round up suspects, interrogate them and put them on 
trial,” the letter said. “It is quite another to unleash helicopter gunships on 
thousands of ordinary civilians and to rape women and throw babies into a fire.”

The Rohingya are a minority of about a million people who, despite living in 
the country for generations, are treated as illegal immigrants and denied 
citizenship. They have been persecuted for years by the government and 
nationalist Buddhists.

It would be one thing to round up suspects … quite another to unleash 
helicopter gunships and throw babies into a fire.
Letter to UN security council 
The recent bloodshed is the most deadly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/myanmar-rohingya-violence-dozens-killed-army-clashes>
 since hundreds were killed in clashes in 2012 and more than 100,000 were 
forced into squalid camps.

An Amnesty International report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/myanmars-rohingya-campaign-may-be-against-humanity>
 this month, based on extensive interviews with Rohingya as well as analysis of 
satellite imagery, claimed that actions by Myanmar’s military may constitute 
crimes against humanity.

Aung San Suu Kyi, who spent much of the past two decades under house arrest 
and was awarded the 1991 Nobel peace prize,won elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/23/final-myanmar-results-show-aung-san-suu-kyis-party-won-77-of-seats>
 last November, ending decades of junta rule.

But the Myanmar armed forces, or Tatmadaw, retain significant power in Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>. Under the army-drafted 
constitution, the military controls the three most powerful government 
ministries: home, defence and border affairs.

Aung San Suu Kyi is foreign minister and state counsellor, as the law bars her 
from the presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/aung-san-suu-kyi-nominates-htin-kyaw-myanmar-president>
, which is held by her close aideHtin Kyaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/htin-kyaw-myanmar-president-electon-aung-san-suu-kyi-nld>
. However, she is widely considered the country’s de facto leader.

The open letter said that “despite repeated appeals to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi we 
are frustrated that she has not taken any initiative to ensure full and equal 
citizenship rights of the Rohingyas. Daw Suu Kyi is the leader and is the one 
with the primary responsibility to lead, and lead with courage, humanity and 
compassion.”

‘It will blow up’: fears Myanmar's deadly crackdown on Muslims will spiral out 
of control
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/myanmar-deadly-crackdown-muslims-rohingya>
Nobel peace laureates who signed the letter include Jose Ramos-Horta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/feb/16/indonesia.easttimor>, 
former president of East Timor, and Yemeni opposition activistTawakul Karman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/25/tawakul-karman-yemeni-activist-saleh>
. It was also signed by former prime minister of Italy Romano Prodi and British 
business leader Sir Richard Branson.

Bangladesh has stepped up patrols to try to stop refugees crossing the border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/rohingya-muslims-fleeing-myanmar-turned-away-by-bangladesh>
 during the last three months, and its foreign ministry had summoned Myanmar’s 
ambassador to express “deep concern at the continued influx”.


“Around 50,000 Myanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> citizens 
took shelter into Bangladesh since 9 October 2016,” the foreign ministry said 
in a statement on Thursday.

A spokesman for the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> high commissioner for 
refugees told AFP that at least 43,000 Rohingya have taken shelter in 
Bangladesh since October.

AP and AFP contributed to this report
 