
The term 'literary lion' could have been invented to fit the American writer 
Norman Mailer, who has died aged 84 of acute renal failure. He relished 
confrontation, and was often at his most impressive in the public arena. 
However, underneath the lion lurked a clumsy cub, and among Mailer's many 
appealing attributes was his talent for play.

He led a double life as a literary artist, being both novelist and journalist, 
addressing himself to the major issues of his times, from feminism to 
consumerism ("Plastics," Mailer replied when asked to designate the modern 
world's main enemy), space travel to birth control, Vietnam to race riots, the 
psychology of the mass murderer to that of the graffiti artist. Gaining an idea 
of his range requires sampling from all over the vast table of his output. But 
if there is a 'best' book from the more than 40, it is perhaps The 
Executioner's Song (1979), in which he fused his two careers by writing a 
"non-fiction novel" based on the life of the murderer Gary Gilmore, executed in 
1977, the first person to suffer the death penalty in the US after a four-year 
moratorium.

That book showed Mailer to be capable of controlling a style of lyrical 
simplicity, whereas his reputation had been built on baroque, complex 
sentences, fizzing with ideas to the point of genius or idiocy. Though 
intending to send up a fireworks display, Mailer was unafraid of the damp 
squib, and often pricked his grand ego with bathos. Describing his meeting with 
the poet Robert Lowell in The Armies of the Night (1968), Mailer related how 
Lowell called him "the best journalist in America". He had been hoping the poet 
might have said "best writer"; but Lowell's assessment was nearer the truth.

Mailer was born in Long Branch, New Jersey, and given the middle name Malech, 
because, as his mother explained, "Malech is 'king' in Hebrew, and he was our 
king" (the name on the birth certificate reads "Kingsley"). His parents' 
families had come to the US from Russia, by way of South Africa, where his 
father was born; during this passage the name Mailer was forged from a Russian 
original that Norman never knew.

His father, Isaac, was an accountant, and his mother, Fanny, ran a 
housekeeping and nursing agency. The family moved to Brooklyn when he was four, 
and after attending local schools he entered Harvard to study aeronautical 
engineering in 1939. At university, however, he began to see himself as a 
writer, and shortly after graduation in 1943 was presented with a subject: the 
second world war. Eighteen months in the Pacific with the 112th Cavalry, seeing 
"modest bits of action", according to his own account, but rising only to the 
rank of sergeant technician - which actually meant "first cook" - provided the 
material for The Naked and the Dead, published in 1948 to great acclaim and 
instant celebrity for the 25-year-old author.

Mailer could fairly assert he had been both cursed and blessed by early 
success, but he was mostly blessed. The struggle, as is often the way with 
precocious artists, was to come later in life, when he was unpredictable in his 
choice of subject (Ancient Egypt, the life of Christ, Picasso) for books that 
were either too fat or too thin. At the end of the 1940s, though, he could 
enjoy being number one on the bestseller list, and indulge himself in the 
frivolous thought that The Naked and the Dead was "possibly the greatest book 
written since War And Peace". It was nowhere near it, of course (as he knew), 
but it did give him a career. In Britain, where the novel was published in 
1949, the first impression of 10,500 copies was sold out before reaching the 
bookshops.

Next Mailer wrote two more novels, Barbary Shore (1951) and The Deer Park 
(1955), which failed to consolidate his critical triumph. By then, however, he 
was living the life of a grown-up writer: he had worked in Hollywood, had got 
married (to Beatrice Silverman), and followed in the wake of the writers of the 
Lost Generation (Hemingway, Scott Fitzgerald, Dos Passos) by going to Paris.

Several contemporaries lived there, including William Styron, Peter 
Matthiessen and Irwin Shaw (author of The Young Lions, another war novel 
inevitably compared to War and Peace) but the most potentially valuable 
friendship Mailer formed during the period was with James Baldwin, himself a 
proven novelist and journalist, though settled in a lower league than Mailer. 
They met at the house of Mailer's French translator, Jean Malaquais, at 
precisely the time that Mailer was developing his theories on blackness and 
'hip', which were to result in the essay The White Negro (1957), and Hipster 
and Beatnik, appended to it in Advertisements for Myself (1959).

Baldwin, sensitive, frail, gay, took an immediate liking to the brash Mailer, 
portraying him fondly in his wonderful essay on their relationship, The Black 
Boy Looks at the White Boy, as "confident, boastful, exuberant, and loving - 
striding through the soft Paris nights like a gladiator". But when it came to 
jazz, the nature of 'hip' and the psychopathology of the "White Negro", Baldwin 
grew weary: "The Negro jazz musicians among whom we sometimes found ourselves, 
who really liked Norman, did not for an instant consider him as being even 
remotely 'hip'."

Mailer was well-practised in the art of devastating judgments himself, of 
course. The trigger for Baldwin's put-down had been the publication of 
Advertisements for Myself, which included a section entitled Quick and 
Expensive Comments on the Talent in the Room. Styron had "compromised himself"; 
Bellow wrote "in a style I find self-willed ... I cannot take him seriously"; 
Kerouac lacked "discipline, intelligence, honesty". There were no talented 
women writers at all, and as for Baldwin, he was "incapable of saying 'F___ 
you' to the reader".

By the late 1950s, Mailer was drinking from a wild cocktail of ideas involving 
violence, cancer, sex, birth control, and the use of drugs. Stories about his 
fighting filled the gossip columns: headbutting contests at parties; boxing 
round a startled John Updike met by accident in the street; punching Gore 
Vidal. He liked the company of boxers, trainers and fight journalists (the 
light-heavyweight champion, Jos√© Torres, was a particular friend), and wrote 
well on the subject.

His most famous boxing essay is the book-length account of the Ali-Foreman 
Rumble in the Jungle, The Fight (1975), but his best is the 30,000-word piece 
(originally published in Esquire) on the 1962 Liston-Paterson bout, which 
lasted one round, Ten Thousand Words a Minute. At a news conference, Mailer sat 
down in Liston's chair and refused to move when the boxer arrived.

The violent antics had had far more serious consequences two years earlier, 
when Mailer stabbed his second wife, Adele Morales, puncturing her cardiac sac 
and necessitating emergency surgery to save her life. At this stage, friends 
regarded him as being on the verge of dementia, and his explanation to a friend 
that he stabbed Adele "to relieve her of cancer" does little to contradict the 
view. Probably, though, he was suffering only from over-intoxication from his 
own ideas and the power to make people take them seriously. He was a tireless 
propagandist for his self-proclaimed aim, a revolution in the consciousness of 
his times.

In 1962, Mailer divorced Adele and married Lady Jeanne Campbell, daughter of a 
Scottish aristocrat. The marriage lasted only a year, and in 1963 he wedded 
Beverley Bentley, an actress. His egomania began to find a more conventional 
outlet, in politics, though he chose an unconventional and highly original form 
in which to express it. Advertisements for Myself had been, as the title 
suggests, a mainly self-reflective collection, comprising stories, play 
fragments, opinions and interviews. His next assemblage, The Presidential 
Papers (1963), was meant as a source of counsel for John F Kennedy, a man whom 
Mailer considered capable of uniting the entire American people in a revolution 
of consciousness, as Martin Luther King had united the black population. 
Kennedy might even be the first 'hipster' president.

Here again, the pen jabbed at the salient topics of the day - Cuba, juvenile 
delinquency, the Red menace - interspersing essays with letters to the 
president ("Wasn't there anyone around to give you the lecture on Cuba? Don't 
you understand the enormity of your mistake - you invade a country without 
understanding its music"). More collections of the same type followed: 
Cannibals and Christians (1966), Existential Errands (1972) and Pieces and 
Pontifications (1982). The last, as Mailer wrote in a preface, contained 
remarks on "marriage, sex, pornography, God, the Devil, rock, science, magic, 
violence, art, literary status, women's liberation, male identity, and even ... 
occasional comment on the craft of writing".

In his own writing, he had tried not to put fiction in second place behind 
journalism. But the solitude needed for reflection and attention to craft was 
the one thing the king of the literary jungle could not command.

Mailer's prose in his novels, on the whole, lacks suppleness and classical 
disinterest: he cannot help muscling in on his characters and forcing his own 
views on them. His fiction after the mid-1950s displays little interest in 
character for its own sake, which would entail modest attributes (such as 
modesty itself); Mailer's fictional creations are making as much noise as they 
can.

Between 1955 and 1979, he wrote only two novels, An American Dream (1965) and 
Why Are We in Vietnam? (1967). The latter is not a story of the actual war, but 
consists mainly of the recollections of DJ, Disc Jockey to the World, on a 
hunting trip to Alaska two years before. At this time, too, Mailer sank a lot 
of money into a film project, Maidstone (1970), in which the writer-director 
takes the part of "Norman Kingsley, movie director" and runs for president. It 
gave no financial, and little critical, return. In 1969, he was a real-life, if 
quixotic, candidate for mayor of New York, on a "left conservative" platform 
urging that the city become the 51st state, while its "black ghetto dwellers" 
should vote on getting their own government. Later, he directed a screen 
version of his own novel, Tough Guys Don't Dance (1984), and took the role of 
Stanford White in the film of EL Doctorow's Ragtime (1981).

Something Mailer did much better than writing novels was to apply the 
techniques of fiction to a non-fiction subject. The first book to use this 
strategy was Armies of the Night (subtitled History as a Novel/The Novel as 
History), which recorded, through the eyes of the narrator, "Mailer", the 1967 
march on the Pentagon to protest against the Vietnam War. He employed the same 
technique in other books (by now Mailer might publish two a year), including 
Miami and the Siege of Chicago (1968) and Of a Fire on the Moon (1970), an 
account of space travel in which he styled himself Aquarius.

The novel was still the contest for which the big awards were given, however - 
no one was likely to win the Nobel prize for writing journalism, though Mailer 
still had hopes - and to say that Mailer's talent was not suited to fiction was 
still the quickest way to hurt him. He managed to prove his critics both right 
and wrong at the same time, then, by producing, in 1979, his 1,000-page-long 
non-fiction novel, The Executioner's Song. It traces the story of Gilmore from 
his childhood, through a life of petty crime, to the cold-blooded murders of a 
petrol-station attendant and a motel manager, to his weird apotheosis when he 
pleaded for the appeals process to be halted so that he could die in the 
electric chair. It was a grisly drama of the modern Wild West that seemed to be 
waiting for Mailer's shaping skills, and he tackled it at the top of his form.

Even this feat, though, was hampered by grandiose ambition. The second half of 
the book is given over to the peddling of Gilmore's story as a news-media event 
(Mailer himself never met the criminal), which has the effect of leaving The 
Executioner's Song broken-backed. It was another instance of the 50% rule in 
Mailer's life, according to which everything could seem half-brilliant and 
half-dud; the genius was always matched by the clown.

Many potential readers must have been put off by the clowning and the 
belligerence. "When two men pass one another in the street and say 'Good 
morning'," he once said, "there's a winner and a loser." And it was a 
characteristic inseparable from his skill at playing the news-media game, which 
kept him to the fore of the cultural stage for more than half a century.

On at least one occasion after the stabbing of Adele, his twin fascination for 
violence and publicity led to something more serious than a tiff with Sonny 
Liston. In 1981, a prisoner serving life for murder, Jack Abbott, was released 
on parole following a correspondence with Mailer. Abbott represented the kind 
of Dostoyevskian conundrum Mailer dreamt of: a psychopath too "pure" to live in 
society, an outlaw capable of undermining our moral perceptions. With Mailer's 
help, Abbott published a collection of writings, entitled In the Belly of the 
Beast, which does indeed contain some startling prose, but within a few weeks 
he had stabbed to death a young waiter, after a trivial altercation in a 
Manhattan restaurant, and was soon back inside.

What could Mailer offer, by way of vindication? "Culture's worth a little 
risk," he told a press conference, at which point a reporter from the New York 
Post asked, "Specifically, what elements of society are you willing to risk? 
Waiters?" Later, Mailer admitted: "People who say that I have blood on my hands 
are right. I do."

The prodigious flow of words did not cease with the increase of age, but 
sometimes his choice of subject matter left old admirers scratching their 
heads. His huge novel of ancient Egypt, Ancient Evenings (1983), puzzled those 
that had seen him as above all a chronicler of the American present.

Two books of the following decade, Harlot's Ghost (1991), about the CIA, and 
Oswald's Tale (1995), a return to his earlier interest in Kennedy, were praised 
for many qualities, but fall foul of their own unwieldiness; one is seldom 
charmed by a book that is hard to lift. In 1997, he succeeded in causing 
another news-media storm by writing a novel about Christ, The Gospel According 
to the Son. Newspapers in Britain ran news stories to cover the brouhaha, in 
which Mailer denied that he identified with the Son of God.

Taken less seriously than ever by literary critics, he was increasingly a 
celebrity, which for him had always been half the point. In the middle of the 
fuss over The Gospel, he popped up as a commentator in a film documentary about 
the Rumble In the Jungle, When We Were Kings, a character as full of charm, 
intelligence and humour as one could wish to meet.

Which, indeed, was how he usually was in person, to the surprise of many. His 
aggrandising machismo was matched by a generosity of spirit, a willingness to 
share ideas and help younger writers.

His dedication to the discipline was borne out in The Spooky Art: Some 
Thoughts on Writing (2003), assembled when he was 80: "Over the years, I've 
found one rule ... If you tell yourself you are going to be at your desk 
tomorrow, you are by that declaration asking your unconscious to prepare the 
material. You are, in effect, contracting to pick up such valuables at a given 
time. Count on me, you are saying to a few forces below: I will be there to 
write. The point is that you have to maintain trustworthy relations."

Those relations served him well to the end: February of this year saw the 
publication of The Castle in the Forest - from Walderschloss, the name given to 
the Dachau concentration camp by its inmates - a novel of nearly 500 pages 
inquiring into the nature of evil. This account of how dark forces infected the 
family of an Austrian customs inspector, Alois Schicklgruber, later Hitler, and 
his son Adolf, points to the impossibility of attributing total blame for the 
most barbaric acts to any one individual.

In 1980, the lion had married yet again, Carol Stevens, and then again, Norris 
Church. This time it was pure Hollywood: Mailer married and divorced Carol on 
the same day, in order to legitimise their child, and then betrothed himself to 
Norris the next day. Altogether, he had eight children, and alimony obligations 
meant that he never lived in lavish style. "You never know a woman till you've 
had her in court," he quipped. His marriage to Norris was the enduring one, 
however; Mailer said that when he first set eyes on her, he was so struck with 
love that he had to leave the room. Their son, John Buffalo, was born in 1978, 
and both survive him, as do children Susan from his first marriage; Danielle 
and Elizabeth from his second; Kate from his third; Michael and Steven from his 
fourth; and Maggie from his fifth.

Back in the early 1960s, Mailer bought a flat in Brooklyn Heights, overlooking 
the Manhattan skyline, and stayed there for most of the rest of his life. The 
living room was done up in strange style, with a ship's rigging and nets. At 
one stage, the only access to his office was by rope (he explained this oddity 
by saying that he was terrified of heights). At parties, guests were urged to 
participate in contests, climbing up and down the ropes, descending, winners 
and losers alike, to some further sport dreamed up by the host. The little king 
enjoyed nothing so much as play, and the second half of the 20th century 
offered him plenty of scope.

Norman Kingsley Mailer, writer, born January 31 1923; died November 10 2007
 