
In the wake of overwhelming reaction to Stan Grant’s speech on racism and the 
Australian dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/24/stan-grants-speech-on-racism-and-the-australian-dream-goes-viral>
, we’ve pulled together a list of speeches you may want to read next, by some 
of the most powerful voices in the long campaign for Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander rights.

A number of earlier speeches were not included because they are no longer 
widely available.

Stan Grant's speech on racism and the Australian dream goes viral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/24/stan-grants-speech-on-racism-and-the-australian-dream-goes-viral>
Jack Patten’s opening address to the Day of Mourning protest on 26 January 1938

Jack Patten was born at Moama on the New South Wales side of the Murray River 
in 1905 and went to school at Cummeragunja reserve, later becoming the first 
president of the Aborigines Progressive Association (APA).

He delivered this speech at the Australian Hall on Elizabeth Street in Sydney 
at the first Day of Mourning protest:

On this day the white people are rejoicing, but we, as Aborigines, have no 
reason to rejoice on Australia’s 150th birthday. Our purpose in meeting today 
is to bring home to the white people of Australia the frightful conditions in 
which the native Aborigines of this continent live. This land belonged to our 
forefathers 150 years ago, but today we are pushed further and further into the 
background. The Aborigines Progressive Association has been formed to put 
before the white people the fact that Aborigines throughout Australia are 
literally being starved to death.

We refuse to be pushed into the background. We have decided to make ourselves 
heard. White men pretend that the Australian Aboriginal is a low type, who 
cannot be bettered. Our reply to that is, ‘Give us the chance!’ We do not wish 
to be left behind in Australia’s march to progress. We ask for full citizen 
rights including old-age pensions, maternity bonus, relief work when 
unemployed, and the right to a full Australian education for our children. We 
do not wish to be herded like cattle and treated as a special class.

Engineered by Bill Ferguson, William Cooper and Margaret Tucker, the event was 
thefirst formal Aboriginal civil rights gathering in Australian history 
<http://www.sydneybarani.com.au/sites/significant-aboriginal-events-in-sydney/>
. Doug Nicholls, Jack Kinchela, Selina Patten, Pearl Gibbs, Jack Johnson, Mrs F 
Ardler, Bert Marr, Frank Roberts, Tom Peckham, Henry Noble, Jack Kinchella, 
Bert Groves, Bert Marr, Ted Duncan, Robert McKenzie and Tom Foster also 
attended.

All speeches were transcribed by Aboriginal media and can be read in full here 
<http://www.acmssearch.sl.nsw.gov.au/search/itemLargeCopyright.cgi?itemID=863758&size=full&album=1&collection=865458&parent=954390>
.

Faith Bandler at the Talkin’ up Reconciliation Convention in Wollongong in 
August 1999
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc695f553998d81cf7facf6ca1cc303f38a428f2f%2F0_187_1181_998%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notable%20speeches%20by%20Indigenous%20Australians%3A%20'We%20refuse%20to%20be%20pushed%20into%20the%20background'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notable%20speeches%20by%20Indigenous%20Australians%3A%20%27We%20refuse%20to%20be%20pushed%20into%20the%20background%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc695f553998d81cf7facf6ca1cc303f38a428f2f%2F0_187_1181_998%2F1181.jpg>
 Faith Bandler, who died in 2015, was a central campaigner for the 1967 
referendum. Photograph: Jane Dempster/AAP 
Faith Bandler, of South Sea Islander descent, was a leading activist in the 
Aboriginal rights movement from the 1950s and a central campaigner for the 1967 
referendum. She died in 2015.

In 1999 she gave this speech about where the fight for Aboriginal equality had 
come since the referendum:

My learning was rather hard and slow. It took some time for me to understand, 
when there are millions in the world today who are hungry, millions who are 
homeless, millions who are without work, the wrongfully imprisoned, the deaths 
in custody, the tortured, the mass murder of women and children, why in the 
name of creation our differences should matter. Why is it so hard to find our 
commonalities?

The most commonly voiced opinions of some who are willingly blind is that we 
focus on the failures and faults and too little praise is given. But if praise 
must be given it ought not to be given to the powerful but rather to the 
powerless, who patiently bear the brunt of many misdeeds and indecencies.

You can read the full speech here 
<http://files.campus.edublogs.org/lisarowhigh.org/dist/c/2/files/2010/09/Faith_Bandler.pdf>
.

Denis Walker at an Invasion Day rally in Brisbane on 26 January 2008
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0d60e3c13de9182bd9624186b5d6fd8cf172c82%2F227_139_1498_898%2F1498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notable%20speeches%20by%20Indigenous%20Australians%3A%20'We%20refuse%20to%20be%20pushed%20into%20the%20background'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notable%20speeches%20by%20Indigenous%20Australians%3A%20%27We%20refuse%20to%20be%20pushed%20into%20the%20background%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0d60e3c13de9182bd9624186b5d6fd8cf172c82%2F227_139_1498_898%2F1498.jpg>
 Denis Walker: ‘I could never be as arrogant as a white man in this country.’ 
Photograph: AAP 
Denis Walker, also known as Bejam Kunmunara Jarlow Nunukel Kabool, is the son 
of poet and activist Oodgeroo Noonuccal and co-founded the Brisbane branch of 
the Australian Black Panther party in 1972. He began his speech to the Invasion 
Day rally outside Queensland parliament with “Thank you, I won’t bore you with 
the statistics of the devastation being wrecked upon us”, then continued:

Just in case you think I’m arrogant – I know I’m arrogant, but as arrogant as 
I am, I could never be as arrogant as a white man in this country. And don’t 
say you as individuals aren’t responsible for it; you pay taxes so your police 
forces, your legislators and your courts do the dirty work for you.

So don’t say you haven’t got a hand in this, you helped pay for this coming 
down on us. Don’t forget that it’s not just us they’re coming after, we are 
just the convenient scapegoats to get the uranium out so the state can keep the 
power. Your youth death rates are up too, they come for us today they’ll be 
coming for you tonight.

His speech is transcribed here 
<http://www.treatyrepublic.net/content/dennis-walker-speaks-about-treaty-sovereignty-and-more>
.

Tom Calma giving the Charles Perkins AO Memorial Oration at the University of 
Sydney on 23 October 2008
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ddd1c8d2296bf53c8363253100b12d4250b028d%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notable%20speeches%20by%20Indigenous%20Australians%3A%20'We%20refuse%20to%20be%20pushed%20into%20the%20background'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notable%20speeches%20by%20Indigenous%20Australians%3A%20%27We%20refuse%20to%20be%20pushed%20into%20the%20background%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fnotable-speeches-by-indigenous-australians-we-refuse-to-be-pushed-into-the-background%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ddd1c8d2296bf53c8363253100b12d4250b028d%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Tom Calma is co-chair of Reconciliation Australia and and chancellor of the 
University of Canberra. Photograph: Alan Porritt/AAP 
Tom Calma is a Kungarakan elder and Iwaidja man from the Northern Territory, 
co-chair of Reconciliation Australia and chancellor of the University of 
Canberra. He delivered this speech during his tenure as social justice 
commissioner and race discrimination commissioner and argued that the 
suggestion that focusing on the rights of Indigenous people would take away 
from addressing disadvantage was “a false dichotomy”.

Bland commitments to practical reconciliation have hidden the human tragedy of 
families divided by unacceptably high rates of imprisonment, and of too many 
children dying in circumstances that don’t exist for the rest of the Australian 
community.

And the fact is that there has been no simple way of being able to decide 
whether the progress made through ‘record expenditure’ has been ‘good enough’. 
So the ‘practical’ approach to these issues has lacked any accountability 
whatsoever.

It has also dampened any expectation that things should improve from among the 
broader community. And so we have accepted as inevitable horror statistics of 
premature death, underachievement and destroyed lives.

I am sure history will show that this past decade was one of significant 
underachievement in addressing Indigenous disadvantage – and quite 
inexplicably, underachievement at a time of unrivalled prosperity for our 
nation.

Calma’s full speech, is available here 
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/news/speeches/still-riding-freedom-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-human-rights-agenda-twenty>
.

Lowitja O’Donoghue at the opening of the National Congress of Australia’s 
First People on 8 June 2011

Lowitja O’Donoghue, a Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara woman, is one of the most 
revered public figures in Australia. She is a former chair of the now disbanded 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission and in 1992 was the first 
Aboriginal Australian (she objects to the term “Indigenous” 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/dont-call-me-indigenous-lowitja/2008/05/01/1209235051400.html>
) to address the UN general assembly.

Since the 1967 referendum, Australia has been living a lie. It has patted 
itself on the back as a fair country, one that treats its citizens equally and, 
especially, protects the vulnerable.

 Don’t get me wrong. I am proud to have helped to secure the ‘Yes’ vote that 
recognised us as citizens and more than mere flora and fauna. It was important. 
But it also pains me to know that the constitution still contains a potentially 
discriminatory power, which can be used by the commonwealth against our people 
or, indeed, any other race. And that it still lacks any explicit recognition of 
us or our place as the First Australians.

Of course, our founding document was framed in a different era. Many say we 
cannot judge it by today’s standards. Perhaps not but we can bring it into line 
with those standards. This would be good not only for our own heads and our 
hearts, as per advice from the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of 
Psychiatrists, but also for the nation’s soul.

The full text of the speech is available here 
<http://nationalcongress.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/Lowitja-ODonoghue-Nat-Congress-080611.pdf>
.
 