
Amsterdam is classically romantic but is also funky, forward-thinking and 
citizen-friendly. In the old centre, around the southern canal belt, there are 
these beautiful 17th-century merchants’ houses that 21st-century Amsterdammers 
still live in. I’ve always thought it wears its historical cloak quite casually 
and doesn’t just dwell in the past.

The Rijksmuseum <https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/> is stunning and I love it as a 
fascinating, cool, accessible museum, as well as for the part it played in 
inspiringThe Miniaturist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/04/the-miniaturist-review-jessie-burton>
. I came across Petronella Oortman’s doll’s house there by chance. It’s an 
exact scale replica of her real home, and Oortman spent a fortune having it 
created. I thought at the time it was an interesting story, but I didn’t think 
I was going to write a novel about it. I’m in its debt, really.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fjessie-burton-the-miniaturist-amsterdam-the-way-i-see-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424972948150%2Fc957fdeb-f516-49b1-a84e-bdddb8b3b71d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Novelist%20Jessie%20Burton%20on%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fjessie-burton-the-miniaturist-amsterdam-the-way-i-see-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Novelist%20Jessie%20Burton%20on%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fjessie-burton-the-miniaturist-amsterdam-the-way-i-see-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424972948150%2Fc957fdeb-f516-49b1-a84e-bdddb8b3b71d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jessie Burton. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose/Observer 
The city battles the image created by stag and hen party trips. I didn’t visit 
until 2009 and so I had the idea of it just being the place where people went 
to smoke weed without being arrested. You know, the preconception: “It’s going 
to be full of stoned tourists with their faces in the gutter.” But it’s not 
been like that at all.

Stroll through the Nine Streets of the Jordaan <http://www.theninestreets.com/>
 area and it’s like walking on to a film set. It’s one of the nicest, most 
peaceful walks in the city. The area is full of old shops – ice-cream parlours, 
trinket shops, bookstores – and it has a fantastic atmosphere.

I explored the suburbs when visiting Amsterdam’s Tram Museum 
<http://www.museumtramlijn.org/> and ended up seeing the 1928 Olympic Stadium 
and the hugeAmsterdamse Bos <http://www.amsterdamsebos.nl/> forest park. My 
boyfriend and I jumped on an old tram (€5 return) at Haarlemmermeerstation and 
took it to the suburb of Amstelveen. You can hire bicycles there and cycle into 
the forest.

Renting helped me feel more like a local, that’s for sure. The owner of an 
apartment I rented on the Herengracht throughCityMundo 
<http://amsterdam.citymundo.com/> was a traveller and an adventurer. She had 
left her place furnished and it was filled with seashells she’d collected and 
had shelves brimming with 17th-century books. It was amazing. CityMundo rents 
houseboats, houses and apartments. If you’re after a nice, but not too 
expensive, hotel, I’d recommendHotel Vondel <http://www.hotelvondel.com/en> 
(doubles from £50) on Vondelstraat; it’s not far from Leidseplein and the city 
centre.
 The doll’s house of Petronella Oortman at the Rijksmuseum provided part of 
the inspiration for The Miniaturist. Photograph: Alamy 
Top 10 pop-up restaurants and food experiences in Amsterdam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/08/top-10-pop-up-restaurants-food-hotspots-amsterdam>
Forget bowls of crisps and nuts for nibbles, at De Kas 
<http://www.restaurantdekas.nl/> they serve tiny yellow and red tomatoes from 
their garden covered in an amazing garnish. I had my 30th birthday at this 
wonderful restaurant in a massive greenhouse nearFrankendael Park 
<http://ktl.nl/park-frankendael>. It’s beautifully laid out, with fruit and 
vegetable gardens and you sit and eat overlooking them.

The sunset when you’re at the top of the REM Eiland <http://www.remeiland.com/>
 island restaurant is dramatic, just like the food. My publisher took me for 
dinner here when The Miniaturist came out in the Netherlands. It’s actually a 
former helicopter deck and you climb up and up and up, and are then rewarded 
with extraordinary views of the waterfront and port areas.

For an immediate food fix, I love the poffertjes (tiny pancakes) that they 
griddle in sets of 10 atAlbert Cuyp market 
<http://www.albertcuypmarkt.nl/ac_english.html>. They just chuck butter and 
icing sugar all over them and they are the most unbelievable thing. Mind you, 
throwing sugar and butter at most treats usually does the trick!

During the winter the bar T’smalle <http://www.t-smalle.nl/> is a peaceful 
place to be. It’s in an old house which is right on the Egelantiersgracht canal 
and is just so cosy and beautiful, with all its lights twinkling. In summer, 
everyone sits outside on the canalside terrace. It’s a cool place to have a 
beer or a glass of wine in the evening.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fjessie-burton-the-miniaturist-amsterdam-the-way-i-see-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424957088208%2F04052a44-6585-41db-84e6-bdca1bcdcb40-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Novelist%20Jessie%20Burton%20on%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fjessie-burton-the-miniaturist-amsterdam-the-way-i-see-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Novelist%20Jessie%20Burton%20on%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fjessie-burton-the-miniaturist-amsterdam-the-way-i-see-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424957088208%2F04052a44-6585-41db-84e6-bdca1bcdcb40-2060x1236.jpeg>
 17th-century merchants’ buildings in Amsterdam. Photograph: Ruy Barbosa 
Pinto/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
The waterfront of the Eastern Islands area is beautiful and offers a much 
quieter experience than all the hustle and bustle of the city centre. 
Historically, the harbour had been used by the Dutch East India Company but the 
area had fallen into disrepair until it was redeveloped in the early 2000s; it 
now has theNemo science centre <https://www.e-nemo.nl/en/>, nice new apartments 
and cafe-bars.

The Vondelpark <http://www.hetvondelpark.net/>, in the south of the city, is 
perfect if you’re after a chilled and sedate place to hang out. It’s worth 
exploring for the architecture – it was created in 1865, so happy 150th 
birthday. It’s a relaxing place with a lake, a performance space and cafes.
 A relaxed vibe at the Vondelpark. Photograph: Alamy 
The light plays beautifully on the canals when the sun hits the water. Even on 
wintry days it’s still atmospheric. I enjoy seeing the city from a canal boat, 
especially theGouden Bocht (Golden Bend) between Leidsestraat and Vijzelstraat. 
It’s lovely to see the houseboats bobbing and people going past on their 
bicycles, as well as all the extraordinary houses.

I’ve got this little house on my mantelpiece: it’s a nightlight in the shape 
of an Amsterdam townhouse. I love it because it’s a visual reminder of my trips 
there and the house in my book in a way … and because it gives off a very nice 
glow.

• Jessie Burton’s image research for the book is on Pinterest 
<https://uk.pinterest.com/jesskatbee/the-miniaturist/>, containing source 
material and photos taken in Amsterdam.The Miniaturist is published by Picador, 
price £7.99. To buy a copy for £5.99 including UK p&p visitguardian bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/miniaturist-2.html> or call 0330 333 6846
 