
The two most memorable shows of London fashion week had a common theme: 
memories. Ryan Lo’s fantasia collection of clothes (ruffles and balloon 
trousers in sweet-shop colours) recalled Pierrot. The rainbow wave was helped 
along by a triple whammy of music: A Whole New World from Aladdin, Immortality 
by Céline Dion and Walk Like an Egyptian by the Bangles.

While in a mise-en-scène that included an unmade bed and a girl cutting her 
own hair in a mirror, Ashley Williams’s collection was a what’s what of a 
teenager’s wardrobe: a baseball jacket, hoodies, dungarees and Star Trek-ish 
sunglasses. As with Lo’s show, the music – Kate Bush’s Under the Ivy, Kirsty 
MacColl’s A New England – suggested the emotional terrain and introspection of 
the adolescent years. Both collections followed the trend for “now-stalgia”, 
the idea of using a patchwork quilt of memories to make something current. It’s 
big in 2016, from Stranger Things to Drake’s love of the Cheesecake Factory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fnow-stalgia-why-fashion-is-obsessed-with-looking-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48788245000cb6641c17ec54cb174e1841dd6ec8%2F0_0_756_1184%2F756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Now-stalgia%3A%20why%20fashion%20is%20obsessed%20with%20looking%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fnow-stalgia-why-fashion-is-obsessed-with-looking-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Now-stalgia%3A%20why%20fashion%20is%20obsessed%20with%20looking%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fnow-stalgia-why-fashion-is-obsessed-with-looking-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48788245000cb6641c17ec54cb174e1841dd6ec8%2F0_0_756_1184%2F756.jpg>
 Christopher Kane’s crocs at his spring/summer show. Photograph: 
WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
In fashion terms, it is a very now phenomenon, from the mood-board to the 
catwalk. There is Gigi Hadid’s collaboration with Tommy Hilfiger that drew on 
90s sportswear trends and the silhouette ofAaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/26/aaliyah-fashion-originator-athleisure-health-goth>
,Vetements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/03/paris-haute-couture-leaps-into-the-21st-century>
 and Kim Kardashian’s re-configuring of the Juicy Couturetracksuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jun/20/juicy-couture-store-closures-tracksuit-celebrity>
, and Christopher Kane’s inclusion of Crocs on the catwalk at London fashion 
week.

Nostalgia not only provides us with a safety net at a time of political or 
economic instability, it allows us to engage with the stylistic elements at a 
distance. On the internet, the past is presented as a smörgåsbord of 
interconnected trends and pop culture moments, spliced with a new twist. 
Instead of a wide range of sub-cultures roaming around organically, styles and 
tastes are dictated by Tumblrs and Instagram accounts. The pre-internet age has 
been fetishised. Buzzfeed (45 things from your 90s childhood you probably 
forgot about 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/jessicamisener/those-garfield-cups-though?utm_term=.gb9qRyX2O#.mm5akgx2Z>
) andInstagrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/16/beyond-retro-instagrams-archive-images-are-the-height-of-fashion>
 (such asEvery outfit on Sex & the City 
<https://www.instagram.com/everyoutfitonsatc/>) illustrate our bottomless need 
to revisit and re-evaluate visual signifiers from our childhoods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fnow-stalgia-why-fashion-is-obsessed-with-looking-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7edde1d086d1ddb967d1c275b61568c6f98e6b0%2F131_116_2561_1536%2F2561.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Now-stalgia%3A%20why%20fashion%20is%20obsessed%20with%20looking%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fnow-stalgia-why-fashion-is-obsessed-with-looking-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Now-stalgia%3A%20why%20fashion%20is%20obsessed%20with%20looking%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fnow-stalgia-why-fashion-is-obsessed-with-looking-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7edde1d086d1ddb967d1c275b61568c6f98e6b0%2F131_116_2561_1536%2F2561.jpg>
 Gosha Rubchinskiy’s spring/summer 2016 show. Photograph: SIPA/Rex/Shutterstock 
This interconnectivity, where nostalgia meets current fashion trends, can be 
seen whenever an Instagirl celebrity, such as Hadid or Kylie or Kendall Jenner, 
wears items rooted in the not-so-distant past:round sunglasses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/may/20/round-sunglasses-the-humblebrag-shades>
,chokers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/17/neck-and-neck-new-ways-to-wear-a-choker>
 or distressed denim. Or when labels such as Hood By Air and Gosha Rubchinskiy 
pay tribute to retro sportswear, and new iterations of jean shapeand colour  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/25/goodbye-skinny-indigos-hello-midblue-jeans>
reference the past. As our reference points bounce from the fashions in 
Clueless to My So-Called Life, now-stalgia exists with less ironic distance and 
more joy as the architecture for fashion now.
 