
There is sunshine still (at least there is at the time of writing). We can go 
for long walks and drink out of doors, and possibly have a fairly good time, a 
summer time, even if it is September. But obviously stacks of us are not on 
holiday, not spending days taking long walks or picnics. We probably have 
little choice but to welcome in the autumn while sitting at home, working, or 
when grinding to the office. We’re left wondering how to make our lives still 
feel a bit more summery.

We think of the lucky people who are still having a holiday in the more 
sun-assured south… while there’s nothing much that’s exciting going on here. Oh 
yes, they’ll be back soon I suppose, we can think, to cheer ourselves up. But, 
as a matter of fact, what really stops us feeling lucky is that, whereas we all 
accept that we have to work when we do – and it may have its boring bits with 
only the odd festive meal here and party there – that’s fine because that’s 
what we expect in normal times. The trouble with all this Indian summer stuff 
is that we feel cheated if we’re not having a good holiday time, if we’re just 
going along as usual. The sun may tempt us out to the park – but only briefly, 
because then it’s back to the office.

Most of us would do better to enjoy the autumn, the signs of winter, the plans 
for going to the flicks rather than the pool – instead of feeling cheated. In 
this small way, we who put summer behind us, score. We don’t have to feel 
miserable if it rains. We can start doing indoor things and working out how 
we’re going to enjoy the winter – and stop feeling angry about not being out 
enjoying the last of the sunshine.

What do you think? Have your say below
 