
A mother and daughter have been rescued from a burning property by helicopter 
and homes have reportedly been destroyed as a bushfire burnt out of control in 
theNew South Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> 
Hunter region.

The woman and young girl were spotted by a Rural Fire Service rapid response 
crew in Kurri Kurri on Wednesday afternoon before being taken to Cessnock 
airport in distress.

“The fire was impacting upon the property and when the helicopter flew over 
they were waved down by a number of people,” RFS assistant commissioner Rebel 
Talbert said after the fire was downgraded to watch and act late on Wednesday 
afternoon.

“There were two other people who remained on the property to try and defend 
the house and shed from the fire.”

The RFS has received unconfirmed reports from the public and firefighters of 
properties being destroyed by the 650 hectare fire, which was formed when two 
serious blazes merged on Wednesday.

More than 250 firefighters continue to battle the northwest-moving fire, which 
is burning near Hart Road, McLeod Road, and the Hunter Expressway.


The crews, including extra hands from Sydney and the Central Coast, have been 
assisted by waterbombing aircraft.

The Hunter Expressway remained closed between Buchanan and Branxton on 
Wednesday afternoon.

The ABC was reporting 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-18/properties-lost-as-nsw-firefighters-tackle-kurri-kurri-blazes/8191438>
 the nearby Weston Aluminium recycling plant had been shut down to limit the 
threat of an explosion.

Residents were evacuating and moving stock on Wednesday as firefighters 
battled worsening conditions and an out-of-control blaze nearCanberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/canberra>.

The New South Wales Rural Fire Service had earlier said those in the Mount 
Fairy and Boro areas, near Tarago north-west ofCanberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra>, should implement their 
bushfire survival plan.


“Your safest option is to leave early,” it said on Wednesday morning. 
“Well-prepared and actively defended homes can offer safety during the fire.”

Related: Australia's east-coast heatwave persists with steamy night above 30C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2017/jan/18/australias-east-coast-heatwave-persists-with-steamy-night-above-30c>

The grass and bushfire near Tarago, which broke out on Tuesday, is now 3,290 
hectares in size and has burnt through Taylors Creek Road, Bungendore Road and 
Mount Fairy Road. There are reports that some property has already been lost.


The Tarago crews took advantage of more favourable conditions – including some 
rain – overnight to strengthen containment lines and hold the fire to the 
western side of Goulburn Road between Boro Road and Barnet Drive.

Anyone who has relocated owing to the fire should register with Queanbeyan 
police station on (02) 6298 0558. Residents who need to move horses from the 
area can take them to Goulburn showground.
 