
1 The nude selfie


The most influential outfit of the year featured no clothes at all. When Kim 
Kardashian <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> posted a 
hotel-bathroom nude selfie <https://www.instagram.com/p/BCpQBQROS5l/> on 
Instagram back in March, shekickstarted a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/from-shopping-to-naked-selfies-how-empowerment-lost-its-meaning-feminism>
 over how this peculiarly narcissistic form of self-expression squares with its 
advocate’s self-proclaimed feminism. Should you doubt the impact this image had 
on our fashion psyche, consider this: shopping siteLyst 
<https://www.lyst.co.uk/shop/womens/> reported a 400% rise in searches for 
black bandeau bikinis that would recreate the effect of the black censorship 
bars. Yes, censor-bar chic is a thing. At Paris fashion week, a few weeks 
later, Kim’s sisterKendall <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kendall-jenner> 
wore a minimalist black bandeau top that echoed Kim’s look. With it, she wore a 
black ribbon choker, a trend that has been worn by every female celebrity under 
25 this year, and is now all over the high street. If you are a teen girl, you 
are so getting a Claire’s choker in your stocking. Which is odd, because a 
choker is as rude as jewellery gets. The meaning of the choker is, basically, 
nudity: seeManet’s Olympia <http://www.manet.org/olympia.jsp>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe563a047d48a9d3c1397f84c827aff788a485633%2F0_0_1028_1030%2F1028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe563a047d48a9d3c1397f84c827aff788a485633%2F0_0_1028_1030%2F1028.jpg>
 Kim Kardashian’s naked selfie. Photograph: @kimkardashian/instagram 
2 The most liked (better than the most beautiful)


A year is a long time in social media. I mean, an hour is a long time in 
social media, so where to start? But, the topline is: 2016 was the yearInstagram
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> became a competitive sport. 
In fashion, “winning” at Instagram is now a thing. It turns out that the whole 
of 2015 was the equivalent of that bit before the Wimbledon final whenAndy 
Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> and whoever that other 
man was knocked balls back and forth across the net, before the umpire called 
time and the match actually started. If you still think Instagram is for, I 
dunno, drunken taxi selfies, then you need to up your game. Instagram is now 
LinkedIn for the beautiful people. If you don’t believe me, take a look at
Selena Gomez <https://www.instagram.com/selenagomez/>, who has 104 million 
followers on Instagram and is cleaning up on the fashion pay cheque front – 
with a Louis Vuitton campaign under her belt, Gomez just signed a $13m (£10.2m) 
deal to be the face of Coach. That may not be an attainable goal for everyone. 
But next time you take a back-of-the-cab selfie, maybeFaceTune 
<http://www.facetuneapp.com/> it at least, OK?

Retail to runway: what happens when clothes are sold direct from the catwalk?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/14/time-lag-catwalk-highstreet> 
3 The cold shoulder


From Bardot tops on summer holidays to cut-out knitwear for autumn, with 
off-the-shoulder wedding dresses and cold-shoulder blouses in between, 
shoulder-exposure has been this year’s standout detail. If you ever find 
yourself adrift in the aforementioned space time continuum and needing to find 
your way back to 2016, you can reorientate yourself by following the clavicles. 
The cold shoulder hit the spot this year because it encapsulates our love-hate 
relationship with nudity: the spotlight is on skin, but the whole point of the 
look is that the rest of you is covered up. The perfect look for a messed-up 
year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F293475260566360383fe26af9b4feaae67b2ab03%2F93_0_1907_3000%2F1907.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F293475260566360383fe26af9b4feaae67b2ab03%2F93_0_1907_3000%2F1907.jpg>
 2016 loved clavicles ... Proenza Schouler at New York fashion week. 
Photograph: Edward James/WireImage 
4 Timelapse trends


You will recall that in Back to the Future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/back-to-the-future> (1985), Doc explains that 
if Jennifer comes face to face with her older self, “the encounter could create 
a time paradox, the results of which could cause a chain reaction which would 
unravel the very fabric of the space-time continuum”. This is exactly where we 
are now, in fashion. In the year of the Timelapse and Boomerang video trends 
and of Stranger Things’ Upside Down, fashion has disrupted its own timeline 
with the arrival of see now buy now. See now buy now means that the status quo, 
whereby clothes arrived on the catwalk six months before they arrived in shops, 
has been hijacked. Some catwalk collections, such as Burberry’s, are available 
in stores hours after the show; others get looped back to a season later. (To 
add a layer of complexity,Christopher Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/burberrys-christopher-bailey-new-ceo-celine-marco-gobbetti>
 themed the Burberry collection around Virginia Woolf’s time-travel classic, 
Orlando.) For people in fashion, this is all very discombobulating, similar to 
when the post stopped coming at breakfast time like clockwork, and started 
randomly arriving mid afternoon. The upside is: you can start wearing a trend 
during fashion week or wait six months, and either counts as being on trend.

5 The state room photo-op


Fashion’s big moments are no longer the domain of fashion week and the Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>, and as many of the key style moments 
of 2016 have happened in state rooms as they have on catwalks. Case in point:
Tina Fey <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tina-fey> rocked Versace on the 
Oscars red carpet andZayn <https://www.theguardian.com/music/zayn-malik> wore 
bespoke Versace armoured sleeves at theMet Ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/met-ball-2016>, but no one rocked Versace 
in 2016 likeMichelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> 
did ingoddess sequins at her last state dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/oct/19/barack-michelle-obama-host-final-state-dinner-white-house-pictures>
. Likewise, the streets of Paris and Milan were literally swarming with wannabe 
street-style stars doing a dressed-up pyjama look during the last fashion 
month, but none of them came close, for cuteness, toPrince George meeting the 
president in his fluffy dressing gown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/apr/23/barack-obamas-visit-to-the-uk-day-two-in-pictures>
. FromMelania Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump>’s 
pussy-bow blouse toTheresa May’s leather trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/dec/07/theresa-mays-leather-trousers-you-need-a-tough-hide-to-wear-them>
, this was a year when the biggest fashion news happened on the actual news.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5ff47bb18c5bc150fb2a24e05e19dcc33c06d63%2F0_0_3000_2107%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5ff47bb18c5bc150fb2a24e05e19dcc33c06d63%2F0_0_3000_2107%2F3000.jpg>
 Michelle Obama stunned in Versace. Photograph: Leigh Vogel/WireImage 
6 Post-truth chic


If you had to put one piece of 2016 in a time capsule to represent this year 
in style, it would beVetements sock-boots with the unicorn heel 
<http://www.fwrd.com/product-vetements-sock-ankle-boots-in-green/VETF-WZ10/?d=Womens&source=google&currency=GBP&mkwid={ifsearch:s}{ifcontent:c}_dc|pcrid|138625681913|pkw||pmt|&pdv=c&matchtype=&gclid=CNGdqauY8dACFUuT7QodKyUEWw>
. Except it would be impossible, because those boots sold out months ago and 
are only available online for double their original retail price, and if you 
find a pair in my size I will wrestle you to the ground for them.Vetements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vetements>, the cult Paris brand that 
turned the DHL intoa style icon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/19/dhl-t-shirt-vetements-fashion-paris-catwalk>
, has turned fashion upside down by subverting every rule of what’s haute and 
what’s not. AfterVetements put a Justin4Ever 
<http://www.thenewguard.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/VETEMENTS-JUSTIN-4EVER-OVERSIZED-TSHIRT-DRESS.jpg>
 T-shirt on their catwalk, Bieber brought out Vetements-inspired tour 
merchandise that became this summer’s hottest look whichever after-party you 
were at. What does it mean? Who can we believe, in a world whereTom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston> responds to accusations that 
loved-up photos with Taylor Swift are staged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/19/tom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt>
 bywearing an I ♥ TS vest 
<http://www.elle.com/culture/celebrities/news/a37559/best-reactions-to-tom-hiddlestons-i-heart-ts-top/>
 in what look even more like staged loved-up photos with Taylor Swift? Reality 
is so last year. Snuggle up in yourmermaid blanket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2016/dec/11/mermaid-blankets-this-years-answer-to-the-onesie>
 and dream of Santa coming down the chimney with size six unicorn boots.

7 The Hadiography


Do I need to spell it out? In 2016, we worshipped the Hadids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2016/may/16/gigi-and-bella-hadid-the-sisters-taking-over-the-world>
. The new holy family of fashion are modelsGigi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gigi-hadid> (21), Bella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/bella-hadid> (20) and their mother 
Yolanda. For the benefit of those who – bafflingly – perhaps don’t follow such 
things in granular details, the narrative arc of 2016 developed when Gigi, 
having established a power base via a strategic alliance with Kendall Jenner 
(scion of the Kardashian sex-tape and lip-gloss fortune) repositioned herself 
in the celebrity firmament alongside her sister. To consolidate the in-house 
brand, if you like. The scope of ambition of the Hadids can be seen in the 
increased visibility ofYolanda, who accompanied Gigi to the Fashion awards 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-4004520/Gigi-Hadid-stuns-silver-mother-Yolanda-Fashion-Awards-2016.html>
, because you are no one without a momager.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10531750ef4cafe70c7cee8f2170fd2475ee7285%2F0_0_2000_2787%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10531750ef4cafe70c7cee8f2170fd2475ee7285%2F0_0_2000_2787%2F2000.jpg>
 The Hadids and their momager, Yolanda. Photograph: Michael Stewart/FilmMagic  
<> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7580c21284d356753500eb96c25d7b7f26fd265%2F497_1896_883_1104%2F883.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7580c21284d356753500eb96c25d7b7f26fd265%2F497_1896_883_1104%2F883.jpg>
 The Frankenstein jean. Photograph: Vanni Bassetti/Getty Images 
8 The Frankenstein jean


The skinny jean entrenched itself in power a decade ago and hung on doggedly 
longer than anyone would have predicted. But now a crazy new generation of 
denim has succeeded where more low-key new looks have failed. We had the 
boyfriend jean, the girlfriend jean, the skinny boyfriend jean, the Mom jean – 
a whole extended family of jean shapes attempted to oust the skinny, without 
real success. But this year, along came a whole new beast in the Frankenstein 
jean, as invented by Vetements, which remade jeans by chopping and patching. 
(Look for the distinctivemullet-stepped hem 
<http://www.glamour.com/gallery/two-tone-denim#4>.) If you are not wearing them 
yet, you will be.

9 Meaningful Beyoncé


If Barbie is in the market for a seasonal spinoff that would sell like hot 
cakes at the close of 2016, it should go for MeaningfulBeyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce>. Meaningful Beyoncé slayed all 
comers this year. At the Superbowl,she reinvented the leotard as Black Panther 
homage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/beyonce-black-panthers-homage-black-lives-matter-super-bowl-50>
. WithLemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/01/beyonce-lemonade-visual-album-review-woman-scorned>
, she rocked the world with a visual essay on the inner lives of black women. 
As living proof of the fact that a female celebrity can use her image and her 
beauty to say something more interesting and more genuinely empowering than 
“women are beautiful – like, just look at my breasts!”* Beyoncé is, to use the 
most overused word of 2016, an inspiration.
*paging Emily Ratajkowski 
<http://www.harpersbazaar.com/celebrity/latest/news/a15997/emily-ratajkowski-body-positivity/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb5671a1401dae19de95c1111c096301e2e90ec0%2F0_0_1265_2344%2F1265.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb5671a1401dae19de95c1111c096301e2e90ec0%2F0_0_1265_2344%2F1265.jpg>
 A Black-Panthered Beyoncé at the Superbowl. Photograph: Timothy A 
Clary/AFP/Getty Images 
10 The Kardashians: Act three


Such is the primacy of the Kardashian clan in popular culture that no recap of 
the year would be complete without them. But this year was different. It was 
season 12 in Keeping Up With the Kardashians, but it is best viewed as Act 
three of The Kardashians. The connection (via Kim’s father, Rob Kardashian) to 
the awful deeds behind spring’s TV hitThe People v OJ Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/19/the-people-v-oj-simpson-finale-review-racism-sexism-and-celebrity-dazzle>
 felt prescient at Paris fashion week, whenKim Kardashian was held hostage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/03/kim-kardashian-west-held-at-gunpoint-fake-policemen-paris-hotel-kanye-concert>
 in her apartment. The story that had been a diverting soap opera became 
genuinely horrifying. Weirdly, the most high-profile outing for any of the 
Kardashians in the period since was Kendall Jenner at theVictoria’s Secret show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/04/victorias-secret-miss-world-pageant-lingerie-retailer-fashion-show>
, where she won the hard-fought prize of Most Tasteless outfit on the catwalk 
by wearing lingerie with what appeared to be a neck-brace.

11 Peter Lindberg meets I Woke Up Like Dis


The latest Pirelli calendar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/29/fully-clothed-the-2017-pirelli-calendar>
, shot by Peter Lindberg, is a landmark moment. It represents fashion coming to 
terms with the fact that the world has moved on from an aesthetic landscape 
peopled only by young, slim, heavily made-up and then even more heavily 
Photoshopped women. The calendar features older women – Uma Thurman, Helen 
Mirren, Julianne Moore – and there is more knitwear than swimwear. Lindberg’s 
comment that the photos were “a cry for beauty today against the terror of 
perfection and youth” echoed the launch a week later ofReebok’s #PerfectNever 
<http://www.reebok.com/us/gigi_hadid> campaign, which purports to question 
images of body perfection (while, confusingly, putting Gigi Hadid onstage in a 
crop top, but there you go.) This year, the No Make Up selfie was more 
aspirational than any amount of contouring.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fc7e29ab0385e631076a22ae25d38f4658d77e1%2F0_168_2944_1767%2F2944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fc7e29ab0385e631076a22ae25d38f4658d77e1%2F0_168_2944_1767%2F2944.jpg>
 Julianne Moore for the new Pirelli calendar. Photograph: EPA/Peter Lindburgh 
12 Millennial pink


“Millennial pink”, “not pink pink”, “rose quartz” – call it what you like. 
It’s the colour of now. See: the limited-editionwindowpane blanket 
<http://thegentlewoman.tictail.com/product/paul-smith-blanket> made for the 
Gentlewoman magazine by Paul Smith; thecape-fronted pink dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/04/fashion-pink-dress-designers-tracksuits-gender-fluidity-years-femininity-paris-catwalk>
 from Céline’s most recent collection.

13 Fedoras, cigars and Chevrolets


In 2016, Paris lost its style pre-eminence. Rio had the Olympics, and a 
futuristic Louis Vuitton Cruise catwalk show. But Cuba, where Chanel staged 
their Cruise show, had a serious style moment. Karl Lagerfeld’s decision to use 
the streets of Havana as a shabby-chic theatrical backdrop for eyewateringly 
expensive clothes may have raised a few brows, but it has brought the chic 
tourists flocking.

14 The gender-neutral shoe


Is it a girl, is it a boy? In 2016, the only appropriate answer is: who cares? 
That gender neutrality is now solidly embedded in fashion could be seen in 
Jaden Smith wearing womenswear for Louis Vuitton, and in the many brands that 
have merged their mens and womens’ collections on the catwalk. But never mind 
that, look at the shoes. The Gucci loafer – iconic gender-neutral shoe – was 
everywhere this year. As for where this will go next, well, Alessandro Michele, 
Gucci designer and mastermind of the loafer revival, has taken to wearing 
pearl-buttoned Mary Janes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ea4ed85d711ebf64a6199723e41e06854bcd29e%2F0_0_4960_2976%2F4960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ea4ed85d711ebf64a6199723e41e06854bcd29e%2F0_0_4960_2976%2F4960.jpg>
 The Gucci loafer is an iconic gender-neutral shoe. Photograph: Christian 
Vierig/Getty Images 
15 Athleisure all day long


Subtext: “My usual Saturday? Oh, you know, a juice before Pilates. Then 
brunch, of course!”

16 Commercial street style


One name in the long, long list of extraordinary people we lost in 2016 is 
photographerBill Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/27/bill-cunningham-street-style-photographer-set-standard>
, the godfather of streetstyle, who more or less invented the genre with his 
spreads in the New York Times. But streetstyle means something different these 
days: essentially, sponsored clickbait designed to flog blue 
shirts/Frankenstein jeans/cold-shoulder tops.

17 The blue shirt


Better than a white shirt in 2016 – and going strong into next year. Not 
everything has to be complicated, thank goodness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d13934be643c813aba0005be194b709c581208b%2F0_537_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nude%20selfies%2C%20cold%20shoulders%20and%20the%20Hadids%3A%20the%20year%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fnude-selfies-cold-shoulders-and-the-hadids-the-year-in-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d13934be643c813aba0005be194b709c581208b%2F0_537_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
 Style blogger Leonie Markhorst channelling street style and the blue shirt. 
Photograph: Christian Vierig/Getty Images 
18 The velvet revolution


How does the advent of velvet as this year’s fabric fit with the continued 
ascendancy of athleisure? It doesn’t, obviously. But in the words of Karl 
Lagerfeld: “Fashion is about two things – the evolution and the opposite.” The 
forces of physics are in play here. Which is good news, because no one wants to 
eat Christmas dinner in a crop top and sucky leggings.

19 The climate change denial coat


In 2016 it’s not where your coat is from, it’s how you wear it. Specifically: 
falling back off both shoulders, as modelled on the Balenciaga catwalk in March 
and byany celebrity with access to the internet 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BLD408djiT4/> ever since. The point of this look 
is that it separates the act of wearing a coat from such pedestrian concerns as 
keeping warm. Wearing your coat like this denies the existence of winter. It is 
a style tic that would drive your mum crazy, and would likely snub the Paris 
agreement on climate change. But, y’know, it does look good.
 