
In Chicago’s Grant Park, after winning the presidential election on 4 November 
2008,Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> looked out 
at the faces of some of the estimated 240,000 people who had come in person to 
hail his historic night.

Millions around the world meanwhile watched on television – many, to varying 
degrees, caught up in the excitement of “yes we can” and in sharing his message 
of hope that, while perhaps bound to ultimately fall short of expectations, was 
strong enough to win a second term in 2012.

As Donald Trump prepares to succeed him as US president later in January – a 
turn of events few could have predicted on that heady night in Chicago – we 
asked Guardian US specialist news writers to weigh up the Obama presidency: 
what did he achieve in various key areas of policy? And will it endure?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f241c35a5d12408efb3fbbd340e36e4dbee8e29%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f241c35a5d12408efb3fbbd340e36e4dbee8e29%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 November 2008: a scene from the election night victory celebration in Chicago. 
Photograph: Chris McGrath/Getty Images 
The economy

Eight years after President Obama’s inauguration, stock markets are at record 
highs; the unemployment rate, at 4.6%, is the lowest it has been in a decade; 
and house prices have risen 23%, recovering from their biggest crash in living 
memory.

By those measures, the US should be celebrating the economic record of the man 
who inherited the worst recession since the Great Depression. And yet his 
successor, Trump, was elected on a wave of economic populism and a promise to 
“Make America Great Again” that suggests large numbers of people are not 
feeling a change they can believe in despite all these rosy numbers.

When Obama was inaugurated in January 2009, unemployment stood at 7.6%. As the 
recession swept people out of jobs across the country that number rose, 
reaching 10% in October 2009.

But while Obama can rightly champion the 11m jobs created under his 
leadership, other statistics point to one reason why people wanted change: the 
labor force participation rate – the number of people in work or actively 
looking for it – has reached a low unseen since the 1970s. Why fewer people are 
looking for work is a subject of much debate. It may be demographics, or baby 
boomers ageing out of the workforce; or it may be people simply giving up on 
finding suitable work. Much of the recovery in jobs has been in the service 
industry or healthcare; manufacturing jobs are still disappearing overseas or 
making way for robots. As a result, wage growth has been flat throughout 
Obama’s presidency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa49d62c4ca7b31dc1d3c5ace0b987229c02ff5d1%2F248_308_2901_1741%2F2901.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa49d62c4ca7b31dc1d3c5ace0b987229c02ff5d1%2F248_308_2901_1741%2F2901.jpg>
 September 2014: protesters demanding higher wages and unionization for fast 
food workers block traffic in New York City. Photograph: Andrew Burton/Getty 
Images 
The US economy has avoided yet another cycle of boom and bust under Obama, but 
growth has been anemic. That said, the economy bounced back from the recession 
stronger and faster than its counterparts in Europe, after avoiding the 
austerity measures initially so popular across that continent. Obama also saw 
off the possibility of another major crisis in the financial sector with tough 
new rules on Wall Street in the Dodd-Frank Act.

But for all its laudable achievements, Obama’s economic legacy has left too 
many people feeling underpaid and insecure. Now that Trump is promising to free 
the forces of capitalism once more – axing Dodd-Frank and cutting regulations – 
faster times may be ahead. But we all know what follows boom. Perhaps history 
will be kinder to Obama’s economic legacy than US voters.Dominic Rushe 
us unemployment rate graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/04/unemployment-rate/> 
Climate change


Barack Obama has been alluded to as America’s “first climate president”, but 
it is a mantle he only seemed to hunger for in the final stage of his 
presidency. His two election campaigns made scant mention of climate change, 
and yet he leaves the White House insisting the world faces no greater threat 
than it. The dying embers of Obama’s presidency have been used to make up for 
lost time.

The final flurry of action was significant. The Paris climate accord, the 
first comprehensive deal to lower emissions across 196 nations, was made 
possible through Obama’s cajoling of China to come on board. The deal, while 
still imperfect, was signed and ratified within a year. The task remains 
daunting but the failures of Kyoto and Copenhagen have been banished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6df79d3563e7cecd0165be8ca15742508c39235c%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6df79d3563e7cecd0165be8ca15742508c39235c%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 April 2015: visiting Everglades national park on Earth Day to discuss climate 
change.
 Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
Domestically, Obama tried and failed to implement a cap-and-trade system to 
lower emissions and instead turned to direct regulation of coal-fired power 
plants. While the plan is tangled in the courts, other executive actions to 
limit methane leaks, improve vehicle fuel efficiency and get the vast federal 
bureaucracy to take climate change seriously have proved effective. Ultimately, 
market forces have helped him – the plunging cost of solar, wind and gas has 
helped hasten the demise of coal.

He also, just before Christmas, moved to permanently ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/20/barack-obama-bans-oil-gas-drilling-arctic-atlantic>
 new oil and gas drilling in most US-owned waters in the Arctic and Atlantic 
oceans, a last-ditch effort to lock in environmental protections before he 
hands over toDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57b18bc781bdf391ab39a9d3b98c7e20f94f017f%2F772_266_1054_1317%2F1054.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57b18bc781bdf391ab39a9d3b98c7e20f94f017f%2F772_266_1054_1317%2F1054.jpg>
 Teddy Roosevelt Photograph: Bob Thomas/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
Obama only half-joked that he, not Teddy Roosevelt, should be known as the 
conservationist president. He protected more than 265m acres of land and water, 
more than any other commander-in-chief, including what was the world’s largest 
marine reserve off Hawaii.


Glaring problems remain. The Flint water crisis is just the thin edge of 
tolerated environmental pollution that has been allowed to fester due to years 
of neglect. American towns and cities are increasingly lashed by storms and 
floods and baked by drought due to climate change, yet there lacks a bipartisan 
plan to prepare the country or even admit the problem. Only so much of this can 
be laid at Obama’s door, although therampant financing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/01/obama-fossil-fuels-us-export-import-bank-energy-projects>
 of overseas fossil fuel projects via the Export-Import Bank could and should 
have been curbed.

These achievements, and faults, will find stark contrast with Trump’s 
administration; certainly Trump’s nominations for key positions in his cabinet 
that relate to climate change have prompted alarm by experts and campaigners. 
The president-elect has threatened to tear down almost all of Obama’s climate 
action, which now appears vulnerable. How far Trump, and his fellow 
Republicans, follow through with this remains to be seen, but climate change is 
undoubtably one area where Obama won’t relish being able to say “I told you so.”
Oliver Milman

Obamacare
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcff4231614969c5c74d81e290471a5f798370abd%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcff4231614969c5c74d81e290471a5f798370abd%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 June 2015: the supreme court upholds Obama’s healthcare reforms. Photograph: 
Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA 
Healthcare, and Americans’ lack of it, was a defining issue in the 2008 
presidential campaign. Because there was no government-run health plan in 
America, people without commercial health insurance were at the mercy of the 
world’s most expensive health system.


Health issues caused roughly half 
<http://www.factcheck.org/2008/12/health-care-bill-bankruptcies/> of bankruptcy 
filings.Cancer patients 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/10/20/business/money-medicine-when-insurance-hits-the-ceiling.html>
 were dropped from insurance because of lifetime benefit caps. People were 
locked out of the market because of “pre-existing conditions”such as acne 
<http://kff.org/health-reform/issue-brief/pre-existing-conditions-and-medical-underwriting-in-the-individual-insurance-market-prior-to-the-aca/>
. Catastrophic insurance seemed not to cover catastrophes. Financial ruin, for 
many, was one diagnosis away.


Obama campaigned on a platform of “universal 
<http://elections.nytimes.com/2008/president/issues/health.html>” health 
insurance in hopes of passing a single-payer option, like other programs in 
Europe. What Congress instead approved was a compromise between government and 
industry: Americans would berequired to buy health insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/17/obamacare-aca-republicans-trump-senate-repeal>
, delivering new and healthy customers to the industry. But the industry had to 
drop some of its most hated practices such as lifetime benefit caps, denying 
coverage based on pre-existing conditions and selling shoddy insurance for 
catastrophic accidents.


The Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare, was shepherded through a 
Democrat-controlled Congress in the first half of Obama’s term. It was the 
first social safety net created in more than 50 years. The law was a 
legacy-maker. Or a “big fucking deal”, as vice-president Joe Biden was 
overheard describing it.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-economy-jobs-healthcare-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20legacy%20of%20Barack%20Obama%2C%20in%20seven%20drawings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-economy-jobs-healthcare-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20legacy%20of%20Barack%20Obama%2C%20in%20seven%20drawings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-economy-jobs-healthcare-video&media=>
The legacy of Barack Obama, in seven drawings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/18/barack-obama-legacy-economy-jobs-healthcare-video>
The ACA expanded Medicaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/seema-verma-trump-centers-medicare-medicaid-cms>
, the government’s health insurance for the poor. Taxes on the rich improved
Medicare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/10/ben-carson-medicare-healthcare-proposal>
, the government-run program for the elderly. Andfederally subsidized state 
marketplaces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/03/obamacare-marketplaces-exchanges-insurers-subscribers-competition>
 provided a transparency for individuals and small businesses to compare 
insurance, and purchase it at subsidized rates. Together, the changes provided 
health insurance to22 million Americans 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/11/9/13487772/trump-obamacare-repeal>.


To pay for popular provisions, the law requires Americans to buy insurance or 
pay a tax penalty, and controversially expandedcontraception coverage for women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/jun/30/supreme-court-employers-religious-objections-contraception>
. All this, plus pushing the bill through a Democrat-controlled Congress,
outraged Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/05/republicans-destroy-obamacare-losing>
.

Congressional opponents attempted to dismantle the law in the US supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/25/obama-healthcare-law-upheld-supreme-court>
, and passeddozens of repeal laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/obamacare-trump-administration-tom-price-hhs>
. But at no time have threats to the law been greater than now. Trump 
campaigned to “repeal and replace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-campaign-promises-transition-team>
” Obamacare, and his party now controls Congress and the White House. Hispick 
for secretary of health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
, Tom Price, ardently opposed the ACA when in Congress.

As Obama leaves office, new data shows that people are signing up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/16/obamacare-health-insurance-affordable-care-act>
 for insurance  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/16/obamacare-health-insurance-affordable-care-act>
more than ever before, though the health system he helped create is still 
imperfect. Anopioid epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-overdose-deaths-map>
 leaves more than 30,000 dead each year; the public isoutraged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/novum-pharma-acne-cream-aloquin-price-gouging>
 atprescription drug price hikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/16/opioid-overdose-naloxone-pharmaceutical-price-gouging>
; and companies can stillshift thousands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2015/nov/20/obamacare-premiums-deductibles-increase-health-care>
 of dollars onto consumers in the forms of co-payments and deductibles.

But if Republicans make good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/17/obamacare-aca-republicans-trump-senate-repeal>
 onpromises to repeal the ACA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
, Americans could be in for a fast, painful, health policy education.Jessica 
Glenza

Foreign policy

Obama’s foreign policy was sanctified before it had properly begun. He was 
awarded the Nobel peace prize nine months into his presidency, at a time when 
his main achievements had been aspirational speeches about the Middle East and 
nuclear proliferation. It was hard to escape the suspicion the new president 
was made a premature Nobel laureate chiefly for not being George W Bush.


Obama reflects on Syria at farewell press conference: 'I always feel 
responsible'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-syria-assad-aleppo-final-press-conference>
Obama’s attitude to dealing with the rest of the world was conceived as the 
antithesis of what had come before. It drew heavily on a lesson of the Iraq 
invasion – that US military interventions, fuelled by hubris and ignorance, can 
make fraught situations abroad far worse.

If the Obama Doctrine had a subtitle, it was: “Don’t Do Stupid Shit”. He had 
his officials repeat the phrase in scores of briefings and on at least one 
occasion, on a foreign trip in 2014, the president is said to have got the 
White House press corpsto repeat the words after him 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2014/06/04/obamas-dont-do-stupid-shit-foreign-policy/]>
, like pupils in a particularly sluggish elementary school class.

After the Bush years it had a reassuring ring to it, and as a doctrine it had 
its successes.

The decision to treat Iran not as a monolithic embodiment of evil but as a 
complex society with a strong pragmatic bent led ultimately to theJuly 2015 
agreement in Vienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-18-days-in-vienna>
, by which Tehran accepted strict limits on its nuclear program in return for 
sanctions relief. It was helped by some lucky timing – the election of 
President Hassan Rouhani in July 2013 – and it has weaknesses and critics, but 
it remains one of the most significant diplomatic achievements of a generation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd7fcb6c05d45a1d165403d1a48ca54588175592%2F0_71_3009_1806%2F3009.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd7fcb6c05d45a1d165403d1a48ca54588175592%2F0_71_3009_1806%2F3009.jpg>
 March 2016: the Obamas react along with Cuban president Raúl Castro at an 
exhibition baseball game in Havana. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters 
The rapprochement with Cuba over the past year also represented the undoing of 
“stupid shit”, by ending a policy of isolation that had failed to meet its 
objective over more than a half-century.

But it was predictably a thin reed on which to build a doctrine. By the end of 
the Obama era the mantra had become a burden, thickening into a rationale for 
hesitancy and paralysis. Other governments and leaders did stupid things, 
acting out of hubris, ambition or weakness, making the rest of the world turn 
to Washington for a response. In such circumstances, inaction also counted as 
an action.

Obama fudged the response to the Libyan civil war, agreeing to intervene but 
“leading from behind”. Mindful of the mistakes in Iraq, the US went to the 
United Nations for backing for military action, but then – in Moscow’s eyes at 
least – abused the mandate by pursuing regime change. Qaddafi was toppled and 
then little was done to save Libya from a descent into turmoil.

The Libyan intervention further poisoned the relationship with Russia, helping 
produce deadlock in the UN security council over the biggest crisis of the 
Obama era: the Syrian conflict. The US dabbled ineffectually in helping the 
rebel cause, hobbled by uncertainty over the groups it was dealing with. Most 
fatefully, the president laid down a “red line” for the use of military force 
in the case of the Syrian regime’s use of chemical weapons, and then did not 
deliver on the ultimatum when Bashar al-Assad poisoned his people in August 
2013. The climbdown did lead to the removal of most of the Syrian chemical 
arsenal, but it left Assad emboldened and a vacuum for Vladimir Putin to fill, 
with murderous consequences for the Syrian people.

With a death toll approaching half a million, Syria overshadows Obama’s 
foreign policy legacy just as Iraq darkened George Bush’s. For a US president, 
the sins of omission can weigh as heavily as the sins of commission. Julian 
Borger

National security
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd509d037071830f00928abcdf2d9aad47aa0a5d%2F0_134_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd509d037071830f00928abcdf2d9aad47aa0a5d%2F0_134_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 May 2011: in the White House situation room receiving an update on the mission 
by Seal Team 6 that killed Osama bin Laden. Photograph: Pete Souza/AP 
Long after Obama leaves office, security scholars will debate whether the 
security apparatus captured his presidency or whether Obama’s agenda happened 
to align with their bureaucratic interests.

Obama won the White House with the most liberal national security agenda since 
Jimmy Carter. He campaigned on ending the Iraq war by a certain date, barring 
CIA torture, shuttering Guantánamo Bay and opening dialogue with traditional US 
adversaries. But at the same time, Obama promised an escalation of the 
Afghanistan war and violating Pakistani sovereignty to pursue Osama bin Laden. 
He voted for a massive surveillance expansion, while his closest 
counterterrorism adviser was John Brennan, a senior CIA official at the dawn of 
the torture program.

Obama effectively offered to trade an end to the Iraq war for continuation of 
the war on terrorism, something both his liberal supporters and conservative 
critics elided as it fit neither the picture of Obama the liberal savior or 
Obama the naive peacenik.

Early in his presidency, Obama established a shaky relationship with his 
generals, despite giving them more than he gained. He stalled the Iraq drawdown 
and ordered over 30,000 troops into Afghanistan. But he withdrew from Iraq in 
2011, the same year he scheduled for the Afghan escalation to end. Obama left 
the experience frustrated with what he considered a military establishment 
willing to box him into its desired outcomes. And he had an alternative.

Edward Snowden makes 'moral' case for presidential pardon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/13/edward-snowden-why-barack-obama-should-grant-me-a-pardon>
Against the ponderous ground wars Obama considered the military to favor, 
Obama turned to the CIA’s drones, the NSA’s global surveillance dragnet and the 
secretive but violent raids of the Joint Special Operations Command. Obama 
permitted them to operate with minimal restriction, proliferating the physical 
scope of the global war on terrorism to Somalia, Yemen, Pakistan, Libya, Mali 
and Niger and the digital scope around the world. While Obama proclaimed “the 
tide of war is receding 
<http://www.wsj.com/video/obama-tells-un-the-tide-of-war-is-receding/1EBF05D7-E57E-44B4-8EEA-F44E531DD4AC.html>
”, he expanded it to further shores.


Not even the NSA disclosures of Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/nov/01/snowden-nsa-files-surveillance-revelations-decoded#section/7>
 nor the revelations that the drone strikes had killed a16-year old American boy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/18/us-citizens-drone-strike-deaths>
 prompted much clawback. By the end of his term, Obama had blessedrestrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/03/barack-obama-surveillance-reform-vacillation-caution-fear>
 on the bulk collection of Americans’ phone records and placed modest 
constraints on drone strikes. With the CIA so critical to his strategy, Obama’s 
reluctance to prosecute its torturers shaded into a defense ofcovering up the 
torture program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/cia-torture-report-aftermath-daniel-jones-senate-investigation>
.


The intelligence agencies wanted even more leeway than Obama gave them, and 
Donald Trump is poised to provide it. On national security, Obama, with all his 
progressive promise, provided more of a bridge than a barricade between the 
Bush and Trump eras.Spencer Ackerman


Immigration

President Obama will leave behind a distinctly patchy legacy on immigration, 
one that veers wildly from his reputation as “deporter-in-chief” to his 
determined efforts to secure legal status for millions of young undocumented 
immigrants and their parents.

That less than flattering title has been bestowed on Obama by immigrant 
communities and civil rights groups dismayed by his record of removing more than
2.5 million people 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/obamas-deportation-policy-numbers/story?id=41715661>
 – more than any previous administration.The latest figures 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/08/31/u-s-immigrant-deportations-declined-in-2014-but-remain-near-record-high/>
 from the Pew Research Center show that in recent times the Obama 
administration consistently sustained rates of removals well above those 
effected under George W Bush.

In November 2014, Obama set out his vision 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/transcript-obamas-immigration-speech/2014/11/20/14ba8042-7117-11e4-893f-86bd390a3340_story.html?utm_term=.54821d2e869f>
 for immigration authorities, pledging that federal powers would target serious 
criminals only. “Felons not families” was his catchy refrain. Yet the Pew 
figures suggest that this promise has not been kept. Throughout his years in 
the White House, the proportion of deportees with no criminal records has held 
fairly steady at about 60%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cbc9d111c269bf83e3b55adf7475b72fb9d0340%2F223_173_3251_1951%2F3251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cbc9d111c269bf83e3b55adf7475b72fb9d0340%2F223_173_3251_1951%2F3251.jpg>
 November 2014: an audience listens to President Obama speak about immigration 
reform during a visit to Del Sol high school in Las Vegas. Photograph: Kevin 
Lamarque/Reuters 
Obama will be remembered more favorably among the country’s 11 million 
unauthorized immigrants for the rigorous efforts he made to provide many of 
them with legal status and work papers, even though Republican opposition in 
Congress prevented him from going all out for a pathway to citizenship. More 
than700,000 
<http://www.migrationpolicy.org/research/daca-four-participation-deferred-action-program-and-impacts-recipients?gclid=CjwKEAiAyanCBRDkiO6M_rDroH0SJAAfZ4KL0oA8a2ui-KJ-euAxMyYY18A9QgMn9Z6Uzd 
– Dm0q9BoCRvfw_wcB> “Dreamers” who were brought to the US as young children 
have benefited from the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (Daca) program 
that delays the threat of deportation for two years and allows them to come out 
and work in the open.

The scheme has encouraged a flourishing of political and cultural engagement 
among young, undocumented Hispanics, spawning a network of activism that could 
prove to be a crucial focal point of resistance to Trump and his hardline 
anti-immigrant ambitions. This aspect of Obama’s legacy is also not without its 
difficulties. A similar program to Daca for parents of Dreamers, Dapa (Deferred 
Action for Parents of Americans), would have extended legal status to a further 
five million people, but it wasstymied in the courts 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/06/22/us/who-is-affected-by-supreme-court-decision-on-immigration.html>
.

Obama introduced both schemes by executive order under his own presidential 
powers. That meant he could move swiftly and easily to secure rights for 
individuals who had previously been confined to the shadows, bypassing 
Congress. But it carries with it the seed of its own destruction. 
President-elect Trump will be able to undo the programs and cast them into the 
dustbin of history with equal speed and ease.Ed Pilkington
us immigration removals graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/12/immigrant-removals/> 
Crime and justice 

Midway through his second term, on a sweltering July 2015 day in Philadelphia, 
President Obama declared his intention to make criminal justice reform a 
substantial part of his legacy to a crowd at the annual convention of the NAACP 
(National Association for the Advancement of Colored People). In the years 
since, the president has moved swiftly if subtly, sponsoring a bevy of White 
House forums, taskforces and initiatives aimed at changing the way the business 
of justice, from policing to prosecution to incarceration, gets done in the US.

The County: the story of America's deadliest police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/01/the-county-kern-county-deadliest-police-killings>
Obama’s Department of Justice, under the direction of attorneys general Eric 
Holder and Loretta Lynch, has also reflected a fairly radical departure from 
its predecessors, pushing for the end of prison privatization in the federal 
system, relaxing the prosecution of drug crimes, and using its civil rights 
division to investigate potentially abusive police departments. It was 
announced, for example, last month that two of the law enforcement agencies in 
Kern County, California, labelled the deadliest police departments in America 
following a Guardian investigation,would be investigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/22/california-police-kern-county-investigation-kamala-harris>
 by state authorities.


Many of Obama’s achievements in the realm of criminal justice reform owe to 
the fact that his presidency happened to coincide with a broad shift in 
national attitudes. The transpartisan consensus that began to coalesce on the 
problem of mass incarceration near the beginning of his presidency presented a 
powerful wind at Obama’s back. So, too, did the high visibility of the Black 
Lives Matter movement over Obama’s second term.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e2dee41cfdde1c5c7a3ce90a958cf03329dbe86%2F0_35_4366_2619%2F4366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e2dee41cfdde1c5c7a3ce90a958cf03329dbe86%2F0_35_4366_2619%2F4366.jpg>
 July 2016: demonstrators gather after marching at the Louisiana capitol to 
protest the fatal police shooting of Alton Sterling in Baton Rouge. Photograph: 
Mark Wallheiser/Getty Images 
Behind that momentum, Obama leaves office having overseen the first sustained 
reduction in the overall prison population in over a half-century, and has 
commuted more federal sentences than his last eight predecessors combined. 
Obama ended the solitary confinement of juveniles in federal facilities with an 
executive order, and made it illegal for most federal agencies to ask if a job 
applicant had been convicted of a crime as part of the broader “ban the box” 
movement.

On policing, the DoJ’s landmark Ferguson report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/04/ferguson-police-racial-persecution-federal-report>
 following the unrest after Mike Brown was killed in August 2014 dramatically 
altered the scale and scope a police department investigation could be expected 
to have. Commentators inside and outside the DoJ have described the level of 
commitment in the pre-Obama and post-Obama civil rights division as “from 
another planet”.

Most of the criminal justice system lies squarely outside the federal scope, 
however. Many of Obama’s efforts in the realm functioned more to set an example 
for state and local government to follow than as real, concrete change. 
Ultimately the same diffusion of criminal justice control that limited the 
impact Obama could have from the White House will also limit how quickly an 
incoming Trump administration could slow that reform.

In elections across the country, more progressive district attorneys are 
increasingly winning elections, and a number of state legislatures have 
embraced “smart on crime” legislation that ween law enforcement off of 
incarceration as a typical answer to punishing non-violent offenses. Jamiles 
Lartey

Women, gender and LGBT rights 

President Obama signed the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/30/obama-lilly-ledbetter-equal-pay> 
in January 2009, which opened the doors for women experiencing pay 
discrimination to seek legal redress. It was the first law Obama signed as 
president, an act of symbolism that wound up defining an important aspect of 
his next eight years in office. Obama repeatedly took action to level the 
playing field for people who have historically suffered from discrimination 
related to their sex or gender.

Obamacare prohibited insurers 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/brycecovert/2012/06/28/obamacare-decision-why-women-are-the-big-winners-health-care-supreme-court/#620542275982>
 from charging women more for insurance and at the same time vastly expanded 
the methods of contraception availableat no extra cost 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/09/thanks-obamacare-lots-more-women-don%E2%80%99t-have-shell-out-extra-birth-control>
 to millions of US women. His administration struck back at states attempting 
to defund Planned Parenthood. It charged the Department of Education with 
forcing universities to take seriously the scourge of sexual assault on college 
campuses, and with outlining how school districts should treat transgender 
students. His Department of Justice helped take on same-sex marriage bans and 
onerous abortion restrictions in front of the US supreme court. Obama himself 
became the first sitting president toendorse same-sex marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-news-blog/2012/may/09/obama-same-sex-marriage-twitter>
 after he “evolved” on the topic.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82b2ee4ec837f47f1a9a1b2ceeb82da6e4d157dc%2F171_313_3867_2321%2F3867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82b2ee4ec837f47f1a9a1b2ceeb82da6e4d157dc%2F171_313_3867_2321%2F3867.jpg>
 June 2015: the White House marks the supreme court’s ruling in favor of 
same-sex marriage. Photograph: Mark Wilson/Getty Images 
Which of these accomplishments will survive the Trump presidency? Trump has 
implied that he considers same-sex marriage to be settled law. But that’s about 
it. Republicans in Congress support legislation that would allow employers and 
business owners to discriminate against LGBT people, and they are preparing an 
unprecedented slate of anti-abortion legislation. The fate of Obamacare is 
uncertain, but Republicans’ blueprints for areplacement 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/11/17/13626438/obamacare-replacement-plans-comparison> 
don’t preserve its anti-discrimination provisions for women or transgender 
people. Campus activists are fearful progress in cracking down on sexual assault
could be lost 
<https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/11/10/trump-and-gop-likely-try-scale-back-title-ix-enforcement-sexual-assault>
.And Trump’s vice-president, Mike Pence, has signaled that the administration 
will cease to require the nation’s schools to accommodate transgender students 
and employers to cover contraception in their healthcare plans. Asked about the 
transgender restroom row issue in October, Pence said  
<http://www.washingtonblade.com/2016/10/07/pence-affirms-trump-would-roll-back-trans-protections-for-schools/>
issues like it were “best resolved at the state level by the people of 
communities, by the standards they want to set”.

In the end, what will remain of Obama’s accomplishments might be the major 
cultural shifts he stood behind or helped effect. Obama used his office to 
burnish the legitimacy of campus activists who sought accountability for high 
rates of sexual violence against women and the gay- and trans-rights movements. 
He signed a repeal of “don’t ask don’t tell”, and under his administration the 
Pentagon ended the ban on women in combat positions and set out rules for 
allowing transgender people to serve in the military.


As Mara Keisling, the director of the National Center for Transgender 
Equality, recently argued to the Guardian, the cultural shifts that made those 
milestones possible don’t simply reverse because someone new is in the White 
House.


“Trans people have spent decades educating their classmates and their families 
and their co-workers and the people they worship with about who they are,” she 
said. “The government can maybe take back some of the policy advancements we’ve 
had. But they can’t take away the dignity we’ve created for ourselves.” Molly 
Redden

Gun control 

Obama called the mass shooting at Sandy Hook elementary school “the worst day 
of my presidency”.

Before the December 2012 massacre that left 20 first-graders gunned down in 
their classrooms, Obama had done almost nothing on gun control. Early in his 
tenure, when Obama’s attorney general publicly mentioned an assault weapon ban, 
his chief of staff sent a blunt message: “shut the fuck up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/28/hillary-clinton-gun-control-policies-1990s>
” about guns.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d9520013d0f853f1f9b50cddb4bc06a9d381688%2F1061_0_3040_3800%2F3040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20legacy%3A%20the%20promises%2C%20shortcomings%20and%20fights%20to%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fbarack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d9520013d0f853f1f9b50cddb4bc06a9d381688%2F1061_0_3040_3800%2F3040.jpg>
 January 2016: wiping away tears during an event held to announce new gun 
control measures. Photograph: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters 
After the Sandy Hook shooting, Obama became a passionate advocate for stricter 
gun control laws. He used his presidential bully pulpit to help elevate gun 
control from a fringe issue to a central policy priority for the Democratic 
party. Family members of mass shooting victims said his commitment to the cause 
seemed personal as well as political – not just as president, but also as a 
father who once wept while talking about Sandy Hook at a press conference.

But Obama’s attempts to bring substantive change to America’s gun laws failed. 
Despite a major push from the White House in early 2013, Congress rejected even 
a modest attempt to expand federal requirements for background checks on gun 
sales, as well as a renewed ban on assault weapons. New efforts to consider gun 
control legislation were swiftly rejected after the Pulse nightclub shooting in 
Orlando in June 2016.

“President Obama did everything he could, but his Congress was kind of 
incapable,” said Mark Barden, whose seven-year-old son, Daniel, was killed at 
Sandy Hook.

In the face of congressional inaction, Obama’s attempts to tighten gun 
regulations through executive action were often more symbolic than substantive. 
Even the National Rifle Association, which typically frames any gun control 
effort in apocalyptic terms, was sometimes underwhelmed. “This is it, really?” 
a NRAspokeswoman said 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/05/us/politics/obama-says-he-will-act-on-gun-control-in-coming-days.html>
 in January 2016, when Obama tried to improve gun background checks by
publicizing a new government pamphlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/nra-gun-control-donald-trump-republicans>
 explaining how citizens should comply with the current law. “They’re not 
really doing anything.”

Obama’s last two years in office included not only the highest-casualty mass 
shooting in recent American history, but also, after years of declining 
violence, anuptick in gun murders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/rate-murder-fbi-increase> 
nationwide in 2015. Gun murders spiked to historic highs in Baltimore in 2015, 
then in Chicago, Obama’s hometown, which saw a 50% increase in murders and 
shooting incidents in 2016. The increase in the number of people murdered in 
Chicago last year is about equal to the toll of seven Orlando massacres.

Obama has promised to continue to work 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/obama-press-conference-transcript-232763>
 with organizations across the country on gun violence prevention after he 
leaves office.Lois Beckett
 