
Palmer Luckey has been waiting for this year his whole life. As a teenager, he 
collected obsolete virtual reality headsets from the original VR boom of the 
early 90s, using them as the basis for his own hacked together prototypes. 
Then, four years ago, he dropped out of California State University, founded 
Oculus and crowdfunded the Rift, the first modern-day VR head-mounted display 
(HMD) technology. This April, the device will get its long awaited launch – and 
it won’t be alone: the Samsung Gear VR arrived last year, while the HTC Vive 
and PlayStation VR headset will follow later in 2016.

“This is a huge year,” says Luckey. He’s at Microsoft’s Spring Xbox Showcase 
in San Francisco, introducing the forthcoming Oculus version of Minecraft. But 
as the figurehead of the current virtual reality boom, he’s happy to discuss 
the wider state of play. “This is the first year there will be mass market 
consumer VR,” he says. “It’s the first time there’s going to be a lot of 
developers actually selling VR software and getting feedback. But I don’t think 
2016 is necessarilythe year of virtual reality – it’s not going to instantly 
explode into mass popularity. It’s going to take time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Foculus-rift-founder-facebook-as-we-know-it-is-not-the-future-of-virtual-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d085f89bb1259a819fc14a62b4c4b8c6fb36de%2F0_225_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oculus%20Rift%20founder%3A%20'Facebook%20as%20we%20know%20it%20is%20not%20the%20future%20of%20virtual%20reality'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Foculus-rift-founder-facebook-as-we-know-it-is-not-the-future-of-virtual-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oculus%20Rift%20founder%3A%20%27Facebook%20as%20we%20know%20it%20is%20not%20the%20future%20of%20virtual%20reality%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Foculus-rift-founder-facebook-as-we-know-it-is-not-the-future-of-virtual-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d085f89bb1259a819fc14a62b4c4b8c6fb36de%2F0_225_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 The new Oculus Rift virtual reality headset on display in San Francisco. The 
device combines HD lenses with head tracking technologies to provide an 
immersive VR experience. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
Fortunately, Luckey has time – or at least money. The 2012 Kickstarter 
campaign for the Oculus Rift secured almost $2.5m (£1.8m) in funding, and an 
investment round in December 2013 brought in $75m from VC firms. A year later,
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> bought the company 
for $2bn. At first, the purchase caused a fair amount of surprise: Rift was 
seen by some as a novelty gaming peripheral – indeed, it was heavily marketed 
at gamers and the game development community. But Luckey always had his eye on 
bigger things.

“People have been watching science fiction and wanting virtual reality for 
decades,” he says. “There’s this idea of parallel digital worlds, where you can 
live, work, play and communicate. We have always known that VR isn’t just about 
games – in fact, that’s a very modern conception.”

Luckey sees the potential for a new form of communication – a way for people 
to meet and chat that’s more tangible than any other technological equivalent.

“Every form of digital communication is generally inferior to face-to-face 
communication,” he says. “There’s something you get by actually meeting people 
that you don’t get from email, text or phone.Virtual reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/virtual-reality> is the first 
technology that tries to make digital communication, not just more efficient or 
more useful, but more compelling and more human. That’s the promise of VR: the 
best of real world communication combined with the best of digital 
communication. It offers low cost, instantaneous accessibility, combined with 
the richness of human interaction.”

In this regard he sounds a lot like his boss (if that’s how $2bn tech buyouts 
work), Mark Zuckerberg. The Facebook founder made a surprise appearance at 
February’s Mobile World Congress in Barcelona to talk about the company’s VR 
plans. “Pretty soon we’re going to live in a world where everyone has the power 
to share and experience whole scenes as if you’re right there in person,” he 
said. “Imagine being able to sit in front of a campfire and hang out with 
friends anytime you want. Or being able to watch a movie in a private theatre 
with your friends anytime you want.”

Zuckerberg seemed to be conflating two very different aspects of the virtual 
reality experience. One is the ability to watch 360-degree videos that put you 
inside specially filmed footage and allow you to look around, but not move or 
fully interact with the footage. The other is interactive virtual worlds that 
let you explore computer generated environments, either alone or with other 
people. Facebook already hasthe capacity to show 360-degree videos 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2015/09/introducing-360-video-on-facebook/>, but 
Luckey is unconvinced that this will be where we come for anything more 
immersive.

“The thing to remember is, Facebook the social networking tool as it exists 
today is not necessarily the future of VR,” he says. “Hanging around the 
virtual campfire isn’t what people do on Facebook today. Facebook is largely an 
asynchronous tool – even the company’s realtime Messenger and WhatsApp tools 
are still asynchronous in that generally people have to wait for replies. It’s 
the same thing with the news feed where you’re seeing hundreds of photos and 
status updates over a short period of time. That’s very different from virtual 
reality where you will be in an environment together synchronously.”

For Luckey, virtual reality is going to be about more in-depth, immersive 
experiences, rather than the dip in/dip out dynamic of today’s Facebook. Even 
if people start taking and sharing 360-degree film footage of their lives 
(which is becoming increasinly possible due to a growing range of cheap 360 
cameras), Luckey thinks they won’t be sharing the super quick snippets we tend 
to see on social media today. “You’re not going to see someone’s VR status 
update and process it in half a second and keep scrolling,” he says. “You’re 
going to want to see real world captures in longer than five seconds – it’s 
totally different.

“360 degree video is going to get better and better to the point where it’s 
capturing full depth, full light fields, full sound fields, basically getting 
very close to actually capturing an actual event. It’s terrifying and great at 
the same time. For journalism, it’s going to be the first time in history where 
you’ll be able to effectively capture what actually happenined from all angles 
without framing it, without focusing on a specific thing. Being able to capture 
what is going in everywhere within a moment ... That’s not really existed 
before.”

And it’s not going to come to Facebook in that form? “I don’t think people 
should think ‘how will Facebook VR become a thing’,” he says. “Virtual reality 
will be social, but it’ll be on totally new platforms built from the ground up 
that really push VR, not necessarily applications we have today.”

One key issue Oculus has had to deal with this year is pricing. The headset 
will cost $699 or £499, when it arrives in April, and will require a reasonably 
powerful PC to run it at the framerates it requires to produce a seamless image 
and smooth head tracking. That’s quite some investment for a new hardware 
platform.

Luckey agrees. “The biggest obstacle for PC virtual reality isn’t the cost of 
the headset, it’s the cost of the PC,” he says. “If we lower the quality of our 
hardware and sell it for $400, that’s not actually going to broaden the 
audience that much because most people don’t have a PC capable of running VR 
yet. We either need to get people to buy those machines, or wait for the 
machines to catch up in power over the next few years.

“The other thing to remember is for that $600 you’re getting a lot of stuff. 
You’re getting multple LED displays, a high precision tracking system, very 
complex lenses ... You’re getting a lot more technology than $600 spent on 
pretty much any other device whether it’s a phone, TV or MP3 player. We’ve 
talked about the fact that we’re not making money on the hardware, we’re trying 
to sell this thing as affordable as we can and still provide a good VR 
experience.

“At the end of the day, we’re sold out until July – we’re exceeding all of our 
expectations. We’ve excited enough people. We made the right decision.”

Almost boyishly enthusiastic and unapologetically geeky, you wonder if some of 
Luckey’s raw passion for this technology will be dampened as the Oculus Rift 
becomes a commercial reality. It’s one thing to tinker with homebrew VR tech in 
your garage, it’s quite another to support that product into a competitive 
global marketplace. Is he still interested in virtual reality, now that it’s a 
multimillion dollar business?

“The things that inspired me five years ago are the same things that inspire 
me today,” he says. “It’s just that now it’s more obvious that this is going to 
take off.”

• Keith Stuart attended a press event in San Francisco, with travel and 
accommodation costs met by Microsoft
 