
The roads were calm and uncluttered, minutes passed before another vehicle 
appeared. On the horizon the Sierra Nevada rolled along in the sunlight, still 
snow-capped and blue-hued in places. Outside the car was the countryside of 
rural Andalucía, with its olive and almond groves, and spaghetti western-like 
terrain. I drove the narrow, cobbled roads into Alhama de Granada’s main 
square, Plaza Constitucion, and parked with ease, ready to explore this small 
hill town with its Moorish quarter, the Iglesia del Carmen and dramatic views 
of Los Tajos (the gorge).

The joys of this out-of-season break extended beyond the uncongested roads. 
The temperature was a pleasant 20C, the sunshine was constant, other tourists 
were few and the pace of life had shifted down a couple of gears. Yet, I had 
not driven to the back of beyond to get here: around 45 minutes’ drive in a 
hire car from Málaga airport had taken me to my base, the town of Archidona. 
The capital of Málaga province during Moorish rule, it’s now a regular working 
town with a population of around 9,000 and a reassuringly light dash of tourism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b7a2bdebaa1900510694975e644176403835d3%2F34_0_3196_1918%2F3196.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b7a2bdebaa1900510694975e644176403835d3%2F34_0_3196_1918%2F3196.jpg>
 Los Tajos, Alhama de Granada. Photograph: Robert Hull 
I checked in at Almohalla 51 <http://www.almohalla51.com/>, a five-bedroom 
boutique guesthouse – comprised of two renovated townhouses – run by David 
Matthews and Myles Rainford. The whitewashed walls, exposed beams and 
stone-tiled floors make for a calming retreat. The house is on several levels 
and has a higgledy-piggeldy feel, with nooks to read in. There is also a shaded 
patio, a terrace to soak up the sun and a plunge pool.

I preferred to keep cosy by the woodburner – the daytime was mild but after 
sundown there was a chill. My fireside reading included Washington Irving’s 
Tales of the Alhambra; first published in 1832, the book’s essays and short 
fiction detail the American writer’s journey through this part of Spain, and 
helped inspire David and Myles’s Andalucía: the Roads Less Travelled package. 
The four-night, off-season itinerary explores some of Andalucía’s lesser-known 
small towns, which are often as historic, beautiful and architecturally 
interesting as the region’s big hitters: Seville, Granada, Córdoba and Ronda. 
The routes include driving instructions, sights, and tips on where to eat. None 
were much more than an hour or so from Archidona and easy to explore on the 
empty roads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24342f62f96829bb001140806e259a56ccbdf6de%2F0_0_2352_1404%2F2352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24342f62f96829bb001140806e259a56ccbdf6de%2F0_0_2352_1404%2F2352.jpg>
 Almohalla 51 guesthouse 
The highlight was Setenil de las Bodegas, a river-gorge town dominated by a 
hilltop church and a Moorish fort. What stole the show, though, were the 
houses, shops and bars built into the overhanging rocks of the Cuevas del Sol 
and Cuevas de la Sombra, either side of the Rio Trejo. At times the 
labyrinthine streets made Setenil feel like an MC Escher artwork, but losing my 
way here was an enjoyable challenge not an ordeal, the legwork leading me to
Restaurante Palmero <https://www.facebook.com/RestauranteCasaPalmero> and the 
chance to savourmigas. I’d never thought a dish of breadcrumbs would make such 
an impact but these – slowly fried over a fire with garlic, chorizo and black 
pudding – were a robust and flavoursome experience.

Antequera, about 25km west of Archidona, offered an Alcazar next to a baroque 
church (Real Colegiata de Santa María La Mayor 
<http://turismo.antequera.es/en/place/real-colegiata-de-santa-maria-la-mayor/>) 
and beside them Roman ruins. In the spring sunshine the view over the town led 
the eye to dolmens (prehistoric burial grounds withUnesco heritage status 
pending <http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/5668/>) and the majestic La 
Peña de los Enamorados <https://www.facebook.com/lapenatenamora> (Lover’s Rock).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf669ff4fbca16d87065ab26cfb4b8e2fc4152bf%2F40_0_3669_2202%2F3669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf669ff4fbca16d87065ab26cfb4b8e2fc4152bf%2F40_0_3669_2202%2F3669.jpg>
 Setenil de las Bodegas, where dwellings are built into rock overhangs above 
the Rio Trejo. Photograph: Kevin Rushby for the Guardian 
In Osuna, I explored ornate former duke’s palaces on Calle San Pedro, its 
cathedral and 16th-century university building. But I could also have searched 
out its bullring, monastery or Plaza Mayor. In fact, had I not chosen Osuna, 
the routes from Almohalla 51 could have taken me to Estepa, Priego de Córdoba, 
Olvera or Zuheros. What I discovered was that there was always another 
hospitable town to visit.

I came to see Archidona as a jumping-off point but made sure I still wandered 
its winding, occasionally steep streets. I found the calm of Plaza de la 
Iglesia de Santa Ana and the focal point of Plaza Ochavada, the town’s 
“octagonal” baroque square. Around here were bars and restaurants, among them 
the traditional Bar Central,Bar Picasso 
<https://www.facebook.com/Bar-Picasso-170124456476914/> with its Italian twist, 
and the contemporary (and remarkable)Restaurante Arxiduna 
<https://www.facebook.com/Arxiduna> – built into caves that form part of the 
plaza. Dishes such as foie mille-feuille (€14), pork shoulder crunch (€12) and 
a distinctive take on a New York cheesecake (€4.50) were simply breathtaking in 
their flavour, sense of fun and eye-catching presentation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd57c1f07383c985c18336d33a7f8ae06da66031%2F707_37_5187_3113%2F5187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd57c1f07383c985c18336d33a7f8ae06da66031%2F707_37_5187_3113%2F5187.jpg>
 Plaza de la Iglesia de Santa Ana, Archidona - with La Peña de los Enamorados 
in the distance. Photograph: Robert Hull 
Not every traveller is looking for solitude and tradition - for some there is 
a need for hubbub and activity. I was aware of that on the occasions I sat in 
uncrowded cafes, strolled along empty ramparts or chatted to locals. But, as I 
watched the sunset from the summit of Sierra de Gracia – a brief hike from 
Archidona – I knew this affordable out-of-season adventure had delivered far 
more than I had expected and reinforced the idea of how small can often be so 
beautiful.

• Accommodation was provided by Almohalla 51 <http://www.almohalla51.com/>, 
which offers Andalucia: the Roads Less Travelled from €300 (£233) in a standard 
room and €350 (£272) in a superior room. The package includes four nights’ B&B, 
self-guided itineraries and a copy of Washington Irving’s book Tales of the 
Alhambra.Rhino Car Hire <http://www.rhinocarhire.com/> offers car rental from 
Málaga airport from £25 a week

Marvão, Portugal
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd3bbdb179b48ada369cd83c41fad3ff2b59a0f0%2F0_0_4320_2591%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd3bbdb179b48ada369cd83c41fad3ff2b59a0f0%2F0_0_4320_2591%2F4320.jpg>
 Dramatic mountain views from the medieval fortress town of Marvão, in the 
Alentejo. Photograph: Alex Robinson 
Dreamy castles and ducal palaces. Forests of cork oak grazed by wild boar. 
Fragrant meadows brilliant with salvia and silene. It’s a wonder the Alentejo, 
in southern Portugal, isn’t as crowded as Tuscany. Perhaps it’s because 
temperatures - away from the coast - soar to a 40C in summer.

Which is why I’ve chosen spring, when it’s pleasantly warm in the village of 
Marvão on the Spanish border. From Lisbon, I drove here in just under two hours 
via an empty motorway then a winding mountain road into the Serra de Estrela 
hills, which cut through little whitewashed villages and terraces of vineyards 
green with young leaves. I stopped at the Roman ruins of Ammaia: a shamble of 
rubble that was once a great trading town, and took a detour to the Menhir da 
Meada, a seven-metre-high digit of weather-worn neolithic stone towering over a 
lonely landscape of butterfly-filled fields.

Then I saw Marvão and it looked spectacular, even from a distance: a jagged 
crenulation of church towers and fortified walls silhouetted against a deep 
yellow afternoon sun.

Beyond the bastions, Marvão is a scatter of sugar-white houses, cut by half a 
dozen mule-cart wide streets and ringed with rugged walls put up by the Moors 
nearly 1,000 years ago. The ridgetop where it sits ripples into low hills that 
run to the horizon, where the setting sun oozes orange, gilding the whitewash 
of the village bell-towers. In the chilling air I descended to the village, 
footfalls echoing off the stone walls, and to Pousada de Marvão, the town’s 
only hotel, for port by a crackling fire and a dinner ofensopado de borrego 
(lamb hotpot).
• Sunvil <https://www.sunvil.co.uk/discovery/portugal/alentejo/accommodation> 
has three nights at Pousada de Marvão B&B from £510pp including flights and car 
hire
Alex Robinson

Calvi, Corsica
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfab9ab8fb9e203448590240f3eaf48f94383df7%2F61_317_5578_3347%2F5578.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfab9ab8fb9e203448590240f3eaf48f94383df7%2F61_317_5578_3347%2F5578.jpg>
 The city walls and waterfront at Calvi. Photograph: Alamy 
The way Parisians talk about it, Corsica is the place to come to in summer. 
July heralds the electronic music festivalCalvi on the Rocks 
<http://www.calviontherocks.com/>, while August empties the city of its locals 
and dumps them on Mediterranean beaches. My partner and I had always longed to 
experience the island’s dramatic landscape, a juxtaposition of sea and 
mountains, but peak-season flights were too expensive. Luckily, Corsican 
friends from Calvi and the surrounding Balagne region let us in on a secret: 
the year-round temperate climate makes the area great for off-season sunshine.

We flew in early October, with Calvi as our base. Many of its businesses are 
open year-round and the town is all the more delicious without the crowds. This 
is especially true of the citadel, Calvi’s pièce de résistance: a fortified 
labyrinth of cobblestone streets with impressive views of the city and the sea.

Exploring the rest of Balagne in our rental car, we discovered the Village 
d’Occi, a ghost town built in the middle ages and abandoned in the early 19th 
century, set against a panoramic backdrop. We continued up the coast to L’Île 
Rousse, known for its port, quaint streets and views of the big blue from its 
lighthouse. I was envious of the people swimming off the glistening shoreline, 
but my partner preferred to venture into the mountainous inland where villages 
perched in the clouds are as striking at a distance as they are up close. We 
spent our remaining days roaming from artist studios to vineyards to olive oil 
mills. Most of these are open all year, as Corsican culture does not ebb with 
the tourists.
The only letdown was our Airbnb; when we return – and we’re definitely 
returning – I’m going to try theHostellerie de l’Abbaye 
<http://www.hostellerie-abbaye.com/hotel-id-2-lg-en-stay_holiday_calvi_corsica.html>
, a centrally located four-star hotel that has doubles from €120.
Rozena Crossman

Gubbio, Umbria
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9cecec23dcfe690bb66dd10a20cc51323cd456%2F0_222_3000_1896%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Off-season%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%3A%20escape%20the%20crowds%20and%20save%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fandalucia-spain-off-season-holidays-corsica-portugal-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9cecec23dcfe690bb66dd10a20cc51323cd456%2F0_222_3000_1896%2F3000.jpg>
 The Ceri run through the streets of Gubbio. Photograph: Filippo 
Monteforte/AFP/Getty Images 
Having escaped the crowds of tourists in nearby Perugia, arriving in Gubbio, 
Umbria’s oldest town, brings a sense of discovery and achievement. But while it 
remains largely off foreigners’ radar, Italians flock to Gubbio during the 
country’s insufferably hot summers.

The cooler spring months are undoubtedly the best time to visit, when the lush 
countryside is at its most beautiful and Gubbio hosts its two most important 
events. The highlight comes on 15 May, when men charge through town bearing 
three huge wooden structures topped with statues of saints on the Ceri run, as 
a crowd lining the route roars them on. Another unmissable day comes on the 
last Sunday in May, when the town’s Crossbow Festival sees locals compete in 
the main square. Expect period dress and ceremonial flag-waving, too.

We headed to the 15th-century Ducal Palace, whose wooden study was deemed so 
exceptional it was shipped off to New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art. 
Thankfully, the replica produced by the town’s artisans is equally impressive. 
Nearby stands the Civic Museum, where we sought out the bronze Eugubine 
Tablets, written between the third and first centuries BC in the local 
language. This grand palace also affords views across to Gubbio’s ancient 
theatre, a sign of the importance of the town to Rome.

A springtime trip to Gubbio wouldn’t be complete without a lengthy lunch along 
one of its narrow streets, and so we grabbed an outdoor table atTaverna del Lupo
 <http://www.tavernadellupo.it/> for its truffle-infused dishes. A hearty plate 
of pasta can be walked off by climbing the mountainside (or taking the cable 
car if you’ve over-indulged) - up to the Basilica of Sant’Ubaldo, where the 
Ceri structures are kept safe.
Rosie Scammell


• Gubbio is a 25-mile drive from Perugia airport, which has direct flights to 
the UK. In central Gubbiom,Hotel Gattapone <http://www.hotelgattapone.net/en/> 
has doubles from €90, andHotel Bosone Palace <http://www.hotelbosone.com/en> 
has double rooms from €71
 