
Saturday is the first day of this year’s Oktoberfest in Munich. Between now 
and 3 October,millions of women in dirndl and men in lederhosen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/sep/23/oktoberfest-2013-munich-germany-beer-festival>
 will gather in a 42-hectare area called Theresienwiese in the Bavarian 
capital. There they will eatbrathendl (fried chicken), listen to schlagermusik 
(don’t ask), ride rollercoasters and drink an ever-increasing amount of beer.

Whereas the number of visitors has increased only slightly over the past 35 
years – from 5.1 million in 1980 to 5.9 million in 2015 with a peak of 7.1 
million in 1985 – the amount of beer consumed per head is on the up. During 
last year’s Oktoberfest, a total of 7.5m litres of beer were drunk, equivalent 
to 1.3 litres a person. That’s 70% more beer drunk by each visitor than in 1980.
Beer drunk by each visitor. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/oktoberfest-zip/giv-226011xXkmSC6332v/>
But Oktoberfest is not all beer and skittles. The price for a beer in a 
traditional one-litre mug has also increased enormously. In 1980, the price of 
a “Maß” ranged between 4.80DM (€2.45) and 4.90DM. Today, visitors pay between 
€10.40 (£8.90) and €10.70.
Cost of a litre of beer. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-15T10:56:08/embed.html>
The first Oktoberfest was held in 1810. It has only failed to happen in 23 
years subsequently, mostly due to war. This year’s is the 183rd event. Over the 
years, the festival has become more and more popular with foreign visitors. 
Drinkers from Austria to Australia (and many other countries) join locals on 
the benches each year. However, foreigners still only account for about 19% of 
all visitors.
 