
A gorgeous July day in Paris, the haute couture shows are in full swing and the
Four Seasons hotel <http://www.fourseasons.com/paris/> is in glamour lockdown. 
A motorcade of buffed, black, presidential-scale cars lines the kerb outside 
its street entrance, currently occupied by two women in red-carpet hair and 
makeup who have paused at the exit for a prolonged session with a selfie stick. 
Inside, a chandelier the size of a meteorite twinkles above a vast expanse of 
black and white marble floor, the airy space punctuated by urns crowded with 
triffid-sized white gladioli, reed slender and supermodel height.

In other words, the scene is perfectly set for the entrance of Olivier 
Rousteing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/09/olivier-rousteing-balmain-rihanna-fashion-paris>
, Balmain’s creative director and Paris fashion’s most glamorous frontman. 
Except, of course, he isn’t here yet, because I am 10 minutes early and he – 
like any self-respecting rock star – will be 20 minutes late. The restaurant is 
mostly empty, the diners having spilled out into the courtyard for post-lunch 
cigarettes and espresso, so I sip a Diet Coke served with elaborate ceremony by 
a waitress in a cocktail dress, and wait.

And then here he is. He is in a black fedora, Keith Richards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/keithrichards> vibes, a sharp Balmain blazer 
with sleeves pushed up to the elbow. His chunky black and gold Rolex is exactly 
the watchTutankhamun <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tutankhamun> would 
have worn, were he to be reincarnated in 2016. Skinny jeans, biker boots, a 
black T-shirt faded to the perfect sultry charcoal. His sunglasses are 
enormous, the size of lab goggles. There is an awkward moment when he sits down 
opposite me and I think he isn’t going to take them off, but then he does, 
flashing me the wide, slightly distancing smile of the very beautiful, the 
smile of a man accustomed to being admired.

He is ridiculously good-looking. Zoolander 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=zoolander&espv=2&biw=1858&bih=1280&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjwhfu2_6nOAhXkIMAKHWA3DeMQ_AUIBigB&dpr=1>
 good-looking. Poreless skin, worked-out body, cheekbones for days. And while 
being good-looking has never been part of the job description for a traditional 
fashion designer, that is the point, because Rousteing is very much a 
non-traditional fashion designer. He is mixed race. He lovesthe Kardashians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/14/whats-wrong-with-studying-the-kardashians>
. He postsendless selfies <https://www.instagram.com/olivier_rousteing/?hl=en>. 
And he has reinvented the house founded byPierre Balmain 
<http://www.balmain.com/en_au/heritage> in 1945 as a new kind of fashion 
enterprise, one that “is very pop, but communicates like a luxury brand”. He is 
not always adored by the critics (of which more later). But can 3.8 million 
Instagram followers be wrong?

The industry is scathing about designers who pour their creative energies into 
their celebrity friendships and social media feeds, but Rousteing turns this on 
its head. He tells me the moment his creativity stepped up a notch was five 
years ago, when he moved from behind the scenes at Balmain to replaceChristophe 
Decarnin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/06/christophe-decarnin-fashion-balmain>
 as creative director. “That was a big step,” he says. “School can teach you to 
be a great ‘designer’” – he puts ironic speech marks around the word with his 
fingers, as if to suggest being a designer isn’t really a proper job – “but 
there is so much more to being a creative director.” This job title, by 
contrast, he says in reverential tones. “It means overseeing everything from 
the business to the fittings to the campaign to the stores. It means having a 
vision.” Where the traditionalists of Paris revere the role of designer and 
roll their eyes at that of creative director, Rousteing does the opposite.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4ccb93a94e5753cbf81c70afe27a337637fb58%2F0_0_3000_2001%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20Rousteing%20on%20Rihanna%2C%20Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20Balmain%20army&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20Rousteing%20on%20Rihanna%2C%20Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20Balmain%20army&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4ccb93a94e5753cbf81c70afe27a337637fb58%2F0_0_3000_2001%2F3000.jpg>
 Olivier Rousteing backstage at Paris fashion week with bosom buddies Kanye 
West, Kim Kardashian, Kendall Jenner and Kris Jenner. Photograph: Michel 
Dufour/WireImage 
Frankly, Rousteing’s Balmain frightens the life out of the fashion 
establishment, particularly in Paris, where a few blue-chip family names – 
Gainsbourg, Deneuve, de la Fressange, de la Falaise – have for decades ruled 
the front row like a quaint oligarchy. Rousteing, by contrast, has forged an 
alliance with theKardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian>-West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>s, an American family who have 
built a multimillion global empire on sex tapes and nude selfies. To use an 
analogy with a suitable level of cultural bling, Olivier Rousteing is to the 
Kardashians whatSandro Botticelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/botticelli> was to the Medici family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/may/08/great-dynasties-medici-family>
. Critics who dismiss Balmain’s dresses as vulgar because they are made for Kim 
Kardashian might bear in mind that Botticelli paintedPrimavera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2012/mar/19/sandro-botticelli-primavera-spring-artworks>
 for the Medicis.

The Balmain aesthetic is tight, bright and leggy. It is a rarefied, 
artisan-embroidered, exquisitely tailored version of an aesthetic instantly 
recognisable by any 18-year-old as Friday-night partywear. “Some people feel 
luxury shouldn’t look like what the masses like,” Rousteing says. “They feel it 
should be more elitist. But Balmain talks to young people. It’s not about 
selling to them, it’s about making them part of my world. And the people who 
can afford to buy luxury fashion, today those women want to feel young. So 
Balmain is pop, but it is a luxury brand as well. I don’t think you have to 
make sad, complicated clothes to show you have depth.” The aesthetic is 
accessible, but the prices are stratospheric – so high that they make Balmain 
feel aspirational in an abstract way. Like diamonds, or skiing holidays.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca3fe1c030ebd1e618944b35b4e401ae2b0e6c78%2F0_0_2550_3000%2F2550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20Rousteing%20on%20Rihanna%2C%20Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20Balmain%20army&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20Rousteing%20on%20Rihanna%2C%20Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20Balmain%20army&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca3fe1c030ebd1e618944b35b4e401ae2b0e6c78%2F0_0_2550_3000%2F2550.jpg>
 Olivier Rousteing hanging out with Justin Bieber at the Met Ball in New York. 
Photograph: Dimitrios Kambouris/Getty Images 
Together, Rousteing, the Kardashians and a “Balmain army” of 
I’m-with-the-brand model-groupies have staged a coup over the fashion 
establishment as gamechanging as it is glamorous, in which the traditional 
gatekeepers of taste are bypassed. Consider, for example, how Balmain’s 
autumn/winter 2016 collection has made it into the public consciousness. When 
Kardashian-clan supermodel and Rousteing’s close friendKendall Jenner 
<https://www.instagram.com/kendalljenner/?hl=en> opened and closed the show in 
March, she shared the moment with her 63 million Instagram followers. (It pains 
me to say it, but with that kind of instant reach, it arguably doesn’t matter 
whether newspaper critics like your show.) In July, Kanye West and Rousteing 
jointly released amusic video for West’s single Wolves 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsA84bXrBZw> which doubled as the Balmain 
autumn/winter 2016 campaign video, featuring Kim Kardashian and models including
Joan Smalls <https://www.instagram.com/joansmalls/?hl=en>, Jourdan Dunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/10/jourdan-dunn-crush-of-week>
 andAlessandra Ambrosio <http://alessandraambrosio.com/main2.htm> wearing the 
collection. “With music, you talk to an entire generation, where sometimes with 
fashion, you don’t talk to an entire generation because not everybody gets 
magazines,”Rousteing told Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.com/13462487/kanye-west-wolves-music-video-balmain-fall-2016-campaign/>
. Within two days, the video had been watched five million times on YouTube.

Yet when we meet, two weeks before the video will be released, Rousteing is in 
sensitive mood. In particular, and awkwardly, he is fed up with critics, who he 
feels disparage his work.

“The reality of fashion is that the more success you have, the more haters you 
get. I am talking about journalists. But I understand that I will not always be 
loved in fashion, and that the only thing that matters is the business I am 
building. So, I don’t care.” I am not entirely convinced of the veracity of 
this sentence, especially when he continues, “You can dislike my show, but 
don’t come to my show and then write 20 lines about how my face looks on 
Instagram! If that’s what you want to write, don’t bother coming to see six 
months’ hard work. Just stay home!”

Haters? It is a word a pop star would use, not a fashion designer. But then 
that is Rousteing’s world. Earlier that day, I visited the Balmain showroom to 
see the resort collection, some of which had been showcased during the menswear 
show the week before. One fringed and latticed leather coatdress in cornflower 
blue looked familiar:Rihanna had already worn it 
<http://www.instyle.com/news/rihanna-balmain-party-dress> on a night out in 
London, a couple of days after the show, at which it had been well-documented 
by the paparazzi. I asked Rousteing how that came about.

“The night of the show, she [Rihanna] texted me and she was like, ‘Babe, I 
love that show, so beautiful, it was amazing.’ So I texted back, ‘What do you 
like?’ and she sent me a picture of the blue coat and I was like, ‘OK, I’ll 
send it tomorrow.’ There is no strategy. It comes from a text, from love and 
friendship. I don’t need PRs.” At this point he remembers his PR is sitting 
next to him and says, “I mean, of course I need PR. But I don’t need them for 
that.” His PR, sanguine, concurs. “When you see someone wearing Balmain, 
there’s no contract. It’s a real relationship, and that’s the magic.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fec7a7a49e77a5a2e7894ade6533b3809b23b6d%2F0_0_3016_4642%2F3016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20Rousteing%20on%20Rihanna%2C%20Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20Balmain%20army&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20Rousteing%20on%20Rihanna%2C%20Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20Balmain%20army&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fec7a7a49e77a5a2e7894ade6533b3809b23b6d%2F0_0_3016_4642%2F3016.jpg>
 Rihanna wore a Balmain outfit to a fragrance launch in Paris just a few days 
after it was first shown on the catwalk. Photograph: David 
Fisher/Rex/Shutterstock 
Rousteing has sufficient star quality not just to get his clothes in paparazzi 
photographs, but to be in the frame himself. There isa striking photograph 
<http://mobile.nytimes.com/slideshow/2016/05/05/fashion/beyonce-taylor-swift-kanye-west-kardashian-met-gala-/s/05AFTERPARTIES-slide-0BFX.html?_r=0>
 ofBeyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> from this year’s Met 
Ball after party, in which she is lounging on a velvet sofa, gazing at 
Rousteing next to her, who is talking and gesticulating, feet pulled up on the 
sofa as if he owns the place. Rousteing wants to be the face of Balmain, 
because that is “a positive message”, he says. He spent the first year of his 
life in an orphanage before being adopted by a middle-class white couple, who 
brought him up in Bordeaux. “Diverse is a word that is really important to me,” 
he says. “I want to show that no matter your background, no matter what colour 
you are, where you come from, you can feel part of Balmain.” He is a committed 
activist for diversity in fashion, consistently casting a range of ethnicities 
for his catwalks and ad campaigns, and appearingon Newsnight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sC-n7V2uUc8> and CNN 
<http://edition.cnn.com/videos/fashion/2015/09/29/olivier-rousteing-guest-editor-style.cnn/video/playlists/cnn-style-fashion-videos/>
 to challenge the fashion industry’s lack of diversity.

Rousteing began his career in Italy, where he spent five years at Roberto 
Cavalli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/13/roberto-cavalli-this-much-i-know>
 before moving back to France. For two years, he worked closely with Decarnin, 
adored by the French Vogue in-crowd for his haute-grunge aesthetic of insanely 
expensive ripped jeans, before stepping up to replace him in 2011 at the age of 
just 24. Between 2013 and 2015 revenue grew by 50% – but this tells only half 
the story. Balmain’s new celebrity firepower brought it a vast slice of the 
fashion bandwidth, and this new status as an industry headliner brought about
the collaboration with H&M 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/oct/15/balmain-x-hm-collaboration-the-first-look>
 last year, which made the brand a household name. In June this year, Mayhoola, 
the Qatari private investment company that owns Valentino, announcedthe 
acquisition of Balmain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/22/fashion-house-balmain-sold-to-qatars-mayhoola-sovereign-wealth-fund>
, with a view to growing the brand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6ec0c4dad176647d029ad22c698c9f09f3de888%2F0_855_3280_3908%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20Rousteing%20on%20Rihanna%2C%20Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20Balmain%20army&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20Rousteing%20on%20Rihanna%2C%20Kim%20Kardashian%20and%20the%20Balmain%20army&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Folivier-rousteing-on-rihanna-kim-kardashian-and-the-balmain-army%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6ec0c4dad176647d029ad22c698c9f09f3de888%2F0_855_3280_3908%2F3280.jpg>
 Rousteing has recreated Balmain’s aesthetic: under his leadership it is tight, 
leggy and bright. Photograph: Jason Lloyd-Evans for the Guardian 
Rousteing was closely involved in sealing the deal. “I met them right at the 
start, and we clicked. They understand the depth in my work. They get that I 
have success because I work hard.” To paraphraseMelanie Griffiths in Working 
Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/27/why-working-girl-offers-the-real-deal-mike-nichols-melanie-griffith>
, Rousteing has a head for business and a bod for Instagram. “The point of my 
Instagram is to show the beauty of my life. I want to inspire people. 
Obviously, I’m not going to post a picture of me where I don’t feel like I am 
pretty, and I am not going to post a picture of my collection before it is 
ready. But everything is real. I can post a picture of a flower, of my grandma 
at Christmas.” The bio on his Instagram reads, “THIS IS MY REALITY”. To be 
fair, it is probably quite hard to take a bad photo of someone who looks like 
Rousteing.

He works at this. “I go to the gym every morning at 7.30. I work out, I box, 
and then I go to work for about 10am. I work late, so I eat in the office in 
the evening. And then I want to go to sleep, because I will be up early at the 
gym. I might go out Friday or Saturday, but not both.” He was working late in 
his office on the Friday evening in November last year when news broke of the
terrorist attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/paris-attacks-timeline-of-terror>
 that killed more than 130 people. Rousteing’s apartment, like many of his 
colleagues’, is in the 11th arrondissement, close to where the attacks took 
place, so they slept in the office. That weekend, he stayed in a hotel. “I 
don’t have anyone in my life in Paris,” he told Vogue. “My assistants and 
colleagues went to their boyfriend’s or girlfriend’s or parents’ – I don’t have 
that here.”

Rousteing does have a support network, but it is a meta, international one. 
“When I post on Instagram aboutJustin [Bieber] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/justin-bieber> or Lewis [Hamilton] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> or Kim or Rihanna, that’s a 
real friendship I am showing. If I love your album, I’ll post about your music. 
But also, we can call each other at 5am when we just need to talk.”

His connection to the Kardashians came through West, whom he first had lunch 
with seven years ago. These days, he is very close with Kris Jenner (“I am 
always with Kris”) and devoted to Kim. “I don’t care what anybody says about 
Kim. I love her. I love that she is a woman but has more power than so many 
men. And I love that she is so powerful but always takes care of the people she 
loves. And I admire her, because she is the best in the world at communicating 
with people.” Like it or not, Kim makes people want what she has. It’s a gift 
her friend Rousteing also has. Balmain’s global presence is only going to grow 
as the house’s new owners add their financial clout to the cultural pull of the 
Balmain army. “Fashion is a business. If you have a job in fashion, you have 
that job because people want fashion – and they want my fashion. You can 
dislike my taste, but you can’t say I’m not relevant.”
 