
The main ramp of Marina da Gloria, the sailing venue of the Rio de Janeiro 
Olympics, has partially collapsed,raising further questions about the quality 
of construction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/29/olympic-village-second-fire-rio-2016>
 in the Olympic host city.

'Don’t put your head underwater': visitors warned over Olympics pollution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/rio-de-janiero-water-pollution-olympics-2016>
Philip Wilkinson, a spokesman for the Rio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> organising committee, said high 
tides and stormy seas on Saturday were to blame for the damage. The collapsed 
structure, which is temporary, is the main access point for boats to reach the 
water. No one was injured in the incident.

Wilkinson said the construction company responsible for the project has been 
contacted and was expected to make the repairs within four days.Sailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sailing> competitions begin on 8 August.


Training will not be affected as the boats can use the permanent ramp to the 
side of the damaged structure, Rio 2016’s spokesman said. Mark Adams, 
International Olympic Committee spokesman, said “it would be wrong to make a 
great deal” of the Marina da Gloria incident. “In the run-up to the games, 
things happen,” Adams said.

World Sailing said in a statement that it is following closely the efforts to 
fix the ramp. Spokesman Malcolm Page said that a coach boat pontoon was also 
damaged on Saturday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Folympic-sailing-ramp-in-rio-de-janeiro-collapses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeb0e3a8a5f64b32c3f88b28ea882c9efe3a7a7e%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympic%20sailing%20ramp%20in%20Rio%20de%20Janeiro%20collapses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Folympic-sailing-ramp-in-rio-de-janeiro-collapses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympic%20sailing%20ramp%20in%20Rio%20de%20Janeiro%20collapses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Folympic-sailing-ramp-in-rio-de-janeiro-collapses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeb0e3a8a5f64b32c3f88b28ea882c9efe3a7a7e%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
 Construction workers are seen repairing the broken boat ramp at the Olympic 
sailing venue at Marina da Gloria. Photograph: Lukas Coch/EPA 
In another incident caused by strong winds in Rio, water inundated TV studios 
on Copacabana Beach near the volleyball arena. Iron boards were used to contain 
the waves.

Rio’s construction standards have been under heavy criticism since April, when 
a new elevated bike path that was heralded as a top legacy project of the Rio 
Olympics collapsed,killing two people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/21/rio-de-janeiro-bicycle-path-collapse-death-brazil-olympic-games>
.
 