
Once upon a time in Canberra, there was an ironclad convention. People in 
glass houses didn’t throw stones.


The response to short-term imbroglios about the misuse of parliamentary 
entitlements or about donations that don’t meet the pub test was to move on 
quickly. No one inside the system benefited from anyone looking too closely at 
the closed conventions of Canberra.

Bronwyn Bishop proved something of a step change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/30/bronwyn-bishop-apologises-error-judgment-travel-claims>
 in this practice. Labor’s aggressive pursuit of the former Speaker of the 
House of Representatives threw out the unofficial mutually assured destruction 
pact. Now, various imbroglios are fair game politically. It’s not entirely 
clear why the convention has changed, but it’s a welcome development. 
Progressively, a conversation is building about donations, disclosure, 
influence and perks.

Bronwyn Bishop travel expenses scandal: how it unfolded – timeline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/bronwyn-bishop-travel-expenses-scandal-how-it-unfolded>
I’ve written ad nauseum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/23/australia-must-reform-political-donations-trust-deficit>
 that this is one of the most important conversations we need to have in 
Australian politics, because cleaning up the system is the first step to 
ensuring that our representative democracy works for people, not rent-seekers 
and undisclosed interests.

But somehow, the serious conversation never seems to happen. Once upon a time 
it didn’t happen because of the three monkeys convention, but now, it isn’t 
happening because short-term scandals seem to be substituting for systemic 
action.

Every now and again a flare is fired, much finger-pointing and faux outrage 
and rank political expediency ensues, media outlets chase increments of the 
fresh scandal through the news cycle, very occasionallysomeone falls on their 
sword 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/brownyn-bishop-resigns-as-speaker-tony-abbott-announces>
 to stop the destructive cycle of sunlight being shone on dim places – then 
things return to normal.

The Labor senator Sam Dastyari is the current bunny in the headlights. Let’s 
step through his poor judgments 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/labor-senator-sam-dastyari-had-chinese-interests-foot-the-bill-for-travel-entitlement-repayment-20160830-gr4mlh.html>
. Dastyari blew his travel budget by $1,670.82. Instead of putting his hand in 
his own pocket he asked the Top Education Institute to write a cheque. The 
company is a private education provider, run by businessman Minshen Zhu, with 
links to the Chinese government.

The transaction was declared in accordance with the rules. So lets pause right 
here.

The rules allow this transaction to occur, which of course normalises the 
conduct if you are so steeped in the business of chasing corporate cash for 
political endeavours that you don’t stop and think for five minutes how this 
might look to people who don’t routinely chase corporate cash to cover their 
operating expenses.

Everyone in Australian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics> is chasing 
cash.

It’s not just random or rogue activity.

Everyone.

That’s the hard facts of the matter.

In the 1980s and for most of the 1990s, political fundraising was highly 
centralised – a handful of people, controlling a single pipeline. The prize was 
drumming up dollars for television advertising during campaigns.

Unless Australia reforms political donations, the trust deficit will grow | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/23/australia-must-reform-political-donations-trust-deficit>
Now the whole process is hardwired into organisational structures of political 
parties and their associated thinktanks: lots of people, chasing dollars to 
fund their campaigning activities (which cover a much greater field of activity 
than during the quaint analogue period) and also cover their own operating 
costs.

It’s more prolific, and it’s more diffuse, and inside the system, effective 
fundraisers are rewarded – it helps them aggregate power.

For someone like Dastyari, who has been a state secretary and who would 
probably struggle to tell you accurately how much cash he’s raised for Labor 
over the years, an inconvenient bill just north of $1,000 is lunch money, 
nothing you’d give even 10 seconds thought to.

As for China’s interest in Australian politics – a recent investigation by the 
ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-21/australian-groups-strong-ties-china-political-donations/7768012>
 found Beijing is now the largest source of foreign-linked donations in this 
country. Businesses with connections to China coughed up more than $5.5m 
between 2013 and 2015, according to that report. Aseparate report by Fairfax 
Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/foreign-minister-julie-bishops-links-to-chinese-political-donors-20160823-gqzauy.html>
 said the Western Australian division of the Liberal party had benefited to the 
tune of half a million dollars in the past couple of years from donations from 
Chinese businesspeople with links to the foreign affairs minister, Julie Bishop.

Sensible people in politics have been worried about this trend for quite some 
time, and worried about the appetite of some of their colleagues for chasing 
dollars from Chinese business interests, who are often indistinguishable from 
government interests.

The simplest course of action would be to ban foreign donations.

Dastyari’s lapse of judgment about the overspend has been compounded by a 
report on Thursday 
<http://www.afr.com/news/sam-dastyari-pledges-to-support-china-on-south-china-sea-beside-labor-donor-20160831-gr5mwk>
 revealing that during the recent election campaign he made sympathetic noises 
about China’s position with regard to the South China Sea, while standing at a 
press conference next to a donor who had very kindly picked up one of his legal 
bills.

It’s an elegant case study of a boiling frog.

Nothing will change after the Stuart Robert furore dies down. It never does | 
Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/nothing-will-change-after-the-stuart-robert-furore-dies-down-it-never-does>
If all the incentives in the system point you in a certain way, then this is 
the way the story inevitably ends – with a lack of clarity about where to draw 
boundaries.

This is the problem we need to talk about, the culture of self-harm that 
pervades in Australian politics. We need to understand that one dopey senator 
and his overspend and his overreach is a symptom, not an aberration, and not 
something that will change with a specific sanction on Dastyari.

We have to look at the system, not the symptom.

Someone has to wake these folks up, because bit by bit, action by action, they 
are sleepwalking into their own integrity crisis.
 