
Football has the Euros, politics has the party conferences and the fashion 
desk has its twice-yearly round of catwalk shows. For four weeks every February 
and September the Guardian fashion team goes on tour to see the clothes that 
will appear in shops four months later.

In practice the catwalk shows come around much more often – when you add in 
haute couture, menswear and the newer resort shows – there is pretty much a 
selection for the desk to cover every month.

The shows are central to our fashion coverage. They are important because they 
inform how we will cover the trends for the coming season in our supplements 
for the Guardian and the Observer, and for the website.

Each of the four fashion cities has a slightly different identity, although we 
approach them all in a similar way

They’re the starting gun for the clothes that will filter down to the high 
street and are often spectacles that in themselves rival any piece of 
performance art. The catwalks provide important business stories from an 
industry that makes a £27bn contribution to the UK economy and one where it is 
often women rather than men who are central players.

While we know most of our readers might balk at the thought of a £4,000 coat, 
we are reasonably confident they want to know about cultural shifts, big 
business and what might end up in Zara and Cos next season.


Each of the four fashion cities has a slightly different identity, although we 
approach them all in a similar way. First up is always New York, which throws 
up its own challenges. Not least how to look stylish when reviewing the 
Victoria Beckham and the Marc Jacobs shows in icy February conditions. (Trade 
secret: our team relies on layering with thermal tights from M&S and Uniqlo 
down jackets.)

London fashion week behind the scenes – a photo essay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/ng-interactive/2016/feb/23/london-fashion-week-behind-the-scenes-a-photo-essay>
Next the catwalk tour returns to home ground in London, where it is all hands 
on deck, as the Guardian and the Observer fashion teams dash around the city 
covering shows, presentations and parties – producing galleries, news, features 
and social media posts. Pret a Manger serves as an impromptu office since 
coffee and plug sockets are central to our 15-hours-a-day coverage.


Third is Milan where the huge brands such as Gucci, Prada and Armani attempt 
to define the season. On arrival at the hotel the editors riffle through the 
invitations left at the hotel reception and head off past 600-year-old 
cathedrals to make the first shows of the day. The Prada invitation is a 
highlight – often a postmodernist work of art in itself.

Finally comes Paris, the city that arguably has the most high-fashion 
reputation and is where – thanks to the likes of labels such as Céline, Saint 
Laurent and Louis Vuitton – the trends of the season really start to 
consolidate. Then it’s home on the Eurostar to recover from 28 days working 
without a break and to plan the coverage for the next six months.


London fashion week diary
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fon-the-road-with-the-guardian-fashion-team%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff408cfee1c6dfa51d35047583d880ff7d1dc90b9%2F0_420_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20road%20with%20the%20Guardian%20fashion%20team&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fon-the-road-with-the-guardian-fashion-team%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20road%20with%20the%20Guardian%20fashion%20team&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fon-the-road-with-the-guardian-fashion-team%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff408cfee1c6dfa51d35047583d880ff7d1dc90b9%2F0_420_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
 On Saturday evening the Guardian team celebrated the five-year anniversary of 
Mr Porter at a party at the Savile Club that featured waiters in bowler hats 
and a walk-in-wardrobe-cum-martini bar. Photograph: Guardian Fashion 
Thursday 18 February


This season London fashion week unofficially began with a party to launch 
Archive By Alexa at Marks and Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/04/alexa-chung-to-collaborate-with-marks-spencer-stylewatch>
. This capsule collection is based on clothes found in the company’s warehouse 
that have been updated by Chung. Best was a pie crust blouse and a mac – which 
at £79 is the most expensive piece in the collection. Alexa woreit to the 
launch and convinced us we wanted it.

Friday 19 February


The catwalks begin in a souped up multistorey car park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/19/london-fashion-week-catwalk-shows-insta-gratification>
 in Soho. Meanwhile BFC chair and Net-a-Porter founder Natalie Massenet accepts 
her damehood for services to retail and the fashion industry. The talk off the 
catwalk is how much the so-called “see-now-buy-now” approach to designer 
shopping will affect the shows.

Saturday 20 February


More editors are back from the New York shows by now and LFW really gets 
going. JW Anderson – named at the British fashion awards as both menswear and 
womenswear designer of the year – is the highlight on the catwalk. His show is 
inspired by interior designer David Hicks and features avant garde partywear.
Marc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/20/aime-robertson-marc-jacobs-london-fashion-week>
 also makes a special guest appearance on the front row to cheer on young 
designer AV Robertson, who interned at his label in New York.

Fashion to go: from the London catwalk shows straight into the shops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/19/london-fashion-week-catwalk-shows-insta-gratification>
Sunday 21 February


On the catwalk it was all handbags at dawn as accessories labels Anya 
Hindmarch, Hill & Friends and Mulberry went head to head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/21/its-handbags-accessory-labels-do-battle-at-london-fashion-week>
. Hindmarch based her collection on the early gaming era with motifs such as 
Pac-Man,Tetris and Rubik’s Cube on the catwalk while Hill & Friends also went 
for the novelty factor. All eyes were on Johnny Coca’s debut at Mulberry after 
the brand’s three-year hiatus from LFW, and Alexander McQueen’s one-off return 
to the London schedule. Off the runway we amused ourselves by playing “how many 
pairs of Vetements jeans can you count” (Vetements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/16/good-girl-bad-new-york-hoodies-grunge-pvc-rihanna-alexander-wang-marijuana-leaf-skirts-vetements>
 is a cult label based in Paris and very much the toast of street style this 
season).

Monday 22 February


Insiders refer to this as SuperMonday as it is the day when London’s big guns 
– includingBurberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/22/burberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay>
, Erdem and Christopher Kane, all show. Erdem’s catwalk set – a mishmash of 
dusty theatre props including antique chandeliers and marble fireplaces won the 
battle to dominate Instagram in the morning, while Christopher Kane’s bid to 
glamorise the rain bonnet in a show inspired by a TV program about hoarders 
topped the afternoon coverage.Jake Bugg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/27/jake-bugg-interview> sang 
live in the middle of the Burberry show and the brand won the unofficial battle 
of the front row with guests including Naomi Campbell, Laura Dern and Nicholas 
Hoult.

Tuesday 23 February


London fashion week drew to a close with shows from younger designers including
Marques’Almeida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/23/london-fashion-week-marquesalmeida-rock-a-1990s-look-to-tie-dye-for>
 and Ashley Williams. After five days of shows Jess Cartner-Morleysummed up the 
trends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/24/london-fashion-week-wardrobe-more-interesting-eiderdown-coats-showgirl-sequins-next-seasons-trends>
as “major coats, governess gowns, polo neck dresses, pieces of silver, pink, 
venetian blind chic and sequins”. Which pretty much describes the creative 
eclecticism that London fashion week is famous for.

To support our independent journalism and become part of a wider community of 
readers,sign up to become a Guardian Member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/welcome>.
 