
Everyone in Lisbon <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/lisbon> says that, 
since Portugal’s great age of exploration, the city has looked far out to sea. 
It took a hand-written list ofpratos de dia outside a little restaurant on the 
Rua das Janelas Verdes – Street of Green Shutters – to add spice to that truism 
for me. Today’s specials? “Tandoori chicken €6.50, pork saag €6.50, chicken 
dansak €6.50, pork biryani €5.50”.


The pork dishes tell the story on a plate. In 1497, Vasco da Gama’s first 
expedition to the Malabar coast inaugurated Portugal’s brief heyday as a 
maritime superpower and began an affair with India (above all in Goa, 
Portuguese until 1961) that persists until now.António Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/25/portugal-gets-new-leftwing-pm-after-election-winner-only-lasted-11-days>
, Portugal’s prime minister, comes from a part-Indian family that still has an 
ancestral house in the south Goan town of Margao.

Costa helped clear the path for the latest, and boldest, project to restore 
the links between the city’s hilly, labyrinthine old quarters and the 
waterfront that runs along the river Tagus to the sea. By the river at Belém, 
not far from the exuberant Jerónimos monastery built to celebrate Vasco da 
Gama’s return, the new Museum of Art, Architecture and Technology (MAAT 
<https://www.maat.pt/en>) will open on 5 October with a 12-hour jamboree of 
exhibition launches, music and performance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99dc114b3dd2b44baff6b26ccbbba0152b8d3d1c%2F0_50_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20waterfront%3A%20Lisbon's%20riverside%20regeneration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20waterfront%3A%20Lisbon%27s%20riverside%20regeneration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99dc114b3dd2b44baff6b26ccbbba0152b8d3d1c%2F0_50_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Power house: the renovated Central Tejo exhibition space at Belém. Photograph: 
EDP Foundation 
Visitors already besiege Belém (take the No 15 tram) to gasp at the show-off 
splendour of Jerónimos. Its outsize riot of late-Gothic decoration bears 
witness to the country’s short-lived burst of boundless confidence. Hordes also 
descend for a taste of the delicatepastel de nata (custard tart) served since 
1837 at the prettily tiledAntiga Confeitaria de Belém 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Antiga-Confeitaria-de-Belem/181321715253824>. A 
takeaway queue always snakes outside this cult bakery, but after waiting in 
line you can find refuge nearby in the seldom-visitedJardim Botânico Tropical 
<http://www2.iict.pt/jbt/>. Luxuriant and overgrown, this almost-secret garden, 
patrolled by lazily sauntering peacocks and wildfowl, gathers the trees and 
plants of Asia, Africa and the Americas.

If this riverside boasts an imperial heritage, it also has a gritty industrial 
past. The MAAT site lies next door to the Central Tejo, a hulking, handsome 
power plant-turned-exhibition space, already Lisbon’s answer to Tate Modern. 
Together, these twin centres will form a 38,000-square metre artistic “campus”. 
Central Tejo merits a visit in itself. In contrast to the Tate, its gargantuan 
turbines and pipes sit proudly intact within a red-brick cathedral of 
electricity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bd8824e52ad35748c0afa442b6152de106fb5a4%2F0_337_5082_3049%2F5082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20waterfront%3A%20Lisbon's%20riverside%20regeneration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20waterfront%3A%20Lisbon%27s%20riverside%20regeneration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bd8824e52ad35748c0afa442b6152de106fb5a4%2F0_337_5082_3049%2F5082.jpg>
 Flying saucer: the new Museum of Art, Architecture and Technology (MAAT). 
Photograph: Hufton+Crow 
Alongside, MAAT looks slinky and inviting on this lovely but long-neglected 
stretch of waterside. “It’s as though you just drift into the building,” says 
its British architect,Amanda Levete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/aug/29/amanda-levete-architect-portrait-artist>
, chosen for the project after a string of high-profile commissions including 
the V&A expansion in London (due early next year) and the transformation of 
Galeries Lafayette in Paris. The museum’s 15,000 creamy, crackle-glazed ceramic 
tiles bounce sunlight off the river from its cantilevered frontage and down 
into the main galleries. The roof slopes up towards a broad terrace that 
rewards you with epic views both back towards the city, and out towards the 
ocean.

Container ships glide slowly under the 25 April Bridge – named the Salazer 
Bridge after the Portuguese dictator, until his overthrow on that date in 1974. 
For much of the 4km between the Cais do Sodré station and the flamboyant Belém 
Tower, hectic dual-carriageways, railways and tramlines conspire to sever city 
from river. MAAT will soon be connected to central Belém by a pedestrian 
bridge, providing a precious lifeline.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4733a1145ca1eae04f0c43706a8f3aaa26beb46c%2F0_0_1244_1244%2F1244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20waterfront%3A%20Lisbon's%20riverside%20regeneration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20waterfront%3A%20Lisbon%27s%20riverside%20regeneration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4733a1145ca1eae04f0c43706a8f3aaa26beb46c%2F0_0_1244_1244%2F1244.jpg>
 City colours: jacaranda trees in bloom. Photograph: Teresa Rosas/Getty Images 
As with many European ports, Lisbon spent much of the late 20th century 
turning its back on the messy, and increasingly redundant, tangle of docks and 
wharves that had given it pomp and wealth. Now – as with Liverpool or 
Marseille, Bristol or Bilbao – culture and the leisure economy that partners it 
have driven the revival.

Back on the Rua das Janelas Verdes, the Museu Nacional de Arte Antiga 
<http://www.museudearteantiga.pt/english> offers not only a rich miscellany of 
medieval and Renaissance masterworks – fromHieronymus Bosch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/22/netherlands-s-hertogenbosch-hieronymus-bosch-anniversary>
 andAlbrecht Dürer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland/2014/dec/03/durers-polyhedron-5-theories-that-explain-melencolias-crazy-cube>
 to the unique St Vincent panels by Nuno Gonçalves – but a stylish garden café. 
Around here, in the neighbourhoods of Santos and Alcântara, briefly fashionable 
clubs and bars blazed a docklands trail for artists, designers and gallerists 
to come. Waterside chic still sprouts in patches. I wandered over waste lots 
behind the shells of half-demolished warehouses and came across a seedy bingo 
hall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70b75fa2671e56cb1838fbe93c9b6137d17f54b1%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20waterfront%3A%20Lisbon's%20riverside%20regeneration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20waterfront%3A%20Lisbon%27s%20riverside%20regeneration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboyd-tonkin-lisbon-waterside-district-maat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70b75fa2671e56cb1838fbe93c9b6137d17f54b1%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 On the right tracks: one of Lisbon’s many trams. Photograph: Danita 
Delimont/Getty Images/Gallo Images 
Yet the regeneration game gathers pace, and nowhere faster than at the LX 
Factory. In the shadow of the bridge, this barrack-like complex was built to 
house textile workshops in 1846. Now there’s a warren of new businesses, from 
design studios and courtyard cafés to the cavernousLer Devagar 
<http://www.lerdevagar.com/> (“Read Slowly”) bookshop. Housed in a former print 
works, with a bar inside, this temple to the arts shelves its eclectic stock 
high up into lofty rafters in a vast hall presided over by a flying-bicycle 
sculpture.

Compared to the studied cool of its post-industrial counterparts in 
Shoreditch, Barcelona or Berlin, the LX still has sacks of the offbeat, 
slightly reclusive, charm that old Lisbon made its trademark – and the 
renovated waterfront will surely retain. As the line from Leonard Cohen’s 
“Anthem”, emblazoned on a bar facade here, puts it: “There is a crack in 
everything… That’s how the light gets in.”

Essentials

EasyJet <http://www.easyjet.com/en>, Ryanair <https://www.ryanair.com/gb/en/> 
andTAP Portugal <http://www.flytap.com/UnitedKingdom/en/Homepage> fly to Lisbon 
from Gatwick and Stansted. October return fares start from around £100. Boyd 
Tonkin stayed at theHotel Jerónimos 8 <http://jeronimos8.com/index.php/en>, in 
the Belém district; doubles in October cost from around £120 a night B&B

MAAT Lisbon <http://maat.pt/en> opens on 5 October
 