
A record 65 million men, women and children were forced from their homes by 
war and persecution last year, leaving one in every 113 people arefugee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, internally displaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/internally-displaced-people> or seeking 
asylum <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/immigration> at the end of 2015, 
according to the UN.

The latest annual global trends study <http://www.unhcr.org/5748413a2d9> from 
theUN refugee agency, the UNHCR <http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/home>, 
shows that the total number of forcibly displaced people rose sharply last year,
increasing from 59.5 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/18/59m-people-displaced-war-violence-persecution-says-un>
 in December 2014 to 65.3 million in December 2015.

With 24 people being displaced every minute and the threshold of 60 million 
crossed for the first time, the number of forcibly displaced people across the 
world is now greater than the entire population of the UK. Were the 65.3 
million to be counted as the population of a single country, it would be the 
21st largest in the world.

The refugee crisis is a problem of poverty, not just migration | Sarah 
Dalrymple
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/20/the-refugee-crisis-is-a-problem-of-poverty-not-just-migration>
Although the total includes 21.3 million refugees and 3.2 million people 
awaiting asylum decisions, the overwhelming majority of the displaced – 40.8 
million – are exiled from their homes within the borders of their own countries.


The UNHCR said the figures had increased by more than 50% over the past five 
years as levels of displacement reached their highest since the aftermath of 
the second world war. The organisation added that it knew of no precedent for 
the level of risk posed by displacement on such a massive scale.

While forced displacement has been a growing phenomenon in most regions for 
the past 20 years, the agency says three factors are driving the current 
increase in numbers. Conflicts such as those inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> are lasting longer, fresh or 
familiar violence is breaking out or re-erupting frequently in countries such as
South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/11/south-sudans-soldiers-allowed-to-rape-civilians-civil-war-says-un-government-torture>
,Burundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/burundi-ethnic-violence-refugees>
,Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/yemen-fighting-rising-food-prices-scarce-resources-famine>
,Central African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/12/central-african-republic-must-be-built-from-scratch-francois-hollande-country-divided>
 andUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>, and the world is 
taking longer to figure out what to do with displaced people.
Major source countries for refugees 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-17T11:01:00/embed.html>
Filippo Grandi <http://www.unhcr.org/uk/the-high-commissioner.html>, the UN 
high commissioner for refugees, said the world was not doing enough to tackle a 
crisis with no end in sight.

“More people are being displaced by war and persecution – and that’s worrying 
in itself – but the factors that endanger refugees are multiplying too,” he 
said.

“At sea, a frightening number of refugees and migrants are dying each year; on 
land, people fleeing war are finding their way blocked by closed borders.”

And yet, said Grandi, politics in some countries was “gravitating against” 
asylum.

He added: “The willingness of nations to work together not just for refugees 
but for the collective human interest is what’s being tested today, and it’s 
this spirit of unity that badly needs to prevail.”


Conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa remained the greatest cause of 
displacement last year. Syria’s war left 4.9 million people living as refugees 
and a further 6.6 million internally displaced. In Iraq, conflict displaced 4.4 
million people internally and created more than a quarter of a million 
refugees. Yemen’s civil war, which began in March last year, has internally 
displaced 2.5 million people, while violence inLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> forced nearly half a million people 
to flee their homes.


More than half the refugees under UNHCR’s mandate are from just three 
countries: Syria (4.9 million), Afghanistan (2.7 million) and Somalia (1.1 
million). A further 5.2 million Palestinian refugees are registered withUNRWA 
<http://www.unrwa.org/who-we-are>, the UN agency for Palestinian refugees.


A refugee in Edinburgh: 'My children don’t want to know they’re Syrian'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/20/syrian-refugee-edinburgh-scotland-children-dont-want-to-know-syrian-world-refugee-day>
According to the UNHCR figures, Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia>, which has suffered decades of 
conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/15/colombia-end-in-sight-longest-running-conflict>
, remains the country with the highest number of internally displaced people 
(6.9 million). Behind it are Syria (6.6 million) and Iraq (4.4 million).

The violence in Yemen brought about more new internal displacement than any 
other conflict in 2015, with almost 10% of its population forced into internal 
exile.

The report also notes that, although Europe is struggling to cope with the 
arrival of more than 1 million refugees and migrants, the continent’s struggles 
are dwarfed by the challenge facing countries closer to the wars fuelling the 
crisis.

Eighty-six percent of the refugees under the UNHCR’s mandate last year – or 
13.9 million people – were in low- and middle-income countries close to 
conflict situations.

Turkey was once again the world’s biggest host country last year, taking in 
2.5 million refugees, most of them from Syria.Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> was next with 1.6 million people, 
whileLebanon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/lebanon> hosted more refugees 
compared with its population than any other country: 1.1 million people – or 
183 refugees for every 1,000 inhabitants. Next cameIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> (979,400), Ethiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> (736,100), Jordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan> (664,100), Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> (553,912), Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> (477,187), the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> (383,100) and Chad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chad> (369,540).

 * This article was amended on 20 June 2016 to correct the number of people 
being forced to flee from one in every 112 to one in every 113.
 