
Close to one in five people living in towns, cities and megacities across the 
world do not have access to a safe, basic toilet, according to WaterAid.

Some 600 million urban dwellers globally rely on a humiliating and haphazard 
array of the only services available to them in slums: filthy and crowded 
communal toilets, or rudimentary pit or bucket latrines that fail to meet 
minimum standards of hygiene, safety or privacy. A further 100 million people 
in cities do not even have access to these services and are forced to defecate 
in the open, using railway tracks, roadsides and even plastic bags dubbed 
“flying toilets”, the report found.

'God comes first, water second': Liberian clinics without taps – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/oct/28/water-liberian-clinics-toil-without-taps-monrovia-in-pictures>
WaterAid’s Overflowing Cities report 
<http://www.wateraid.org/stateoftoilets2016> ranks developing countries, where 
the majority of current population growth is happening, according to how they 
are accommodating the basic needs of urban dwellers. It highlights diseases 
like Ebola, which originatedin a remote rural community in Guinea 
<http://www.who.int/csr/disease/ebola/one-year-report/virus-origin/en/> and 
spread across towns and borders to killmore than 11,000 worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/17/west-africa-to-target-human-and-animal-health-together-to-fight-ebola-and-zika>
, and cholera, both carried via human excrement and fluids, as reminders of how 
devastating the effect of poor sanitation can be.

Liberia, one of the three west African countries at the heart of the Ebola 
epidemic, is ranked fourth worst in the world for the high proportion – 27% – 
of city dwellers practisingopen defecation 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_defecation>. 

India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> comes top of WaterAid’s list 
of countries with the largest number of urban dwellers without adequate toilets 
– some 157 million people in total, 41 million of whom defecate in the open. 
Although the Indian government has prioritised sanitation, the sheer scale of 
people migrating from rural areas to India’s cities has meant urban populations 
are expanding at a faster rate than such basic infrastructure is being built. 
As a result, the country has 68,000 preventable child deaths a year from 
diarrhoeal diseases, the report found.

China, which also has a massive rate of rural to urban migration, is the 
second worst, with 104 million people without safe sanitation.

However, WaterAid also ranks China top of the “most improved” countries for 
reaching the highest number of people in urban areas with safe, private 
toilets. The state has managed to build sanitation facilities faster than the 
pace of new arrivals, providing more than 329 million people since 2000 with 
urban sanitation systems, outpacing population growth by 9 million, it said. 
Brazil, North Korea, Vietnam and Pakistan were also in the charity’s “most 
improved” top 10.

Barbara Frost, WaterAid’s chief executive, said: “For the first time in 
history, more people around the globe are now living in cities. Cities should 
be a place for sustainable lifestyles offering healthy living, good 
infrastructure, wellbeing and economic growth. But the reality is that one 
person in every five living in a town or city today does not have access to a 
toilet or good sanitation and many live in poverty in overcrowded, rapidly 
expanding informal settlements.

“Not only does this lead to a lack of dignity for women and girls and health 
risks to poor families, this lack of sanitation also threatens the health and 
security of all city dwellers and leads to pollution of rivers and water 
sources. This World Toilet Day, we are calling on national leaders to deliver 
on their promises to meet the UN’sglobal goal six 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 to ensure access to safe water and sanitation. Everyone has the right to 
affordable access to these basic services that will lead to better lives and 
drive prosperity.”

Urban dwellers are expected to make up two-thirds of the world’s population by 
2050 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/news/population/world-urbanization-prospects-2014.html>
.

Last year, the World Health Organisation and Unicef warned that a lack of 
progress on sanitation threatens to undermine child survival and health gains 
made by countries and the international community.One child dies every two 
minutes <http://www.wateraid.org/what-we-do/the-crisis/statistics> from 
diarrhoeal diseases caused by dirty water, poor sanitation and hygiene. The 
practice ofopen defecation is also linked to stunting or malnutrition 
<https://www.unicef.org/media/media_86283.html>, which affects 161 million 
children globally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/30/the-guardian-view-on-stunting-malnutrition-is-holding-millions-of-children-back>
.

Africa’s biggest economy, Nigeria, is falling furthest behind in providing its 
rapidly growing urban population with toilets. For every city dweller reached 
with sanitation since 2000, two were left without, an increase of 31 million 
people in the last 15 years. India, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 
Bangladesh were also included in the top 10 falling furthest behind.


Remote Congo town gets water on tap for first time in a generation – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/02/water-on-tap-democratic-republic-congo-remote-town-world-water-week-in-pictures>
The report ranks South Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, 
the world’s newest nation, as the worst country in the world for urban 
sanitation. An estimated 84% of those living in the war-ravaged country’s urban 
areas have no safe toilets, one in two urbanites practising open defecation. 
Ghana, despite making great advances in development, and with one of the 
highest GDPs in west Africa, still has 80% of its urban population with poor 
sanitation.

All UN member states have committed to ensuring everyone has access to basic 
toilets by 2030 <http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/water-and-sanitation/>
, one of the sustainable development goals.

Andrés Hueso, WaterAid’s senior policy analyst, said: “WaterAid’s latest 
‘state of world’s toilets’ report has exposed several countries for failing to 
make progress in providing urban sanitation, despite their rapid economic 
growth. Often politicians prefer to invest in roads and other visible 
infrastructure and neglect the dirty issue of sanitation. But good sanitation 
is the bedrock of public health. Every town and city in the world needs to 
prioritise providing safe sanitation services to all the population in order to 
create a healthier, more sustainable future.”
 