
With China on course to become the world’s biggest box-office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/01/chinas-box-office-certain-to-overtake-us-as-takings-up-50-in-2016s-first-quarter>
 market within two or three years, Hollywood studios have been tripping over 
each other for a ticket to ride what Stephen Colbertrecently dubbed 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V4WBsahU3X4> “the pander express”. It’s hard 
not to be cynical when efforts to engage Chinese audiences usually seem to 
involve such screenwriting masterstrokes as getting your giant robots tolay 
waste to Shanghai <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i2A32hmxy5s> instead of San 
Francisco, or some lantern-jawed action hero displaying an unlikely taste for
hanzi-labelled soy milk. The world of cinema is supposedly bracing itself for 
complete realignment, but you could be forgiven for thinking the only people 
benefiting at the moment are washed-up American directors on the funding trail 
and Chinese stars you’ve never heard of looking to raise their global profile. 
But it’s time to look closer – billions of dollars and soft-power pre-eminence 
are on the table. Here are 10 parties with big stakes in Hollywood’s drive 
eastwards:

1. Wang Jianlin

Wang Jianlin: does China's richest man have a plan to take over Hollywood?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/19/wang-jianlin-chinas-richest-man-hollywood>
Hollywood’s involvement in China is not a one-way street. Looking for finance 
doesn’t just mean via box office – especially with China’s top media players 
keen to invest directly in the American industry.At the front of the queue is 
Wang Jianlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/19/wang-jianlin-chinas-richest-man-hollywood>
, Asia’s richest man and chairman of the Dalian Wanda conglomerate, which now 
owns AMC (second largest cinema chain in the US), Legendary Entertainment 
(producers of The Dark Knight and Jurassic World) and Dick Clark Productions 
(responsible for the Golden Globes). Some believe his conflicting interests in 
film production and exhibition might put him in breach of the 1948 antitrust 
ruling that broke up the studios’ monopoly.

With Wang only one of a number of big-walleted Asian investors bankrolling 
Hollywood,16 US congressmen recently called 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/01/world/asia/china-us-foreign-acquisition-dalian-wanda.html>
 for an inquiry into growing Chinese influence. But with the US industry 
looking to learn Chinese, how can they not expect the opposite to also be true?

2. Struggling franchises 

Warcraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/25/world-of-warcraft-the-beginning-review-end-already-nigh>
 – which took $47m (£38m) in the US and $221m in China – is the latest, 
greatest example of a teetering piece of IP that came good thanks to a 
last-gasp top-up from the eastern hemisphere.Pacific Rim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/11/pacific-rim-review> (US: 
$101m/China: $111m) andTerminator: Genisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/02/terminator-genisys-review-arnies-back-in-a-cynical-franchisebot>
 (US: $89m/China: $113m) also shored up disappointing American showings this 
way (possibly because sci-fi is still a novelty for Chinese audiences). But 
this dubious insurance policy is likely to expire soon. Hollywood’s dirty 
secret in the noughties, after DVD sales declined, was dumping substandard 
product on overseas territories and aggregating the numbers to break even. With 
Chinese filmgoers increasingly expecting quality, they’re likely to be one of 
the first markets to rebel.

3. Zhang Yimou

The Great Wall review – Matt Damon epic delivers spectacle but not soul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/16/the-great-wall-review-matt-damon-zhang-yimou>
With other Chinese directorial names such as Feng Xiaogang and Stephen Chow 
struggling to have impact outside their country, Zhang is the one best placed 
to benefit from the Hollywood presence. Originally part ofthe iconoclastic 
“Fifth Generatio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/21/3>n” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/21/3>, he is now firmly an 
establishment figure and already has international clout thanks toHero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/sep/26/philipfrench> and House of Flying 
Daggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1379290,00.html>
. His 2011 filmFlowers of War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/02/flowers-of-war-review>, an 
account of the Nanjing massacre starring Christian Bale, was one of the first 
big-scale US-Chinese co-productions – but was a dud in the west. His $160mThe 
Great Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/16/the-great-wall-review-matt-damon-zhang-yimou>
, released recently in China and due for release in the UK and US in spring 
2017, will be looking to finally perform the great crossover trick so fervently 
sought by Hollywood: a blockbuster with integral Chinese elements that doesn’t 
alienate the rest of the world. Hence the contentious (in the west) casting of 
Matt Damon in the lead, opposite a raft of Asian stars (Hong Kong favourite 
Andy Lau; boyband fodder Eddie Peng and Lu Han; the up-and-coming star Jian 
Tian – who is also lining up for Kong: Skull Island and the Pacific Rim sequel).

4. Marvel
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhollywood-china-big-industry-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd17ce844f38fb9c84756ea6ffb3da0f3cb1a1d48%2F0_156_4760_2856%2F4760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Open%20door%3A%20who%20benefits%20most%20from%20Hollywood's%20courting%20of%20China%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhollywood-china-big-industry-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Open%20door%3A%20who%20benefits%20most%20from%20Hollywood%27s%20courting%20of%20China%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhollywood-china-big-industry-players%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd17ce844f38fb9c84756ea6ffb3da0f3cb1a1d48%2F0_156_4760_2856%2F4760.jpg>
 Tilda Swinton in Hong Kong to promote Doctor Strange. Photograph: Anthony 
Wallace/AFP/Getty Images 
The Middle Kingdom has been an integral part of Marvel’s dazzling success over 
the last decades – hence whyDoctor Strange chose not to utter the T-word 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/26/doctor-strange-tilda-swinton-whitewashed-china>
. Before The Avengers in 2012, the company’s Chinese grosses were negligible, 
with little or no culture of superhero films there. Since then, every Marvel 
release apart from the second Thor film has made at least 10% of its final box 
office in China. With its cross-fertilising cinematic universe able to spark 
interest in even marginal first-time properties such asGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/guardians-of-the-galaxy-review-marvel-superheroes>
 andAnt-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/19/ant-man-review-mark-kermode>, the 
company has conducted a masterclass in creating and nurturing brand recognition 
in an ostensibly arid cultural climate; far more so than fellow Disney 
stablemate Pixar, which has struggled there. So China will continue to be an 
integral part of its strategy – even if it means that T now stands for Tilda, 
not Tibet.

5. China Film Group

China might be the new box-office Klondike, but that doesn’t mean Hollywood is 
walking away with all the nuggets. Only 34 foreign films are allowed into the 
country each yearunder the quota system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/01/china-limit-on-imported-films-relaxed-amid-box-office-downturn>
 – and the studios receive only 25% of the profits under a revenue-sharing 
scheme (around half of their takeaway elsewhere).China Film Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/07/la-peikang-chairman-china-film-co-chinese-film-industry-box-office-interview>
, the state-film behemoth, is the only sanctioned film importer and takes about 
22% of the proceeds for the pleasure.

So what’s good for Hollywood is good for the local coffers. Especially in 
2016: the mostly poor performance of local films has seen box-office 
projections flag well behind the $7.5-9bn range projected at the start of the 
year. MeaningChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Film Group has 
sneakily extended this year’s quota to 38; a permanent expansion is expected in 
2017.

6. Donald Tang

When two culturally far-flung entities such as Hollywood and China sound each 
other out, it’s the hour of the intermediary. Beijing-based media agency DMG 
made a name early as “gatekeeper” to culturally tone-deaf LA newbies, andhad a 
hand in Iron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/17/iron-man-3-collaboration-china>, 
Looper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/27/looper-review>, 
Transcendence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/17/transcendence-sci-fi-thriller-johnny-depp-review>
 and thePoint Break 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/04/point-break-review-ericson-core-pointless-remake>
 remake. But investment banker Donald Tang is shaping up as perhaps the most 
significant broker between worlds. The Shanghai-born former head of Bear 
Stearns Asia is now based in California; he helped shape Dalian Wanda’s AMC 
coup, secure Chinese financing for hyped startup STX and has connections to 
most of the big Chinese moguls. Now, with his company recently acquiring the 
mini-studio IM Global (responsible for Martin Scorsese’s forthcomingSilence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
), he’s getting his hands dirty. Proof, in this cross-border world, of how a 
flap of a banker’s chequebook in Beijing can start the cameras rolling 
elsewhere.

7. Scarlett Johansson
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fghost-in-the-shell-trailer-scarlett-johansson-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ghost%20in%20the%20Shell%3A%20trailer%20for%20Scarlett%20Johansson%20anime%20adaptation%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fghost-in-the-shell-trailer-scarlett-johansson-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ghost%20in%20the%20Shell%3A%20trailer%20for%20Scarlett%20Johansson%20anime%20adaptation%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fghost-in-the-shell-trailer-scarlett-johansson-video&media=>
Ghost in the Shell: trailer for Scarlett Johansson anime adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/14/ghost-in-the-shell-trailer-scarlett-johansson-video>
Chinoiserie was a popular style of western 18th-century decoration in which 
ceramics, interior design and gardens were given an oriental veneer. It’s still 
working for the 21st-century blockbuster industry as a quick-fix means of 
appealing to both east and west:Pacific Rim appropriated Japanese kaiju 
destruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/28/pacific-rim-us-cultural-domination-china>
, andBig Hero 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/01/big-hero-6-review-scott-adsit> 
took place in the fusion city of San Fransokyo. Both were big hits in China. 
After scoring decently there with 2014’sLucy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/24/lucy-film-review-scarlett-johansson-luc-besson-morgan-freeman>
, set in Taipei, Scarlett Johansson is fully embracing multiplex chinoiserie by 
putting a Caucasian face on an iconic Japanese character: the cyborg The Major 
in the live-action version of Ghost in the Shell. Thecries of yellowface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/15/scarlett-johanssons-role-in-ghost-in-the-shell-ignites-twitter-storm>
 will only be worth it if the film gets a Chinese release, and a chance at 
cementing Johansson’s stardom on that epic playing field.

8. Fan Bingbing

China’s biggest female box-office draw, and the “flower vase” (as locals dub 
stars opportunistically cameoing in Hollywood films) currently most likely to 
break through. When Tony Starkturned to Chinese medicine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=39m85puOQok> to get his chest shrapnel removed 
inIron Man 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/22/iron-man-3-review>, 
she was the wonky-eyed beauty in the operating theatre; she also had a 
blink-and-you’ll-miss-it part inX-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/25/x-men-days-future-past-review> 
(literally – she played the mutant Blink). Her English still isn’t fluent 
enough to fully leap the language barrier that has hindered most Asian actors, 
but she has more momentum than the old generation of bilingual Hong Kong stars 
and peers such as Zhang Ziyi who may have already spent their Hollywood 
currency. Getting sandwiched between Jackie Chan and Johnny Knoxville in this 
summer’sSkiptrace <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kkkOCtOrAcA>, one of the few 
big local hits of the year, will only have enhanced her crossover credentials.

9. Qingdao Movie Metropolis
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhollywood-china-big-industry-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa04bb0c221740c173fe685f721c4c8963bc542e%2F0_54_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Open%20door%3A%20who%20benefits%20most%20from%20Hollywood's%20courting%20of%20China%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhollywood-china-big-industry-players%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Open%20door%3A%20who%20benefits%20most%20from%20Hollywood%27s%20courting%20of%20China%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhollywood-china-big-industry-players%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa04bb0c221740c173fe685f721c4c8963bc542e%2F0_54_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Matt Damon promoting The Great Wall. Photograph: VCG/VCG via Getty Images 
Another way in which China is trying to out-Hollywood Hollywood is by 
establishing itself as a production base to entice the “runaway productions” 
that have spurned Los Angeles over the past 30 years. Recently fanfaring a 
massive 40% tax rebate for foreign productions, this Wanda-owned complex will 
be the world’s biggest studios when it opens in 2018. The Great Wall filmed 
scenes on the existing facilities, and Legendary’s forthcoming Godzilla and 
Pacific Rim sequels will line up there, too. But they’ll need to pack in more 
than in-house productions to give Qingdao that international lustre to match 
LA, Mumbai or even, hundreds of miles to the south, the fading glories of Hong 
Kong. Which means pulling in Hollywood blockbusters.

10. Cao Cao

'No ghosts. No gay love stories. No nudity': tales of film-making in China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/tales-of-film-making-in-china-hollywood-hong-kong>
As Hollywood tries to pack China with its wares, one man has made the most of 
a highly specialised niche that remains outside its sphere of influence.
Jonathan Kos-Read 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/17/magazine/the-american-who-accidentally-became-a-chinese-movie-star.html>
, 43, is the go-to guy for the token foreigner role in domestic Chinese films. 
With more than 100 appearances since the late 90s, Cao Cao – as locals know him 
– is the most recognisable white actor working in the country. Totally unknown 
in the west but handsomely capitalising on a parallel cinematic dimension that 
exists in Hollywood’s shadow, you won’t know him for such iconic parts as 
corrupt British copper inIp Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/ip-man-3-review-fast-and-furious-kung-fu-caper>
 and zombie lawyer in last year’s No 3 Chinese film Mojin: The Lost Legend.






































 