
The world is changing. Fast. Over the past 20 years in my home country of Ghana
 <https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/22732>, poverty levels have 
been halved, child mortality has declined significantly, and strides in 
governance have helped make it one of the leading democracies in Africa. I’ve 
witnessed this progress as a member of parliament, government minister and, 
most recently, transparency advocate.

These successes are the products of foreign direct investment, political 
leadership, active civil society – and foreign aid.

Like Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana>, aid has seen lots of 
changes in recent years. With the expanded involvement of the private sector, 
use of innovations like cash transfers, and former aid recipient countries 
becoming donors themselves, some might say traditional aid is obsolete.

 It is true that for countries like mine, foreign aid funds 
<https://public.tableau.com/views/OECDDACAidataglancebyrecipient_new/Recipients?:embed=y&:display_count=yes&:showTabs=y&:toolbar=no?&:showVizHome=no>
 occupy a relatively small portion of our budgets compared withinvestments in 
our oil and cocoa sectors 
<http://www.theafricareport.com/West-Africa/improved-ghana-cocoa-production-leads-to-world-surplus.html>
, or the money we raise through taxes; and that self-sufficiency is exactly 
what we are – and should be – aiming for. But many countries aren’t there yet.

The big reckoning: how many people did the millennium goals save?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/the-big-reckoning-how-many-people-did-the-millennium-goals-save>
While some might be ready to write off aid as a relic of the past, and look to 
other sources of revenue, for47 countries aid remains the largest development 
finance flow 
<https://github.com/devinit/digital-platform/blob/master/user-data/largest-intl-flow/largest-intl-flow.xlsx?raw=true>
. These countries are the least likely to attract investment and don’t yet have 
economies large enough to allow them to collect enough domestic revenue to meet 
their population’s needs. In these places, traditional aid is still important 
and relevant, especially if we expect to achieve thesustainable development 
goals (SDGs) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 and “leave no one behind”.

Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> should, of course, be 
used in conjunction with strategies to boost economic growth, but 
“trickle-down” economics does not work by default for the poorest and most 
marginalised communities, and we cannot rely solely on the momentum of economic 
growth to sweep us forward to meet the SDGs.

That said, we need aid done right. And a new Oxfam paper <http://oxf.am/Z6Na> 
charts a way forward.

If we truly want countries like Ghana to continue on their paths of progress, 
and the poorest countries to catch up, we need a new vision for what aid should 
do. It needs to help countries mobilise and sustain financing for their own 
development priorities, while strengthening the ability of national 
institutions to deliver the development their citizens demand – especially the 
poorest. And it needs to help people escape poverty in a sustainable manner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Four-vision-for-aid-help-poorest-people-help-themselves-global-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f2af846411d7784e2b3214638bf3ad39608fd1%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20vision%20for%20aid%3F%20Help%20the%20poorest%20people%20help%20themselves%20%7C%20Albert%20Kan-Dapaah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Four-vision-for-aid-help-poorest-people-help-themselves-global-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20vision%20for%20aid%3F%20Help%20the%20poorest%20people%20help%20themselves%20%7C%20Albert%20Kan-Dapaah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Four-vision-for-aid-help-poorest-people-help-themselves-global-goals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f2af846411d7784e2b3214638bf3ad39608fd1%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 A former street child helps another child to wash at Streetwise, an 
organisation that helps street children, in Accra, Ghana. Photograph: Melanie 
Stetson Freeman/Getty Images 
Development aid can, and should, support countries’ ability to lead their own 
development, and their citizens’ ability to hold their leaders accountable. 
Strengthening this “citizen-state compact” is central to achieving lasting 
development progress. And, as a form of public finance, aid can greatly support 
this process if it is targeted in a way that helps people gain greater 
decision-making power and creates space for civil society to monitor how aid 
money is spent.

 This vision isn’t radical or entirely new. Donors have made commitments along 
these lines in the past. What we need them to do is to honour the commitments. 
The world is changing fast, but we can’t afford to leave the poorest in the 
dust. Last yearmy country joined with 192 other UN member states 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/03/ban-ki-moon-hails-sdgs-agreed-by-193-nations-as-leaving-no-one-behind>
 to sign on to the SDGs and agenda 2030. We agreed to leave no one behind and 
reach those furthest behind first. Aid, done well, is an indispensable tool in 
this effort. Let’s not throw away our chances by leaving it untouched in our 
toolbox.


 * Albert Kan-Dapaah is a Ghanaian member of parliament and former minister
 