
Picture this. A woman is strolling by her favourite cafe when an interactive 
sign out the front recognises her and offers 20% off if she adds a sandwich to 
her usual latte purchase.

Coffee and snack in hand, she proceeds to a nearby clothing store, where the 
sales assistant greets her by name, despite the fact they’ve never met. He 
recommends a few newly arrived items her purchase history indicates she’ll 
like, but instead of lugging armfuls of clothes to the change rooms, she simply 
turns to a digital mirror nearby, where she changes her reflected self’s outfit 
with a simple hand gesture. When she settles on an item, she pays instantly and 
painlessly with her phone.

Though it seems heavily tinged with science fiction, this technology exists 
and is already in limited use. And it is just the tiniest tip of how networked 
sensors and smart devices will combine to disruptively reset how we live and do 
business.

It also highlights a counterintuitive but powerful facet of the next wave of 
digital technology; whereas the first iteration of digital commerce removed the 
personal element from our transactions and allowed us to comfortably buy 
anything from groceries to airline tickets while wearing pyjamas on our 
couches, the second iteration will use digital technology to boost that 
personal element, attuning our shopping experience to our individual 
preferences.

The key to this is the coming shift in how we think of and use networks. 
Today, we all have access to a powerful network—the internet—but access it 
mainly through devices like phones and laptops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Four-networked-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4685cf3eef3c33211e64895e1f8f0dc66b64c4e3%2F0_248_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20networked%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Four-networked-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20networked%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Four-networked-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4685cf3eef3c33211e64895e1f8f0dc66b64c4e3%2F0_248_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
 Photograph: mikkelwilliam/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
The network being built today will operate differently and instead be woven 
into the fabric of everyday experience, out of sight but connecting everything. 
Our phones will not only communicate seamlessly with everything from our 
thermostats, televisions, cars and calendars but those devices will also talk 
to each other, as the Internet of Things reshapes everyday transactions.

Optus Retail Associate Director Robbie Kruger said forward-thinking Australian 
businesses were already deploying more advanced networks to improve customer 
service. “Officeworks, for example, has rolled out a mobile point-of-sale 
solution, allowing customers to transact and pay anywhere in store,” he said. 
Door greeters can now multitask by greeting customers as well as acting as an 
untethered checkout staff member.

“When you’re transacting with a person right in front of you, rather than 
across a counter, it removes psychological barriers and makes both the 
customers and staff happier.”

Retailers are already using wifi networks to get to know their customers 
better, including tracking when they visit and what parts of their stores they 
frequent. They can then use these insights to tailor their customer offerings, 
ensure they always have adequate staff and tweak in-store environments to offer 
better shopping experiences.

The business that thrives in tomorrow’s networked world will be the one that 
harnesses networked sensors and data,"

With rising expectations of customer service and increasing online 
competition, the business that thrives in tomorrow’s networked world will be 
the one that harnesses networked sensors and their data to understand its 
customers and cater to their wants better than the competition.

Australian start-up Prospa, for instance, is growing rapidly by enabling 
small-business owners—a notoriously time-poor demographic—to apply online for 
loans in mere minutes and receive funds in less than a day, using nothing but 
their phones.

Meanwhile, near-field communications (NFC) tech means purchases can be made 
with a tap of a phone, but blockchain technology promises to truly 
revolutionise how we make transactions.

Blockchains use a large, distributed network of computers to create 
decentralised, tamper-proof public ledgers, potentially greatly increasing the 
ease of transactions while drastically reducing the opportunity for fraud. As 
the primary role of banks has been that of a trusted middleman in financial 
transactions, the rise of blockchain means any financial institution not making 
it part of their operations risks being cut out entirely.

But just as technology taketh away opportunities, it delivers too. Travel 
agents suffered greatly during the first boom in online commerce, as people 
embraced the savings of booking their own flights. But now virtual reality is 
offering new opportunities.

Optus’ Kruger said years of research had shown that would-be travellers often 
want a better sense of a destination before they book. Using virtual reality 
headsets to transport a person anywhere in the world is offering travel agents 
a way to reassert their relevance.

“The reason people go to travel agents is because of their expertise, which 
enable them to give their customers a much better understanding of the 
different destinations they are considering,” Kruger said. “With VR, a user can 
hold the globe in their hands, pick a city and then walk around it. It’s an 
immersive experience and means they can better choose the right holiday for 
them.”

Digital change: can Australia keep up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/optus-business-smart-future/2016/oct/28/digital-change-can-australia-keep-up>
In the end, the strength of this new breed of network comes from the 
accumulation of data. The more a travel agent knows of your travel history, the 
better the recommendations will be.

This accumulative power is prompting conversations between such unlikely 
collaborators as whitegoods manufacturers and carmakers, as they work to make 
everyday devices talk to each other. The vision is a world in which, from your 
office, you can ask your fridge how much milk is left, triggering an update to 
your spouse as they drive home, with their in-car navigation system suggesting 
a quick supermarket pit-stop.

“Today, everyone is focused on delivering the best possible customer 
experience,” Kruger said. “These customer experiences are only going to improve 
as businesses harness data from a wider array of devices to make their services 
more personalised.”

Ready to be a smart disruptor? Learn more about innovation for Australian 
organisations here <https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/313916696;141715991;r>.
 