
A trip to the US Tony Abbott had to cancel after losing the prime ministership 
toMalcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>
 cost taxpayers more than $60,000.

The latest update of parliamentary entitlements 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/publications/parliamentarians-reporting/parliamentarians-expenditure-P37/>
 shows Abbott had been planning a trip on 25-27 September last year as prime 
minister, but the visit was aborted after he was replaced by Turnbull in a 
Liberal party leadership ballot on 14 September, just 11 days before he was due 
to fly out.

The aborted trip still cost taxpayers $60,282.75, according to the register of 
entitlements.

Clarification was sought from Abbott’s parliamentary office to explain the 
cost, but questions were referred to the prime minister’s office. It advised 
that questions should be directed to the Department of Finance, but the 
department said the government did not comment on the work expenses of 
individual senators and members.

Just days before Abbott was ousted, he had taken a two-day trip to Papua New 
Guinea, from 9-11 September, where he attended the annualPacific Islands Forum 
<http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/events/43842> for lengthy talks about climate 
change. Hisregister of expenditure of entitlements 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P37_ABBOTT_Tony.pdf> shows the 
trip cost taxpayers $15,697.75.

Back in Canberra, on 11 September, Abbott was then caught in an awkward moment 
in Parliament House before a community roundtable on the resettlement of Syrian 
refugees.

Labor wins votes in lower house to force Coalition to debate banking inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/labor-wins-votes-in-lower-house-to-force-coalition-to-debate-banking-inquiry>
While standing with Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton, Dutton joked to Abbott 
that because some attendees were running late it felt like the roundtable was 
running to “Cape York Time”. Abbott replied, “We had a bit of that up in Port 
Moresby.”

Dutton then replied: “Time doesn’t mean anything when you’re, you know, about 
to have water lapping at your door 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/11/peter-dutton-jokes-with-tony-abbott-about-rising-sea-levels-in-pacific-nations>
.”


Three days later Abbott lost the prime ministership to Turnbull. 

The parliamentary entitlements also show the contents of George Brandis’s 
bookcase has expanded again.


The attorney general has demonstrated his friendship with his colleague, 
Christopher Pyne, by using taxpayer dollars to buy the latter’s bookA Letter to 
My Children <https://penguin.com.au/books/a-letter-to-my-children-9780522867985>
.

Late last year Brandis also bought the Sky News host Peter van Onselen’s book 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P37_BRANDIS_George.pdf>, 
Battleground: Why the Liberal Party Shirtfronted Tony Abbott, and Greg 
Sheridan’s ode to his own wild years spent with Abbott, among others, when they 
were at university, When We Were Young and Foolish.

George Christensen, the Liberal National party federal member for Dawson, did 
not buy a single book with taxpayers’ money in the last six months of last year,
according to his register 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P37_CHRISTENSEN_George.pdf>. But 
in the first six months he purchased nearly two dozen books with taxpayer 
dollarson the rise of radical Islam and the threat of 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/politicians-spend-up-on-taxpayerfunded-books-20151203-gleviv.html>
 Islamic State, as well as a separate title about the degeneracy of Australian 
intellectuals.

Bronwyn Bishop’s register 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P37_BISHOP_Bronwyn.pdf> shows 
she repaid the cost of her controversial $5,227.27 helicopter flight from 
Melbourne to Geelong for a Liberal party fundraiser on 5 November 2014.

Bishop eventually tendered her resignation as Speaker of the house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/brownyn-bishop-resigns-as-speaker-tony-abbott-announces>
 as a consequences of the “Choppergate” scandal, on 2 August 2015.
 