
Women’s rights activists have condemned the two-year sentence given to an 
HIV-positive man who claimed to have had sex with more than 100 women and girls 
inMalawi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>.

The Malawi Human Rights Resource Centre (MHRRC), the Gender Coordination 
Network and the African Women’s Development and Communications Network (Femnet) 
branded the sentence of Eric Aniva a disgrace, and demanded it be reviewed. 
Anivaadmitted in a BBC documentary <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-36843769>
 that he had had sex with women and girls in traditional “cleansing” rituals.

“We are shocked and appalled that a man, living with HIV, has for over two 
decadessexually violated children as young as 12 years of age 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-36843769> in an outdated, retrogressive 
culture that is harmful for women and girls,” said Emma Kaliya, executive 
director of MHRRC.

Court convicts Malawi 'hyena' who had sex with over 100 women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/court-convicts-malawi-hyena-who-had-sex-with-100-women>
“What message does this send to all perpetrators of sexual violence hiding 
behind discriminatory and destructive cultural practices – that you can get 
away with only two years? This is a disgrace and a big letdown to the women and 
girls of Malawi. The courts of justice must revoke and reconsider this 
sentence.”

Aniva’s case is the first to be tried under Malawi’s Gender Equality Act 
<http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=16723&LangID=E>
 of 2013.

“This is a great disappointment to the test of a new law that should otherwise 
be stringent enough to fully protect women and children. We are enraged,” 
Kaliya added.

Hellen Apila, Femnet’s head of advocacy, said: “These are the destructive 
cultures we are fighting against that have continued to endanger and harm women 
and girls inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. This particular 
case presented a great opportunity for the Malawi judicial system to affirm its 
commitment to justice for women and girls in Malawi, but it has failed them.”

Aniva, 45, was sentenced on Tuesday after being found guilty of two counts of 
harmful practices last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/court-convicts-malawi-hyena-who-had-sex-with-100-women>
.

His case was brought to court after he spoke to the BBC about his role as a 
“hyena” earlier this year. In parts of southern Malawi, hyenas are paid by 
families to perform a cleansing sexual ceremony with widows to “exorcise evil 
spirits”. Parents also pay them to have sex with their adolescent daughters to 
mark their passage into adulthood.

The charges brought against Aniva related to sex with bereaved widows as none 
of the younger girls would testify.

Aniva, who pleaded not guilty, told AFP immediately after the sentence: “I am 
disappointed because I thought I would be given a suspended sentence.”

Judge Innocent Nebi told the court that Aniva “had no regard to the feelings 
of widows, no regard to dignity of women and it is even doubtful that condoms 
were used … Such a culture has no place in Malawi.”

Aniva’s lawyers said they would appeal the sentence.

Despite some success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/nov/29/malawi-success-reducing-hiv-infection-world-aids-day>
 in reducing HIV prevalence rates in Malawi, more than9% of the country’s 15- 
to 49-year-olds are infected with the virus 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/malawi>.
 