
My day starts like a film cliche, with me, the hapless city dweller, getting 
lost amid the rolling hills of Shropshire. I drive down a near-vertical road 
dubbed “Dangerous Hill”, get stuck behind a tractor and stared down by some 
cows before being forced to ask a smirking farmer if my satnav really is right 
to send me through a shut farm gate.

It turns out it is and, shortly after, I pull up in The Bridges pub 
<http://www.thebridgespub.co.uk/> car park, where my guide for the day, Craig 
Jones, is waiting with a mountain bike and a thermos of hot coffee. Craig runs 
Muddy Cwtch (“cwtch” meaning cuddle in Welsh) with his partner Charlotte 
Griffin, a nutritionist, who’s provided the day’s healthy meals and snacks. 
They grew up in Shropshire, got sucked into London for work but are now 
returning to their roots to offer mountain bike days and weekenders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fd5dd8061ee9d8f4de698b696557254db70ce33%2F39_60_1391_940%2F1391.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Over%20the%20Shropshire%20hills%20and%20far%20away%20%E2%80%93%20by%20mountain%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Over%20the%20Shropshire%20hills%20and%20far%20away%20%E2%80%93%20by%20mountain%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fd5dd8061ee9d8f4de698b696557254db70ce33%2F39_60_1391_940%2F1391.jpg>
 Muddy Cwtch owners Charlotte and Craig 
We’re joined by a friend of mine, whom I don’t get to see enough of these 
days, as we both have young kids and live miles apart. Riding around beautiful 
English countryside seemed like a great chance to catch up, away from the usual 
infant interruptions. She’s a more experienced mountain biker than me, a 
relative beginner at riding off-road – especially the narrow tyre-width, 
single-track trails which will make up some of today’s route.

We practise some basic skills in the car park, then Craig shows us our 17-mile 
loop on the OS map. The distance doesn’t sound much, especially if you’re used 
to road-cycling figures, but he tells me you tick off miles much more slowly on 
a mountain bike and the close contours on the map suggest there are a good few 
hills to conquer en route.

We then hop into Craig’s truck to drive up the hill to our starting point. 
This may seem like a cop-out but it can kill the day to start with such a 
brutal hill climb.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a3da7a61e4310c617f5610108cf2a98fba176e5%2F290_419_1342_805%2F1342.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Over%20the%20Shropshire%20hills%20and%20far%20away%20%E2%80%93%20by%20mountain%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Over%20the%20Shropshire%20hills%20and%20far%20away%20%E2%80%93%20by%20mountain%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a3da7a61e4310c617f5610108cf2a98fba176e5%2F290_419_1342_805%2F1342.jpg>
Our ride starts up on the Long Mynd, a stunning moorland plateau that runs 
through the Shropshire hills. We can see green fields and russet heaths for 
miles around and I’m blown away by how beautiful it is. Millions of years ago 
there were volcanoes here; now it’s an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and 
it’s easy to see why.

It had rained relatively recently, so the ground was soft and spongy with some 
good puddles to dodge. Or, in my case, splash through with childlike enthusiasm 
– though little foresight for how I’d be riding in wet shorts for the rest of 
the day. We ride down hills, bounce over tree roots and pass through fields of 
ponies, sheep and lambs.

The highlight view is the limestone escarpment of Wenlock Edge, which rears up 
like a mountain ridge that wouldn’t look out of place in the Alps. It inspired 
the works of AE Housman and LS Lowry, among others. We dwell long enough to 
have a protein ball from the stash Charlotte’s prepared. They’re tasty and a 
welcome homemade alternative to the gels and power foods cyclists use for 
energy but which I always find quite sickly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35f0e5061ba187094fa0766e64181d94ccb4a47f%2F778_0_4694_3648%2F4694.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Over%20the%20Shropshire%20hills%20and%20far%20away%20%E2%80%93%20by%20mountain%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Over%20the%20Shropshire%20hills%20and%20far%20away%20%E2%80%93%20by%20mountain%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35f0e5061ba187094fa0766e64181d94ccb4a47f%2F778_0_4694_3648%2F4694.jpg>
 Charlotte’s protein balls Photograph: Muddy Cwtch 
We climb a few hills, one in such tough, sticky mud we have to dismount, and 
ride down some very fun single-track, with gorse bushes, steep drops and 
deadpan, grass-chewing sheep in our path adding to the excitement and 
atmosphere.

We have lunch on a bench by an actual babbling brook in the Carding Mill 
valley. Charlotte has packed us veggie burrito wraps with black beans, quinoa 
and peppers, a squash salad and hard-boiled eggs, all of which go down a treat. 
We finish off with a takeaway espresso at the National Trust cafe, where I 
catch my reflection and see my face is splattered in mud, which makes me look 
as though I have a funny dark-brown strain of chickenpox.

We ride through the pretty town of Church Stretton, our only real bit of road 
riding all day, before making our way up through a pine forest, its verges 
dotted with brightly coloured spring flowers. I’m not sure if the hills are 
getting tougher or my legs are getting more tired but I’m starting to feel the 
climbs, until a buzzard circling overhead provides a welcome distraction.

The woods deliver us back to the Long Mynd and a busy gliding club. We get a 
wonderful close-up view of a plane being towed for take-off, while snacking on 
figs, grapes and apricot flapjacks, then enjoy a gentle ride to the plateau’s 
highest point at Pole Bank. There, we chat to some friendly ramblers. We’ve 
seen quite a few today, but only a couple of other mountain bikers. Craig tells 
me it’s not really a mountain bike honeypot, as most riders go to Wales or 
specialised trail centres.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a4e750cf42adec11eb63fd14d91c7f9d88c9eef%2F0_0_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Over%20the%20Shropshire%20hills%20and%20far%20away%20%E2%80%93%20by%20mountain%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Over%20the%20Shropshire%20hills%20and%20far%20away%20%E2%80%93%20by%20mountain%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmountain-bike-day-tour-shropshire-hills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a4e750cf42adec11eb63fd14d91c7f9d88c9eef%2F0_0_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
While I can see the appeal of riding trails designed purely for mountain 
biking, and I did like the more technical single-track that we rode a lot, that 
wasn’t the highlight of my day. What I loved the most was riding around this 
striking and hugely varied landscape, which cleared my head in the most amazing 
way.

Could we have hired bikes locally and found a route online to follow 
ourselves? Possibly, but having a guide took so much of the hassle out of the 
day. And not having to worry about directions at every turn meant we could 
concentrate on enjoying the riding and scenery, while chatting along the way.

Muddy Cwtch could have organised our accommodation for the night, and many of 
its guests come for the whole weekend, often riding for the second day, too, 
but we have to get back to our families. So, after a quick blast down a stony 
hill toThe Bridges pub 
<http://www.thebridgespub.co.uk/accommodation-at-the-bridges/> car park where 
we started, I head off with a blueberry recovery smoothie and delicious salmon, 
potato and pea frittata made by Charlotte, feeling as mentally refreshed and 
physically nourished as I can remember feeling in a very long time.

• The trip was provided by Muddy Cwtch (muddycwtch.com <http://muddycwtch.com/>
). A day’s guided mountain biking, including food and bike hire, costs £75. A 
weekender, including skill training, bike hire, Saturday and Sunday rides, food 
and two nights’ private accommodation costs £250pp (£225 excluding bike hire). 
Pick-ups from Shrewsbury station can be arranged
 