
Global population hit 7.3 billion midway through 2015, an increase of 2 
billion since 1990. It willcontinue to climb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/29/un-world-population-prospects-the-2015-revision-9-7-billion-2050-fertility>
 steadily, according to forecasters, reaching8.5 billion in 2030, 9.7 billion 
in 2050, and 11.2 billion in 2100 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=51526#.V20Lidfd79I>.

But there is more to the population story than unprecedented numbers. The rate 
of growth is continuing to slow – the overall growth rate has beenfalling since 
the 1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/29/un-world-population-prospects-the-2015-revision-9-7-billion-2050-fertility>
 – and demographics are shifting.

Here is what the data shows beyond top line projections.

Globally, women are having fewer children than ever before

“The number of births has peaked, or has levelled off globally,” says John 
Wilmoth, director of thepopulation division 
<http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/> in the UN’s department of 
economic and social affairs. “Some countries still have increasing numbers of 
births but for the world as a whole, we’re not adding people to the population 
through births. We’re mostly adding to the population because people are living 
longer.”

Almost all countries have experienced reductions in family size, with 46% of 
the world’s population 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0ahUKEwjs7dqYoafNAhWHKsAKHaE4DJ0QFggoMAI&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.un.org%2Fen%2Fdevelopment%2Fdesa%2Fpopulation%2Fpublications%2Fpdf%2Ffertility%2Fworld-fertility-patterns-2015.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGewvUmYOK2Atb7nWa1tQb0lNj2LQ&bvm=bv.124272578,d.ZGg>
 (pdf) now living in countries with low levels of fertility, where women have 
fewer than 2.1 children on average. This includes all countries in Europe and 
Northern America and significant parts of Asia and Latin America.

Eight percent of the world’s population live in high-fertility countries that 
have experienced limited reductions in fertility and where the average woman 
has five or more children in her lifetime. As the graphic below shows, 
low-income countries have thehighest fertility rates 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN/> as a general rule, with 
Niger the highest at an average of 7.6 children per woman.
Fertility rates have dropped 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/archive-5-zip/giv-12515I1Hlw3yR4tuI/>
In contrast to those countries facing consistently high fertility rates, more 
than 40 countries are expected to decrease their population between 2015 and 
2050.The UN says fertility 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwiQrNvRoKfNAhXpD8AKHcCRCoEQFggiMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fesa.un.org%2Funpd%2Fwpp%2FPublications%2FFiles%2FKey_Findings_WPP_2015.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEDu0SqRISgx0T1oZt6vqdjSrCJog&sig2=bDxahv4mqUjgCpBwACq-1A>
 in all European countries is now below the level required for “full 
replacement of the population in the long run”.

Birth rates are dropping, but death rates are dropping faster

Even if global fertility rates were to drastically reduce to replacement 
levels, populations would continue to grow for some time due to what experts 
refer to asthe population momentum 
<http://www.worldbank.org/depweb/english/modules/social/pgr/index02.html> – the 
increasing number of people surviving to reproductive age and beyond.

Since 1960, the birth rate has dropped considerably in countries of all income 
groups, but this has not translated into a decline in the global population 
because the death rate has dropped even faster, especially in low-income 
countries, as the graphic below shows.
Birth rates are dropping, but death rates are dropping faster 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/br-dr/giv-1251583GKXoN6Xh3N/>
In 2015 global life expectancy rose to 71.4 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/global-life-expectancy-increases-by-five-years-to-71-who>
, a five-year increase since 2000. Africa experienced the highest increase in 
that time, partly due toimprovements in child health 
<http://www.who.int/gho/mortality_burden_disease/life_tables/situation_trends_text/en/>
 and increased access to HIV treatments.

While rising life expectancy presents a new set of challenges, Wilmoth said it 
was important not to lose sight of the good news. “The narrative around these 
issues is often negative, but when you think about the increase in life 
expectancy and the overall improvement in health conditions that has made 
population growth happen, this is an enormous reduction of human misery that 
has led to longer life,” he says.

Wilmoth says it is the world’s poorest countries, where the bulk of the 
population growth is taking place, that have the biggest challenges ahead. 
“It’s the countries that are growing very rapidly, 3% or 4% per year, and 
therefore they are doubling in size over 25 years – that is a pace of increase 
which is difficult to sustain,” he says.

“It’s just very challenging when a country is trying to improve the level of 
healthcare and education, and at the same time they’re having to constantly 
chase after population growth and increase the size of everything at a rather 
significant pace. The challenge is scaling up.”

Africa has the most rapid population growth

More than half of global population growth between now and 2050 is expected to 
take place in Africa. The UN estimates that33 countries in Africa 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwiQrNvRoKfNAhXpD8AKHcCRCoEQFggiMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fesa.un.org%2Funpd%2Fwpp%2FPublications%2FFiles%2FKey_Findings_WPP_2015.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEDu0SqRISgx0T1oZt6vqdjSrCJog&sig2=bDxahv4mqUjgCpBwACq-1A>
 have a high probability of tripling their populations, this includes Angola, 
Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Mali, Niger and Uganda. The 
most notable growth is expected in Nigeria, where the population is estimated 
to surpass that of the US by 2050, making it the third largest nation on earth.
Most populous countries 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-31T10:21:34/embed.html>
But within this diverse region there are African countries and cities bucking 
the trend – Ethiopia’s capital, Addis Ababa, has afertility rate of 1.7 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34732609>. Some experts tout the 
possibility for Africa to follow trends in many parts of Asia, where lowered 
fertility rates and aslowdown in population growth rates 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwik-rP7v5jNAhWDxRQKHWDfDbgQFggcMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.eastwestcenter.org%2Ffileadmin%2Fstored%2Fmisc%2FFuturePop09Development.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGPgBTEDLc2vQ75fSB8R0Xzg3f49A&sig2=QdoUkCJGwvZCbKYu8c92Hw&bvm=bv.124088155,d.d24>
 took place from the 1960s, including in Japan, Singapore, Thailand and 
Indonesia. As the graphic below shows, fertility is projected to decline in 
Africa too, but the pace with which this happens will have important 
implications for development.
Fertility rate in Africa 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/maps/giv-12515aUxEEfSB7lHu/>
Education and family planning can influence fertility rates

There are a number of factors that can play a role in a country’s fertility 
rates, including its investment in education, the availability of family 
planning services, the status of women’s rights and the prevalence of early and 
forced marriage.

The UN Population Fund (UNFPA) argues that addressing these key issues is 
fundamental to slowing population growth. “Population dynamics are not 
destiny,” theUNFPA’s population matters report 
<http://www.unfpa.org/publications/population-matters-sustainable-development> 
says. “Change is possible through a set of policies which respect human rights 
and freedoms and contribute to a reduction in fertility, notably access to 
sexual and reproductive healthcare, education beyond the primary level, and the 
empowerment of women.”

While more women are using contraceptives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/08/rise-use-contraception-global-population-growth-family-planning>
 than ever before, globally there are still 225 million women who would like to 
avoid or delay pregnancy but are unable to access a modern form of 
contraception. Campaigners say an important step in slowing population growth is
addressing this gap <http://who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs351/en/> and 
recognising women’s rights to choose if and when they have children.

Research has also shown the impact of education on lowering fertility rates – 
educated girls are more likely to marry later and have fewer children.The UN 
estimates 
<http://en.unesco.org/gem-report/sites/gem-report/files/girls-factsheet-en.pdf> 
that in sub-Saharan Africa, women with no education have an average of 6.7 
births, women with primary education have an average of 5.9 births, and women 
with secondary education have an average of 3.9 births.

Also important is the provision of maternal and child health services. Many 
researchers and campaigners support the theory thatincreased child survival 
rates can lead to lower fertility rates 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Who-We-Are/Resources-and-Media/Annual-Letters-List/Annual-Letter-2014#MYTHTHREE>
, as parents choose to have fewer children when they know there is a higher 
likelihood the ones they havewill survive into adulthood 
<http://www.unicef.org/about/history/files/sourcebook_children_1990s_part2.pdf> 
(pdf).

Hans Rosling, statistician and co-founder of data foundation Gapminder 
<https://www.gapminder.org/>, echoes this sentiment in his work, arguing that 
ending population growth starts by saving the poorest children 
<https://youtu.be/BkSO9pOVpRM>.

Wilmoth agrees, saying that while the link between improved maternal health 
and reduced fertility can be difficult to demonstrate empirically, historical 
studies show that parents have family size goals in mind. “They’re less likely 
to have an additional birth because the current children are less likely to 
die.”

More people in less space: rapid urbanisation threatens global health | Seth 
Berkley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/28/rapid-urbanisation-threatens-global-health-more-people-less-space-population-infectious-disease>
Reframing the debate

The challenges of population growth are clear, not least the threats to 
biodiversity from increased pollution, deforestation, intensive agriculture and 
urbanisation. Because the stakes are high, there is a heated debate over how to 
tackle the issue. There are growing calls for less of a focus on overpopulation 
andmore on overconsumption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/28/global-population-science-growth-study-wars-disaster-disease>
, including those outlined in Stephen Emmott’s bookTen Billion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/30/stephen-emmott-ten-billion>
, which calls for drastic behavioural change to curb an unprecedented 
environmental crisis.

Wilmoth argues the key to meeting some of these challenges lies in reframing 
the conversation, putting human rights at the fore. “The use of the term 
overpopulation portrays a certain bias, that you’re focusing on the number of 
people rather than the level of development,” he said. “Is a country 
overpopulated or is it under-developed? I think sometimes the discussion is 
exaggerated, and there’s not enough conversation about the possibility for 
development to keep pace with population growth.

“There is a real opportunity here. But that opportunity can only be grasped if 
the growing number of young people today are empowered with education and 
employment, and have access to contraception, so that the generation that 
follows them won’t be bigger still.”
 