
The winner

Facing relatively weak fresh competition from new releases, Oz the Great and 
Powerful <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151291/oz-the-great-and-powerful>
 managed a decent hold, declining 30% from the previous weekend for a 10-day 
total of £7.7m. That's enough for eighth place among 2013 releases so far, 
behindLes Misérables <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150107/miserables> 
(£39.9m),Wreck-It Ralph 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150381/wreck-it-ralph> (£22.0m), Django 
Unchained <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144406/django-unchained> 
(£15.4m),The Impossible <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148744/impossible>
 (£13.2m),A Good Day to Die Hard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150229/a-good-day-to-die-hard> (£10.6m), 
Lincoln <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149491/lincoln> (£8.5m) and 
Quartet <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148763/quartet> (£8.2m). Oz is 
certain to overtake the last three in that list, and Disney will be hoping for 
a lot better than that, especially with Easter still to come. But it's clear 
that the film is nowhere in the same league commercially as Oz producer Joe 
Roth's Alice in Wonderland, which reached a hefty £37.8m here in 2010.

Not recorded in the official takings for the weekend are Saturday and Sunday 
previews ofThe Croods <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151435/croods>, from
DreamWorks Animation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/27/dreamworks-animation-job-cuts-guardians>
. Believed to be in the £1.7m zone, the caveman film will have provided strong 
competition to Oz in matinee slots. Comic Relief on Friday also presented a 
challenge to all films in the market, especially family-skewing fare such as Oz.

The casualty list

Not counting The Croods previews, three new titles arrived on 300-plus 
screens, and all disappointed. London cops-and-robbers thrillerWelcome to the 
Punch <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150232/welcome-to-the-punch> did 
best of the bunch, which is remarkable given that it debuted on just £460,000. 
That's the lowest tally for a third-placed film since July 2010, when World Cup 
football was still laying waste to UK cinemagoing. It's also the weakest 
box-office for a new entry since Christmas 2011, when Bollywood picture Don 2 
led a notably meagre field of fresh product.

Distributor Momentum will be disappointed with the result for Punch, which 
stars James McAvoy and Mark Strong, but it could have been worse. Warners had 
an even lower number to contend with for its warring-magician comedyThe 
Incredible Burt Wonderstone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151434/incredible-burt-wonderstone>, 
starring Steve Carell and Jim Carrey. Delivering weekend takings of £306,000 
from 386 cinemas, and a puny screen average of £793, the result suggests that 
in the notoriously fickle market for big-screen comedy, affection for these 
toplined stars has significantly waned. The premise and cumbersome title may 
also have represented negatives for audiences.

Taking up the rear is Red Dawn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151440/red-dawn>, a remake of the 1984 US 
invasion actioner, arriving belatedly having filmed in 2009 and then become 
stuck in legal limbo. Despite a cast including Thor's Chris Hemsworth and The 
Hunger Games' Josh Hutcherson, this slice of gung-ho US patriotism always 
looked a tough sell in the UK, and new player Koch Media may not be too 
disappointed with £255,000 from 341 cinema, and a £749 average.

The survivor

While the new entrants floundered, and most existing titles fell by 
significant amounts, the shining exception proved to be Steven Soderbergh'sSide 
Effects <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151294/side-effects>, down just 
15%. Either, uniquely in the market, its audience was not at all interested in 
Comic Relief or Six Nations rugby or, more plausibly, the film is enjoying 
strong word of mouth among cinemagoers.

Crash and burn

Having landed in 33rd place on its opening weekend with just £19,200 from 105 
cinemas,Fire with Fire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151438/fire-with-fire> predictably 
plummeted in its second session. Now languishing in 77th place, having shed the 
majority of its initial sites, the Josh Duhamel action film fell by a 
calamitous 96%, with second-frame takings of £850 from 13 venues, delivering a 
£65 average. The transfer to DVD can't arrive soon enough.
 Sexy, lurid, steamy … The Paperboy. Photograph: Rex Features 
The alternatives

While the wide releases fared pretty dismally, films arriving on fewer than 
100 screens in many cases performed just as badly.The Paperboy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149976/paperboy> achieved a screen 
average of £1,730, which on a typical weekend would hardly be a cause for 
riotous celebration, especially since you would expect decent numbers when the 
rollout is limited to 82 carefully selected cinemas. However, since that's the 
third highest average in the market, credit is due to distributor Lionsgate. A 
debut of £142,000 was enough for 13th place, with 58% of the total earned in 
the generously defined London and West End regions. Strong marketable elements 
included stars Zac Efron, Matthew McConaughey and Nicole Kidman, while an 
attractive poster successfully communicated a sexy, lurid, steamy drama with 
strong critical endorsement. In fact, reviews were highly mixed, with a 
Metacritic score of just 45/100.

A documentary about the 1945 Labour government's creation of the welfare state 
may not suggest itself as an easy sell at cinemas, but add the cachet of 
esteemed director Ken Loach andThe Spirit of '45 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151365/spirit-of-45> had more than a 
fighting chance. Released on 17 screens, the film took around £18,000 on Friday 
and Saturday before surging on Sunday thanks to a live post-screening Q+A with 
Loach, beamed into 49 cinemas from London's Ritzy Brixton. That was enough to 
deliver a healthy three-day tally of £78,000 (or £83,000 including previews).

Other limited releases fared less well. Horror remake Maniac 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149030/maniac>, shot from the POV of 
killer Elijah Wood, disappointed with £21,400 from 53 sites, plus previews. 
Vinyl, based on the true story of veteran Welsh rockers the Alarm inventing a 
fictitious band to front their latest recordings, floundered, with £9,800 from 
60 venues, plus previews. Best results were in Wales. In arthouses,Beyond the 
Hills <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146661/beyond-the-hills>, with 
£16,100 from 15 cinemas, plus £2,800 previews, failed to match the debut of 
Romanian director Cristian Mungiu's4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/jan/11/worldcinema.drama>, which began its 
run in January 2008 with £67,000 from 22 sites, plus £13,000 in previews. 
Beyond the Hills may have fared better via the Curzon on Demand home-viewing 
platform, but those figures are not released. The admiredShell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149905/shell>, with £9,700 (plus 
previews) from 12 cinemas, arguably represented one specialised release too 
many. Scotland, where the intimate drama is set, delivered 51% of the total.

The future

Since those Croods previews were not included in official tallies, the frame 
overall placed a dismal 51st out of 52 in the league table of weekend takings 
for the past year. Box-office is 34% down on the equivalent session from 2012, 
when The Devil Inside, 21 Jump Street, We Bought a Zoo and Contraband all 
re-energized the market. It's also a troubling 53% down on average weekend 
box-office for the past year. Cinema bookers are now pinning their hopes on 
Melissa McCarthy comedyIdentity Thief 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151293/identity-thief>, which has already 
grossed $124m in the US. And of course The Croods, the first DreamWorks 
Animation title to go out through 20th Century Fox, already looks a slam-dunk. 
Joining the fight for the Easter audience is Bryan Singer's priceyJack the 
Giant Slayer <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151433/jack-the-giant-slayer>
, starring Nicholas Hoult and Ewan McGregor, while Nicolas Cage vehicleStolen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/153681/stolen> aims to challenge the 
notion that cinema audiences are generally looking for something fresh and 
different.

Top 10 films

1. Oz the Great and Powerful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oz-the-great-and-powerful>, £2,609,465 from 
539 sites. Total: £7,683,699

2. Side Effects, £759,363 from 371 sites. Total: £2,277,861

3. Welcome to the Punch, £460,250 from 370 sites (New)

4. Wreck-It Ralph, £426,343 from 458 sites. Total: £21,995,949

5. Parker, £308,335 from 276 sites. Total: £1,229,889

6. The Incredible Burt Wonderstone, £305,936 from 386 sites (New)

7. Mama, £266,521 from 299 sites. Total: £5,054,683

8. Red Dawn, £255,448 from 341 sites (New)

9. Hansel & Gretel: Witch Hunters, £221,452 from 270 sites. Total: £3,178,317

10. The Guilt Trip, £157,016 from 284 sites. Total: £814,530

Other openers

The Paperboy, 82 sites, £141,881

The Spirit of 45, 43 sites, £77,717 (+ £5,511 previews)

Maniac, 53 sites, £21,384 (+ £6,943 previews)

Paradesi, 20 sites, £19,635

Beyond the Hills, 15 sites, £16,148 (+ £2,803 previews)

Vinyl, 60 sites, £9,758 (+ £3,547 previews)

Shell, 12 sites, £9,724 (+ £5,111 previews)

Earthbound, 11 sites, £2,676

Michael H Profession: Director, 6 sites, £950
 