
Shared universes are all the rage right now in the comic-book film realm, 
thanks to the mega-success of Marvel Studios and their Avengers series. DC 
Comics is following suit with the release of next year’s Batman v Superman: 
Dawn of Justice.

On Tuesday, Paramount Pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paramount-pictures> and Hasbro announced a 
new deal that will see the studio and Allspark Pictures, Hasbro’s film label, 
build a similar cross-property onscreen universe, featuring popular characters 
from five of the toy company’s brands: GI Joe, Micronauts, Visionaries, Mask 
(Mobile Armored Strike Kommand) and ROM.

Channing Tatum: I was forced to make GI Joe: Rise of Cobra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/24/channing-tatum-gi-joe-rise-of-cobra-forced-studio>
Paramount and Hasbro have previously collaborated on four Transformers movies, 
which have collectively grossed more than $3.8bn to date, and two GI Joe 
movies, which grossed more than $675m worldwide.

According to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/paramount-hasbro-gi-joe-universe-848920>
, the two companies are aiming to mimic the success of the Transformers series 
by having Oscar-winning screenwriter Akiva Goldsman (A Beautiful Mind, I Am 
Legend) lead a writers’ room to develop a creative roadmap to connect the 
properties.

Hasbro reveals plans for four more Transformers movies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/05/hasbro-plans-four-more-transformers-movies-plus-tv-and-digital>
Brad Grey, Paramount chairman and CEO, said in a statement: “Hasbro and 
Allspark Pictures put storytelling at the center of everything that we do. 
These brands are filled with memorable stories and vivid characters, and this 
universe creates a framework for how they will become interconnected. Extending 
our partnership with Paramount allows us to continue our long-term strategy and 
overall vision to build dynamic worlds for all of our brands, and we are 
thrilled to collaborate with them as we develop these properties.”

A fifth Transformers film is planned for release in 2017, with star Mark 
Wahlberg returning to the franchise. Director Michael Bay has yet to confirm 
his participation.

As for the GI Joe films, a third was announced in 2013, but’s it’s unknown 
whether this new deal will change those plans.
 