
Yacht club

Fashion is often subject to a high seas takeover – and with fashion Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/mstinalawson/?hl=en> this summer an advert for 
yachting holidays, it’s no wonder that Paris SS17 had a nautical moment. There 
was a kind of sun-bleached, been-out-on-the-deck vibe to collections including 
Chloé and Loewe. The former added bowline knots to knitted dresses, and 
reworked naval bibs to suitable-for-work shirts. The latter – withJW Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/03/jw-anderson-loewe-interview> 
involved – had more of a shipwrecked vibe, complete with patchwork, muslin, 
jute and luggage suitable for long journeys. Models walked to the soundtrack of 
a film of sea and oil barrels, courtesy of artist Magali Reus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8ef5f4a5cb1684bcb9254881c9bbb1f6aa4f1c5%2F0_0_2606_3909%2F2606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20six%20trends%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20six%20trends%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8ef5f4a5cb1684bcb9254881c9bbb1f6aa4f1c5%2F0_0_2606_3909%2F2606.jpg>
 Yacht club … Chloe SS17, Paris fashion week, September 2016. Photograph: 
Estrop/Getty Images 
Lawn-chair prints

A 1970 portrait by William Eggleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/24/william-eggleston-portraits-review-national-portrait-gallery>
 of his distant relative Devoe Money was surely on the moodboard of brands 
includingBalenciaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/02/demna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect>
 and Chloé. Money sits on a patterned floral couch wearing a floral dress. Turn 
the couch into a jacket and it could have walked down the catwalk at 
Balenciaga, where these kind of loud 70s florals, more typically at home on 
porch furniture than clothing, provided the Money shot for social media, on 
dresses and matching boots. Word has it that the image of stylist and current 
all-round style influencer Lotta Volkova in one of these dresses broke a 
certain corner of the internet.

Ain’t Laurent Without Yves

Designer Anthony Vaccarello, 36, had to follow Hedi Slimane at Saint Laurent – 
Slimane got the revenues for the brand up to £839m in 2015, before exiting. 
Vaccarello’s plan, as revealedat the show on Tuesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/27/anthony-vaccarello-brazenly-sexy-debut-yves-saint-laurent-paris-fashion-week>
, was to go big with the house’s founder, Yves. The YSL logo, mostly absent 
during Slimane’s reign, was back: giant in neon outside the venue, and on 
stiletto heels in the show. The clothes also referenced Yves’s muse Paloma 
Picasso and a specific leather piece in the archive. Elsewhere,Balmain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/29/kim-kardashian-balmain-paris-fashion-week-olivier-rousteing>
 designer Olivier Rousteing used a colour palette worthy of Yves at his 
Moroccan villa, Jardin Majorelle
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb45cf2390b838ed8030ab7ae8ac89c83fa78742b%2F7_0_2808_4205%2F2808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20six%20trends%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20six%20trends%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb45cf2390b838ed8030ab7ae8ac89c83fa78742b%2F7_0_2808_4205%2F2808.jpg>
 Slogan chic … Christian Dior, SS17, Paris fashion week, September 2016. 
Photograph: SIPA/Rex/Shutterstock 
Winter in summer

.While the “See Now Buy Now” revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/14/time-lag-catwalk-highstreet> 
was largely missing in Paris, designers acknowledged that times are changing by 
making collections ostensibly for spring/summer but without much thought to 
summer temperatures. Dries Van Noten had a trenchcoat drenched in jet, polo 
necks and lots of black. Balmain was dominated by knitwear albeit, in a Balmain 
way, slit up to the middle of most models’ thighs. AndLanvin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/28/paris-fashion-week-lanvin-makes-sense-cold-light-of-day-bouchra-jarrar>
 had cardigans, jackets and pyjama shapes suitable for very glamorous 
hibernation. Overheating may come as standard in high fashion next summer.

Slogan chic

Minimalism has been in trouble for a while now and the final death knell 
sounded this season – with slogans taking over the catwalk, the absolute 
opposite of the blank, discreet, whispery world of tasteful knitwear and black 
trousers. A bag at Loewe proclaimed “See U Later” while dresses atStella 
McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/03/stella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel>
 said “Thanks Girls”, both the kind of banality more familiar to WhatsApp 
groups than high fashion. It was left to Maria Grazia Chiuri, inher first 
collection at Christian Dior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/30/maria-grazia-chiuri-christian-dior-debut-feminist-message-paris-fashion-week>
, to make a T-shirt statement that was guaranteed likes: “We Should All Be 
Feminists.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee7fd4457e525c7f98c89f3e6c19712384d072f2%2F0_0_2606_3909%2F2606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20six%20trends%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20six%20trends%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fparis-fashion-week-six-trends-next-spring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee7fd4457e525c7f98c89f3e6c19712384d072f2%2F0_0_2606_3909%2F2606.jpg>
 Eighties OTT … Isabel Marant, SS17, Paris fashion week. September 2017. 
Photograph: Estrop/Getty Images 
Eighties OTT

80s party girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/08/saint-laurent-in-paris-the-return-of-the-80s-party-girl>
 continues her seduction of style for spring. The catwalks were full of all her 
favourite things – metallics, leather, 10-denier tights, stilettos and anything 
ruched. Vacarello’s collection for Saint Laurent had a lot of this, as did 
Balenciaga, along with leather trenchcoats worthy ofCagney & Lacey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rm-tZCwZIm0> and dresses out of Michelle 
Pfeiffer’s Tequila Sunrise wardrobe. Isabel Marant’s collection had the 
designer’s typical bobo favourites – padded jackets, floral prints, frilly 
sandals – but a short red metallic dress had the shot of sheen that nodded to 
the glamour decade. Expect to see on modern-day clothes horses such as Kendall 
Jenner in the coming months. No costume party necessary.
 