
There is a tradition in Kinshasa, the capital of the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo>, that artists hang their 
paintings on the outsides of their studios, for the whole world walking by to 
look at.

Some paintings reflect the very streets where they hang – bars filled with 
music and dancing, streets overcrowded with rusting cars and elegantsapeurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/may/21/the-dandies-of-kinshasa-coup-fatal-alain-platel-sadlers-wells-in-pictures>
 strutting down the pavements, bejewelled and bedecked in flamboyant outfits. 
Others depict a utopia, a vision of the DRC that has left behind the conflict, 
poverty and corruption of the past century. Almost all are steeped in politics.

Love in the time of watermelons: 100 years of art from the Congo – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jul/10/100-years-of-art-from-congo-in-pictures>
It is these paintings, and other artworks stretching back 90 years, that are 
to form the first ever retrospective of art from the DRC. Opening on Saturday 
at theFondation Cartier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/24/fondation-cartier-30-years-portrait-artists-anniversary>
 in Paris, the expansive show incorporates 350 paintings, photographs, 
sculptures and comic books from 41 different artists.

Most of these works have never been displayed internationally, having sat 
among private collections in Belgium, France and Switzerland, while others were 
dug out from colonial archives in Brussels and a few brought over fromKinshasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/15/-sp-forty-years-rumble-in-the-jungle-kinshasa-muhammad-ali-george-foreman>
, direct from the artists themselves.

The exhibition may have taken just one year for the curator, André Magnin, to 
put together but it has been his passion for almost 30 years, having travelled 
back and forth to the DRC meeting and championing many of the artists now 
displayed. With more eyes than ever turned to the African art world, and the 
recent rise inAfrican art fairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/oct/17/flying-nuns-and-multicoloured-zebras-todays-best-african-art-in-pictures>
 in cities such as New York, London and Paris, Magnin, who is the world’s 
foremost expert on African art, said the time felt right to finally work with 
the Fondation Cartier to realise his vision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89ff712edb55fa0ea987d0000623a386ad10fc2f%2F0_0_2415_2118%2F2415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89ff712edb55fa0ea987d0000623a386ad10fc2f%2F0_0_2415_2118%2F2415.jpg>
 Amour & Pastèque, by Chéri Samba, 1984. Photograph: Chéri Samba/Fondation 
Cartier 
“People see the DRC as just this country of war and death and suffering but 
look around – these are such beautiful works filled with such colour and humour 
and sensuality,” said Magnin, standing before thePopular-style 
<http://theculturetrip.com/africa/dr-congo/articles/the-zaire-school-of-popular-painting-an-art-of-independence/>
 paintings of Pierre Bodo. “I want this exhibition to widen people’s 
perceptions of the country, show not only how beautiful but also how diverse 
and how political the art has been over those many decades. I have been wanting 
to do this show since 1987 but it is only now that the time felt right.”

The exhibition itself works backwards, beginning with the contemporary work of 
some of the younger artists painting in the capital today and ending on a 
series of “precursor” paintings: primitive watercolours dating back to 1926 
that had lain forgotten in the depths of the Library of Brussels archive, until 
they were recently rediscovered by Magnin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c69df143264d1f3ec5fe097f6b0a8e441f50d48%2F0_0_5996_4562%2F5996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c69df143264d1f3ec5fe097f6b0a8e441f50d48%2F0_0_5996_4562%2F5996.jpg>
 Untitled, by Antoinette Lubaki, c.1929. Photograph: Antoinette 
Lubaki/Fondation Cartier 
Among the newer works are a collection of photographs by Kiripi Katembo that 
depict the city of Kinshasa reflected in the dirty water that covers the 
streets, offering a certain poetry to the chaotic and polluted streets of the 
capital. Another series, by Sammy Baloji, superimposes photos of Congolese 
tribes taken on a Belgian expedition in the late 1800s on to watercolours of 
the country, painted by a Belgian artist during colonial times – a pointed 
comment on the legacy of colonisation.

Also on display are comic books of Papa Mfumu’eto, who between 1990 and 2000 
produced the most popularbande dessinée (comic strips) in Kinshasa. Though they 
were fictional, they drew from everyday life and the corrupt politics of the
Mobutu dictatorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/10/where-concorde-once-flew-the-story-of-president-mobutus-african-versailles>
 and at their peak were more popular than the daily newspaper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2feded1403ae41fb46a5d19ce87aac07682bf1c6%2F0_0_4256_6129%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2feded1403ae41fb46a5d19ce87aac07682bf1c6%2F0_0_4256_6129%2F4256.jpg>
 La Nostalgie, by JP Mika, 2014. Photograph: JP Mika/Fondation Cartier 
An elusive figure, Mfumu’eto made his first public appearance in seven years 
to visit the retrospective inParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>. 
Speaking to the Guardian, he explained how he had become drawn to the medium of 
comic strips. He said: “My five older sisters died before turning five and then 
I came along and my mother was incredibly protective of me.

“I wasn’t really able to play with other kids because my mother was afraid of 
losing me like she lost my sisters. I felt very isolated and anonymous in terms 
of the world around me and the comics came to me as a way of escaping that. The 
comics brought people to me – they followed the stories and wanted to know what 
I would create next.”

His first comic, which depicted Mobutu as a boa constrictor who swallowed 
things and threw them up again as money – still the most popular comic ever 
sold in Kinshasa – can be seen in the exhibition, alongside numerous others 
produced over the decade. Mfumu’eto often responded to the wishes of his 
readers, and whenMobutu died in exile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/25/mobutu-sese-seko-remains-repatriated-congo-zaire>
 in Morocco in 1997, the artist illustrated him impregnating a woman in hell 
and having to burn there forever.

However, making critical statements on politics in the DRC, even in the format 
of art, can often be a dangerous occupation. Mfumu’eto said he had been 
threatened by the authorities about his comics, while Bodo, another “Popular” 
artist and evangelical pastor whose paintings feature in the exhibition, died 
last September under allegedly suspicious circumstances.

Most artists, however, have continued regardless. One of the most 
internationally renowned Congolese artists in the exhibition is Chéri Samba, 
58, whose works have been shown at the Pompidou in Paris as well as at MoMA in 
New York and at the 2007 Venice Biennale. Having begun life as a billboard 
painter in the 1970s, he went on to pioneer the Popular style of art – bright, 
eye-catching works that focused on everyday life and often incorporated text.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb1455d6f939fc1a44de064d5dffdd53396a00e3%2F0_0_2516_1737%2F2516.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb1455d6f939fc1a44de064d5dffdd53396a00e3%2F0_0_2516_1737%2F2516.jpg>
 Untitled, by Pili Pili Mulongoy. Photograph: Pili Pili Mulongoy/Fondation 
Cartier 
“With my paintings I want to captivate people and I want the messages of my 
paintings to be direct,” Samba said. “I direct my work at the leaders and I 
want to use my paintings to talk about subjects they may have forgotten but are 
important to the people. My paintings inspired by daily life and for me, the 
meaning of Popular art is where people of all milieux can recognise the themes, 
the topics, the subjects that I am treating. This was created as art for the 
people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86bfb2b50806a02d83be5e3dddfac63eef52f206%2F127_88_6589_3980%2F6589.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86bfb2b50806a02d83be5e3dddfac63eef52f206%2F127_88_6589_3980%2F6589.jpg>
 Untitled (Match Ali-Foreman, Kinshasa), by Moke, 1974. Photograph: 
Moke/Fondation Cartier 
“I believe everyone in earth has a mission and I believe that God gave me the 
tools to paint and speak my messages through my paintings.”

Figures from Nelson Mandela <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela> 
toBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> crop up in 
his paintings, though one of the most powerful works on display in the 
retrospective is a piece calledLittle Kadogo, I am For Peace, That is Why I 
Like Weapons 
<https://www.artsy.net/artwork/cheri-samba-little-kadogo-i-am-for-peace-that-is-why-i-like-weapons>
. It is a portrait of his son dressed as aCongolese child soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/sep/29/congo.humanrights>, palms up in 
surrender and looking directly out at the viewer.

“I can’t separate my works from politics and I don’t think I ever could,” said 
Samba. “Yes, my work has got me into difficulty, I have been stopped by the 
authorities, but it has never gone any further than that and I don’t care. It 
will never stop me from painting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb2e18828b6b756b2f5a94b95a8a72eb4488e7a2%2F0_0_6614_4494%2F6614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20hosts%20first%20ever%20retrospective%20of%20art%20from%20Democratic%20Republic%20of%20the%20Congo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fdemocratic-republic-of-the-congo-art-paris-fondation-cartier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb2e18828b6b756b2f5a94b95a8a72eb4488e7a2%2F0_0_6614_4494%2F6614.jpg>
 Oui, il faut réfléchir, by Chéri Samba, 2014. Photograph: Chéri 
Samba/Fondation Cartier 
Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, said Samba, was everywhere 
in Kinshasa, from the posters on the streets to the facades of people’s houses. 
Now, more than ever, the art scene in the city was thriving, he said. He was 
heartened that a new generation had taken on the mantle of Popular art and that 
it was now being seen beyond the city and country’s borders.

Indeed, Samba said he would continue to paint as he had always done. “For 40 
years I’ve always been doing the same thing in my paintings, particularly in 
terms of the message,” he said. “The only thing that has changed is the grey 
hair in my beard.”

 * Beauté Congo 1926-2015 Congo Kitoko 
<http://fondation.cartier.com/#/en/art-contemporain/26/exhibitions/1771/upcoming/1789/beaute-congo/>
will be at Fondation Cartier pour l’art contemporain in Paris from 11 July-15 
November 2015
 