
Paris fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/paris-fashion-week> 
has long been code for chic – the rarefied world of Avenue Montaigne, bird-like 
couture clients in Chanel suits and gamines in ballet flats. But, on the eve of 
the spring/summer 2017 shows, there’s a new mood blowing into the city of 
Chanel, Christian Dior and Louis Vuitton. Chic is out, cool is in. London 
fashion week was once the home of new talent and cutting-edge trends, but now 
Paris is moving in for this territory.

This season there will be several debuts of designers at established brands – 
beginning with Anthony Vaccarello at Saint Laurent on Tuesday evening. 
Vaccarello, a 33-year-old Belgian-Italian, takes over from Hedi Slimane. His 
aesthetic, seen at both his own brand and work with Versus, is brazenly sexy, 
and his show promises to be more in-your-face than Slimane’s indie-influenced 
work. In a statement announcing his appointment in April, Francesca Bellettini, 
president and CEO of Saint Laurent, commented that Vaccarello “impeccably 
balances elements of provocative femininity and sharp masculinity in his 
silhouettes”. His first work for the brand, an advertising campaign released in 
July, kept the fashion crowd guessing: the images featured no clothes at all. 
An Instagram post earlier this month was more revealing – in both senses. It 
featured model Anja Rubik in a high-cut metallic swimsuit, tan lines from a 
bikini visible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fparis-fashion-week-chic-is-out-and-cool-is-in%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3ee69e58ad59f786cd88c1151fbf7ee38bd3c5e%2F0_269_5568_3339%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20chic%20is%20out%20and%20cool%20is%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fparis-fashion-week-chic-is-out-and-cool-is-in%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20chic%20is%20out%20and%20cool%20is%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fparis-fashion-week-chic-is-out-and-cool-is-in%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3ee69e58ad59f786cd88c1151fbf7ee38bd3c5e%2F0_269_5568_3339%2F5568.jpg>
 Maria Grazia Chiuri and Pierpaolo Piccioli walk the runway during the 
Valentino haute couture in July. Photograph: Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images 
Other debuts see women designers moving into positions more recently held by 
men. The relative unknown Bouchra Jarrar will show her first collection for 
Lanvin on Wednesday and Maria Grazia Chiuri – ex of Valentino – does the same 
at Christian Dior on Friday. Chiuri is the first female designer to take up the 
Dior helm in the house’s nearly 60-year history. Her work at Valentino with 
Pierpaolo Piccioli since 2008 has gained fans for its modern, younger take on 
femininity. Chiuri’s Dior is set to be one of the most anticipated shows of the 
week. “I am very excited to see what Chiuri does at Dior, and Jarrar at 
Lanvin,” confirms Kenya Hunt, fashion features director at Elle. “I love the 
idea of women designing for women at two of Paris’s most storied houses.”

While Chanel, Balenciaga, Céline and Louis Vuitton remain the blue-chip 
Parisian houses, newer labels are gaining hype with an aesthetic that has more 
of an street edge to it. Tuesday has shows from Koché and Jacquemus – both 
brands led by a new generation of Paris designers, playing with sportswear and 
staples such as trenches in new ways. Koché’s designer, Christelle Kocher, told 
the Guardian this month that “Paris has always been the centre of creativity. 
Now, there is a new area of fashion with youth taking over.” This is further 
emphasised with street labels from America – Rihanna’s Fenty Puma line and 
Virgil Abloh’s Off White – also on the Paris schedule.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fparis-fashion-week-chic-is-out-and-cool-is-in%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c8d574794375d3acae6381bf265c4b4b70f61c1%2F0_311_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20chic%20is%20out%20and%20cool%20is%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fparis-fashion-week-chic-is-out-and-cool-is-in%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20chic%20is%20out%20and%20cool%20is%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fparis-fashion-week-chic-is-out-and-cool-is-in%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c8d574794375d3acae6381bf265c4b4b70f61c1%2F0_311_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
 Rihanna walks the runway at the Fenty Puma show in February in New York. 
Photograph: JP Yim/Getty Images for Fenty Puma 
“Paris fashion week has always been major, but we’re seeing much more newness 
now,” says Sarah Rutson, vice-president of global buying at Net-a-Porter. “It’s 
not just about the big established brands any more, there are so many debuts on 
and off schedule.” She namechecks Jacquemus, Off White, Atlein and Vetements as 
key players.

Paris’ new street cred is arguably led by Vetements, founded by Demna Gvasalia 
and collective in 2014. “Gvasalia’s work has been the most agenda-setting in 
that we’ve seen his influence all over the spring/summer catwalks, and all over 
the street style circuit,” says Hunt. This is achieved through a youth-infused 
look. Gvasalia told the Guardian last year that the inspiration was “what young 
people are wearing on the streets of Paris”. Rather than the white shirts and 
ballet flats of the old guard, this translates to oversized hoodies, logo 
T-shirts and vintage-y floral dresses.
Gvasalia has now reached the top of Paris fashion: he will show his second 
collection for Balenciaga this week. Vetements, meanwhile, has the ultimate 
Paris fashion accolade: they were nowhere to be seen on the schedule this week. 
Instead, they showed their spring collection at couture in July – a sure sign 
that the new generation have been accepted by the Paris fashion establishment.
 