
With selfies, Snapchat previews and screaming crowds craning for a view of 
Kendall Jenner’s bottom, fashion shows in 2015 can feel like wannabe stadium 
rock concerts. What catwalk events do not often feel like are prologues to the 
Frieze art fair. Unless, of course the brand is question is the hugely 
influentialCéline <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/celine>.

For her spring/summer show on Sunday, the label’s creative director, Phoebe 
Philo, commissioned the Danish artist Thomas Poulsen, who works under the name 
FOS, to create the catwalk space. Guests carrying invitations with dollops of 
poured resin puddled over them walked into a venue divided by large sheets of 
ripstop nylon in orange, blue and yellow hanging from the ceiling rigging. The 
soundtrack, which came without a melody, had been conceived by Philo and FOS 
and “reflected a mechanical energy, sound and rhythm to create an immersive 
feeling”, said the brand. With Céline clothes also the de facto uniform of the 
female gallerists, the arty credentials were stacked tall.

On the catwalk the lofty intent of the soundtrack made sense. The collection 
was packed with many seemingly discordant ideas and no single standout theme to 
pull it together; no snappy portmanteau to spout out, to inspire the design 
teams at Zara. But as ever with Céline, this awkwardness was the collection’s 
strength. There aren’t many designers earning a handsome profit for their 
bosses who can send out a collection that could feasibly be described as the 
tailoring of 1980s west London, with the leather tabards and hand-sewn shoes of 
the great fire of London, and Sade’s hair and makeup. There are even fewer who 
could make that into agenda-leading luxurious clothes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fparis-fashion-week-celines-art-collaboration-is-a-natural-fit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde8c255ee726f413b20606ff964c835c02f4bdd0%2F0_0_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20C%C3%A9line%E2%80%99s%20art%20collaboration%20is%20a%20natural%20fit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fparis-fashion-week-celines-art-collaboration-is-a-natural-fit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20fashion%20week%3A%20C%C3%A9line%E2%80%99s%20art%20collaboration%20is%20a%20natural%20fit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fparis-fashion-week-celines-art-collaboration-is-a-natural-fit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde8c255ee726f413b20606ff964c835c02f4bdd0%2F0_0_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 The Céline collection was packed with many seemingly discordant ideas. 
Photograph: Etienne Laurent/EPA 
The first outfit was a white silk negligee dress with black lace and creases 
that looked as if they came from tight packaging. Slicked-back hair, bright red 
lips and tough ankle boots completed the look. Models strode down a dirt track 
of a catwalk, against the tent-like backdrop. There was a vague sense of 
survival camp about it all. Backstage, the designer was characteristically 
oblique. “The idea was ‘what does it feel like to wear clothes?’” she said.

Mock if you like, but Philo’s take on fashion has been to put women – her 
loyal customers who actually wear the clothes – first. She understands that the 
relationship a woman has with her wardrobe – does it make her feel confident or 
constrained? – is a fact as much as an intellectual concept.

So who is the Céline woman next summer? “As ever I want her to be strong. To 
be going somewhere even if she is sitting still.” What this meant on the 
catwalk was a certain toughness to the clothes: shoulders were large and 
curved, trousers were loose and tapered and finished at an awkward ankle 
length, there were boilersuit details. It could be described loosely as a haute 
capable look. Aesthetically challenging shoes look like they are here to stay 
at Céline. The designer herself has eschewed the skate shoes she made so 
prominent in favour of the brand’s elasticated, chunky-heeled pumps.

Philo’s Céline has triumphed on a refusal to play the fashion game. Choosing 
an art collaboration, rather than participating in catwalk’s social media 
circus, was not a surprise. FOS and Céline are a natural fit. The artist, whose 
work ranges from experimental video to creating low-income housing, has already 
been commissioned by Philo to create installations in Céline stores and 
headquarters. Both prefer anonymity on the internet. Philo has no social media 
presence and Céline is one of the few brands not to have embraced e-commerce; 
its CEO, Marco Gobbetti, recently stated that it was important to touch the 
clothes, and that much of what is special is lost online. FOS, meanwhile, 
hasn’t updated his website since 2003.
 