
The humble stationery shop adjacent to George Whitman’s, Shakespeare and 
Company – the successor to the legendary interwar bookstore of the same name 
where Hemingway et al used to congregate – was some of the hottest real estate 
in Paris. According to David Delannet, co-manager of the store, Whitman had 
been knocking on the owners’ door once a month since the 60s, asking if he 
could use the space to open a literary café. Although Whitman died in 2011, his 
daughter, Sylvia, continued the monthly tradition of wooing the neighbours. 
After two generations of negotiation, the café finally opened in October 2015.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fparis-bookshop-shakespeare-and-company-opens-cafe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F793c593447ac9820661a7ec8a14fb8bc168c5eab%2F160_155_2834_1701%2F2834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20bookshop%20Shakespeare%20and%20Company%20opens%20cafe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fparis-bookshop-shakespeare-and-company-opens-cafe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20bookshop%20Shakespeare%20and%20Company%20opens%20cafe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fparis-bookshop-shakespeare-and-company-opens-cafe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F793c593447ac9820661a7ec8a14fb8bc168c5eab%2F160_155_2834_1701%2F2834.jpg>
 Sketches of the proposed cafe drawn by James King, a writer in residence, in 
the 1980s. Photograph: Rozena Crossman 
Despite its small size, the café has a lighter and more modern atmosphere than 
the cramped bookshop next door, a famous hub for influential writers. Yet it 
shares the bookstore’s signature eccentric charm. Dishes have names like “the 
Flapjack Kerouac” or “The Bun Also Rises”, and a version of the Proust 
Questionnaire lines the trays. A mix of second-hand novels, cookbooks and 
bookshop classics take up two walls and are available to be purchased. Leftover 
food from the café is given to the “Tumbleweeds”, the bookshop’s resident 
writers. From spring 2016, the café will sell “A Moveable Feast” picnic baskets 
(€20-30) for Seine-side eating, which will include wine, cheese and a short 
story.

Paris: Gare du Nord, where to eat, drink and stay near the Eurostar station
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/11/paris-gare-du-nord-eurostar-stay-eat-drink>
Created in tandem with Parisian bakery and catering company Bob’s Bake Shop 
<http://www.bobsjuicebar.com/>, the Shakespeare and Company Café has a 
health-conscious ethos and serves a largely vegetarian menu, featuring vegan 
protein shakes, gluten-free crumble, bagels and daily soups. Prices start at 
€1.50 for cookies up to €9.50 for bagels. Like the bookstore, the café plans to 
host events such as kitchen takeovers and craft-beer tastings.

Although the café took decades to become a reality – and the final touches are 
still being added – Delannet notes that the whole neighbourhood has been 
excited and encouraging, with many remarking that it feels as if the café has 
always been there.
• 37 rue de la Bûcherie, Paris, +33 1 43 25 95 95, shakespeareandcompany.com 
<http://shakespeareandcompany.com/>; opening hours 9am-6pm every day (can vary) 
but will soon be open after 6pm
 