
As the Paris talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 enter their final week, there is increased focus on the impact of climate 
change in the world’s poorest nations. Representing least developed countries, 
landlocked developing countries and small island developing states, Gyan 
Chandra Acharya calls on leaders to make themost vulnerable countries the top 
priority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/02/climate-change-paris-talks-those-who-contributed-least-fighting-for-survival>
. “It is a sad reality that while the world’s most vulnerable countries have 
contributed the least to climate change, they are most at risk from its 
negative effects and the least equipped to withstand and adapt to it,” Acharya 
writes.

You can stay updated with the Guardian’s coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 of the latest news from COP 21, including Africa’s ambitiousrenewable energy 
drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/07/africa-plans-renewable-energy-initiative-solar-hydro-cut-emissions>
 backed by the continent’s leaders, thelatest push 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/04/religious-leaders-step-up-pressure-for-action-on-climate-change>
 from religious leaders on action against climate change, andChina’s call for 
rich countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/03/china-poor-countries-wealthy-states-emissions-paris-climate-talks-cop21>
 to take responsibility for historical greenhouse gas emissions.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Killed defending women’s rights: nine female activists who died in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/29/end-the-violence-womens-rights-defenders-killed-2015-16-days-activism>
 * Quest for tuberculosis vaccine begins as scientists aim to beat disease by 
2035 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/07/tuberculosis-vaccine-beat-disease-by-2035-stop-tb-partnership>
 * Brazil warns women not to get pregnant as zika virus is linked to rare 
birth defect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/04/brazil-zika-virus-pregnancy-microcephaly-mosquito-rare-birth-defect>
 * Horrific attacks prompt South Sudan’s communities to form armed groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/07/south-sudan-horrific-attacks-prompt-communities-take-arms>

 * Morocco: activists claim draft rights law fails to treat disabled people as 
equals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/03/morocco-disabled-people-draft-law-97-13-human-rights-equality>
 * Humanitarian response treats women’s health ‘as an afterthought’, says the 
UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/03/humanitarian-response-health-family-planning-women-girls-afterthought-un-population-fund-report>
Opinion

What should the world do in the face of unprecedented humanitarian disaster? 
As complex conflicts continue to unfold, the president of the International 
Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, says the priority should be
strengthening respect for the laws of war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/08/conflict-what-should-we-do-world-burning-restoring-laws-of-war-geneva-conventions>
. “Not enough countries, not enough armies, not enough armed groups, are 
abiding by the fundamental human values enshrined in the Geneva conventions,” 
Maurer writes.

The UK is adopting a problematic course in deciding to use aid to advance its 
security and prosperity as well as to help the world’s poor, says researcher 
Nilima Gulrajani.Read her take 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/03/britain-development-aid-strategy-priorities>
 on Britain’s new aid strategy.

Multimedia

Podcast: Why are there so few women in power? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/nov/30/women-in-power-gender-equality-sustainable-development-goals>

Video: Child marriage in Mauritania: ‘When it has ended, I will be so happy’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/nov/28/child-marriage-mauritania-when-it-has-ended-i-will-be-so-happy-video>

Gallery: West Bank water crisis puts Palestinians in firing zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/nov/27/west-bank-water-access-palestinians-al-rashayda-in-pictures>

Event – ending violence against women

One in three women worldwide faces violence in her lifetime. To mark the final 
day of this year’s16 days of activism to end violence against women 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-focus/end-violence-against-women>, Guardian 
Global development ishosting an event 
<https://www.actionaid.org.uk/fearless-policy-panel-event?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=article&utm_campaign=pac_vawgcampaign>
 organised byActionAid <http://www.actionaid.org.uk/> to discuss what needs to 
be done to ensure global commitments to end violence are upheld. Among the 
speakers is Rashida Manjoo, former UN special rapporteur on violence against 
women. The event will be held from 10am to 1pm on Thursday 10 December 2015 at 
the Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. It’s not too late to put 
your name down. If you would like to attend, email Lizzie Gerrard at ActionAid:
lizzie.gerrard@actionaid.org <mailto:lizzie.gerrard@actionaid.org>.

What you said

On the piece Killed defending women’s rights: nine female activists who died 
in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/29/end-the-violence-womens-rights-defenders-killed-2015-16-days-activism#comments>
,Mshelike wrote:

Thank you for making these women known to me. I had no idea so many women 
activists were murdered this year. I feel both shocked by their deaths and 
moved by their bravery.


Highlight from the blogosphere

Overseas development institute: 10 things to know about climate finance in 2015
 
<http://www.odi.org/publications/9607-10-ten-things-know-about-climate-finance-2015>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 