
It’s got all the makings of a bad comedy: a romantic trip where a “secret” 
photographer spies on you as you propose to your partner. Yet this is precisely 
what one French business is offering. Fed up with working in one of the world’s 
most reviled professions, a former paparazzo has turned her skills to 
situations where she hopes she will be more welcome.

All the fun of the fair: Paris’s best retro attractions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/dec/22/retro-paris-attractions-nostalgia-christmas-fairground-circus>
Snaplove Paparazzi <http://www.snaplovepaparazzi.com/> snapped into life in 
spring 2015 as the brainchild of Irène Billard. Based in Paris – ostensibly the 
city of love – she will travel anywhere in France and provide a photographer to 
capture the point at which the question is popped, snapping the couple from 
afar as marriage is proposed – for €400.

Staking out a couple, Billard and another photographer will hide 10-20 metres 
away, clutching the sort of long-lens camera that is synonymous with the trade. 
Once the proposal is complete (and, hopefully, accepted) the couple can call 
the photographer over to take more snaps of the moment.

“It’s different every time,” she says. “I could hide among the people on the 
street or, with the last couple, I was just in the queue behind them as they 
climbed the Eiffel Tower.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fparis-marriage-proposals-snaplove-paparazzi-romantic-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7714a9cdf217064084dbacf89eb37922d4699d68%2F865_471_845_507%2F845.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%2C%20love%2C%20proposals%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20your%20own%20pack%20of%20paparazzi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fparis-marriage-proposals-snaplove-paparazzi-romantic-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%2C%20love%2C%20proposals%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20your%20own%20pack%20of%20paparazzi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fparis-marriage-proposals-snaplove-paparazzi-romantic-photography%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7714a9cdf217064084dbacf89eb37922d4699d68%2F865_471_845_507%2F845.jpg>
 Stan and Maja. Photograph: Irene Billard/Snaplove Paparazzi 
Sneaking up on these couples, Billard no longer worries about the negative 
attention and aggro that came with the former job – one of the reasons she 
moved onto this enterprise was because of the routine abuse and occasional 
attacks faced by paparazzi.

Top 10 new restaurants, bars and cafes in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/17/top-10-new-restaurants-bars-and-cafes-in-paris>
“The worst thing about being a paparazzo is the people around you who don’t 
like them,” she says. “Especially in France, where we are passionate about our 
privacy. But this is different. We are paparazzi of love.”

Billard has now completed 12 assignments, producing portfolios of photographs 
in a style that will be familiar to anyone who has flicked through a 
celebrity-filled glossy magazine: blurry objects in the foreground and a sense 
that the subjects are unaware they are being watched. Except that one of them 
is fully aware, and both the subjects are happy with the results.

One client, Stan (“it’s always the men”, says Billard), contacted the company 
to capture his proposal to wife Maja at a castle in the Périgord region. 
Through the bushes, the couple can be seen canoodling by the poolside but, 
unlike in most cases of celebrities caught unawares, Maja was “pleased to have 
some ‘stolen’ pictures of herself”.

And they say romance is dead. 



 