
Sydney has long been Australia’s epicentre of glitz and glamour, though that 
tag has sometimes come with accusations of superficiality from unkind critics. 
But one of the most refreshing trends blowing through the city’s dining scene 
firmly dispenses with that notion, taking the care and attention to detail that 
defines fine dining and transplanting it into some of the most unlikely 
locations.

Keen to break free from the confines of white tablecloths, fine china and 
silverware, chefs in Sydney are pushing the boundaries in their effort to 
satisfy Sydney’s insatiable hunger and thirst for top-class dining experiences 
without foregoing an appealingly casual air.

One restaurant leading the charge is Automata, which was one of the most 
anticipated openings in the newly revamped Kensington Street precinct in 
Chippendale. The first solo project by culinary heavyweight and Momofuko 
Seiobo’s ex-sous chef, Clayton Wells, the fitout at Automata is more grunge 
than grandeur. The space is strategically bare with polished concrete from 
floor to ceiling, and long communal tables lit by lights fashioned from Ducati 
motorcycle parts and a chandelier that was once an airplane engine. Automata 
has taken the concept of an elegant and delicate fine-dining venue and added 
some horsepower. And while the warehouse space is unashamedly simple, the 
ever-changing degustation menu is anything but. Delicate and complex, Wells is 
serving up the same premium produce as fine dining institutes of old, without 
the restrictive formalities or the price tag.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44b8c5406625ee53e150c3b5be8948ea5c56017d%2F0_184_4930_2958%2F4930.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passion%20trumps%20ostentation%20for%20Sydney%E2%80%99s%20diners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passion%20trumps%20ostentation%20for%20Sydney%E2%80%99s%20diners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44b8c5406625ee53e150c3b5be8948ea5c56017d%2F0_184_4930_2958%2F4930.jpg>
 Sydney Precinct: Central Park Photograph: Kokkai Ng/Getty Images 
Cut from some of the finest culinary cloth that Sydney has to offer, former 
Tetsuya chef Luke Powell has gone from preparing intricate, world-renowned 
Japanese cuisine, to running a restaurant centred around cured, smoked and 
barbecued meats. For Powell, as for Wells, the standard of the experience comes 
from what he is delivering, not the delivery itself. At LP’s Meats the music is 
pumping and there are no rules when it comes to eating ribs with your hands. 
Stand-outs on the menu include applewood-smoked ocean trout with creme fraiche, 
dill and capers, and smoked lamb belly stuffed with merguez sausage as a shared 
main. And while his idea is by no means groundbreaking—in essence it’s a casual 
BBQ with friends—it’s a leading light in a movement dedicated to relaxed 
approaches to dining without compromising on the food itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F704c2bb90eb7c659b7d8ec6ff9ea3277dba13b44%2F0_86_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passion%20trumps%20ostentation%20for%20Sydney%E2%80%99s%20diners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passion%20trumps%20ostentation%20for%20Sydney%E2%80%99s%20diners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F704c2bb90eb7c659b7d8ec6ff9ea3277dba13b44%2F0_86_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Sydney restaurant LP Quality Meats Photograph: Hollie Adams 
One of the most memorable testaments to the new way of things is Butter, a 
hybrid sneaker, fried chicken and champagne bar in Surry Hills. Previously 
relegated to the menus of greasy fast food joints, Butter’s fried chicken is 
served in a shoebox, dripping with sauce, and often attracts lines out the 
door. Combining finger-licking deliciousness with flutes of champagne, the 
approach is offering a new definition of casual yet classy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F709b74cc799a99630312bd5f66f318adadec7f4d%2F0_0_5506_3304%2F5506.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passion%20trumps%20ostentation%20for%20Sydney%E2%80%99s%20diners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passion%20trumps%20ostentation%20for%20Sydney%E2%80%99s%20diners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F709b74cc799a99630312bd5f66f318adadec7f4d%2F0_0_5506_3304%2F5506.jpg>
 Fried chicken at Butter Photograph: The Washington Post/Getty Images 
And while you could think that the popularity of a fried chicken restaurant is 
an anomaly—and in the past this would have been true—Butter is not alone in its 
notoriety. Ranked among the top restaurants in Sydney, the inner-west’s 
Hartsyard is famous for its fried chicken served with buttermilk biscuit and 
low-country sausage gravy, along with other reinvented fast food staples such 
as poutine and soft-serve ice cream. A place where food is shared and diners 
are encouraged to pull apart dishes with forks and fingers, Hartsyard invokes 
an inner-city homestead built for comfort and conversation.

Even Neil Perry, the famed force behind the iconic Rockpool restaurant, has 
traded fastidiousness for fast-food inspiration. His ever-growing Burger 
Project chain takes his signature passion for quality produce and perfectionism 
to the humble hamburger, using hand-cut grass-fed beef and exclusive wines from 
one of Australia’s most acclaimed winemakers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9205ee4d9ab264daeaef697b33b2cc5446de927e%2F0_941_1997_1197%2F1997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passion%20trumps%20ostentation%20for%20Sydney%E2%80%99s%20diners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passion%20trumps%20ostentation%20for%20Sydney%E2%80%99s%20diners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassion-trumps-ostentation-for-sydneys-diners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9205ee4d9ab264daeaef697b33b2cc5446de927e%2F0_941_1997_1197%2F1997.jpg>
 Chef Neil Perry Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
A mere selection of the newcomers reinventing the dining scene, Sydney has 
become a city where a burger, made from the finest of ingredients, rather than 
a gastronomic masterpiece will win you culinary accolades. It’s a city that 
caters to more casual and adventurous clientele. And while there’s still a 
place for a pressed white tablecloths and a meal with a view, memorable dining 
experiences are now more accessible, with no dress code required.

The Bankwest More World MasterCard 
<http://www.bankwest.com.au/personal/credit-cards/compare-credit-cards/more-mastercard-rewards-credit-cards>
 - helping you open a world of real experiences with the people that matter 
most.
 