
As politicians seek to understand a post-Brexit, post-Trump world, the release 
of the 1992-93 Australian cabinet documents reminds us that there was a time 
when a different conversation going on between leaders and voters.

The year was 1993 and the Labor government led by Paul Keating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/paul-keating2> had just snatched 
victory from the jaws of defeat, courtesy of Liberal leader John Hewson’s 
Fightback! package which proposed a goods and services tax. (And showing we 
voters are nothing if not contrary, John Howard won the 1998 election calling 
for a GST.)

Paul Keating: Australia's 'dullards' have missed Trump's foreign policy switch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/keating-says-australia-must-realise-trumps-focus-is-solely-on-us>
Keating was trying to resolve a workable framework for native title during the 
Mabo debate, after the high court repudiated the idea ofterra nullius – that 
Australia was a land that belonged to no one.

This came hot on the heels of the 1992 report into 99 Aboriginal deaths in 
custody in the 1980s. It was three years before Pauline Hanson was elected as 
an independent after she was thrown out of the Liberal party for writing a 
letter to the editor during her campaign which was reminiscent of her comments 
this year onreverse racism 
<http://www.skynews.com.au/news/politics/federal/2016/11/24/pauline-hanson-calls-out-reverse-racism.html>
 – claiming that Indigenous Australians get more than white people.


Hanson was to write 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-07-10/timeline-rise-of-pauline-hanson-one-nation/7583230>
 in the Queensland Times in 1996: “How can we expect this race to help 
themselves when governments shower them with money, facilities and 
opportunities that only these people can obtain no matter how minute the 
Indigenous blood is that flows through their veins, and that is what is causing 
racism.”

Keating was interviewed on 17 June 1993 by 2UE’s talkback king, John Laws, and 
took calls from listeners worried about the implications of the high court’s 
decision.

Caller: “My question to the prime minister – I would like to actually ask him 
quite a few questions on Mabo, but just a very broad question, Mr Keating, why 
does your government see the Aboriginal people as a much more equal people than 
the average white Australian?”


Keating: “We don’t. We see them as equal.”

As a child, I aspired to be an elite. Paul Keating made it look worthwhile | 
Brigid Delaney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/10/as-a-child-i-aspired-to-be-an-elite-paul-keating-made-it-look-worthwhile>
Caller: “Well you might say that, but all the indications are that you don’t.”

Keating: “But I think it was implied in your question that you don’t. You 
think that non-Aboriginal Australians – there ought to be discrimination in 
their favour against blacks.”

Caller: “Not whatsoever. I don’t see that at all. But myself and every person 
I talk to, I am not racist, every person I talk to.”

Keating: “That’s what they all say, don’t they? They put these questions, they 
always say, ‘I am not racist but, you know, I don’t believe that Aboriginal 
Australians ought to have a basis in equality with non-Aboriginal Australians’. 
Well of course that is part of the problem.”

Caller: “Aren’t they more equal than us at the moment with the preferences 
they get?”

Keating: “It is not for me to be giving you a history lesson, they were 
largely dispossessed of the land they held.”

Caller: “I think there is a question over that. I think a lot of people would 
tell you that. You are telling us one thing and expecting us to believe it.”

Keating: “Well, if you are sitting on the title of any block of land in New 
South Wales you can bet an Aboriginal person at some stage was dispossessed of 
it.”

Caller: “You know that for sure, do you?”

Keating: “Well of course we know it for sure.”

Australia's 'political deplorables' head to the pub to call last drinks on 
major parties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/04/malcolm-roberts-david-leyonhjelm-one-nation-pauline-hanson-australias-political-deplorables-head-to-the-pub-to-call-last-drinks-on-major-parties>
Caller: “Yeah. Well, going on to your last caller there, I think he had some 
pertinent things to say that you couldn’t answer either.”

Keating: “Yeah I know but you hold his view, don’t you?”

Caller: “Of course I do.”

Keating: “That’s part of the problem.”

John Laws: “Let’s clarify the view. What is the view?”

Caller: “My question in general, I mean is with regard just to the whole 
Aboriginal question, is why does the average white Australian feel that he is 
prejudiced against? Why? Because of the things your government does.”

Keating: “Like what?”

Caller: “The preferential treatment.”

Keating: “Are you challenging the high court decision? Are you saying that the 
high court has got this all wrong?”

Caller: “No, I am not saying that at all. I wouldn’t know who was on the high 
court.”

Keating: “Well why don’t you sign off, if you don’t know anything about it and 
you’re not interested, goodbye. You can’t challenge these things and then say I 
don’t know about them.”

Cabinet papers 1990-91: Labor wrestled with rising asylum claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/01/cabinet-papers-1990-91-labor-wrestled-with-rising-asylum-claims>
John Laws: “Well, he’s gone. But you see sadly what you are hearing there is 
in some ways very typical of the feeling that exists and it may be a very 
unhealthy feeling but it exists there. What do you do to placate those people 
who feel that strongly, and they do feel, I talk to them every day, they do 
feel that they are being disadvantaged by what is being given to the Aboriginal 
people.”

Keating: “Well, what is being given to the Aboriginal people is at this stage 
limited land. Let’s say, before the Mabo judgment, limited land opportunities 
and some income support and social justice in education and in health, so there 
are commonwealth programs for health and social justice to deal with such 
things as diseases which particularly afflicted Aboriginal people, like 
glaucoma of the eyes, and infant mortality and all these other problems they 
had; we have tried to direct funding to deal with those problems, to extend 
educational opportunities to Aboriginal people.”

The Keating government lost the 1996 election, at which Hanson won the seat of 
Oxley – a seat that had long been held by Labor, including by its former 
opposition leader and governor general Bill Hayden.

• Cabinet records for 1992 and 1993, held by the National Archives of 
Australia, reach the open access period on 1 January 2017. Information about 
the cabinet records, and copies of key cabinet documents, including selected 
submissions and decisions, are available on thearchives website 
<http://www.naa.gov.au/>
 