
It’s the world we live in: every human activity broken down into measurable 
chunks, everything made quantifiable, the easier to be priced, packaged and 
sold. So why should comedy be spared? But still, this story has the air of a 
belated (or early) April Fool. Is there really a theatre in Barcelona that’s 
set up apay-per-laugh scheme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-29551380> 
for comedy audiences? Are standup punters really being charged every time they 
crack a smile?

Apparently, they are. The Teatreneu club in Barcelona has introduced the 
system, in cahoots with ad agencyThe Cyranos McCann <http://vimeo.com/97413457>
. It’s a response, reportedly, to a spike in Spanish government taxes on 
theatre tickets, which has scared audiences off live performance. This 
pay-per-laugh wheeze draws on facial recognition technology. A tablet is fitted 
to the back of each seat, which reads audience members’ facial expressions and 
runs up a tab of smirks, chuckles and belly laughs. Each laugh (the BBC tells 
us) is charged at €0.30 (24p), and once you’ve spent €24 (£19), you can knock 
yourself out – every subsequent laugh is free.

Now, I was once fingered as the real-life template for the anti-hero of 
Russell Kane’s novel The Humorist – a critic who is“incapable of laughing or 
smiling” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/features/the-diary-jack-du-rose-nicholas-lloyd-webber-david-hockney-russell-kane-6263562.html>
. By that argument, surely I’d welcome an arrangement to secure me free comedy 
in perpetuity. Then there are those “high cultural capital” comedygoers – as per
sociologist Sam Friedman’s research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/15/are-you-a-comedy-snob-edinburgh-festival>
 – who consider that “laughter contaminated the aesthetic experience” of 
comedy. Again, news of this scheme might prompt even these committed killjoys 
to break out a cheesy grin.

But even if I were stony-faced in the aisles, I wouldn’t want to spend half a 
comedy gig distracted by an image of that unsmiling mush on an iPad 12in from 
the end of my nose. And in fact, I like a laugh. Whether I’d like a laugh so 
much if I submitted to a system that monetised that laugh, making me highly 
conscious of every laugh I laughed, and every laugh I didn’t (to the detriment, 
you’d think, of much enjoying the act on stage) is less clear.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F97413457&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F97413457> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F97413457&media=>
 Publicity video: in English and Spanish. 
So how to take this? As a harmless gimmick that (hats off to The Cyranos 
McCann!) has garnered worldwide media attention? As a harbinger of the 
apocalypse? Taken seriously, it’s flatly reductive for comedy, with its 
implication that the most valuable comedy is the comedy that generates most 
laughs. Were pay-per-laugh to take off, would any club ever again book 
experimental comics – the ones who risk deferring laughter, or withholding it; 
the ones who generate not quantity of laughs, but high quality? In any event, 
the last thing comedy needs is a mechanism to make everyone even more neurotic 
about how many seconds have passed since the last laugh.

But I can’t take it seriously. I think it’s a brilliant piece of satire in 
itself, a Chris Morris stunt designed to shame the Spanish government into 
scrapping theatre ticket taxes all together. “You want to monetise culture?” 
this initiative seems to say. “Well, we’ll show you how to monetise culture!” 
Roll on pay-per-sob King Lear and pay-per-foot-tap rock’n’roll. This is the
reductio ad absurdum <http://www.iep.utm.edu/reductio/> of art commercialised, 
and the only appropriate response to it is at least 24 euros worth of laughter.

Three to see

John Cleese
Michael Palin’s just done it, and by all accounts they’ve a competitive 
relationship, so here’s Mr Silly Walk himself, performing a nationwide 
theatre-and-book tour to offset the alimony payments, I dare say, and herald 
the publication of his memoirSo, Anyway 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/so-anyway.html>…
• Cambridge Arts Theatre 
<https://cambridgeartstheatre.purchase-tickets-online.co.uk/public/show.asp?shcode=10527>
 (01223 503333) on 19 October,then touring from 26 November 
<http://www.ents24.com/uk/tour-dates/john-cleese>.

Mark Thomas
“A clever, funny and angry show,” the Guardian’s Lyn Gardner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/04/mark-thomas-cuckooed-edinburgh-festival-2014-review>
 called Mark Thomas’s Cuckooed when it opened in Edinburgh two months ago. It’s 
a play with standup roots, based on the true story of campaigners against the 
arms trade (Thomas included) infiltrated by a very convincing spy.
• The North Wall, Oxford 
<http://www.thenorthwall.com/moreinfo.php?ref=cuckooed-markthomas> (01865 
319450) on 15 and 16 October; Cornerstone, Didcot (01235 515144), on 17 October,
then touring <http://www.markthomasinfo.co.uk/section_gigs/>.

Natasia Demetriou
The latest new talent to emerge from the Invisible Dot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/27/invisible-dot-hand-up-standup> 
stable, Demetriou (whosebrother Jamie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/18/jamie-demetriou-edinburgh-2013-review>
 made waves at the fringe in 2013) is a refugee from the sketch troupeOyster 
Eyes <https://twitter.com/OysterEyes>. Her solo debut (“a head-spinning array 
of garish oddballs and sexy/disturbing dance moves,” wrote one observer) 
generated low-level buzz in Edinburgh; now she’s back at the Dot for a week’s 
run.
• Invisible Dot 
<http://www.theinvisibledot.com/events/332-natasia-demetriou-youll-never-have-all-of-me>
, London (020 7424 8918), 20-25 October.

More comedy coverage


Never mind the broadcasts: TV doesn’t make or break a standup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/07/tv-make-break-standup-comedians-never-mind-buzzcocks>

Angela Barnes: the salty standup mentored by ‘Auntie’ Sarah Millican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/06/angela-barnes-standup-comedy-edinburgh-sarah-millican>

All hail the Pajama Men: the Velvet Underground of comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/30/pajama-men-velvet-underground-comedy>

Sheeps, Beasts and the new breed of sketch show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/29/new-sketch-show-sheeps-beasts-the-pin>

James Acaster’s top of the cops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/26/james-acaster-comedy-cops-chief-wiggum>

Lee Evans review – when he starts talking he stops being funny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/28/lee-evans-live-at-the-o2-review>
 