
It all started at the Zombie Prom. If you've never been to Birmingham's weekly 
indie night, you'll certainly be aware of its Foster's-and-Fratellis equivalent 
in your own home town: scruffs in leather jackets trying to mack off with one 
another in between repeated plays of the Killers' Mr Brightside.

Today, 12 of the Zombie Prom's most loyal patrons are crowded round a trestle 
table in the Old Crown pub near Birmingham city centre. At one end of the table 
arePeace <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jan/16/new-band-peace>, the 
city's brightest new band, who earlier this year signed a massive record deal 
and have just scored a coveted spot on February'sNME Awards Tour 
<http://www.guardiantickets.co.uk/nme-awards-tour-tickets/>, where bands like 
Coldplay and Arctic Monkeys cut their teeth. Next to them are Swim Deep: 
poppier than Peace, and quickly following in their footsteps with a major-label 
deal and the press queueing up to tip them for 2013. Down the end sit Jaws, the 
undiscovered gems of the Birmingham scene, still plugging their way through the 
city's indie discos with their scuzzy shoegaze sound.

Most of the boys are wearing charity shop jumpers and coats borrowed from 
their mums. They nurse pints as if they were the first thing to pass their lips 
for days. You wouldn't think it from looking, but around this table sit the 
leading lights of "B-Town", the first English music scene in over a year to 
come from outside the capital and make the rest of the country take notice.

Swim Deep - Honey <http://www.muzu.tv/swim-deep/honey-music-video/1555097/> on 
MUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view 
<http://www.muzu.tv/swim-deep/honey-music-video/1555097/>

"I think it's the fact that we're all buds that makes it all right," says Eddy 
Geach, Jaws' drummer. "If it was just three random bands that were being 
associated cos we're from the same town, it wouldn't be the same. But most of 
us have known each other since school."

Where did they all meet? "Don't get us emotional," says Harrison Koisser, the 
singer from Peace. "Zombie Prom was our stomping ground in the glory days. It's 
where we all became friends. It's where we met all the girls and wrote all the 
songs."

Over the last year it has seemed as if indie, or at least its boyish British 
contingent, was on its way to becoming a marginalised scene like metal, with a 
loyal fanbase but a nominal impact on the casual listener. Guitar music's 
"decline" has not been helped by bands such asthe Vaccines 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/the-vaccines> and Spector proselytising for 
indie music as if its drifting popularity was an affliction that had to be 
reversed, rather than a reflection on the poor quality of music being made. One 
of the refreshing things about the B-Town scene is that the bands couldn't give 
a crap about any of that. None of them are trying to "revive" guitar music. 
They're just friends who formed bands to play at each other's parties. They are 
also a pleasant respite from the relentless stream of guitar bands (Noah And 
The Whale, Florence + The Machine, Mumford & Sons, Bombay Bicycle Club, the 
Vaccines, Spector) who were educated at London private schools. Not because it 
matters if a band is posh, but when theyall are, you start to worry that 
guitars have become a profession for the privileged.

'Zombie Prom was our stomping ground in the glory days. It's where we all 
became friends. It's where we met all the girls and wrote all the songs.' 
Harrison Koisser, Peace
 Swim Deep sample the healthy, refreshing spa waters of, um, Birmingham 
"None of us went to a posh school," confirms Harrison. "My high-school 
experience was terrifying." As for the idea of keeping indie alive, he says 
simply: "I don't think anything we've done has been that premeditated. The 
guitar music conversation is old as fuck."

These B-Town bands are lightyears away from the carby stodge of Birmingham's 
last indie hopes, the Twang. Peace owe far more to indie oddballs like Mystery 
Jets and the House Of Love. If Jaws were from Brooklyn, they'd havePitchfork 
<http://pitchfork.com/> drooling all over their off-kilter synth-led scribbles. 
Swim Deep's lyrics, far from the boorish cliche, are vignettes of their wasted 
teens. "Don't just dream in your sleep, that's just lazy", they cry on latest 
single Honey.

We leave the pub to go for a walk that takes us past the bands' old hangouts. 
There's Snobs, another indie nightclub. "We like to call it Snogs," says Austin 
Williams, Swim Deep's singer. "Higgy [the band's guitarist] snogged seven girls 
when we did a show there. I think once he got into double figures." There are 
also the abandoned warehouses, "which were pretty cool, you could just go there 
and drink K cider and smash all the old lightbulbs."

"But those were just our hangouts," chips in Doug Castle, the guitarist from 
Peace. "All the rival gangs like the Toads and the Nice Girls had their spots, 
too." It sounds like Grease. "It was, pretty much," says Cavan McCarthy, 
bassist of Swim Deep. "Just with less girls and shitter hair. That was all part 
of the fun. We spent a year dicking about and the music reflects those empty 
days."

Yet despite all the memories, none of the bands are especially clingy about 
their home town. "Most of us are in London all the time because we've fallen in 
love with London girls," says Doug. "There were glory days here where there was 
nothing to do but drink and laugh. It was those days that made our music, but 
it's hard to relive it."

'Birmingham's like the safehouse in Grand Theft Auto. You come here to save 
game! In London we'll drink cocktails but here we drink K cider on the rocks.' 
Austin Williams, Swim Deep
 Jaws: keen adherents to the Green Cross Code 
"Birmingham's like the safehouse in Grand Theft Auto 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/nov/18/dan-houser-grand-theft-auto>," 
agrees Austin. "You come here to save game! In London we'll drink cocktails. 
But when we come back we drink K cider on the rocks."

"I think it's nice that Jaws have stayed in Birmingham, though," reckons 
Harrison. "They're still holding the torch for the city while we dick around in 
Dalston, falling in love and taking drugs." He sighs: "It's not the same in 
London. There's something warmer when we all went out here. I definitely prefer 
Digbeth in 2010 to Dalston in 2012."

One part of the city they're never getting back is Zombie Prom. It closed its 
doors for good in September. On the last night, they played Bloodshake by Peace 
and King City by Swim Deep. "We were crowd-surfing to our own songs, there was 
no shame," smiles Harrison. "At one point we were all stood on plant pots 
screaming that we ran the town. I guess, for a while, we sort of did."

Who's who in B-Town?

JAWS sound like Foals or Battles, but without all the shouting

Biggest success to date Getting covered in wrapping paper on the Christmas 
cover of a Birmingham music magazine
Their inspirations Green Day, Led Zeppelin, Wagamama 
Listen to Their new double A-side single, Surround You/Stay In 
<https://soundcloud.com/jaws-band/jaws-surround-you>, out now on Rattlepop 
records.

PEACE sound like Friendly Fires would after nine pints of snakebite. They 
started when one of them was playing Electric Feel by MGMT in the music room at 
school

Their inspirations True love, Take That and Magical Mystery Tour
Listen to New song Wraith <https://soundcloud.com/p-e-a-c-e/wraith>, recorded 
by Arctic Monkeys and Adele producer Jim Abbiss
Bonus fact Greatest Day by Take That is their karaoke song of choice.

SWIM DEEP sound like dreamy doss-pop recorded from underneath a duvet. They 
met when Austin and Higgy were both working in Morrisons. Zach joined later 
when the others found him wandering outside a strip club in Walsall

Their inspirations One Direction, Duran Duran and 90210
Listen to Last single Honey <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P49qiSnA_nw>, the 
best song to come out of B-Town so far.
 