
Mr Fish, the 60s fashion label that helped usher in a “peacock revolution” in 
men’s fashion, is to be revived, evoking fond memories of a dandy revolution 
that inspired theyoung David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/04/david-bowie-his-style-story-1972-1973>
.

Although it ceased trading almost 40 years ago, plans are being made to bring 
out a new line of shirts and kipper ties, using the famous name. The move comes 
as a number of menswear designers and fashion houses, including Gucci andJW 
Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/10/jw-anderson-mixes-mundane-and-strange-in-fashion-show-streamed-on-grindr>
, are referencing the label’s style.

David Bowie: five defining looks – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-key-looks-pictures>
Situated in Clifford Street, London, between Savile Row and Bond Street, the 
shop was named after its owner Michael Fish. Bowie, who was magnetically drawn 
towards talent, had found a sartorial partner in crime. Although Fish’s fashion 
reign did not last long (the shop shut down a few years after Bowie’s 
man-dress), the store was a part of a new wave of clothes that tapped into the 
counterculture movement. Teen- agers born into the postwar baby boom had record 
levels of disposable income and were defining themselves by doing what their 
parents did not do, including how they dressed.

The outfit that Mr Fish is perhaps best known for is the “man-skirt”, which 
provided Bowie with one of his most memorable (and calculated) sartorial 
moments. “The man-dress Bowie wore on the cover of [the album]The Man Who Sold 
the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/22/spiders-from-mars-to-play-bowies-the-man-who-sold-the-world-live>
 was part of a plan. He wanted to shock people,” says Paul Trynka, author of 
Bowie biographyStarman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/mar/13/david-bowie-starman-any-day>. 
“He was explicitly destroying the Bowie of Space Oddity, the singer with the 
curly Bob Dylan haircut. It was his first reboot.”

It certainly confused many. Arriving in Los Angeles in the dress, Bowie was 
described by a dribblingRolling Stone magazine as “ravishing … disconcertingly 
reminiscent of Lauren Bacall”. Months later, when his PR team took his next 
album,Hunky Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/moment-that-changed-me-david-bowie-hunky-dory>
, to the BBC, they were ejected from the building after being told that Auntie 
“didn’t play records by perverts”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpeacock-revolution-david-bowie-mick-jagger-mr-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff4f60592cc01dc270ad674d0c4a0b19732d16b5%2F0_0_1024_1021%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peacock%20revolution%20back%20with%20label%20that%20dressed%20Mick%20Jagger%20and%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpeacock-revolution-david-bowie-mick-jagger-mr-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peacock%20revolution%20back%20with%20label%20that%20dressed%20Mick%20Jagger%20and%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpeacock-revolution-david-bowie-mick-jagger-mr-fish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff4f60592cc01dc270ad674d0c4a0b19732d16b5%2F0_0_1024_1021%2F1024.jpg>
 David Bowie on the cover of The Man Who Sold the World. 
Trynka says the man-dress was part of a sea change in the singer’s life. 
“Bowie was hanging out with[the fashion designer] Ossie Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/jul/13/art.artsfeatures2>. He 
was being dressed by the flamboyantly gay Freddie Buretti. The dress 
represented all of that.”

“Menswear was very conservative at that time,” says Phil Fish, Michael’s 
brother, who worked in the stockroom of the shop. “In the City it was the 
bowler hat and stiff collar brigade. People weren’t wearing frilly shirts.” Mr 
Fish offered a stark contrast: beads on velvet jackets and flattened kipper 
ties. “His clothes were very dandyish but had a historical depth to them,” says 
Elizabeth Selby curator of a forthcoming exhibition,Moses, Mods and Mr Fish 
<http://www.jewishmuseum.org.uk/menswear>. “He was using historical tailoring 
but making it very flamboyant. In a way he was going back to an 18th-century 
approach where men weren’t afraid of being expressive with their clothes.”

His references may have been looking to the past but they chimed with the 
free-thinking mindset. Explaining his philosophy, Fish toldNewsweek: “Clothes 
should not reflect how ‘they’ or ‘I’ think you should look. [They] should 
reflect how you want to look.”

Fish was born in Wood Green, north London, and started his career working as a 
salesman before getting a job as a designer at Turnbull & Asser in 1962. Here 
his inventive floral designs helped the company update its lines. His bespoke 
boutique Mr Fish opened in 1966. “It was a lovely shop,” remembers his brother. 
“It was always full of celebrities, members of the royal family and 
aristocrats. He opened up lots of people’s eyes to men’s fashion.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpeacock-revolution-david-bowie-mick-jagger-mr-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23f9c4eec4946bb39d641f245875b3f69daa4f18%2F0_119_3226_2675%2F3226.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peacock%20revolution%20back%20with%20label%20that%20dressed%20Mick%20Jagger%20and%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpeacock-revolution-david-bowie-mick-jagger-mr-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peacock%20revolution%20back%20with%20label%20that%20dressed%20Mick%20Jagger%20and%20David%20Bowie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fpeacock-revolution-david-bowie-mick-jagger-mr-fish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23f9c4eec4946bb39d641f245875b3f69daa4f18%2F0_119_3226_2675%2F3226.jpg>
 Michael Fish wearing one of his creations. Photograph: Alamy 
Mr Fish’s notoriety grew. As well as dressing key players in the London scene 
such as Bowie, he helped costume various cinematic lovable rogues (most notably 
Peter Sellers inThere’s a Girl in My Soup) and designed Muhammad Ali’s Rumble 
in the Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/29/rumble-in-the-jungle-muhammad-ali-george-foreman-book-extract>
 robe. Mick Jagger wore his bishop-sleeved tunic at the Rolling Stones’ 1969 
Hyde Park gig. It was two days after Brian Jones had been found dead and Jagger 
recited Shelley’s Adonais as a eulogy. The era-spanning shirt-dress felt 
strangely appropriate.

Collars to kaftans: how Vinyl spins our 70s style obsession
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/16/collars-to-kaftans-how-vinyl-spins-our-70s-style-obsession>
Investor David Mason is behind the revival of the label. “Mr Mason said the 
label deserves to be relaunched and there’s a market for it,” said Phil Fish 
last week. The influence of the man who said: “I always believed men are not 
physically designed for trousers” still looms large. Recent collections from 
Gucci and JW Anderson featured ​tunic-like skirt-shirts, silk robes and 
piecrust-collar shirts. And although Michael Fish suffered a stroke 11 years 
ago that left him speechless, his brother believes the original Mr Fish would 
be happy at the recent turn of events. “He’d be brimming over with happiness if 
he could understand everything that was happening.”

Moses, Mods and Mr Fish is at  <http://jewishmuseum.org.uk/menswear> the 
Jewish Museum, London NW1 7NB, from 31 March
 