
The trade minister, Steven Ciobo, has given a spirited defence of politicians 
charging taxpayers to attend major sports events, declaring they are 
work-related expenses because they allow businesses and other organisations to 
“showcase themselves”.

After the health minister, Sussan Ley, stood aside on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 pending an investigation of her decision to purchase a $795,000 Gold Coast 
apartment on a taxpayer-funded trip, attention has focused on politicians 
charging to attend events includingNew Year’s Eve parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-used-taxpayer-money-for-gold-coast-events-with-multi-millionaire>
 and major sporting events.

These have included the foreign affairs minister, Julie Bishop, charging to 
attend a polo event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/mps-havent-sought-to-defraud-says-minister-as-travel-claims-scandal-widens>
 on the Mornington Peninsula and two government ministers and a Coalition 
senator attending the 2013 AFL grand final.

MPs 'haven't sought to defraud', says minister as travel claims scandal widens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/mps-havent-sought-to-defraud-says-minister-as-travel-claims-scandal-widens>
Asked on ABC’s AM on Friday why he had charged taxpayers $1,000 for an airfare 
to attend the grand final, Ciobo said: “The matter of principle in relation to 
this is: should work expenses be claimed for a work-related activity?”

Ciobo said he used a taxpayer-funded vehicle to go to games in his own 
electorate, because “people expect that”.

“I can certainly say as an Australian that I would love to see, for example, 
Australia’s prime minister – and I don’t care whether it’s Liberal or Labor – 
at a key game ... between the Wallabies and the All Blacks.

“So, I’m sorry but the reason I was invited isn’t because I am Steve Ciobo. I 
was invited because I am the trade minister and at that time in fact I was the 
parliamentary secretary to the treasurer.”

Ciobo was gifted a ticket and hospitality 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/~/media/03%20Senators%20and%20Members/32%20Members/Register/44p/CF/CioboS_44P.pdf>
 at the 2013 grand final by the National Australia Bank.

Ciobo said businesses and other organisations who invited politicians were 
“taking the opportunity to showcase themselves there, to take the time to have 
a conversation in relation to important matters”.

“Absolutely [it] is work-related and that’s the reason why.”

On Monday the acting special minister of state, Kelly O’Dwyer, said the 
Turnbull government would implement the recommendations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/parliamentary-expenses-government-to-clarify-what-official-business-means>
 fromlast year’s review of the expenses system 
<https://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/independent-parliamentary-entitlements-system-review-feb-2016.pdf>
, including clarifying what constitutes “official business”.

On Friday the independent MP Andrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie> called for a larger 
overhaul including higher penalties for improper expense claims.

He told ABC TV federal police should be called in “when there’s wrongdoing” 
rather than simply allowing politicians to pay the money back.

“And also [there should be] a fairly simple requirement that parliamentarians 
be required to list on their allowance claim form, which is made available 
publicly, all of the substantive activity, both public and private, that they 
conduct on a trip.”

Wilkie said the government’s promise to implement the 36 recommendations was 
“pretty worthless” because it had promised the same thing last March but 
“virtually none” had been implemented so far.


Sussan Ley may lose her job over expenses. She should lose it over health 
policy | Michael Buckley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/sussan-ley-may-lose-her-job-over-expenses-she-should-lose-it-over-health-policy>
On Thursday, the ABC reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-12/julie-bishop-charged-taxpayers-for-melbourne-cup-rugby-polo/8178408>
 that Bishop had claimed a total of $11,000 to attend five events including 
Derby day, Portsea polo, the Melbourne Cup and the rugby. Bishop listed travel 
to the events as for “official ministerial business”.

She reportedly attended marquees on Derby day and Melbourne Cup day as guests 
of an airline company and an alcohol company.

In a statement, Bishop said: “The minister was invited and attended in her 
official capacity as minister for foreign affairs and deputy leader of the
Liberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party>.”

Wilkie said the test for expense claims should be whether a trip is 
“substantially to do with a private matter”.

He said claiming a trip to buy an expensive investment property, attend a New 
Year’s Eve party, the polo or “a mate’s wedding” was not reasonable.
 