
Flying into Rotterdam as the early mist hangs over the seemingly endless 
docks, it strikes me that this is an appropriate location in which to meet the 
photographerPeter Lindbergh <http://www.peterlindbergh.com/>. This is the man 
who has made raw images his signature – whether a stark electricity pylon shot 
in the industrial city of Duisburg, Germany, where Lindbergh grew up, or the 
untouched portrait of a model’s face, apparently devoid of make-up or any other 
such artifice.

‘Oh, but she looks tired,’ they say. So what? Tired and beautiful

In fact, if I had arrived the previous day, I might have seen Lindbergh in 
action in one of the semi-derelict warehouses where he was photographing the 
32-year-old model Lara Stone. The shoot is a commission by DutchVogue to 
coincide with “A Different Vision on Fashion Photography”, an exhibition of 
Lindbergh’s work which opens this September in Rotterdam.

I met Lindbergh at Rem Koolhaas’s Kunsthal <http://oma.eu/projects/kunsthal>, 
where he was editing the Lara Stone images with the show’s curator, 
Thierry-Maxime Loriot. “I see him more as an artist,” Loriot told me. “He has 
such strong themes. You can immediately say, ‘That’s a Lindbergh image’ because 
of the timelessness of the portraits, without make-up, without hair. They never 
date.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe981504643c29bc3dc90a6e91084440114f84bd0%2F0_0_665_1000%2F665.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe981504643c29bc3dc90a6e91084440114f84bd0%2F0_0_665_1000%2F665.jpg>
 Wing and a prayer: Amber Valletta wearing Helmut Lang, New York, 1993. 
Photograph: Peter Lindbergh/Courtesy of Peter Lindbergh, Paris/Gagosian Gallery 
Lindbergh does what he does. And as long as you don’t try to retouch what he 
does, he is happy. A warm, round bear of a man, his glasses perched on the end 
of his nose, he shows me some of the images of Stone. Someone had suggested 
that her nose was a little red. Unlike much of his work, the picture is in 
colour. Lara, her hair rough and messy, stares back at me looking powerful, 
womanly, slightly lined, and yes, a little pink around the nose. “She looks 
absolutely fantastic… raw, the same power as Kate [Moss],” he says. He shakes 
his head. “But who cares if her nose is red? You don’t see the power and the 
poetry of not being perfect?”

Magazines have to sign a contract agreeing not to do any retouching, 
otherwise, he says, it happens. “The cosmetic companies have everyone 
brainwashed. I don’t retouch anything. ‘Oh, but she looks tired!’ they say. So 
what if she looks tired? Tired and beautiful.”

Of course it helps if the subject is extraordinarily beautiful to start with. 
And Lindbergh is the man credited with discovering the supermodels, after all. 
He describes the iconic 1990 cover he shot for BritishVogue – of Linda, 
Christy, Tatjana, Naomi and Cindy – as “the birth certificate of the 
supermodels”.

“I never had the idea that this was history,” he says. “Never for one second… 
I didn’t do anything, a bit of light. It came together very naturally, 
effortless; you never felt you were changing the world. It was all intuition.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F790baf408e24259cd8dd85a44dcd2baafea8ff90%2F0_0_790_1000%2F790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F790baf408e24259cd8dd85a44dcd2baafea8ff90%2F0_0_790_1000%2F790.jpg>
 New look: Kate Moss for Harper’s Bazaar, 1994. Photograph: Peter 
Lindbergh/Courtesy of Peter Lindbergh, Paris/Gagosian Gallery 
Two years before, Lindbergh had photographed a group of new faces including 
Linda, Christy and Tatjana for a story for AmericanVogue. The shots of the 
girls, windswept on the beach wearing nothing but plain white shirts, were 
totally out of kilter with the bold, glitzy, big-haired fashion then filling 
the pages of the magazine, and the editor at the time, Grace Mirabella, was not 
impressed. “She threw the pictures in the waste basket,” says Lindbergh.

I left Poland in 1944 with my family, on a little platform with a horse. We 
travelled 2,500km to western Germany

Happily for him, Mirabella was fired not long after, and in August 1988 Anna 
Wintour took over and promptly hired Lindbergh to shoot her first cover. It 
signalled a complete change for the magazine – and for the mood of fashion in 
general. Wintour chose Lindbergh’s shot of the Israeli model Michaela Bercu. 
Her long, wavy hair is blowing in the wind. She is laughing, her eyes squinting 
in the sun. If she is wearing make-up, it is minimal. Her midriff, below a 
bejewelled Christian Lacroix top, is bare, and she is wearing jeans.

“I couldn’t stand the kind of woman who was featured in the magazine, 
supported by the rich husband,” he says, with a shudder, describing the 
pre-Wintour years. “I’ve never been impressed by somebody who came in with a 
crocodile bag, you know?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb2e743c15f473ce3188e2219139f597c5314119%2F0_0_1000_670%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb2e743c15f473ce3188e2219139f597c5314119%2F0_0_1000_670%2F1000.jpg>
 Birth of the supermodels: (from left) Estelle Lefébure, Karen Alexander, 
Rachel Williams, Linda Evangelista, Tatjana Patitz and Christy Turlington, 
Malibu, 1988. Photograph: Peter Lindbergh/Courtesy of Peter Lindbergh, 
Paris/Gagosian Gallery 
Of the many film stars and celebrities he has photographed, from Charlotte 
Rampling to Keith Richards, I wonder how he manages to circumvent the 
publicists’ ever-increasing demands for picture approval and retouching, or the 
agents who say he can only have half an hour with the talent. “I say: ‘Why 
don’t you fuck yourself and get out of here?’ – and I say it in a way they even 
say thank you.” He laughs, and I believe him.

That is part of his charm and part of how you get to be Peter Lindbergh. You 
have a vision. You don’t compromise on it for one minute, and you get your way 
– but always with a smile.

Lindbergh, 71, has been the subject of many exhibitions, and this one promises 
to speak to a new generation, not least because of the gallery dedicated to the 
“supermodels”. “I usually kick the supermodels out of exhibitions because it’s 
too commercial, but there is so much history – it’s forced me to look at them 
again.”

Although his photography is largely commissioned by and produced for fashion 
magazines, he uses clothes as props rather than the central element for the 
shoot. “I don’t even ask what outfit I’m shooting,” he says. But it is the 
advertisers who pay for the paper that the fashion stories are printed on (and 
when Lindbergh shoots for ItalianVogue, his stories will span at least 20 
pages), so how does he feel about his photography being used as a vehicle to 
give clothing credits to those advertisers? “I don’t care what they slip in as 
long is it can integrate with the picture I want to do,” he shrugs. “But if it 
doesn’t fit, then I don’t care for the credits, I have to say.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e0579df202d7d0679b0b4f66f9f92c4c4c69157%2F0_0_793_1000%2F793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e0579df202d7d0679b0b4f66f9f92c4c4c69157%2F0_0_793_1000%2F793.jpg>
 New wave: Michaela Bercu in Christian Lacroix, 1988, chosen by Anna Wintour 
for her first cover as Vogue editor. Photograph: Peter Lindbergh/Courtesy of 
Peter Lindbergh, Paris/Gagosian Gallery 
Lindbergh was born in 1944 in Lissa, in western Poland. When he was just two 
months old the family were forced by the Russians to flee. “What I know is my 
mum, my grandmother and my sister and my brother and I got on a little platform 
with two wheels and a horse, left there and ended up travelling 2,500km. Isn’t 
that incredible? In the war! We travelled through Berlin all the way down to 
south Germany, in the Alps.”

I was lost to society, smoking pot, sleeping outside. Two years on the road is 
a lot of time to think

Lindbergh was the youngest of three children. His father was shot early in the 
war. “A sniper shot him, ripped off his fingers.” It probably saved his life as 
he worked in the barracks for the rest of the war. When he returned home, he 
became a salesman for a sweet company.

The family ended up in Duisburg, the centre of Germany’s steel industry. “We 
had no money. We had three small floors, for five people. Today when I go into 
my apartment I have a huge hall and big rooms with high ceilings!” His parents 
lived in the family home all their lives. “Duisburg was the worst industrial, 
depressive part of Germany. But it was great. We had nothing, but I didn’t miss 
nothing so that was fine.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a77610bd28b85a3fa199fb9a30755e934b87ef8%2F0_0_670_1000%2F670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a77610bd28b85a3fa199fb9a30755e934b87ef8%2F0_0_670_1000%2F670.jpg>
 Paint it black: Keith Richards in Tom Ford for Gucci, New York, 1999. 
Photograph: Peter Lindbergh/Courtesy of Peter Lindbergh, Paris/Gagosian Gallery 
At 14 he left school to start work as a window dresser in a local branch of 
the Karstadt department store. He moved to Switzerland at 18 to avoid military 
service in Germany and then to Berlin, where he got a job at Karstadt again. 
But it wasn’t long before he started to see other possibilities.

“It was really exciting,” he recalls. “I had never seen an exhibition, an art 
book, I’d never listened to music, nothing. I’d never been in a museum before! 
I was like a dry towel – I sucked up everything.”

He enrolled at the Academy of Fine Arts but soon decided to follow in the 
footsteps of Van Gogh and go to Arles to discover himself. He worked on a farm 
in the mornings and painted in the afternoons, selling his work in the markets 
to make some money. After eight months, like a proper beatnik, he set off 
hitchhiking around Europe and North Africa. Finally he returned to Germany. “I 
was about 20. I was lost to society: smoking pot, sleeping outside. Two years 
on the road is long. That is a lot of time to think. It made me a different 
man.”

Lindbergh discovered photography quite by accident. “My brother had fabulous 
children before I had children and for some reason I wanted to photograph them, 
and that was when I got my first camera. Children have something totally 
unconscious about them. That’s how I learned.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7444528285c0c886508ba050238290537a37e6e0%2F0_0_668_1000%2F668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Lindbergh%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20retouch%20anything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fpeter-lindbergh-i-dont-retouch-anything-a-different-vision-on-fashion-photography%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7444528285c0c886508ba050238290537a37e6e0%2F0_0_668_1000%2F668.jpg>
 Short cut: Charlotte Rampling for Giorgio Armani, Paris, 1987. Photograph: 
Peter Lindbergh/Courtesy of Peter Lindbergh, Paris/Gagosian Gallery 
Having established himself in Germany – he opened his own studio in Düsseldorf 
in 1973, shot the first ad campaign for VW Golf and his first fashion shoot for 
the prestigiousStern magazine in 1978 – he moved to Paris, where he has lived 
ever since. He has four children – all boys – and is married toPetra Sedlaczek 
<http://petrasedlaczek.com/>, who is also a photographer (she started out 
assisting Lindbergh).

Like those of Steven Meisel, Bruce Weber and David Sims, his images continue 
to be relevant – rarely aVogue Italia goes by without one of his stories. And 
while Lindbergh says the era of the supermodels is over, he tends to work with 
the same models over and over again –Lara Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/24/lara-stone-model-fashion-vogue-david-walliams>
 is a current favourite, as are Mariacarla Boscono, Kate Moss and Kristen 
McMenamy. Like a choreographer, these are his dancers and it’s not about 
finding the new all the time, but building a relationship and creating a style 
that is beyond fashion.

He draws my attention to his image used for last year’s ad for the Calvin 
Klein fragrance Eternity. “It was Mark Vanderloo and Christy Turlington, very 
simple, just the two of them, looking at the camera. And it was done 25 years 
ago and they just used the same image again and nobody figured it out. It 
looked just like from yesterday, which was really nice. If you don’t do 
anything, what could age in that picture?” he asks. He sits back in his chair, 
and smiles. “Nothing!” And that’s the truth.

Peter Lindbergh: A Different Vision on Fashion Photography is at the Kunsthal 
Rotterdam from 10 September 2016-12 February 2017 (kunsthal.nl 
<http://www.kunsthal.nl/en/#tijdlijn-2016-07>)
 