
My mother, Phyllia Ormrod, grew up among the team of people who helped to 
excavate the Cretan palace of Knossos under the guidance of the archaeologist
Sir Arthur Evans. <http://sirarthurevans.ashmus.ox.ac.uk/biography/> She rubbed 
shoulders with both the refined members of the British archaeological institute 
and the immensely loyal Cretan workforce.

Phyllia was the youngest of the 10 or more children of Emmanuel Akouminakis, 
and his wife, Kyria Kalaitxaki; seven children survived into adulthood. Her 
father had walked barefoot from his village ofAnogia 
<http://www.explorecrete.com/history/WW2_Anogia_Destruction.html> to work on 
the site atKnossos 
<http://www.odysseyadventures.ca/articles/knossos/articleKnossos01.html>, near 
Heraklion, the island’s capital. He became Evans’s righthand man and, 
eventually, the curator of the Minoan museum in Heraklion. A regular visitor to 
Crete was the authorDilys Powell 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituarydilys-powell-1585062.html>, 
whom Phyllia later helped with her book The Villa Ariadne (1973), inspired by 
the house that Evans built for himself on the site at Knossos.

Phyllia, who has died aged 95, was a bright pupil at her primary school and 
could have won a place to a high school, but she had to stay at home to help 
with the chores after her older sister, Maria, became pregnant while still a 
teenager.

Before long, with her brother, Micky, who was the senior liaison agent with 
the Special Operations Executive (SOE) during the second world war, she was 
gathering intelligence from the staff of the German headquarteres who had 
occupied the Villa Ariadne. These were dangerous times, but they were also 
exciting. She soon made friends with the author and SOE officerPatrick Leigh 
Fermor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/jun/10/patrick-leigh-fermor-obituary>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fphyllia-ormrod-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c36ee82a56129e4d45fb431291d0b8c4cbe6f5%2F0_0_3564_2139%2F3564.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phyllia%20Ormrod%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fphyllia-ormrod-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phyllia%20Ormrod%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fphyllia-ormrod-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c36ee82a56129e4d45fb431291d0b8c4cbe6f5%2F0_0_3564_2139%2F3564.jpg>
 Phyllia Ormrod (listed as Phyllia Houseman in the film credits) in Ill Met by 
Moonlight, 1957, which starred Dirk Bogarde, second left, and Cyril Cusack, 
right 
Phyllia was a young woman when her father was killed by German paratroopers 
during the battle of Crete in 1941. Ignoring all danger she entered the battle 
zone, found her father’s body and buried it as best she could.

She was the last surviving member of the Cretan resistance unit that supported 
the capture by SOE ofGeneral Heinrich Kreipe 
<http://www.ekathimerini.com/208542/article/ekathimerini/life/accounts-of-audacious-abduction-of-nazi-general-heinrich-kreipe-now-in-greek>
, the German commandant of Crete. She and her first husband, John Houseman, an 
SOE subaltern, later appeared as themselves in Michael Powell’s film about the 
exploit, Ill Met by Moonlight (1957).

When she became engaged to John a small adjustment to her date of birth was 
deemed desirable. Micky, with the help of the obliging passport office in 
Heraklion, took four years off her age. John and Phyllia were married at the 
family home near Knossos in 1946.

The couple arrived in Britain the following year. Finding it hard to resume 
his Oxford degree course after his war experiences, John went into commerce, 
was convicted for fraud and imprisoned on the Isle of Wight, escaping to join 
the Foreign Legion. He then deserted and returned himself to prison.

During this time, Phyllia was determined to remain in Britain, living in 
Finchampstead, Berkshire, where I was born in 1951. John eventually wound up in 
the Turks and Caicos Islands, where he set up the islands’ first newspaper, the 
Conch News. My parents divorced in the early 1960s.

Phyllia briefly ran a bubble-gum vending company, before settling down with a 
former partner in that ill-fated business, Oliver Ormrod, whom she married in 
1963.

She was a member of the Special Forces Club, which supports those who have 
served in the military. She was also a great cook and party-giver.

Oliver died in 1986. Phyllia is survived by me, and by her grandchildren Eva, 
Anna, Oliver, Lily and Allegra.
 