
Joe Wicks. Heard of him? You’ve undoubtedly seen him: also known as the Body 
Coach, the eternally cheerful Wicks currently has three health and fitness 
books in the UK top 10 – and it’s all thanks to Instagram.He joined the social 
media site <https://www.instagram.com/thebodycoach/?hl=en> in 2013 to get more 
clients for his personal training business, and his toned pecs, quick workouts, 
and 15-second video recipes won him a 150,000-strong following and the 
attention of publishers. Macmillan’s Bluebird imprint didn’t reveal what it 
paid for Wicks’s first two books in 2015, but the Bookseller reportedit was a 
“heated” eight-way auction 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/body-coach-joins-bluebird>, so it’s safe to 
assume six figures. (The two-book deal laterbecame four 
<http://home.bt.com/news/uk-news/personal-trainer-joe-wicks-beats-delia-smith-sales-record-for-cookery-books-11364032276425>
, noweight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/09/lean-in-15s-joe-wicks-i-dont-understand-the-clean-eating-thing-ive-just-had-bangers-and-mash>
.)


Lean in 15’s Joe Wicks: ‘I don’t understand the clean-eating thing. I’ve just 
had bangers and mash’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/09/lean-in-15s-joe-wicks-i-dont-understand-the-clean-eating-thing-ive-just-had-bangers-and-mash>
Lean in 15 sold 77,000 copies in its first week of sales in December 2015. In 
2016,it sold 972,000 copies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/31/bestselling-books-2016-analysis-ghost-christmas-past>
, making it the third bestselling book of the year. (His other books came 
seventh and 27th, with 449,000 and 177,000 sales respectively.) Wicks has 
parlayed that success into a TV show, DVDs, and a fitness empire. His business 
now turns over more than £1m a month. He also now has 1.6m Instagram followers 
(and counting).

Publishers turning to Instagram – a photography-based medium – to find authors 
may seem strange. But we live in an image-focused society and a lot of a 
publisher’s work has already been done if their new signing has already shaped 
their brand. Consider the authorial success of a YouTuber juggernaut such as 
gamer PewDiePie’s book This Book Loves You, which reached top spot on the New 
York Times bestseller list in a week. Or Zoella, whose 2014 novel Girl Online 
sold more copies in one week (78,109) than any debut novel since records began, 
making the £100,000 advance she was paidto have it ghostwritten 
<http://time.com/3623032/zoella-girl-online-ghost-written/> seem like small 
potatoes. For comparison, the last Booker prize winner Paul Beattysold 45,000 
copies <http://www.daily-sun.com/home/printnews/178334> of The Sellout in the 
18 months before the ceremony – actually very successful for literary fiction. A
2015 survey 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/average-author-advance-under-6600> found the 
median author advance was less than £6,600.

Deliciously Stella: the Instagram sensation serving up raw Kinder eggs on 
avo-toast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/18/deliciously-stella-clean-eating-instagram-comedian-bella-younger-interview>
Other Instagram successes include comedian Bella Younger, whose tie-in book 
for herDeliciously Stella <https://www.instagram.com/deliciouslystella/?hl=en> 
web presence pokes fun at some of the sites’s more earnest dieting trends. If 
the name sounds familiar, it’s because it’s a play onDeliciously Ella 
<https://www.instagram.com/deliciouslyella/?hl=en>, aka Ella Mills, another 
Instagrammer and bestselling author, whose first cookbook, also called 
Deliciously Ella, sold 32,144 copies in its first week (a record until Wicks 
turned up). You don’t even need to be a person to be an Instagram author: in 
2015, Orion snapped up the rights to Marnie the Dog: I’m a Book, bythe 
eponymous shih tzu <https://www.instagram.com/marniethedog/?hl=en>, famous for 
her lopsided grin among her 1m followers. Turning the popularCats of Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/cats_of_instagram/?hl=en> account into a book? A 
no-brainer.

It would be easy to look at all these and feel cynical about the future of 
publishing. But it’s worth remembering that popular books help keep the 
industry afloat.Print sales rose 7% in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/10/jk-rowling-and-joe-wicks-powered-2016-surge-in-uk-book-sales>
, in large part thanks to Wicks (with a little help from JK Rowling and 
colouring books for adults). Even established authors in all genres are 
embracing Instagram: The Night Circus author Erin Morgenstern 
<https://www.instagram.com/erinmorgenstern/> shares what she’s reading, plus 
the odd kitten shot;Bret Easton Ellis <https://www.instagram.com/bretellis/> 
posts pictures of shiny LA alongside his recommended reads and judging byPaolo 
Coelho’s account <https://www.instagram.com/paulocoelho/?hl=en>, the new-age 
novelist splits his time between frigid walks and taking photos of ads for his 
books. Publishers want all their writers to have a social media presence. It is 
the new normal.

A photo posted by Matilda and Harry Goodman (@heyharryheymatilda) 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BFmOgZwmvAW/> on May 19, 2016 at 10:31am PDT

Some authors have even begun using Instagram to tell stories, all within the 
2,200-character photo caption limits imposed by Instagram. And the results are 
fascinating. Caroline Calloway’s memoir And We Were Like started asa series of 
Instagram updates <https://www.instagram.com/carolinecalloway/?hl=en> by the 
24-year-old about her life as an American in Cambridge and comes out in 2018. 
Journalist Jeff Sharlet has publishedhis Instagram photo essays in magazines 
such as GQ <http://www.gq.com/story/jeff-sharlet-writing-longform-on-instagram> 
and plans to devote his next book to them. And this month sees the release of 
Rachel Hulin’s novel Hey Harry, Hey Matilda. Originally told on Instagram, the 
story of unusually close twins in their early 30s is written in the form of 
emails that gradually reveal the shameful secrets they’ve both been hiding. 
It’s weird, witty and clever, and it leads me to think that in future we should 
not always be cynical about looking at Instagram to find our next read. Now 
picture that.
 