
Earlier this summer, Californians Brad and Amy Herzog came up with an idea for 
what they’re calling “a picture book for adults about a man-child”: D Is for 
Dump Trump: An Anti-Hate Alphabet.

“S is for a silver spoon, / right from the beginning. / You can’t start far 
ahead, / then claim that you’ve been winning,” Brad writes in one of his 26 
poems (the book is illustrated by Amy). The letter M, he writes, “is for 
misogyny. / For years, Trump has shown / a disregard for women / in his talk, 
his tweets, his tone.”

D Is for Dump Trump is part of a small but burgeoning new genre: satirical 
books aboutDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. 
Since the Republican nominee announced his candidacy for US president, a spate 
of books has popped up, from both self-publishers and big houses.

There are parody picture books, like the just-published A Child’s First Book 
of Trump, by comedian Michael Ian Black: “The beasty is called an American 
Trump. / Its skin is bright orange, its figure is plump. / Its fur so complex 
you might get enveloped. / Its hands though are, sadly, underdeveloped.” 
Illustrator and filmmaker Guy Larsen’sDonald Trump and the Wig of Evil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2016/feb/12/donald-trump-wig-of-evil-guy-larsen-in-pictures>
 about the mogul’s distinctive hair being secretly sentient – and bad: “Donald 
was lovely, so misunderstood. Kind to all races … that hair though … that hair 
was no good.”

And then there’s eyebrow-raising adult fiction, like Richard Hine’s novel Kim 
Kardashian Saves the World (After President Trump Nearly Ends It), or Elijah 
Daniel’serotic gay novel Trump Temptation: The Billionaire and the Bellboy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/26/donald-trump-erotic-novel-temptation-billionaire-bellboy-elijah-daniel-amazon>
 - sample line: “The door creaked open and there he was, handsome as ever, like 
a giant melting fat carrot with fake hair.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpicture-books-and-porn-mini-boom-in-satirical-titles-inspired-by-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24c5801abcba63d6c02c798253cce919b4deb97c%2F0_0_4800_3000%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Picture%20books%20and%20porn%3A%20mini-boom%20in%20satirical%20titles%20inspired%20by%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpicture-books-and-porn-mini-boom-in-satirical-titles-inspired-by-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Picture%20books%20and%20porn%3A%20mini-boom%20in%20satirical%20titles%20inspired%20by%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpicture-books-and-porn-mini-boom-in-satirical-titles-inspired-by-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24c5801abcba63d6c02c798253cce919b4deb97c%2F0_0_4800_3000%2F4800.jpg>
 Illustration from A Child’s First Book of Trump by Michael Ian Black. 
Photograph: Simon & Schuster 
The Herzogs launched a Kickstarter in late June 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/383212107/d-is-for-dump-trump-an-anti-hate-alphabet-book?ref=category_popular>
, looking to raise $7,500 (£5,700) to help publish D Is for Dump Trump. A day 
later, they found their contract as spokespeople promoting the Recreational 
Vehicle Industry Association had been terminated, after an industry journalist 
wrote that they might use their work to market the book.

“The RVIA also scrubbed clean six years 
<http://blog.gorving.com/author/brad-herzog> of completely apolitical blog 
posts that I had written on their behalf. They’re gone. It’s as if we never 
existed,” said Brad, who has written dozens of books for adults and children. 
All because we wrote a satirical picture book criticising Donald Trump. It’s 
pretty chilling.”

In a statement, the RVIA has said 
<http://www.rvia.org/?ESID=preleases&PRID=1766&SR=1> that it suspended the 
Herzogs’ tour “based solely on the tone and content of the Herzogs’ book”, and 
that “regardless of the candidate or political affiliation depicted, we would 
have arrived at the same decision”.


Despite the controversy – or perhaps because of it – the Herzogs’ D is for 
Dump TrumpKickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> is 
doing well. Better than well – with more than a week to go, the Herzogs have 
raised almost $37,000 for their book, more than five times what they were 
looking for. With 52 backers the day they were fired, the Herzogs now have more 
than 850 pre-orders from supporters all around the world, as far away as Norway 
and the Netherlands. Aside from the Herzog’s personal plight, the appetite for 
poking fun at the tycoon is not restricted to the country where Trump is 
looking to take power.

“We were inspired to create D Is for Dump Trump due to our disgust at Trump’s 
method of scapegoating entire segments of the population, inflaming the 
uninformed, attacking freedom of expression, and responding in a reactionary 
manner. And, in a case of tragic irony, we feel those were exactly the tactics 
used against us,” said Brad. “We anticipated a strong response because there 
are so many people out there who share our sentiments about a demagogue running 
for president, but upon discovering that, we lost our primary source of income 
– simply because we found a creative way to express the courage of our 
convictions, people from all over the world have turned our project into 
something of a movement.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpicture-books-and-porn-mini-boom-in-satirical-titles-inspired-by-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe344db3afc32ece6c19b5a26d91c05e1161ab5fb%2F0_244_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Picture%20books%20and%20porn%3A%20mini-boom%20in%20satirical%20titles%20inspired%20by%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpicture-books-and-porn-mini-boom-in-satirical-titles-inspired-by-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Picture%20books%20and%20porn%3A%20mini-boom%20in%20satirical%20titles%20inspired%20by%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpicture-books-and-porn-mini-boom-in-satirical-titles-inspired-by-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe344db3afc32ece6c19b5a26d91c05e1161ab5fb%2F0_244_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Guy Larsen’s Donald Trump and the Wig of Evil. Photograph: Guy Larsen 
So why have we not seen the same creative output for say Bernie Sanders, or 
Hillary Clinton? Aside from any political differences between the authors and 
Trump, the candidate’s self-regard makes him the ideal fodder for comedy.


“Trump is a golden, racist egg for anybody who wants to produce political 
satire,” said Guy Larsen, who originallyfilmed himself reading his picture book 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H3EUHywXCuw> Donald Trump and the Wig of Evil 
before landing a publishing deal. “There were some diehard Trump fans very 
pissed off in the YouTube comments, but that proved the audience was bigger 
than my aunt and a couple of friends I’d forced to watch it. It’s always a 
positive sign when there’s some negative feedback,” he said.

Trump, says Larsen, is a man who is “really charismatic, incredibly scary, and 
takes himself far too seriously, which is why irony is the perfect takedown for 
him.

“Seeing that he really hates people making fun of him just makes it better.”
 