
By rights Le Bar du Caveau, on the Ile de la Cité’s Place Dauphine, one of the 
most picturesque squares in the very centre of the tourist’s Paris, should have 
been crammed with foreigners. Instead, at lunch hour, the only time it was 
open, it was filled with lawyers from the adjoining Palais de Justice who 
clearly hadn’t got to talk enough in court because they were now screaming 
their heads off.

I asked, politely and in French, if a female lawyer sitting to my left wanted 
to switch places with me so she could more easily converse with the man sitting 
to my right. “No,” she said and then continued to shout in my ear to 
communicate with her colleague. The perfectly creamy, soft-scrambled eggs piled 
on to crisp brown bread were partial consolation.

I thought of Georges Simenon’s curmudgeonly, phlegmatic detective, Chief 
Inspector Maigret. Not only was the bar adjacent to his fictional workplace at 
the Police Judiciaire, but this kind of bar – tiny, timeworn and populated 
almost entirely by customers of the same profession who knew each other well – 
was precisely the kind of environment Maigret sought out in order to solve a 
crime. If there was a Maigret methodology, then perhaps its most axiomatic 
lesson was this: exit the scene of the crime as soon as possible. Scan the 
street corner for an adjacent bar or bistro. Mozy up to the counter and have 
what they’re having. Wait, listen and observe. Have some more of what they’re 
having.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33610771baa7298120b447f2ffd4168fed61c2e1%2F0_170_5150_3089%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pipe%20dreams%3A%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20Maigret%E2%80%99s%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pipe%20dreams%3A%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20Maigret%E2%80%99s%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33610771baa7298120b447f2ffd4168fed61c2e1%2F0_170_5150_3089%2F5150.jpg>
 Place Dauphine on the Ile de la Cité. Photograph: Getty Images 
Simenon published his 75 Maigret novels and 28 Maigret short stories between 
1931 and 1972; last monthITV broadcast the first of two made-for-TV Maigret 
<http://www.itv.com/presscentre/press-packs/maigret> movies starring Rowan 
Atkinson as the chief inspector. And so I set off to do a little detective work 
of my own, to discover whether Maigret’s Paris, full of squalid, storied hotels 
with communal bathrooms, apartment buildings with nosy concierges and, most 
importantly, characterful regional bistros and hyper-provincial bars, could 
still be found.

I made a list of Maigret’s haunts: 32 Quai des Orfèvres, where he worked; 132 
Boulevard Richard-Lenoir, where he lived with Madame Maigret; the Brasserie 
Dauphine, where he ordered trayfuls of beer and sandwiches when he was working 
late and which, according to some, was based on the Restaurant aux Trois 
Marches on the Rue de Harlay. But Maigret’s Paris wasn’t a physical landscape 
as much as an emotional, psychological and anthropological one. Take a walk 
through Paris with a Simenon policier and you will find the echoes and shouts, 
the smells and stenches dissected historically, thematically, philosophically. 
I decided to plunge into the dark alleyways of Paris with only a copy of 
Simenon’sTwo Penny Bar, and see where it took me. The problem, in today’s 
Paris, was finding any dark alleyways at all.

I was staying at the Le Robinet d’Or <http://www.lerobinetdor.com/en/>, just 
east of the Gare de l’Est and Gare du Nord train stations and a few steps west 
of Canal Saint-Martin. Maigret loved the atmosphere of train stations. He also 
frequently patrolled the small streets flanking the canal, home back then, to 
dozens of residential hotels and colourful regional bistros run by people from 
the north and east of France. They’d disembarked from the railway and not get 
very far before opening hotels, restaurants or bars catering to their fellow 
transplants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbba41278f97fb5f4468dabf5c31b2082ac84e82a%2F35_196_2904_1742%2F2904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pipe%20dreams%3A%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20Maigret%E2%80%99s%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pipe%20dreams%3A%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20Maigret%E2%80%99s%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbba41278f97fb5f4468dabf5c31b2082ac84e82a%2F35_196_2904_1742%2F2904.jpg>
 ‘I ate my meal with a glass of Alsatian riesling and thought about how 
Maigret’s Paris is now being reimagined.’ Belleville inhabitants enjoy the 
sunshine. Photograph: Shutterstock 
The immediate neighbourhood around the canal is now so thoroughly hipsterised 
that Maigret, finely attuned to the distinctions between petite and haute 
bourgeoisie, would probably have to quickly down a few strongmarcs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomace_brandy> before he could process the idea 
of wealthy young Parisians deliberately embracing, en masse, an area that was 
once so working class.

A few minutes walk away, though, just opposite the Gare de l’Est, I found 
Schmid Traiteur, an Alsatian delicatessen here since 1904, and joined a crowd 
of commuters at some small tables sampling the tarte flambée, the sausages and 
the sauerkraut. One feature of Maigret’s Paris was that it was a city not just 
of immigrants from eastern, central and northern Europe, but also that it was 
filled with French people from other parts of the country. They brought with 
them their regional cuisine, their local wines and their strange-sounding 
dialects, peppering Parisian street corners with the exotic herbs of Provence 
or the sweet yet acidic wines of Alsace. I washed down my meal with a glass of 
Alsatian riesling and thought about how Maigret’s Paris is now being reimagined.

In Maigret Sets a Trap, Rowan Atkinson tried to adhere to the quirks of the 
original character: constant pipe smoking, an unshakeable and prescient 
demeanour, a thoroughly domesticised home life in contrast to a work life 
hunting killers and criminals. But the real problem with the ITV drama isn’t 
performance or plot. It’s Paris. Shot on soundstages or in the streets of 
Budapest, the TV series offers us only fleeting, artificial glimpses of the 
city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b8f20524943147133491308f136b4bac84f722e%2F0_225_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pipe%20dreams%3A%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20Maigret%E2%80%99s%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pipe%20dreams%3A%20on%20the%20trail%20of%20Maigret%E2%80%99s%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fon-the-trail-of-maigrets-paris-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b8f20524943147133491308f136b4bac84f722e%2F0_225_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Street sweets … Middle Eastern pastries for sale at a food market. Photograph: 
Kay-Paris Fernandes/Getty Images 
The Maigret novels aren’t about a dramatic revelation of whodunnit – they are 
about process. And Maigret’s process means poking around: strolling the 
boulevards with a lit pipe in hand, ducking in and out of neighbourhoods to 
feel the pulse of a place at dawn and dusk, sampling a herring fillet or a 
home-style cassoulet at a local cafe. This process, come to think of it, is 
exactly how I love to explore a city – minus the pipe, plus a bicycle.

I took to the streets on my Vélib <http://en.velib.paris.fr/>. Though the 
city’s core is mostly for outsiders or the globalised rich, a short bike ride 
from Le Robinet D’Or plunged me into a very different Paris. There were rows of 
Turkish tailors and African braiding salons on Rue du Château d’Eau; Orthodox 
Jewish women in long skirts and wigs pushing prams along Rue Tristan Tzara; 
Congolese customers bargaining for fresh fish at the street markets of Château 
Rouge. Working class people from all over the city thronged the streets around 
Barbès-Rochechouart in search of quality clothes at good prices. Pockets of 
immigrant Paris remain, especially on this side of the Seine, as an antidote to 
the now sterile city centre.

Later that afternoon, I ventured east to Belleville, a neighbourhood now known 
for its unusual immigrant combinations – mainland Chinese, Sephardic Jews, 
North African Muslims, all jammed into one tiny quartier – and I stopped for a 
coffee at the counter of La Vielleuse, a giant cafe/restaurant with small 
tables spilling out on to terraces on the street. I sipped my café crème and 
gazed at the hundreds of people downing frothy beers, dipping crispy fries into 
mayonnaise and talking to each other in a friendly, conspiratorial, utterly 
Parisian way.

I did as I imagined Maigret would have, switching my coffee to a draft beer 
and ordering a small plate of oeufs mayonnaise to go with it. After a bite of 
boiled egg, and another look around, I realised something: though Maigret would 
have been baffled by the sound of Khmer, the sight of bearded men in cloaks, 
the text messages being sent off in Mandarin, all in such a thoroughly French 
establishment, he would have recognised and understood the relentless, complex 
energy of this place and the way that these relative newcomers had become so 
comfortable in this locale, just as the Poles and Burgundians, the Russians and 
the Alsatians all had in his Paris.
 