
There were no paparazzi long lenses focused on the lake in Bath this summer 
whenPixie Geldof <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/pixie-geldof> sank into 
the dark green water and held her breath. A minute passed. Earlier in the year 
she had recorded her first solo album, a bruisy collection of love songs called
I’m Yours. Another minute passed. The water was extremely cold and extremely 
deep. Now 26 she’s been writing songs since she was 18, releasing records with 
a band called Violet, but as her debut album neared release she started to 
panic – that people would think of the songs in terms of, “things they know 
happened in my life”. Just before she reached three minutes underwater, she 
raised her head, gasping.

Pixie decided to learn to freedive one holiday, swimming with whale sharks. 
She had seen freedivers who could go right up close to the sharks, “and I was 
so jealous. I wanted to go down, and stay down.” Completists will find that 
paparazziwere watching on that occasion: “PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Alexa Chung goes 
topless as she enjoys a sailing boat trip with bikini-clad palPixie Geldof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/pixie-geldof>.”

Back home in London at the house she shares with her boyfriend, musician 
George Barnett, she tells me she’s already done the written exam; the “static 
breath hold” in the Somerset lake was part two and was followed by a duration 
test. Next is depth. “The surprise,” she says with a chuckle, “was that I 
didn’t need to learn how to hold my breath. I needed to learn how to breathe.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff50699068c3412340daa54ba9897d470b7cfc4e7%2F0_129_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff50699068c3412340daa54ba9897d470b7cfc4e7%2F0_129_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
 On track: singing with her band, Violet. Photograph: Felix Clay for the 
Guardian 
Pixie was born in 1990, the third daughter of Sir Bob Geldof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bob-geldof> and TV presenter Paula Yates, 
after Fifi Trixibelle and Peaches, and grew up in the glare of photographers’ 
flashes. Paparazzi pictures from the early 90s show her looking into the lens 
with pigtails and a weary grimace as she trails behind Yates, who was pregnant 
with her little sister Tiger Lily and wearing a silk slip and lipstick. It was 
on Pixie’s 10th birthday that her mother was found dead of an accidental heroin 
overdose. Bob Geldof adopted Tiger Lily, whose own father INXS singerMichael 
Hutchence <http://michaelhutchence.org/> had committed suicide three years 
earlier. In 2014, at 25, her older sister Peaches was also found dead. The 
funeral took place in the same church in Kent where Peaches had been married, 
where her parents also had married, and where her mother was buried.

I am… OK. But there’s no recovery from it. There’s no therapy for it; no one 
day when it won’t be bad

Pixie’s favourite things are Buffy the Vampire Slayer, sharks, music and 
pasta, but the order changes. On Instagram she mainly follows ocean accounts. 
Pictures of water. She talks with deep romance about her friends. She says 
things are “sick”, or “groovy”. Perhaps it shouldn’t be a surprise that despite 
the paragraph of tragedy that each profile of her requires, in person, Pixie is 
giggly, open, content. It’s a warm afternoon in London when we meet and her 
living room curtains are drawn; the effect is cosy, rather than bleak. Pixie’s 
white chihuahua Buster moults joyfully on the sofa and aTownes Van Zandt 
<http://townesvanzandt.com/> record plays in the next room.

She is embarrassed by her tattoos. On her right forearm in wide ornate script 
is the phrase, “What will survive of us is love”; she is having it removed. 
“But it’s the worst pain in the world, like the sun has heated an elastic band 
and is whacking you with it, again and again.” She laughs. “They should change 
the legal age of tattoos to 25. You don’t know what you want on your body for 
life at 16! I’m a different person now.” This is a theme she returns to – 
memories of moving through life as if stepping on stage, and then realising 
she’s “not that girl”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7956970efbc4d644c458ac8f214635df4443bca6%2F0_101_1641_984%2F1641.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7956970efbc4d644c458ac8f214635df4443bca6%2F0_101_1641_984%2F1641.jpg>
 Sisters in arms: with father Bob Geldof and sister Peaches. Photograph: Yui 
Mok/Empics 
Pixie used to find all the press interest in her family confusing. Often, Bob 
Geldof <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bob-geldof> recently recalled, there 
would be 40 photographers walking backwards in front of them on the way to 
school.

“When you’re trying to build who you are as a person and the Daily Mail are 
telling you you’re something else, it’s quite… odd. At a point it gets to you, 
when you realise you’re walking into adulthood being seen as a person who 
really doesn’t exist.”

How was she seen? “As a crazy party girl. This mad wild child. They made it 
sound like I was doing something wrong.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd81169d3c73707c4423c6612471a62df5a77cfc8%2F2490_221_2502_3128%2F2502.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd81169d3c73707c4423c6612471a62df5a77cfc8%2F2490_221_2502_3128%2F2502.jpg>
 ‘It’s beautiful that someone can live a life so short and yet make such an 
impact,’ Pixie says about her sister, Peaches. Photograph: Chris Floyd for the 
Observer 
She fell into modelling, which is where she met the people (including Radio 
One DJ Nick Grimshaw and model Alexa Chung) who became her best friends. She 
was 14. “They joke that they saw my boobs come in.” She guffaws. “But I was 
focused on music from 18, and I didn’t want to be a ‘slashy’.” Model slash 
musician, slash designer, slash… “God knows I’m still avoiding it.”

Pixie doesn’t like “fame”, she says. “But I watch soaps, and I get it’s the 
same thing – people like to follow a storyline. I don’t want one thing to 
overshadow the other. I’m doing something that is real and it would be a shame 
if people just thought it was because I was famous. It’s more in spite of that, 
to be honest.”

When she invited Nick Grimshaw to listen to her album for the first time, he 
tells me over the phone, he drove to meet her feeling, “very stressed. What if 
it was horrible? If it had no heart, or purpose?” He sighs, a heavy relief. 
“Luckily it’s amazing. It sounds like ‘her’.”

I was so jealous seeing the freedivers swimming with the whale sharks. I 
wanted to go down, and stay down

The two see each other daily – yesterday she helped him assemble his new bed; 
they spent the evening watchingBake Off, her boyfriend in the armchair, 
Grimshaw spooning Pixie on the sofa. It was his dad that gave her a nickname 
that stuck, complaining Nick was “running around town after that Pepsi Geldof”. 
He giggles. “Can’t blame him, his confusion at those stupid Geldof names.” And 
it was Nick who worked hard to distract her from the horror of Peaches’ death, 
settling in to watch theKardashians in the days before the funeral, feeding her 
pizza.

That was what she needed, she says, pointing to the spot on the sofa where she 
had sat, while her friends streamed in and out, “talking about nonsense. I live 
for annoying girl chat.” Even in those gaping moments of grief, she wanted her 
friends to tell her about the guys who hadn’t texted, the parties, the 
hangovers? “There was a moment when nobody came to me with their tiny 
tragedies, sure,” she narrows her eyes, “but their stories are how I made the 
record. It’s not easy to write a heartbreak record when you’ve been with 
someone for six years. You need tales. Lovely laments and ideas. Little things 
people said about their exes became storylines behind songs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff94b671c5024bd0dc5abeb386f524b517b7afb24%2F0_716_3420_2052%2F3420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff94b671c5024bd0dc5abeb386f524b517b7afb24%2F0_716_3420_2052%2F3420.jpg>
 ‘She was a celebrity before she was born’: as a baby with mother Paula Yates 
in 1991. Photograph: Dave Benett/Getty Images 
In April, Peaches’ widowed husband Thomas Cohen released an album called Bloom 
Forever, in which he described returning home to find their son Phaedra playing 
by himself, and her body in the bedroom. “Longing I know, to find you alone / 
At the top of the stairs in your wedding dress.” Pixie’s albumI’m Yours is more 
elliptical, though no less mournful. Her only allusion to her sister’s death is 
a song called “Twin Thing” – “Wish I’d known you like my own skin, so I could 
feel the hurt you were in. Wish we had that twin thing.”

“People put a lot of emphasis on the idea of music as therapy,” Pixie says, 
carefully. “It does help you explain how you’re feeling.” Buster yaps at a 
noise in the garden – recently, she tells me, he’s reinvented himself as a 
guard dog, despite being the size of a bagel. “What it did, though, was give me 
something to focus on. It was the best thing for me. Not the music itself so 
much, but the doing something, something that wasn’t sitting in my house 
staring in the corners.”

When Peaches died, their dad received thousands of letters from strangers. One 
New York cab driver told him he’d had to pull over to steady himself when he 
heard the news. “It’s beautiful that someone can live a life so short and yet 
make such an impact,” Pixie says, staccato, rubbing at an invisible mark on her 
jeans. “Things stop for a second with people like her. She changed worlds, both 
when she was alive and when she wasn’t.”

She looks up, and I ask her how she is. “Oh!” she says. “How am I?” There’s a 
long, toffee-chewing pause. “I am… OK. There’s no recovery from it. There’s no 
therapy for it. I mean, there’s no one day when it won’t be bad.”

She describes waking up, opening her eyes and every morning having to figure 
out how to get up, how to live. “I have a very lovely life. Except there will 
always be something missing.” She takes a breath. “You don’t want to be the 
kind of person who knows how this feels, but unfortunately, I am.” A camp 
shrug, a grim smile. “I realise now that everyone is just trying to live, as 
well as they can. And some people can’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3aafde7e118e3b13e753415b6c5a45836a2a622%2F0_713_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3aafde7e118e3b13e753415b6c5a45836a2a622%2F0_713_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 ‘It was Nick who was settling in to watch theKardashians with her in the days 
before the funeral, feeding her pizza’: with Nick Grimshaw. Photograph: David M 
Benett/Getty Images 
Spending time with Pixie, drinking her coffee, it’s easy to see why her 
friends feel protective. Why her dog has taken to barking at the door. As 
someone who works with pop stars every day, does Nick Grimshaw secretly wish 
his best friend had chosen a career away from cameras? Pixie’s life, he says, 
“happened the wrong way round. She was a celebrity before she was born. Now 
she’s making choices. If there’s publicity, there’s a point to it. Finally.”

Picking through tabloid photos of Pixie’s life online, from baby pictures to 
funerals, what remains is a quizzical, disdainful look at the camera, a weary, 
“Really?”

“Isn’t it mad that paps still exist in an age of Instagram?” she asks. “The 
only reason I can think is for the bad angles. For a picture up a girl’s ass.”

I wonder if being photographed like that for so many years has politicised 
her. “No, but I am sick of a lot of stuff, through things I’ve experienced as 
a… as a ‘lady’. The music industry is a weird place and even though I know I 
have to make myself heard over all the men, I still apologise for it. I’m now 
at the point where I’ll say what I think. But then I will text an apology: 
‘Sorry for being a nightmare today.’ That’s not something related to me being 
in the public eye, is it? That’s all women. We start and end with ‘sorry’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98aae076a14b01874527cfa8cbe5aa365762bd6%2F0_579_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pixie%20Geldof%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20needed%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20breathe%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Eva%20Wiseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fpixie-geldof-i-needed-to-learn-how-to-breathe-im-yours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98aae076a14b01874527cfa8cbe5aa365762bd6%2F0_579_8688_5213%2F8688.jpg>
 ‘The music industry is a weird place’: Pixie on making herself heard. 
She is excited about returning to the studio. She’s excited about the idea 
that, one day, a girl might sing one of her songs at karaoke. She’s excited 
about returning to the lake for her final depth test. “Now I realise why people 
call second albums difficult. You’ve had an entire life for the first one.” Or 
two lives, or three. “I wonder if the next one will sound completely different. 
I wonder if it will be happier.”

Pixie Geldof’s debut album I’m Yours is released 4 November via Stranger 
Records
 