
UK aid will be more closely allied with trade policy after the British 
government signalled a new approach to development assistance that may risk 
sidelining poorer countries.

Two long-awaited reviews published on Thursday promised to change the focus of 
British aid, with the government pledging to do more in fragile and 
conflict-riven states and to expand work across the “arc of instability” that 
bends from north Africa to the Middle East.


MPs on the parliamentary watchdog tasked with scrutinising the use of British 
aid noted “a more overt link between the UK’s aid and trade policies” through a 
£1.3bn “prosperity fund 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/Approach-Paper-Rapid-Review-of-the-Prosperity-Fund.pdf>
”. They said this could lead to more development assistance being directed to 
middle-income countries, such as Mexico, India and China.

UK accused of lack of transparency over rise in aid funding to private sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>
The reviews published by the Department for International Development (DfID) 
offered a twofold evaluation, the firstfocusing on funding for multilateral 
organisations 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/573884/Multilateral-Development-Review-Dec2016.pdf>
 such as the World Bank as well as smaller organisations, while the second 
examinedbilateral aid to individual countries 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/573889/Bilateral-Development-Review-2016.pdf>
.


The development secretary, Priti Patel, who has in the past been highly 
critical of British aid 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/24/exclusive-priti-patel-warns-taxpayers-money-being-wasted-on-supe/>
, wrote in a bullish foreword to the bilateral review: “To those who doubt the 
ability of our aid to make a difference: tell that to the millions of children 
protected from paralysing polio by the British taxpayer, or the millions of 
Kenyans whose lives have been transformed by mobile money invented with British 
assistance, or the people of Sierra Leone who are getting back to their daily 
lives, free from Ebola after UK intervention.”


Patel pledged to continue the work of her predecessor, Justine Greening, on 
supporting women and girls. But the new minister, who earlier this year promised
to overhaul foreign aid based on “core Tory values” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
, also unveiled plans to “turbo charge” her department’s work on trade, 
welcoming what she called “an opportunity to forge a new role for ourselves in 
the world, embedding development within UK trade policy”.

The bilateral review announced that the CDC, the controversial private sector 
arm of the UK’s aid programme, will be at the heart of a push to accelerate the 
role of private investment. On Monday,the state spending watchdog accused CDC 
of failing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/28/uk-aid-watchdog-calls-for-clearer-picture-of-how-investments-benefit-poor>
 to demonstrate adequately how its investments improve the lives of the world’s 
poorest.

The review of multilateral agencies, which account for more than 40% of DfID’s 
funding over the past five years, said the system as a whole was “falling 
short” of its potential, because agencies and the “wider UN family” are not 
working together. The review said the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organisation was in need of “dramatic improvement”, while the Commonwealth 
Secretariat also required “urgent organisational reform”.

Irina Bokova, the director general of Unesco, said she was “deeply 
disappointed” by the DfID review. “This report is based on a flawed 
methodology, which misunderstands – if not ignores – Unesco’s policy support 
role, and its normative and standard setting mandate as a specialised agency of 
the UN, and which misrepresents and underestimates its achievements,” Bokova 
said.

“I am concerned that the feedback given by Unesco on a number of occasions has 
not been taken into account in the assessment.”

The bilateral aid review emphasised efforts by DfID to address conflict. It 
noted that the department is “scaling up investment” in north-east Nigeria, and 
supporting attempts to strengthen the national police force in Somalia as well 
as the Somali National Army with a view to providing security against militant 
groups including al-Shabaab, and reducing poverty.

Concerns have been raised in parliament 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/lords/2016-11-02/debates/333BB123-CF19-41CC-A67F-0D55E3D477A6/ConflictStabilityAndSecurityFund>
 over the transparency and accountability of the £1.3bn conflict, stability and 
security fund, overseen by the National Security Council. Sir Mark Lyall Grant, 
the prime minister’s national security adviser, was this week asked by MPs to 
disclose details of the fund’s spending, at a hearing of the joint committee of 
the National Security Strategy inquiry into the fund.

Labour MP Stephen Doughty, a member of the international development 
committee, accused Patel of seeking to exercise a sleight of hand that would 
shift aid away from some of the poorest recipients of UK assistance.


“There are stealthy efforts revealed by Priti Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel> to divert our aid to richer 
countries like China, Mexico and India to sweeten relationships and to wrongly 
divert billions to a private equity arm that invests in tax havens, private 
schools and private hospitals,” said Doughty.

The World Bank, the Global Fund and Gavi, the global alliance for vaccines and 
immunisation, were ranked “very good” by DfID’s multilateral aid review. This 
was reflected in increased UK support for the Global Fund, which the review 
said had helped save 20 million lives, from £800m to £1.1bn. Future UK funding 
to the World Bank will be announced shortly.

The review assessed 38 agencies, all of which receive more than £1m annual 
core DfID funding.
 