
My grandmother served a month in jail 100 years ago 
<http://time.com/4065338/margaret-sanger-clinic-history/>. Her crime? Opening 
the first birth control clinic in the US. Her name was Margaret Sanger, and she 
was the founder ofPlanned Parenthood <https://www.plannedparenthood.org/>. That 
first clinic was open for just 10 days in 1916 before the police shut it down; 
its very existence was considered a “public nuisance”. Today, Planned 
Parenthood is the single-largest provider of reproductive healthcare services 
in the country.


At 81, when she was very ill, I saw her give her last speech. “The law was 
wrong,” she said, standing in front of a crowd in the ballroom of the Waldorf 
Astoria hotel in New York City, “and I broke it.” She recounted her early 
struggles and the multiple arrests she endured, all to bring reproductive 
healthcare to women. I have never forgotten that day. Even into her 80s, my 
grandmother was always on the move. No sooner would she come to visit us in the 
suburbs than she would hop on a train to New York, an hour away, to attend a 
meeting, give a speech or lobby her supporters. She was indefatigable.

Sexual health gets little attention in a crisis, with devastating results | 
Tewodros Melesse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/sexual-health-little-attention-crisis-devastating-results-reproductive-healthcare-world-humanitarian-summit>
Her example led me to join her unfinished fight. As chair of the International 
Planned Parenthood Federation <http://www.ippf.org/> (IPPF) council for the 
past 15 years and president ofPlanned Parenthood of New York City 
<https://www.plannedparenthood.org/planned-parenthood-new-york-city> for a 
decade before that, I have helped continue my grandmother’s legacy. However, 
she would be appalled that, a century after the founding of Planned Parenthood 
in Brownsville, Brooklyn, the fight for reproductive rights is far from over.
When you live to be 100, you have either good genes or are doing something 
very right. For an organisation, it is both. Three million women a year, every 
year, need Planned Parenthood in the US. We have no national health service. 
Women are forced to rely on charities to fill the gaps that our federal, state, 
county and municipal clinics don’t cover. Its mission, to get birth control 
information to the poor and needy, should have been taken over by government 
health services, much like countries in western Europe. In the rare US cities 
where municipal clinics do offer birth control, like New York City, women still 
come to Planned Parenthood because they know they will get unbiased advice and 
full options.

It shouldn’t be this way. But Planned Parenthood is doing something right and 
the US government is doing something, if not exactly wrong, then certainly 
inadequately. This is made all the more plain by arecent report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/texas-maternal-mortality-rate-health-clinics-funding>
 showing that Texas, a state in the richest country on Earth, has the highest 
maternal mortality rate in the developed world.

Let all women decide for themselves: that is Planned Parenthood’s mantra

Of course, the severe stigma surrounding women’s reproductive rights and 
health isn’t limited to the US. At least47,000 women die every year from unsafe 
abortion 
<http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/unsafe_abortion/magnitude/en/>, 
many in countries where it is legal. US political posturing around reproductive 
rights negatively impacts countless women beyond US borders.

The Helms amendment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/may/15/barack-obama-us-abortion-aid-helms-amendment>
, passed in 1973, prohibits US foreign aid from going to organisations that 
provide safe abortion among their reproductive healthcare services – even if 
abortion is legal in the recipient country. The exportation of a policy 
inconsistent with US law means women suffer, whether in Syria, whererape is a 
weapon of war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/17/disarm-isis-rape-weapon-war>
, or in Latin America, where theZika virus threatens the health of women and 
babies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/11/zika-brazil-babies-microcephaly-one-year-later>
. The US should prioritise policies that help to reduce, not exacerbate, the 
severe health challenges and unnecessary deaths caused by limited access to 
reproductive healthcare services – including safe abortions – in all countries.

My grandmother insisted that women could not call themselves free until they 
could decide whether or not to be a mother. That was her mantra. Born poor, 
Irish, Catholic, tubercular, with an 11th-grade education, my grandmother was a 
tough and determined woman. She witnessed injustice and was determined to fix 
it. As a nurse, she saw women having children they didn’t want or, all too 
often, dying from illegal abortions. “Enough,” she said. Her eye was on women 
and their babies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fplanned-parenthood-100-years-old-reproductive-rights-margaret-sanger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9112bf80478febc6b72a9b6ad055b0e94c9f768a%2F0_624_2920_1751%2F2920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Planned%20Parenthood%20is%20100%20years%20old%2C%20but%20the%20fight%20for%20reproductive%20rights%20goes%20on%20%7C%20Alexander%20Sanger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fplanned-parenthood-100-years-old-reproductive-rights-margaret-sanger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Planned%20Parenthood%20is%20100%20years%20old%2C%20but%20the%20fight%20for%20reproductive%20rights%20goes%20on%20%7C%20Alexander%20Sanger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fplanned-parenthood-100-years-old-reproductive-rights-margaret-sanger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9112bf80478febc6b72a9b6ad055b0e94c9f768a%2F0_624_2920_1751%2F2920.jpg>
 When Planned Parenthood founder Margaret Sanger opened a family planning 
clinic in Brooklyn in 1916, it was promptly shut down. Photograph: Bettmann 
Archive 
Let all women decide for themselves: that is Planned Parenthood’s mantra, and 
it transcends national borders. My grandmother was also one of the founders of 
International Planned Parenthood, launched in 1952. Just last week, I visited 
IPPF’s member association in Morocco, called theAssociation Marocaine de 
Planification Familiale 
<http://www.ippf.org/about-us/member-associations/morocco>. The association not 
only operates a reproductive health clinic, but also runs a community school 
for orphans and offers training facilities in hairdressing, dressmaking and 
cooking, providing career paths for underprivileged boys and girls. The 
Moroccan people trust and respect our organisation, as do people in 172 
countries where IPPF operates.

To the poor and underserved, to the young and marginalised, to the minorities 
and immigrants that the US government doesn’t reach, my grandmother said: “We 
are here for you, all of you, no questions asked.”

A century ago, she was persecuted for this by the government, the churches, 
and many of her fellow citizens. She went to jail. When she got out, she 
continued the fight. At Planned Parenthood, we have fought the government, 
politicians, protestors and many anti-choice institutions, including churches 
and corporations. We have plenty more to do, nor least repealing theHyde 
amendment 
<https://www.plannedparenthoodaction.org/issues/abortion/hyde-amendment>, which 
prohibits Medicaid – social healthcare for US citizens of limited resources – 
from including abortion services, thereby depriving poor women of the right and 
means to decide on whether and when to have children.

Our international movement has never backed away from the fight to give women 
a choice. And we aren’t tired, even at 100 years old.



 