
Poetry, comedy and unmade beds? Pah. Video games are the new rock'n'roll. Just 
ask Sam Houser, the 27-year-old British president of New York publisher Rockstar
Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>. He used to direct music 
videos, but finds games much more enjoyable. "We get into trouble every now and 
again - it's raw," Houser enthuses. "That's what the record business was like 
when it started. It's supposed to be energetic and fun."

Houser, a witty, personable bloke with a shaggy beard and chunky jewellery, is 
in London for the launch of Grand Theft Auto 2, developed by the Scottish 
company DMA Design. The first game became notorious for concentrating on 
stealing cars, killing cops, and (for bonus points) running over whole lines of 
orange-robed Hare Krishnas. On its British release two years ago, the game was 
denounced by the Police Federation as "sick, deluded and beneath contempt".

Lovely: you can't buy publicity like that. Houser cherishes video games' 
"naughtiness", and the new game provides even more freedom to commit random 
acts of humorous violence than did its predecessor. But not everyone 
disapproves. "I met the NYPD," Houser says, "and they said, 'We think your 
game's all right.' And I said, 'What about the fact that you kill cops?' and 
they said, 'Well, you know what? There's a lot of people out there trying to 
kill cops and we'd rather they did it in your game than on the street.' "

Of course, you can't slap a sticker on the box saying, "Cops love this game!" 
- it wouldn't play with the kids. And that matters to the people at Rockstar: 
they approach marketing as an art in itself. They publish video games, sure - 
but they've also started a nightclub in New York, flying in famous DJs such as 
Dimitri from Paris; they are designing a range of street clothing; they promote 
hip-hop gigs; and to advertise Grand Theft Auto 2 they shot a full-blown short 
film on 16mm, which they have already been invited to screen at film festivals. 
It looks like a five-year plan for global media domination.

Eagerly smothering his fried breakfast in ketchup, Houser explains the 
multimedia rationale. "We wanted to create a label that reflected the emerging 
status of these games. They were becoming credible, they were becoming cool. 
Video games have gone from being playground currency to street culture. 
Everyone's playing 'em. So we thought, "Why don't we try and have fun with it 
and do some other things too?' "

Most video game marketing departments, Houser says, are staffed with people 
from the toy business. But he and his colleagues come from music and film, so 
they can target consumers in a more hip, sophisticated way. "In America we have 
what they call a street team. Street teams were invented by R&B and hip-hop 
bands. They're units of urban guys who go to gatherings where there are young 
people and spread the word about a particular track. We're the first game 
company to employ one of these."

Rockstar's next major product is a street skateboarding game. Authenticity is 
key, so as well as getting all the major board and clothing manufacturers 
involved, they've made sure that the music fits. The sound of skateboarding is 
hip-hop. So, Houser explains, "We've gone round and we've cleared everything 
from Afrika Bambaata, Sugar Hill, Grandmaster Flash, up to A Tribe Called 
Quest, Gangstar, Public Enemy, Run DMC, Eric B and Rakim and on and on... It's 
the definitive history of hip-hop in a game soundtrack." And they'll release it 
as an audio CD too? "No. Kids will already have most of these tracks. We'd far 
rather do that with something like the Grand Theft Auto 2 soundtrack, which is 
all original music."

Apparently none of this does any harm to your love-life, either. Houser's 
trump card - incontrovertible proof that video games are now a pervasive 
cultural force - is this sweet little romantic story. "I genuinely pulled my 
current girlfriend on the back of Grand Theft Auto," he relates with charming 
self- deprecation. "We bumped into each other in a bar, and we got talking, and 
she said, 'There's this game my friends are playing and they're all talking 
about it - I wonder if you can help me?' I said, 'What's it called?' and she 
said, 'Grand Theft Auto.' Bingo!"

Â• Grand Theft Auto 2 is out now for PC and PlayStation. Steven Poole's book, 
Trigger Happy: the Inner Life of Videogames, will be published by Fourth Estate 
in the spring.
 