
The coffee-machine robot dispensing my cappuccino at the Lisbon Web Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/29/lisbon-web-summit-sun-surf-cheap-rents-tech-capital>
 brought wonder mixed with a stab of unease. A robotic grandchild of Luke 
Skywalker’s R2DT, it trundled around the speakers’ area, stopping just short of 
our ankles as it tracked the movements of its mortal controller. So used to 
such novelties were the startup moguls and Silicon Valley venture capitalists 
that even stopping to admire the innovation marked me out as an ingenue on 
Planet Tech.

Elsewhere, a chatty humanoid called Sophia had featured in a talk on the 
potential of artificial intelligence. “She” remembers interaction and can 
respond to facial expressions and adjust her responses, the result of machine 
learning. Asked if she deserved employment rights and citizenship, Sophia 
retorted that as a “citizen of the world” she deserved rights. It felt like 
arguing with a teenager.

The steepest challenge of rapid technological change, however, is highlighted 
not by the eerie androids, but the gap between the promise of innovation and 
its impact on those at the sharp end of globalisation. To sample what lies 
ahead, my colleagueRyan Avent <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ryanavent> 
in his book in automation’s impact, The Wealth of Humans, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/09/technological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest>
 tried out a computer program that copied complex analytical journalism. 
Happily for my trade, the result was not a must-read. Yet even if we columnists 
are not yet to be displaced by some offspring of Sophia, with an expertly 
engineered prose style, it’s a safe bet that some parts of many jobs will be 
altered or eradicated by automation much faster than we reckoned on or find 
comfortable. A report for the World Economic Forum estimated that technology 
wouldcreate about 2m jobs by 2020 worldwide, but displace 7m 
<http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FOJ_Executive_Summary_Jobs.pdf>.

For the educated and financially secure, this causes apprehension enough. Now 
imagine you are either without a job or in low-paid, patchy work, in economies 
facing the resulting efficiency gains but lowering the price of labour and 
wearing away workers’ bargaining power. What does the tech world, so 
communicative about its promise, triumphs and potential, have to say to you? 
Not a lot.

Don’t be smug, technology is eating middle-class jobs too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/feb/29/technology-middle-class-jobs-labour-market-retail>
It’s striking how many of its attention-grabbing developments, from startups 
to crowdfunding and phone apps to virtual-reality headsets, enrich the lives of 
the better-off and well-educated. A digital divide thus widens yearly in 
developed countries, between those who can reap the benefit of online services 
and those who cannot. Inherently, technology accelerates change and magnifies 
its effects. But the upheavals of Brexit and now the dawning of the Trump era 
shine an unforgiving light on anxieties in countries that were regarded as 
beacons of stability. These two developments are not attributable to 
disaffected, low-paid workers to the degree that fans of mono-causal theories, 
left or right, claim. But they do reflect a sense that onrushing economic and 
technological changes are failing to benefit a large number of people.

Luddite response won’t help. We can no more hold back the advances of 
automation and computational power than Sophia can understand romantic 
infatuation or a desire to binge-watch box sets. Political forces that try to 
ban or regulate their way out of all this will find that the tributaries of 
invention simply flow a different way.

But those who lead the debate in technology urgently need to increase the 
effort and urgency they are putting into helping those at the sharp end of the 
advances they drive. Many of the big companies donate a percentage of income 
(albeit accompanied by a fierce antipathy to paying much tax) to charitable 
works. They run brilliant projects such as theGates Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bill-and-melinda-gates-foundation> to beat 
malaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/25/british-government-and-bill-gates-announce-3bn-to-fight-malaria>
 or “combat humanity’s biggest challenges”, as the Google Giving site modestly 
puts it. Planet Tech likes big-ticket, wow-factor, emotionally engaging 
challenges, such as climate change or the cutting edge of life sciences.

What gets played down is the daily but pressing task of finding solutions to 
the problem that is their biggest negative bequest: the impact on how we work 
and the falling value of labour. The Googles, Amazons, Apples, Ubers and their 
heirs are the heart of a deep social and economic change in the developed world 
and need to put more energy into helping address the consequences. The evidence 
of what goes wrong is at their own gates. Amazon is clamping down on poor 
treatment of warehouse contract workers, but only after an almighty fuss and 
poor publicity over“non-compete clauses” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/27/amazon-remove-noncompete-clause-contracts-hourly-workers>
 for casual workers. Silicon Valley has been jolted by bad press and protests 
to replace badly paid contract workers in manual and security jobs with more 
generous employment contracts.

Is this the future of work? Scientists predict which jobs will still be open 
to humans in 2035
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/26/future-of-work-remote-controlled-vehicle-operators-in-demand-in-2035>
But it is the brainpower and drive of the tech giants and their ambitious 
offspring in Lisbon that we need to harness, not just the assuaging of 
consciences. Scaling tech-enabled changes in learning is part of the answer. 
Even if the pace of schools reforms is glacially slow in Europe and America, 
innovations such asKnewton’s adaptive learning platforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/10/geekie-educational-software-brazil-machine-learning>
 are spreading. They make it easier for teachers to figure out the strengths 
and weaknesses in the way pupils learn (and why they don’t) – and they target 
better solutions in real time. What we don’t have is a slew of ingenious 
solutions for what happens when a new generation enters a workforce where 
disruptions will only gather pace.

Take away the tech speak and we are back to the challenge the great 
19th-century reformers,such as Theresa May’s icon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/15/may-appoints-former-advisers-as-joint-chiefs-of-staff>
, the eclectic reformer Joseph Chamberlain, faced: how to bring the benefits of 
progress to those most in need of it, without seeking to inhibit advancement. 
To match that now, governments need to embrace the digital shake-up and bring 
it closer to their endeavours to close the poverty gap and make public services 
more responsive and cost-effective. Alas, out with David Cameron and hisSilicon 
Roundabout <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-roundabout> mates 
went any sense of a hunger to capture such gains for social ends. The minister 
for digital innovation in Britain still sits in a mid-ranking role in the 
Department for Culture, Media & Sport. I rest my case.

Overall, the May reform plan has a retro feel. You can fiddle with selection 
in schools, twiddle the tax system to deter avoiders and promise more workers’ 
rights. But it will take much bigger and better ways of thinking to redress the 
social balance for those who feel the brunt of the most significant changes to 
the way we work since the Industrial Revolution. Sophia, bless her 
machine-enabled heart, can’t do it alone. Humans need to get serious about the 
task, starting with the biggest beasts roaming the plains of tech progress.

Anne McElvoy is senior editor at the Economist and spoke as head of Economist 
Radio at the Web Summit.
 