
When you think of glamorous fashion shoots and the models who star in them, an 
extra extra large (XXL) heavily tattooed and bearded landscape gardener and 
personal trainer may not be the first person who springs to mind.

But this March, Ben Whit, a self-described “normal working-class man” who 
lives with his mother in Surrey, became the first plus-size male model, which 
generally means size XL or someone tall and well built, to sign to a major 
agency in the UK.


The 24-year-old former builder, who is 6ft 1in, says it’s about time the world 
took larger men like him seriously. “A lot of people have this misconception 
that plus size means overweight – that’s wrong,” he says. “For a man, it’s 
broad shoulders and a big chest. For a woman, it just means they’ve got curves. 
People need to realise this.”


With average clothes sizes creeping steadily upwards 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/11270739/British-men-are-taller-fatter-stronger-and-healthier.html>
 in the UK, there’s growing demand for larger models and plus-size women have 
made strides for body positivity in recent years – there areat least seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/27/where-are-all-the-plus-size-male-models>
 plus-size agencies for women in the UK, while popularmodels such as Tess 
Holliday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/06/tess-holliday-first-size-26-supermodel>
, a size 26, are challenging narrow definitions of beauty. However, the first 
plus-size male models in theUK and America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/29/zach-miko-male-model-plus-size-body-image-fashion>
 were only signed this spring.


This lack of opportunity meant Whit didn’t pursue modelling seriously until 
his girlfriend accidentally launched his career. After enduring his repeated 
brags that he had the looks of a model, she bought him a photoshoot as a 
present – ostensibly to support him, but perhaps just to shut him up, he admits.


It backfired. When he saw modelling agency Bridge Models 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/models> was looking for an XXL male model, 
Whit used the photos to apply. Today he is signed to modelling agencies in both 
the UK and Germany, has appeared on BBC and ITV news programmes, and is more 
ambitious than ever. “In the next year people will see a lot more of me,” he 
says.


So what’s working life like for one of the UK’s only plus-size male models? In 
between catching fish and Pokémon, a typical week for Whit involves attending 
castings and photoshoots that are unexpectedly physically tiring for a man 
already used to heavy manual labour. At castings, Whit takes his portfolio to 
designers and agents, mainly in London, where he “does a few poses” in front of 
the camera and tries to impress them. He then plays “the waiting game” to see 
if they like him.

When you get a call-back, photoshoots can be long and tiring, with more than 
100 outfit changes. “You’ve got to get changed really quickly and it’s 
fast-paced,” Whit says.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fplus-size-male-model-ben-whit-larger-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F555b81220271a09efde861b01147bcb5bb80c6fd%2F0_33_1133_1415%2F1133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plus-size%20model%20Ben%20Whit%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20ready%20for%20larger%20men'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fplus-size-male-model-ben-whit-larger-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plus-size%20model%20Ben%20Whit%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20ready%20for%20larger%20men%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fplus-size-male-model-ben-whit-larger-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F555b81220271a09efde861b01147bcb5bb80c6fd%2F0_33_1133_1415%2F1133.jpg>
 Ben Whit’s first photoshoot was for Bad Rhino, a company specialising in 
clothes for big and tall men. Photograph: BadRhino 
His first photoshoot was for Bad Rhino, a company specialising in clothes for 
big and tall men. “I was nervous because I hadn’t been in front of a camera for 
that long before, although I have always liked a selfie. I had to do 150 
outfits and got some of the camera angles a bit wrong, but you improve on that.”


Was it a shock transitioning from traditionally masculine working 
environments, such as building and gardening, to the fashion industry? “It is 
very different, but I adapted easily because I’ve always loved fashion,” Whit 
says.


As a school boy he refused to wear boring black school shoes, instead opting 
for loud flashy trainers. “For a couple of years I wore tie-dye T-shirts all 
the time,” he says. “I loved lairy clothes.”


But his love of fashion also led to frustration with attitudes towards male 
body shape. “A lot of high street companies don’t sell big enough sizes,” Whit 
says. “I’d have to buy clothes online and hope they would fit, and at the start 
of summer I’d buy large shorts quickly before the few pairs available had sold 
out. It was frustrating.”


Whit says he wants to show young boys that larger men can be models and have 
an interest in fashion too. He also wants to encourage greater body confidence –
surveys have suggested 
<https://goodmenproject.com/featured-content/cc-surveys-suggest-men-are-just-as-insecure-about-their-bodies-as-women/>
 that many young men are insecure about their bodies.


“There is pressure to look a certain way,” he says. “You see slim men on 
television and in fitness magazines. People want to get that look, but they’re 
just not built that way. I’ve seen young men in the gym putting their body 
through a lot of stress and it’s just not worth it.”


Men are also less likely to talk about their insecurities, the model says. 
“Guys are a lot more reserved when it comes to talking about their size. Blokes 
I know aren’t going to sit down the pub with their mates and say: ‘I think I’m 
getting a bit chubby’.”


But Whit is no stranger to body shaming. “Obviously you’ve got a few haters 
out there,” he says. “Men comment on my size and say that I’m not plus size, or 
that I don’t go to the gym, or that I’m obese. But many more say they are 
pleased to see a male model like me.”


Whit expects the upcoming year to be busy for him and for demand for plus-size 
male models to grow. Budding plus-size male models need to be photogenic, must 
be themselves and should keep an eye out for opportunities at modelling 
agencies, he says.


“The world is ready for larger men. Women are doing really well in the 
plus-size industry. Now it’s time for us blokes to follow them.”


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 