
You hate catching Pidgeys. I hate catching Pidgeys. Now, finally, Niantic Lab, 
the makers ofPokémon Go <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go>, 
have realised that no-one likes catching Pidgeys, and tweaked the game so that 
you won’t be catching as many bloody Pidgeys.

The change is one of a few introduced by the developers in the latest update 
to Pokémon Go, and the biggest sign yet that Niantic is actually listening to
Pokémon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> Go’s large, yet 
shrinking, playerbase when deciding how to guide the game going forward.

The two biggest changes both revolve around the unloved, yet infuriatingly 
common, Pokémon that players spend most of the game seeing, catching and 
immediately releasing for meagre rewards.

Firstly, some of them are simply being chucked out. “You may encounter other 
Pokémon where Pidgey, Rattata, and Zubat were previously more commonly found,”
Niantic tweets <https://twitter.com/PokemonGoApp/status/794324686570131457>. 
This is good, because those Pokémon are trash and no one likes getting them.

Secondly, the Pokémon that are born from eggs have been switched up. Walking 
for 2km only to find a pigeon or rat in your pocket isn’t nice in real life, 
and it’s no nicer in Pokémon Go, so that won’t happen any more: “Pidgey and 
Rattata no longer hatch from eggs,” says Niantic. On top of that, Eevee, a less 
awful Pokémon, will no longer hatch from the most valuable 10km eggs. Instead, 
it will come from 5km eggs only, meaning that 10km eggs should more reliably 
drop actually good and rare Pokemon.

The update that enables those changes also paves the way for another key 
feature: daily bonuses, common in other games like Pokémon Go, will reward 
players who use the app regularly. The first Pokémon you catch, and the first 
Pokéstop you spin, each day will net you 500xp, extra stardust, and more items, 
while a full seven day streak will reward you with even more of everything.

After months of firefighting, it looks like development on Pokémon Go has 
finally settled into a more steady groove, working on new features and tweaking 
the actual play experience rather than trying to stop things from breaking.

The tweaks to the catch rates come after the first live ‘event’ in the game, 
the Pokémon Go Halloween 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/25/pokemon-go-halloween-event-millions-players-game>
, which upped rewards temporarily as well as making ghostly Pokémon easier to 
find. That event was seen as a success by the playerbase, and is likely to be 
the first of many.
 