
Pokémon Go may be the mobile game phenomenon of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/29/pokemon-go-pokenomics-smartphone-game-shops-cafes-museums>
, but Nintendo is eager to ensure players don’t forget about its forthcoming 
games for the 3DS, Pokémon Sun and Moon.

In its latest trailer, the publisher has revealed a twist on the age-old 
formula. The same species of Pokémon can exist in two completely different 
versions, called Alola forms, that represent “the different microclimates in 
the Alola region”, the part of the Pokémon world where the two new games are 
set. In practice, they represent the first inklings of evolution in the Pokémon 
universe, as specificPokémon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> 
adapt to the climates in which they live.

Among the Pokémon revealed in Monday’s trailer were new forms of Vulpix and 
Ninetails, the fire-foxes from the original games, and Sandshrew and Sandslash, 
the … armadillo moles? The Alolan forms of the four Pokémon have changed to 
better suit “the harsh environment of the snow mountains” in which they now 
live. Vulpix and Ninetails are now Ice and Ice/Fairy respectively, as opposed 
to the Fire types of the originals, while Sandshrew and Sandslash are Ice/Steel 
instead of their original Ground types.

Serebii.net (@SerebiiNet) 
Serebii Picture: Official artwork for Alola Form Sandshrew & Sandslash 
https://t.co/oV6DIIA7Ub <https://t.co/oV6DIIA7Ub> pic.twitter.com/QBNzHnNAAV 
<https://t.co/QBNzHnNAAV>
 <https://twitter.com/SerebiiNet/status/760100249281191937> August 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SerebiiNet/status/760100249281191937> 
The biggest change is reserved for Exeggutor, the weird squat egg/palm tree 
hybrid which is a combined Grass/Psychic type in the original games. In Alola, 
“strong sunlight pours down all year round”, and Exeggutor thrives, growing to 
35 feet tall and swapping its Psychic subtype for a Dragon.

Serebii.net (@SerebiiNet) 
Serebii Update: Official artwork for Alola Form Exeggutor 
https://t.co/oV6DIIA7Ub <https://t.co/oV6DIIA7Ub> pic.twitter.com/LEyBVxpkS9 
<https://t.co/LEyBVxpkS9>
 <https://twitter.com/SerebiiNet/status/760100141131042816> August 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SerebiiNet/status/760100141131042816> 
Also one of its heads moves to its tail, “and can take on opponents to the 
rear that can’t be reached by the main heads’ attacks”. Which seems like a 
pretty bum deal.

It is probably not a coincidence that the change affects five Pokémon all 
hailing from the original trio of Pokémon games, Red, Blue and Green. As the 
number of Pokémon has ballooned to over 700, the franchise has seen diminishing 
returns with each new introduction: while the success of Pokémon Go reveals 
that the fan connection with the original 150 Pokémon is as strong as it ever 
was, the number of people who can tell a Pancham from a Swirlix is much smaller.

So expanding the Pokémon pool by offering new spins on old favourites could 
work to get players excited about the new games. It already seems to be 
working: the fan reaction to the Alola forms is some of the most positive since 
Pokémon Sun and Moon were first announced.

• This article was amended on 3 August 2016. An earlier version said this will 
be the first time ever that the same species of Pokemon can exist in two 
completely different forms. This has been corrected.
 