
UN back-slapping for the record speed at which the Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/obama-paris-climate-deal-ratification>
 on climate change has been ratified this week has been tempered by the reality 
that the new treaty will not stop catastrophic warming as it stands, and that 
the money so far pledged by rich countries is nowhere near enough to allow 
developing countries to adapt to expected sea level rises and more extreme 
weather.


The agreement, which will come into force on 4 November, is hoped to hold 
temperatures to a maximum 2C rise, and for the first time commits both rich and 
poor countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Paris climate talks: vulnerable countries demand 1.5C warming limit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/30/paris-climate-talks-vulnerable-countries-demand-15c-warming-limit>
But, say scientists, the historic measures pledged in Paris last year by the 
big greenhouse gas emitters like Europe, the US and China set the world on 
track to a temperature rise of about 3C over the next 50 years – enough to 
render many of the world’s poorest countries uninhabitable.


The world’s 48 least developed countries (LDCs), which unanimously pressed for 
a global commitment to a 1.5C warmer world in Paris, said this week that they 
welcomed the ratification of the agreement, but warned that the rich must act 
urgently.

“Now we need to now turn our words into action. Without action, the Paris 
agreement will just be a piece of paper,” said Hilda Heine, president of the 
Marshall Islands. “We need to see finance quickly flow to those who need it 
most so we can all implement our own ambitious plans to reduce emissions. 
Without [that] there is no way we will be able to stay within 1.5 degrees.”

Abdallah Wafy, Niger’s ambassador to the UN, added: “Despite Africa’s 
insignificant contribution to the causes of climate change, it is suffering 
from drought, flooding, climate-induced displacement and other climate-related 
challenges. The international community should accelerate efforts to curb those 
negative effects.”

Jan Eliasson, deputy secretary general of the UN, told a meeting of LDCs in 
New York that their ability to act on their commitments will be a challenge. 
“They need the support of international partners,” he said.

Developing countries played a major role in Paris even though they have been 
barely responsible for historic global warming.China committed to peaking its 
emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/16/worlds-climate-pledges-impressive-but-still-not-enough>
 and obtaining 20% of all its energy from non-fossil sources by 2030,Brazil to 
cutting emissions by 37% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/28/brazil-pledges-to-cut-carbon-emissions-37-by-2025>
 and India plans to triple its renewable energy capacity by 2022.


The LDCs also committed to make major changes in the way they develop. 
Ethiopia and many other African countries said they planned to vastly expand 
wind, solar and hydro power, and to reforest large areas.

But finding the money to allow them to meet their commitments will be hard, 
said theInternational Institute for Environment and Development 
<http://www.iied.org/> (IIED). In a report published at the climate summit, the 
institute calculated it would cost the 48 countries around$93bn (£73bn) a year 
<http://www.iied.org/ldc-climate-action-plans-estimated-cost-us937-billion-year>
, or close to $1tn in total to meet their commitments.

“Countries’ swift action in ratifying the Paris agreement should be 
celebrated, and means it will come into force at unprecedented speed. But for 
it to be effective and fair, developed countries must live up to and increase 
their commitments and prioritise raising and investing international climate 
finance within the least developed countries,” said the IIED’s director, Andrew 
Norton.

Climate change talks: five reasons to be cheerful or fearful | John Vidal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/30/climate-talks-five-reasons-cheerful-fearful-paris-summit>
A UN report 
<http://www.unep.org/newscentre/Default.aspx?DocumentID=27074&ArticleID=36171&l=en>
 calculated that the cost for all developing countries to adapt to climate 
change could go as high as $500bn a year by 2050 – four to five times higher 
than previous estimates.

Where the money is going to come from is uncertain. Rich countries have agreed 
to “mobilise”$100bn a year from 2020 onwards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
 but the details are still vague. Much of the money is expected to be 
channelled through theGreen Climate Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/aug/23/un-green-climate-fund-climate-change>
, which has been set up and has attracted nearly $10bn, but is said by
developing countries to be bureaucratic, slow and inaccessible. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/20/red-tape-locking-small-island-states-out-of-billions-in-climate-funds-commonwealth>

“There is still a lot of hard work ahead. Small island states and developing 
countries know only too well the scale of the challenge. Families and 
communities are already feeling the devastating effects of climate change. Our 
fear is that extreme weather eventslike hurricane Matthew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/06/hurricane-matthew-hits-bahamas-florida-storm-arrival-us>
 in the Caribbean will become the norm, not the exception,” said Patricia 
Scotland, secretary general of the Commonwealth as finance ministers met in 
Washington to discuss the funds required for climate mitigation and adaption on 
Thursday.

“All of us – governments, experts and civil society – need to work together, 
collaboratively, if we’re to make a true difference,” she added.

 Rich countries have a bad record on meeting their climate pledges to the most 
vulnerable countries. Oxfam has estimated that in 2014 just 16% of total 
climate finance was channelled towards poorer countries.

“The Paris agreement’s credibility test starts today. Each and every country 
has pledged to cut their greenhouse gas emissions, but our world is still on 
track to warm up to 3C or more, much higher than the agreement’s stated goal of 
1.5C. Countries will need to quickly and aggressively cut their greenhouse gas 
emissions further,” said an Oxfam spokeswoman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fpoor-countries-urge-fast-action-paris-climate-deal-to-stop-catastrophic-warming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21a40ab5d327fc90d59b6dd2e2eaff7823c55618%2F471_316_4457_2675%2F4457.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poor%20countries%20urge%20fast%20action%20on%20Paris%20deal%20to%20stop%20catastrophic%20warming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fpoor-countries-urge-fast-action-paris-climate-deal-to-stop-catastrophic-warming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poor%20countries%20urge%20fast%20action%20on%20Paris%20deal%20to%20stop%20catastrophic%20warming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fpoor-countries-urge-fast-action-paris-climate-deal-to-stop-catastrophic-warming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21a40ab5d327fc90d59b6dd2e2eaff7823c55618%2F471_316_4457_2675%2F4457.jpg>
 People try to cross the overflowing La Rouyonne river after hurricane Matthew 
hit, in Léogâne, south of Port-au-Prince, Haiti, 5 October 2016. Photograph: 
Hector Retamal/AFP/Getty Images 
“Only a fraction of the money that rich countries are spending on climate 
change is reaching the most vulnerable communities that desperately need it 
most. Figuring out how to close this gap and strengthen the resilience of these 
communities should be high on the list of priorities ahead of next month’s UN 
climate change conference in Morocco.”

Oxfam called on countries to target 35% of funding by 2020, and 50% by 2025. 
“The share is not only too low, it is also declining. It was 21% in 2013. No 
share or specific amount has been agreed for vulnerable countries in the Paris 
agreement,” the spokeswoman said.
 