
A green finance gap means many projects fail to get off the ground for lack of 
funds while investors complain about a dearth of bankable projects, warned 
experts at theGlobal Green Growth conference 
<http://sd.iisd.org/events/global-green-growth-week-2016/> on the South Korean 
island of Jeju.

'Red tape' locking small island states out of billions in climate funds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/20/red-tape-locking-small-island-states-out-of-billions-in-climate-funds-commonwealth>
“The general agreement is that money is there, but money is also scarce 
because you cannot get it in a simple way,” Shiferaw Teklemariam, Ethiopia’s 
minister for the environment, forestry and climate change, said at the 
conference earlier this month. “We need to simplify the processes and make them 
more accessible.”

The gathering was hosted by the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI) 
<http://gggi.org/>, set up by the UN in 2012 to chart and promote a socially 
inclusive and environmentally friendly path to development.

 Shiferaw said Ethiopia estimates that it will need at least $7.5bn (£5.8bn) 
over the next decade in order to meet its targets on green growth. He 
emphasised that the “financial resources gap” was the biggest challenge to 
Ethiopia’s quest for growth that reduces poverty, increases social inclusion 
and promotes environmental sustainability.

 Mahua Acharya, GGGI’s assistant director general, said that designers of 
development projects are not speaking the language that institutional investors 
want to hear. “The supply of capital is not a problem,” she said. “It is the 
moving of that money into a project.”

She said financiers find many prospective projects either too risky or not 
rewarding enough, pointing out that in 2014 only $391bn of the trillions 
sitting in Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development member 
countries was made available for green finance.

In a speech to open the conference, which gathered hundreds of delegates from 
50 countries, GGGI’s president, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, called for the walls 
between available finance and unfunded green projects to be knocked down.

He said more money for sustainable development has become available from 
private investors and public donors, as the world has realised that modern 
economic growth – in Asia, for example – has come at a huge cost to the 
environment and has exacerbated inequality. In 2013,$193bn out of a total $331bn
 
<https://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/sites/devco/files/erd5-background-paper-financing-sustainable-energy-systems-2015_en.pdf>
 (pdf) of climate finance flows came from private financiers, Yudhoyono said.


“Somewhat ironically, we still frequently hear of projects struggling to find 
finance, and financiers struggling to find projects,” said Yudhoyono, a former 
president of Indonesia.

Acharya said the GGGI has been working to set up an investment service, 
involving mainly people with banking backgrounds, to support countries in 
preparing projects that appeal to the private sector. In the pipeline are 
ventures in India, Mongolia, Vanuatu and Indonesia, she said.

Want to beat climate change and achieve sustainability? Try paying your taxes 
| Tove Maria Ryding and Bodo Ellmers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/22/paris-climate-change-agreement-sustainability-try-paying-taxes-panama-papers>
According to officials from the Climate and Development Knowledge Network 
<http://cdkn.org/?loclang=en_gb> (CDKN), developing countries need help to 
translate their climate pledges under theParis climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement> into action 
towards green growth goals.

 “This does not happen overnight, but we should now focus on building on 
existing capabilities to ensure that the available climate funds are programmed 
in a way that catalyses significant volumes of other public and private finance 
for urgent climate action,” said Ari Huhtala, CDKN’s deputy chief executive for 
policy and programmes.

CDKN runs a dedicated website <http://climatefinanceready.org/> supporting the 
preparation of bankable projects.

Nevertheless, Mairi Dupar, global public affairs coordinator at CDKN, 
acknowledged that it may take a lot more to help countries in which human 
resources are already stretched. “That’s why there’s an acute need for external 
actors – sometimes the climate funds themselves … to provide governments with 
technical support for preparing proposals.”

 * Travel for this story was supported by the GGGI

 * This article was amended on 4 October 2016 to correct the name of the 
conference’s host to the Global Green Growth Institute  