
The Douro river is wild and tamed, fertile, rich and dust poor. She is the 
heart, soul and life force of the region she gives her name to. For 900km, from 
central Spain to Atlantic Porto, she pushes and runs, fat, green, inexorable. 
The Douro region is about the size of Suffolk but, unlike East Anglia, has 
barely a metre of flat ground. Instead, dizzying mountain slopes are creased 
and folded and combed with the millions of vines that make those juicy Douro 
table wines and its celebrated ports.

Visitors have been welcomed here for centuries but it’s taken until just now 
for the Dourense region to cotton on to eno-tourism, that happy marriage 
between travel and tippling. Though frequented mostly by 
cashmere-and-smart-slacks travellers, the Douro is also a fine destination for 
the thirsty but thrifty.

Getting to the region can be fun. There are hotel boats from Porto, but these 
seem mostly to be witless, Duplo-like affairs into which you’re tightly 
packaged and drably excursioned. It’s better by far to take the train to 
Pocinho. This is one of the world’s great train rides and, once away from 
Porto’s concrete suburbs, offers twisting, sighing, soaring riverine views for 
much of its three-hour route.
 See the full visual 
The bus network form here on is sketchy; to get the most out of your visit, 
you’ll need a car from Pocinho. But be warned: these roads are for confident 
drivers only. They are intestinally curly. Climbs are crazily steep. Cliffs 
must be tightly hugged and other vehicles may well be kissed. Safety barriers 
seem anathema. Most roads are breathe-in thin. Heroic cyclists with Hoy-like 
thighs might enjoy the suffering these roads provide.

Millions of hot, tough hours of manual work have gone into terracing and 
training these great hills of schist into vineyards. Neat terraces corrugate 
every horizon, rows and stairs intricate as cornrows, maps with living 
contours. The visual effect is mesmerising even before the first drinking – 
sorry, tasting – session of Douro wines. And, like the river beneath you, these 
sessions sail along smoothly to begin with. Until you get into those seductive 
ports.

There are three parts to this wine region. Baixo Corgo is westernmost and 
mostly produces ports to be drunk young. Its main town is Peso da Régua, 
commonly known as Régua.
 Aerial view of vineyard terraces and the Douro river in the Alto Douro 
region. Photograph: Alex Robinson/Getty Images 
The posh section of the Douro is Cima Corgo, whose classy quintas are run by a 
manicured handful of intermarried wine dynasties, often with British and Dutch 
names and/or branches on their French-polished family trees. Even here, though, 
visitors who stray one vineyard away from the main routes will boggle most 
locals simply by being foreign. Cobbly, sleepy Pinhão with its gorgeous 
blue-tiled station, is at Cima’s centre. Then, closest to the Spanish border, 
is Douro Superior, the largest area, which is mostly national park. It also has 
the fewest people: the only town of any size is Vila Nova de Foz Côa, home to 
3,300 people.

The Douro is perfect for a long weekend, especially when tacked on to a stay 
in Porto. But beware: the wiggly roads mean distances that look tiddly on the 
map can take hours to negotiate. Talking of tiddly, in Baixo Corgo I aim 
straight for Régua and the wine hotel atQuinta do Vallado 
<http://www.quintadovallado.com/wine-hotel/161/wine-hotel/en/> (doubles from 
€100 including cycle hire), with its 13 cool and light rooms and (hurray!) 
all-day wine tastings and bibulous visits to their renowned winery. Régua isn’t 
immediately beautiful but has a light and bustling riverfront vibe and theDouro 
Museum <http://www.museudodouro.pt/> on Rua Marquês de Pombal, where €7.50 buys 
me entrance and a schooner of port. The museum also provides intensive wine 
tastings for the unwary and unwise visitor.

Now needing a sugar hit, outside the train station I spot two aproned ladies 
with wicker baskets selling paper-twistedrebuçadas, the Douro version of barley 
sugar. These fuel my two-minute dignified stagger down Avenida José Vasques 
Osório toCastas e Pratos <http://www.castasepratos.com/> (+351 254 323 290). 
It’s a young-ish and stylish food and drinks hangout in an upcycled railway 
shed. As everywhere in the region, its wine list is exciting and affordable 
(three courses from €30).
 Castas e Pratos in Peso da Régua 
But I’m feeling more dishevelled than chic, so lunch instead at the down-home 
A Velha Tendinha (around €15 a head, Largo 25 de Abril, +351 254 318 160). It’s 
a wonderful almost-riverfront grill joint, and my octopusgrelhado is a charry 
tangle of spectacular tentacles. The rest of the day is spent traversing the 
sheer breadth of wine styles produced by the Douro’s sheer slopes.

Cima Corgo is the most-visited part of the region. Across the river from 
Pinhão, isQuinta do Seixo 
<http://eng.sograpevinhos.com/regioes/Douro/locais/Quinta%20do%20Seixo>, where 
the huge Sandeman winery does the region’s slickest tours (from €6pp) at its 
grand quinta. Luís Sottomayor is Sandeman’s head winemaker – fiftyish, wiry and 
tanned. After an in-depth “tasting” session, he points me back to Pinhão to 
experience Qualifer (45 Rua António Manuel Saraiva,on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/qualifer>). This is a tiny fumeiro (smokery) where 
butcher Fernando – part black-clad ninja, part conjuror, part psychologist, 
part naturopath – retails a magical selection of fresh and smoked meats, plus 
his own-baked bread, local cheeses and his daughter’s jams. From these, I 
assemble the picnic hamper of champions and head for the Chapel of São Salvador 
do Mundo (off EN222-3), near São João da Pesqueira, amiradouro (viewpoint) that 
makes the heart soar like the Bonelli’s eagles wheeling below. Luis’s other 
miradouro tip is a stunner as well. São Leonardo de Galafura, high above Régua, 
also has an in-season cafe that serves excellent and sustaining snacks and 
lunches.
 Pinhão railway station, with its traditional blue-tiled walls. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Five of the leading new-wave Douro winemakers have banded together as the 
Douro Boys <http://www.douroboys.com/>. One of these is the eccentric, inspired 
Dirk Niepoort <http://www.niepoort-vinhos.com/en/> , whose family have been 
winemakers since 1842. Dirk’s wines – both table and fortified – are always 
intriguing and enlightening. Wine has been made at his Quinta de Nápoles at 
Santo Adrião since the 15th century. Today, you taste in a secret subterranean 
cellar (book ahead on +351 254 855 436, no charge). Over a tasting where I 
completely forget to spit, Dirk explains how the Douro’s schist rock forces the 
vine’s roots to thrust deep to establish themselves, creating more flavour 
intensity in the tens of local “field” varieties that go into his blends. My 
favourite grape issousão, which pretty much sums up my situation by lunch. This 
is taken at local posh restaurantDOC 
<http://ruipaula.com/web/doc-en/presentation/?lang=en> (222 Estrada Nacional, 
+351 254 858 123), built like a gin palace over the river at Folgosa. Note to 
self: port at lunch, all at sea all afternoon.
 Posh nosh at DOC restaurant 
On 25-26 June this year, the Douro Boys will hold their annual Feira do Douro 
<http://www.douroboys.com/news/feira-do-douro-25-26-june>, this year at Niepoort
 <http://www.niepoort-vinhos.com/en/>, where €10 buys you entrance (and a free 
Riedel glass) plus tastings (natch) and a farmers’ market.

Dinner is at Dirk’s “secret” tip: 16-seat Papas Zaide (1 Largo de Praça, +351 
254 731 899), snoozing in the pretty hill village of Provesende. Here you eat 
olives dipped in honey (weird, but great), sheep’s cheese and great knuckles of 
melting meat, tinkling the goat bell on your table for cook Graça to bring – 
yes! – more wine. In the square below is the never-modernised 1940s Fatima 
bakery, where craft baker Antonio José bakes only 180 impeccable sourdough 
loaves a day. Like me, they’re gone by lunchtime. In the same square is the 
bonkers Café Arado (no phone, opening hours erratic), a winery, bar, craft shop 
and farm-implement museum.
 The Douro Boys 
Also in Provesende is the charming, simple, self-catering Quinta da Costa 
<https://www.facebook.com/quintacostacima> (doubles from €65, +351 917 985 
956). Alternatively, at river level, there’s the grandQuinta do Crasto 
<http://quintadocrasto.pt/> (one-night stays only, from €140 a night, +351 934 
920 024), with four rooms above the winery. One eats, drinks and swims in 
elegant aristo splendour here.

There are loads of river excursions offered in both Régua and Pinhão. Most are 
in the now-motorised vessels that once carried port “pipes” (barrels) down to 
Porto for maturing. To feel less of a tourist, book a trip onPipadouro 
<http://pipadouro.pt/> (from €35, +351 939 196 262) which runs two beautifully 
restored 1950s wooden launches from the pier at Pinhão. The larger was an 
admiral’s boat, now bookable for a cosseted night’s stay aboard. Drinks flow on 
board until I no longer know my port from my starboard.
 Sampling wine at the annual Feira do Douro 
Back in Pinhão, Quinta de Bonfim <https://www.symington.com/> (+351 254 730 
370) has just started offering guided tours, tastings and charming, bowered 
vineyard lunches. Here, Joe Alvares Ribeiro – chiselled jaw, clean chinos, 
ineffable charm – gently insists that I swing up to the two-street town of 
Favaios, where moscatel wines are made. The lovely, small Museum of Bread and 
Wine is on Rua Direita, where the €1.50 entry also scores a tumbler of sweet 
moscatel that smooths out any wrinkles remaining in my morning. About 800 
metres out of town, at Alto da Portela, an anonymous, ugly modern house with a 
car park on the right is Padaria Queirós (+351 259 949 514), where Fernanda and 
her two cousins bake good bread and a stupendousbolo de carne, which is what 
every meat pie wants to be when it grows up. They’re hot out of the oven around 
noon.

And so to wilder, empty Douro Superior. Unlike Cima, Superior has little 
traffic, though its roads are hardly less tortuous. I drive up to the 
dog-and-donkey village of Parambos near Carrazeda de Ansíäes, where svelte, 
sprite-like Puri atDoces da Puri  <http://www.docesdapuri.com/pt> (30 Beco de 
Jaime) produces extraordinary jams, cookies and pastes in her 300-year-old, 
low-beamed kitchen. The fruit comes from her heavenly organic garden next door 
and her tomato-and-port preserve deserves a DOC status of its own. Puri’s 
generosity and energy are matchless. After a glass of something lovely, she 
directs me to Taberna da Helena (Avenida Aquilino Ribeira – below the church in 
Carrazeda) for a sit-down with a platter of chops and a mountain of chips in 
company with local cattle farmers.
 Niepoort’s Quinta de Nápoles 
Forty minutes from here, I pause in the sturdy medieval hill town of Torre de 
Moncorvo, where my rewards include a bag of warm sugar-crunched almonds from a 
shop opposite the church. Near Vila Nova de Foz Côa,Museu do Côa 
<http://www.arte-coa.pt/index.php?Language=pt&Page=Museu&SubPage=Edificio> 
sweetly interprets the area’s thousand examples of Paleolithic rock art. A 
bookable, guided three-hour dusk/night tour of the art in the valley below is a 
snip at €17.

Outside Foz, a small and unlikely turning takes me down (and, worryingly, 
further down) a steep, twisty, schisty track. My trust is rewarded when it 
delivers me toCasa do Rio 
<http://www.quintadovallado.com/wine-hotel/367/accommodations/en/> (from €190 a 
night B&B/wine-hotel) where dynamic Douro Boy João Ribeiro of Quinta do Vallado 
has built a bridge over a dip in his vineyard, and on it a wooden hotel of six 
pale, sexy rooms. Here I join what feels like the Douro’s most chic house 
party: Danish rosewood, hanging Cocoon fires, an orchestra of crickets, no 
neighbours for miles, an infinity pool amid the vines, and the Douro below – 
peaceful and long, strong and unique.

Kevin’s top tips

• Best for picnics The miradouro at São Leonardo da Galafura, above Régua
• Hidden gem Casa do Rio wine hotel near Foz de Côa
• Best tasting Niepoort wines and ports at Quinta do Napolés

• Trains run from Porto to Pocinho (€13 each way each way, cp.pt 
<http://www.cp.pt/passageiros/en/>); the really pretty bit starts at Régua. 
Flights were provided byeasyJet <http://www.easyjet.com/en/>, which flies to 
Porto from Bristol, Gatwick, Luton and Manchester from around £52 return. Car 
hire was provided byHoliday Autos <http://www.holidayautos.co.uk/>
 