
Poundland’s advertising once trumpeted “Yes! Everything’s £1!” but that pledge 
could be ditched as the bargain chain’s new owners move into clothing sales.

Britons spent £5bn in bargain stores last year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/26/britons-spent-5bn-bargain-stores-poundland>
Andy Bond, the former Asda boss who now heads Poundland as the boss of Pepkor 
Europe, an arm of South African group Steinhoff International,which bought the 
retailer for £610m in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/07/poundland-shareholders-approve-takeover-by-steinhoff>
, said he wanted to introduce the group’s Pep & Co clothing to every store – 
and it would not all be priced at £1.

Full 2,500 sq ft Pep & Co outlets will go into 10 Poundland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/poundland-discount-retail> stores from 
next February and Bond said there was room for them in at least 50 of 
Poundland’s 900 outlets. Smaller stores will feature a few racks of clothing, 
focusing on kids and womenswear.

“The relationship between Pep & Co and Poundland will become increasingly 
significant. My ambition is that, over time, Pep & Co will become to Poundland 
like George is to Asda,” said Bond.

The model follows that of GHM!, the six-store budget retail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/05/former-asda-boss-backs-new-guess-how-much-discount-store>
chain launched by Bond in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/05/former-asda-boss-backs-new-guess-how-much-discount-store>
 which will now be folded into Poundland.

Bond said no decision had been made on what would happen to the pricing of 
Poundland’s other products but he admitted that experiments were taking place. 
For more than a year, the chain has been occasionally discounting items to 90p 
or 80p or pushing bigger items for £8 or more.

Bond said: “We will always anchor Poundland around the trust of £1 pricing but 
the research from the business isn’t that people shop there because things are 
£1 but because they get amazing value. There are some areas where sticking to 
£1 doesn’t let you have a credible offer - like toys and clothing.”

Bond said trying out a range of prices was something all single price 
retailers in the UK were looking at. “The journey pound stores are going on is 
the same as the dollar stores in the US,” he said. “The vast majority of them 
have moved from single price to multi-price - from one price to a small number 
of prices.”

The fall in the value of the pound against the dollar, the currency in which 
much of the non-food goods sold in Poundland are bought in from the far east, 
is only likely to add to the pressure for change.

Single price retailers have less options to cope with inflation. In the past, 
it has meant “shrinkflation” – reducing the size of packs so that they can 
still meet the £1 target, but that has attracted criticism from consumer groups.

Bond said: “I’d be foolish to say that we don’t shrink products on occasion as 
we clearly do but there are other solutions – like moving to own label versions 
or just pushing back on suppliers.”

He said Poundland could choose to stop selling items which it did not think 
were good value and said predictions of inflation in the price of clothing, 
food and other goods next year was ”slightly hypothesising”.

Bond said Poundland had taken out insurance against its exposure to the dollar 
well into next year and there were factors at work in the global economy that 
may help to offset the 15% fall in the value of the pound since June.

“The Chinese currency has moved so you can negotiate better cost prices in 
China while Chinese industry is not having the best of times so there is extra 
capacity and that can also make things easier,” Bond said. “It is not obviously 
true that we are going to see retail inflation in goods denominated in dollars.”

Regardless of the inflation threat, Poundland has been experiencing 
difficulties recently.Pretax profits crashed nearly 84% to £5.9m in the year to 
27 March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/16/poundland-profits-crash-as-99p-stores-buyout-takes-its-toll>
 and like-for-like sales dropped 3.9% as Poundland suffered from indigestion 
after swallowing rival 99p Stores – a takeover that took more than a year to 
complete partly because of the intervention of the competition watchdog.

Competition from the major supermarkets also increased as they cut prices to 
become more competitive with the likes of Poundland and grocery discounters 
Aldi and Lidl.

Bond said Poundland’s performance had now improved and he was optimistic about 
the prospects for the Christmas trading period. He admitted the market was 
tough but said Poundland would benefit from getting back to basics after 
bedding down the former 99p Stores.

“Poundland used to be famous for the rate it brought new items to the market. 
What you’ll find over the next 12 months is more getting back to what the 
business does really well – great value and interesting new low-price items. We 
will be more innovative and fleet of foot,” he said.
 