
It’s that time of year again when aid fundraising videos are given one of two 
mighty titles: one they want, and one they probably don’t.

With more than 3,100 votes cast in the last week, the Golden Radiator and 
Rusty Radiator awards were tonight given to the best and worst aid ads of 2016.

Now in their fourth year, the awards – organised by the Norwegian Students’ 
and Academics’ International Assistance Fund <http://saih.no/english/who-we-are>
 (SAIH) – seek to challenge charities to move away from harmful stereotypes.

So here are the worst ... 


Rusty Radiator: finalists

Give to children like Don. Donate now! – Save the Children Netherlands

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmOBv2Cx8WIE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmOBv2Cx8WIE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmOBv2Cx8WIE&media=>
Date Aid: are charities sending the wrong message?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/10/date-aid-charities-messaging-poverty-porn-bond>
An African child with a swollen belly? Check. A sad, depressing soundtrack? 
Check. Even if you don’t understand Dutch, we’ve seen enough ads like this to 
know exactly the type of message it’s trying to send. Dubbed the “epitome of 
poverty pornography” by the jury, the video only focuses on the suffering of 
children, and uses their starving bodies as tools to gain sympathy. The ad 
perpetuates the stereotype that only an outside donor can save these children 
from their misery. The only saving needed here is us from watching this ad.


A sponsored child’s dream – World Vision Australia

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do7E-Ym5LEJA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do7E-Ym5LEJA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do7E-Ym5LEJA&media=>
According to this campaign, a donation will not only help keep a child safe, 
it will send them to school, give them clean drinking water, cure their 
diseases, provide shelter and, most importantly, make them dance. The 
problematic narrative that a donation from the west will solve all these 
problems oversimplifies complicated issues and shows children as passive and 
helpless victims.

The jury said: “Rather than focusing on local agency and initiative, it tells 
that their suffering can easily be solved by western donors. The children are 
depicted as mere objects without any context.”

Rusty Radiator: winner

The wait is over – Compassion International

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F123867816&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F123867816>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F123867816&media=>
And the worst development ad campaign of 2016 is the highly depressing “The 
wait is over” by Compassion International. A young girl and her family pray 
daily for a “saviour”, who turns out to be a blonde, white woman from Australia.


Aid fundraising videos: the best and worst of 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/18/aid-fundraising-videos-the-best-and-worst-of-2015>
Here’s what the jury had to say: “This video promotes deep-rooted perceptions 
of western superiority over the south. It reinforces the white saviour complex, 
and depicts that there is nothing parents can do for their children other than 
to wait for the sponsor who can save their lives and their future.”


And the best ...


Golden Radiator finalists

What do girls really learn at school? Learn without fear – Plan International 
UK

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5TrHh1AQOg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5TrHh1AQOg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5TrHh1AQOg&media=>
This creative and powerful ad by Plan International UK depicts the hardships 
girls face all over the world when getting an education. It also includes an 
example from the UK, reminding us that sexual harassment and abuse against 
girls is a worldwide problem, and not exclusive to developing countries.

“The concept came from our research, which revealed that more than half of all 
UK girls feel unsafe on their way to school,” says Sarah West, head of 
communications at Plan International UK. “This research mirrored much of what 
we already knew about the experiences of millions of girls in some of the 
world’s poorest communities – that sexual harassment and abuse are all too 
often commonplace experiences for many girls.”

Look Beyond Borders: 4-Minute Experiment – Amnesty Poland

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df7XhrXUoD6U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df7XhrXUoD6U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df7XhrXUoD6U&media=>
While much of refugee reporting is dominated by statistics and numbers, this 
video shows a refreshing human side to the crisis.


As Amnesty Poland puts it: “Only when you sit down opposite a specific person 
and look into their eyes, you no longer see an anonymous refugee or one of the 
migrants, and notice the human before you, just like yourself – loving, 
suffering, dreaming.”


This ad reminds us beautifully that humans are more alike than we are 
different, and that we all deserve to live with dignity.

11 of the best aid parodies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/19/11-of-the-best-aid-parodies>
And the Golden Radiator winner is ... 

Love a positive life – International HIV/Aids Alliance

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F171103932&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F171103932>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F171103932&media=>
The winning video follows the story of Daphine an HIV positive 19-year-old in 
Uganda. She talks about her work as a peer educator on HIV and living a full 
life. “I really love the positiveness in me,” she says. “I really love to live 
a positive life.”

The jury was impressed by this. “This video can help break down prejudices and 
stereotypes against HIV by depicting the ‘positive’ daily life of an HIV 
positive woman who transformed her own life,” said the judges. “The video gives 
a good amount of information about the situation for people living with 
HIV/Aids and is not presenting them as helpless victims, but empowerful 
individuals.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 