
At most Milan fashion week shows, the philosophy behind a sheer skirt is the 
desire to show a bit of leg, but things are different atPrada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada>. The sheer organza layers were 
“about the idea of a dress, or the memory of a dress as a memory of another 
time”, Fabio Zambernardi, Prada’s design director, said backstage.

Miuccia Prada: I hate the idea of being a collector. I really hate it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/17/miuccia-prada-i-hate-the-idea-of-being-a-collector>
Muiccia Prada herself was not present, following the death of her 103-year-old 
aunt the previous day. Mrs Prada had been in the studio until midnight 
finishing the collection, but had left the day of the show in the hands of 
Zambernardi, who has worked at the house for over a decade.

Where last season’s womenswear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/26/pradas-milan-fashion-week-show-goes-for-heightened-femininity>
 was almost sickly sweet, this show had a melancholic, faintly seedy quality. 
The clear plastic structures that had hung over the show space forJune’s 
menswear show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/21/milan-mens-fashion-week> were 
lit with yellow bulbs, lending the room a patina of age. Each model had wisps 
of hair stuck to her forehead and greased down her cheeks into sideburns. The
gender ambiguity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/18/prada-menswear-womens-looks-milan-fashion-week>
 was, of course, the point. With the addition of a slick of gold lipstick, the 
look wound up somewhere in the Frida Kahlo field of glamorous androgyny.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fprada-memories-milan-fashion-week-womens-spring-summer-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed0ee13f42abef554d097c8c6206df0abc38823e%2F607_69_1045_2961%2F1045.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prada%20calls%20up%20memories%20of%20other%20times%20and%20dresses%20at%20Milan%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fprada-memories-milan-fashion-week-womens-spring-summer-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prada%20calls%20up%20memories%20of%20other%20times%20and%20dresses%20at%20Milan%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fprada-memories-milan-fashion-week-womens-spring-summer-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed0ee13f42abef554d097c8c6206df0abc38823e%2F607_69_1045_2961%2F1045.jpg>
 Silk dresses layered over chunky tank tops created an off-kilter look at 
Prada’s Milan fashion week show. Photograph: Matteo Bazzi/EPA 
The first outfit was a pale leather skirt suit, the jacket blouson-shaped and 
sporty, the skirt falling loosely to the knee. Then there were more suits, in 
mismatched tweeds; after that, there were sheer suits. “Mrs Prada was obsessed 
with suits this season,” said Zambernadi with a shrug after the show. “She 
likes obsessions.”

Drop-waisted silk dresses stood for “a memory of another time”. They were worn 
over chunky tank tops, a deliberately off-kilter layering that made these 
elegant dresses look a little ridiculous, which was probably the point.

The Inside bag <http://www.prada.com/en/collections/prada-inside-bag.html> 
that Prada introduced earlier this year – an in-joke of an It bag – starred in 
intense, brooding colourways. The miniature spike of a kitten heel ended in a 
flat disc, so that it looked like a shoe balanced on an upside-down drawing 
pin. The strength of the accessories this season is important, because Prada 
could do with a hit show. Theaesthetic about-turn at Gucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/23/alessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week>
 has seen a rival brand that once occupied completely separate aesthetic 
territory stage a dramatic land grab for the quirky-chic look that defines 
Prada.

What’s more, recent financial results have been distinctly gloomy. Prada’s net 
income fell 23% in the first half of the year, to €188.6m.China, once Prada’s 
golden goose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/sep/21/luxury-goods-gucci-prada-china-resistance-to-bling>
, is now the source of its woes. Consumer spending is down, and Prada has been 
hit particularly hard, as it has struggled to position itself as equally 
aspirational as Louis Vuitton and Hermes.
 