
Like many Remain voters, fashion designer Thea Bregazzi felt pretty emotional 
on 24 June. She’d woken up to the Brexit news and everything was in turmoil. 
Her seven-year-old daughter Fauve was upset and asking questions so Thea turned 
onNewsround in the hope that CBBC could provide answers while she pulled 
herself together.

When we design, we think about how people are working and living. Everything 
is in the mix

“Mummy, look, she’s wearing your dress,” called Fauve from in front of the TV. 
And she was. As David Cameron announced his resignation, Samantha Cameron stood 
by his side wearing a resort 2015 dress byPreen by Thornton Bregazzi 
<http://preenbythorntonbregazzi.com/>, the label Thea runs with her husband 
Justin Thornton. That was the picture that dominated the international press: 
David at the lectern, with Samantha downcast but elegant in her beautiful 
dress, standing slightly removed from the spotlight, but impossible to ignore.

“So, you know,” says Thea, with a rueful chuckle. “Every cloud has a silver 
lining.”

Preen isn’t the most obvious name for the British label created by Justin and 
Thea. The word has a sense of vanity or self-aggrandisement that is absent from 
the designers’ attitude. Though their west London studio has all the expected 
accoutrements of a fashion brand – bustling assistants, models’ photographs on 
the walls, nice wooden floors and lots of flowers – Justin and Thea are not 
very fashion. They’re funny and friendly. They’re like the couple you’re really 
pleased to bump into on the school run. They could be new characters on the 
relaunchedCold Feet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/05/cold-feet-review>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc836b164d5678b44bcc7ea3b182b06dac39154%2F0_363_1423_1823%2F1423.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preen%3A%20'We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion's%20next%20big%20thing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preen%3A%20%27We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion%27s%20next%20big%20thing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc836b164d5678b44bcc7ea3b182b06dac39154%2F0_363_1423_1823%2F1423.jpg>
 ‘Mummy, look, she’s wearing your dress’: Samantha Cameron looks on as the 
prime minister announces the result of the EU referendum. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Getty Images 
“We’ve never been the next big thing,” says Justin cheerfully, making sure 
everybody who wants one has a cup of tea.

As the label celebrates its 20th anniversary this year, it’s safe to say they 
never will be. But that doesn’t mean that Preen isn’t an important part of 
British design. Even if you’re not familiar with the Preen name, you know their 
work. A red carpet’s worth of celebrities have worn their clothes – including 
Beyoncé, Alexa Chung and Scarlett Johansson – but Preen’s speciality is 
creating glamorous clothes for grown ups. Jennifer Lopez and Christy Turlington 
are fans. Michelle Obama wears Preen for public appearances. (“We got invited 
to the White House to meet her! All we do is design frocks and we went to the 
White House!”)

While many designers like to wax lyrical about inspiration, Justin and Thea 
are also refreshingly honest about what makes clothes stand out these days and 
particularly the effect of celebrity fans. Perhaps this is why Preen is a 
commercial success, despite being one of the UK’s few completely independent 
fashion labels.

“When we design, we think about the way people are working and living, what’s 
going on,” says Thea. “I’m very interested in why certain people want to wear 
certain styles at certain times. It’s all wound up with culture, politics, 
everything’s in the mix.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53e15a472b538c60bb3de086cc2521dda0e312a7%2F0_102_1612_2830%2F1612.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preen%3A%20'We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion's%20next%20big%20thing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preen%3A%20%27We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion%27s%20next%20big%20thing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53e15a472b538c60bb3de086cc2521dda0e312a7%2F0_102_1612_2830%2F1612.jpg>
 ‘We loved to see Amy Winehouse in our Power dress, but when Gwyneth Paltrow 
wore it on the red carpet, sales went through the roof’: Amy Winehouse arrives 
at the Brit awards in 2007. Photograph: Dave Hogan/Getty Images 
This process led to the creation of the Power dress in 2006. The tight, 
structured dress was inspired by the 90s supermodels – real women compared to 
the scrappy waifs who were seen on the catwalks back then – and it was a huge 
hit, worn by everyone from Cheryl Cole to Rihanna.

“We loved it when Amy Winehouse wore it because she was such a London girl – 
someone who felt part of our world,” says Thea. “But when Gwyneth Paltrow wore 
it to theIronman premiere in 2008, sales went through the roof. That event was 
the big reveal after she’d started theTracy Anderson workout 
<http://tracyanderson.com/>. Everyone went: “‘Oooh!’ That was a real moment.”

The new ways in which fashion is viewed and sold even affects how the duo 
design their collections. “We photograph the clothes all the time so we can see 
how they look on the phone,” says Justin. “All of our biggest clients are on 
Instagram so we design things that will photograph well and look good as a 
static image.”

“We used to be all about black and grey, but that doesn’t sell online,” says 
Thea, wistfully. “If you do black now, you have to add a graphic element to 
grab attention.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfae7410a460463dbbb9df1947602b034b4d9c0e%2F0_0_2668_4003%2F2668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preen%3A%20'We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion's%20next%20big%20thing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preen%3A%20%27We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion%27s%20next%20big%20thing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfae7410a460463dbbb9df1947602b034b4d9c0e%2F0_0_2668_4003%2F2668.jpg>
 In the pink: two outfits from the Preen Resort 2017 lookbook. Photograph: Ash 
Reynolds 
Even the way the clothes are first unveiled has changed since Preen first 
opened its doors. The general public now watch the catwalk show and see the 
looks from the collection at pretty much the same time as the fashion editors 
and buyers.

“The customer used to just see what was in the shops, but now they’ve seen 
showpieces on the runway and that’s what they want. Those clothes are hard to 
make, so the fear is that designers will start creating blander clothes for the 
catwalk show, things that are easy to produce. I don’t want that to happen to 
us. But now we’re producing four collections a year for Preen on top of our 
other commitments, we’re going as fast as we can. Something will have to give, 
won’t it?”

They both look a bit worried, which is understandable. They’ve come a long way 
during their fashion careers, but so has the industry they work in. The 
landscape is unrecognisable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61b2ed4d05e6569bfb855cf909c2b3f05ba78bc8%2F0_241_4912_5471%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preen%3A%20'We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion's%20next%20big%20thing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preen%3A%20%27We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion%27s%20next%20big%20thing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61b2ed4d05e6569bfb855cf909c2b3f05ba78bc8%2F0_241_4912_5471%2F4912.jpg>
 Design duo: Justin Thornton and Thea Bregazzi in their London studio. 
Photograph: Dean Chalkley/Observer 
The couple first met as teenagers on an art foundation course on the Isle of 
Man, where they both grew up. The fashion industry wasn’t a big part of Manx 
culture, but they started at college just as the last significant shift in 
fashion culture occurred. “Grunge was happening,Corinne Day’s photography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/sep/05/corinne-day-photography-kate-moss>
 took off, there wasi-D magazine… fashion stopped being simply about 
sophisticated Italian labels when we were at college. It became something that 
our friends wore, something accessible.” They moved to London in the 1990s 
after university, and set up Preen as a shop in Portobello. The area was the 
creative hub of the time and everyone used to hang out there.

“We were looking for a studio, but then a friend suggested getting a shop 
because we could earn our rent back by selling stock. The first week we opened 
Cher and Janet Jackson came in and we thought: ‘Oh God, this is great!’ We 
thought it would always be like that which, of course, it wasn’t, but it was 
fun and creative.”

A lot of the clothes were made at their flat or out the back of the shop. They 
tried stuff out for a laugh to see what people would buy. One of their first 
design hits was drainpipe trousers, the skinny shape that came to define the 
following decade. Kate Moss used to come in and pick up a couple of pairs at a 
time. Eventually they did a catwalk show and paid the models in clothes.

“We would not have survived if we’d come out of college and had to be slick 
from the start. Nobody at London Fashion Week really knew what they were doing 
back then,” says Thea. “Other people in the industry would point out what you 
were doing wrong and help out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe759d09e15be69aa78d05047d426098099768415%2F0_0_2718_4078%2F2718.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preen%3A%20'We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion's%20next%20big%20thing'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preen%3A%20%27We%E2%80%99ve%20never%20been%20fashion%27s%20next%20big%20thing%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpreen-designers-interview-thea-bregazzi-justin-thornton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe759d09e15be69aa78d05047d426098099768415%2F0_0_2718_4078%2F2718.jpg>
 Earn your stripes: Preen Resort 2017 lookbook. Photograph: Ash Reynolds 
The Preen shows moved from London to New York between 2008 and 2012, because 
at that time no one took London Fashion Week very seriously.

“By the third season of showing there, we’d doubled our business 
internationally,” says Justin. “Plus, we had a great time. Londoners are always 
too cool to say what they really think. Americans are positive, positive, 
positive. They were, like, ‘We LOVE you guys!’”

But Preen is at heart a London label and the collections have been back in the 
British capital since 2012. “At the first show back there was real warmth from 
the London crowd,” says Justin.

“Though that lasted about 10 minutes,” hoots Thea.

Their 20th anniversary show took place last week without, as Justin puts it “a 
lot of razzmatazz”. “We’re just pleased that we’ve managed to stay at this 
level for this long, making clothes that people really like. It’s great that 
we’ve been bloody-minded enough to do it.”

They’re not planning any big events to mark their first two decades, which 
isn’t a surprise. That’s the Preen way. Not the centre of attention – standing 
slightly removed from the spotlight, but impossible to ignore.

preenbythorntonbregazzi.com <http://preenbythorntonbregazzi.com/>
 