
The International Cave Art Centre <http://www.projet-lascaux.com/en> in the 
Dordogne, which celebrates the prehistoric art discovered in 1940 known as 
Lascaux, was inaugurated by President Hollande on Saturday 10 December. The 
€57m (£48m) centre sits at the foot of the hill where the original cave was 
found and is built of glass and grey striated concrete – though it also 
features a replica of the grotto that a teenager, Marcel Ravidat, and his 
black-and-white mongrel, Robot,stumbled upon 76 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/26/prehistoric-cave-art-dordogne>.
Montignac map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/dec/2016-12-14T16:20:20.html> 
There are 8,500 square metres of visitor space at what has been dubbed Lascaux 
4, along with four exhibition rooms that are linked via indoor and outdoor 
paths and explore the region’s prehistory using the latest technology. Designed 
by Norwegian architectural firm Snøhetta, the idea was to combine light and 
opacity in this “incision in the landscape” where dark passageways lead into 
giant halls.

Each visitor has a digital compagnon de visite that looks as if it has been 
hewn out of slate, Flintstones-style: a mini touchpad with headphones means 
visitors can roam freely in the workshops, galleries and exhibition spaces; 
though in the replica cave there is an expert guide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4434b6694de604a7f0a1c7e56a845b8e8d9e8232%2F0_0_4460_2676%2F4460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prehistoric%20cave%20art%20celebrated%20at%20new%20Lascaux%20centre%20in%20Dordogne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prehistoric%20cave%20art%20celebrated%20at%20new%20Lascaux%20centre%20in%20Dordogne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4434b6694de604a7f0a1c7e56a845b8e8d9e8232%2F0_0_4460_2676%2F4460.jpg>
 Artists at work on the cave art replica at the International Cave Art Centre. 
Photograph: Département 24. D Nidos 
The actual cave discovered by Ravidat, and later explored by him and three of 
his friends, has been closed to the public for more than 50 years, since it was 
discovered that merely breathing in the caves was destroying them. A replica 
(known asLascaux 2 <http://www.semitour.com/lascaux-ii>) was opened 200 metres 
away from the new centre in 1983, but there were concerns that too many 
visitors on top of the hill were affecting the original cave. Now that it is 
being superseded by this high-tech cousin, Lascaux 2 will be listed as a French 
historical monument.

“The idea is to have the two centres running together, with perhaps Lascaux 2 
as a focus for school art projects,” says Guillaume Colombo, director of the 
development.

In terms of visitor numbers, Lascaux 2 is the most popular prehistoric cave in 
the world, whileLascaux 3 <http://www.lascaux-expo.fr/expositions/> – an 800 sq 
m kit-form mobile exhibition, made by Périgord’s facsimile workshop,the AFSP 
<http:> – has been travelling the globe since 2012. It is currently in Japan. 
Colombo expects around 400,000 visitors a year to Lascaux 4.

Fans of prehistory are spoiled in this area of France. The Vézère valley has 
147 prehistoric sites, 15 of which are onUnesco’s world heritage list 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/85>. However, there is nothing to match Lascaux 
in terms of colour, size, quality and quantity of the images, a cave dubbed by 
Abbé Breuil, a Catholic priest and the first expert to examine the walls, as 
the “Sistine chapel of prehistory”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd312e2d4aa31a3caec65f5db372743156186f911%2F0_131_4628_2777%2F4628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prehistoric%20cave%20art%20celebrated%20at%20new%20Lascaux%20centre%20in%20Dordogne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prehistoric%20cave%20art%20celebrated%20at%20new%20Lascaux%20centre%20in%20Dordogne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd312e2d4aa31a3caec65f5db372743156186f911%2F0_131_4628_2777%2F4628.jpg>
 Exterior of the new Centre International d’Art Pariétal, Montignac. 
Photograph: Mehdi Fedouach/AFP/Getty Images 
The centre’s tour begins on the Belvedere rooftop which is covered in 
vegetation and overlooks Montignac and the hill where the teenager discoverers 
used to play. A short film in the “digital shelter”, a silver-walled bunker 
with curved benches and a giant screen, transports visitors back to the 
Magdalenian period (17,000 to 12,000 years ago) with a tundra landscape, woolly 
rhinos, lions, bison, deer andCro-Magnon man 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cro-Magnon> preparing pigments and tallow lamps 
to begin work on the cave walls.

Outside again, a soundtrack of Ravidat whistling for Robot floats through the 
woods before visitors re-enter the building through a sliding door and are 
suddenly inside the cave, staring up at the 15-metre scree that the boys slid 
down 76 years ago, half-imagining they may find a secret treasure chamber from 
the local château.

In another clever attempt to improve the facsimile cave experience (only the 
replicas of the celebratedcaves of Altamira in northern Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/26/altamira-cave-paintings-open-public-spain-cantabria>
 andChauvet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/apr/15/chauvet-cave-art-replica-is-nonsense>
 in the Ardèche are now open to visitors) Lascaux 4 has reproduced the 
temperature, air pressure, the damp smell and sounds of the cave from 1940. 
There is also a sense of the darkness beyond, which is absent from other 
replicas. The centre’s digital devices don’t work in the cave, “It’s a place 
for contemplation and discovery,” says a guide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e20ce8f5f8a6d6654e092d4a5a55a4c6f3637f2%2F0_0_3212_1927%2F3212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prehistoric%20cave%20art%20celebrated%20at%20new%20Lascaux%20centre%20in%20Dordogne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prehistoric%20cave%20art%20celebrated%20at%20new%20Lascaux%20centre%20in%20Dordogne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e20ce8f5f8a6d6654e092d4a5a55a4c6f3637f2%2F0_0_3212_1927%2F3212.jpg>
 French president Francois Hollande visits Lascaux 4. Photograph: Regis 
Duvignau/AFP/Getty Images 
The workshop next door has the most celebrated sections of the cave suspended 
from the ceiling, ultraviolet demonstrations of prehistoric engraving 
techniques and a display wall projecting archive documents and photographs. 
Man’s discovery and understanding of cave art is experienced in a theatrical, 
multimedia show where doors magically open at the end of each sequence. This 
leads into another dark auditorium for a 20-minute 3D film about Lascaux and 
art from other caves around the word with a voiceover seemingly coming from the 
depths of the grotto.

The last exhibition space is the Galerie de l’Imagination: a digital cave 
where giant touchscreens hang in floating columns and visitors can create their 
own personal exhibitions by combining modern art and cave art, which are then 
projected around the room. This can be viewed later on the Lascaux website, via 
a system activated by guests’ scanned entrance ticket.

Digital photography, laser imaging and 3D-printing techniques have meant the 
Lascaux 4 facsimile is more an expert forgery than a copy. Around 50 artists 
and sculptors constructed the cave, reproducing 600 animal images and 400 signs 
and symbols. The AFSP used “stone-veil” techniques to fire natural materials 
onto walls. Lascaux 2 had no engravings and displayed only 40% of the cave but 
Lascaux 4 has managed to reproduce every last flicker: bison shedding their 
coats, stags’ lavish antlers, fighting ibex, aurochs, a hidden bear, scores of 
horses, herds during their mating seasons and a single, stick-figure, 
four-fingered man (with a bird’s head) in a deep pit off the main axial gallery.

• The Centre International d’Art Pariétal <http://www.projet-lascaux.com/en>, 
which houses Lascaux 4, is open daily 9am-7pm. Tickets fromlascaux.fr 
<http://reserver.lascaux.fr/en/todo?filter=c%3D31548>, adult €16, child 6-12, 
€10.40, under-6 free, family pass €44. The site has full wheelchair access

The trip was provided by Atout France  <http://atout-france.fr/>, 
Dordogne-Périgord tourism <http://www.dordogne-perigord-tourisme.fr/>, and 
Visit Dordogne Valley <http://www.visit-dordogne-valley.co.uk/>

More cave art around France
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82e50866f5ada4c944a69cb4dcee3eb83fe44f37%2F0_178_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prehistoric%20cave%20art%20celebrated%20at%20new%20Lascaux%20centre%20in%20Dordogne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prehistoric%20cave%20art%20celebrated%20at%20new%20Lascaux%20centre%20in%20Dordogne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fprehistoric-cave-art-lascaux-dordogne-france-grotto-replica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82e50866f5ada4c944a69cb4dcee3eb83fe44f37%2F0_178_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Pech Merle. Photograph: P Cabrol/AP 
Older than the art in Lascaux, the caves of Pech-Merle, near Cahors, include 
original depictions of woolly mammoths and dappled horses.
• pechmerle.com <http://www.pechmerle.com/>

The polychrome animals in Font-de-Gaume and the engravings at Les Combarelles 
accept visitors with advance booking.
• sites-les-eyzies.fr <http://www.sites-les-eyzies.fr/en/>

Rouffignac cave has 250 animal drawings, which can be seen from an underground 
electric train (which reopens on 2 April 2017).
• grottederouffignac.fr <http://www.grottederouffignac.fr/>

The caves of Cougnac near Gourdon were discovered a decade after Lascaux and 
the original cave, with its stunning depictions of mammoths, giant deer and 
man, is still open to the public.
• grottesdecougnac.com <http://www.grottesdecougnac.com/>
 