
Shoppers will have to pay more for Oxo stock cubes, Bisto gravy and Mr Kipling 
cakes as the firm behind the brands prepares to raise prices to offset the fall 
in the pound triggered by theBrexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.

Premier Foods, which also owns Homepride, Batchelors and Ambrosia rice 
pudding, will become the latest in a string of companies to offset the weakness 
of sterling afterUnilever clashed with Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
 over the price of products including Marmite.

The news comes as a survey showed that over the Christmas period supermarket 
prices rose for the first time in more than two years, underlining expectations 
thathousehold budgets will come under increased pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/05/higher-inflation-rising-debt-millions-fall-living-standards>
 in 2017.

Related: Brexit: pro-leave Next boss urges government to lay out core 
principles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/brexit-strategy-next-boss-urges-government-to-lay-out-core-principles>

According to the consumer consultancy Kantar Worldpanel, inflation returned 
with a 0.2% increase in like-for-like grocery prices for the 12-week period 
ending on 1 January compared with a year earlier.

These are not the official inflation figures 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/inflation>, but are based on 75,000 
products Kantar compares year-on-year in the proportions purchased by shoppers. 
The rise brings to an end a run of falling prices that began in September 2014 
as competition in the sector intensified and supermarkets stepped up their 
price wars.

Premier has been in talks for months with major supermarkets such as Tesco and 
Asda over price hikes likely to be close to 5% on some ranges.


“The situation on pricing differs between our different categories and brands 
and is currently under discussion with our individual retail customers,”Premier 
Foods <https://www.theguardian.com/business/premierfoods> said.


“However, on average we are considering rises around the mid single-digit 
mark.”

The company is also considering adjusting “promotional mechanics”, meaning 
some offers, such as biscuit packs where customers get extra biscuits “free”, 
will be axed. It will also look to make cost savings in some areas, to avoid 
raising prices or cancelling promotions.

Sources familiar with the situation said price rises would be considered on a 
“case by case” basis, rather than across the board, and would only be imposed 
as a “last resort”.

The pound has fallen by about 18% against the dollar and 12% against the euro 
since the UK voted for Brexit last June, which makes imported ingredients more 
costly, exacerbating high commodity prices.

In a presentation to investors last year, Premier said it had no exposure to 
the dollar because it buys and sells equal amounts of the US currency. The firm 
said, however, that it spends about €50m (£44m) a year, suggesting it has taken 
a €6m hit from the currency effect.

Premier Foods will become the latest supermarket supplier to increase prices 
as a result of sterling’s fall, raising fears that consumers will behit in the 
pocket by rising food inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/uk-inflation-rises-near-two-year-high-consumer-price-index>
.

International firms have been particularly badly affected by sterling’s slump 
because they count their income in foreign currencies. That means that when 
they convert British sales back into their domestic currency, their value is 
reduced.

Unilever found itself at the centre of a high-profile spat with Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
 after setting out its intention to raise prices for products including Marmite 
and PG Tips. The food firm was eventually forced into a compromise agreement 
with the supermarket that curbed the rises, after a brief period in which Tesco 
ran out of some of its products.

Some companies have responded by keeping prices stable, but reducing what 
shoppers get for their money.Toblerone bars have been redesigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gap-brexit-falling-pound-2016>
 to reduce the amount of chocolate, with the brand’s US owner, Mondelez, 
blaming the change on “higher costs for ingredients”.

Birds Eye fish fingers and Walkers crisps, both ultimately owned by US firms, 
asked supermarkets for price rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/06/birds-eye-walkers-supermarkets-price-rise-brexit-vote-pound>
 of up to 12% last year.

Kantar said retailers offered fewer promotions over the Christmas period, and 
that fish and butter prices were among the biggest risers.

Fraser McKevitt, its head of retail and consumer insight, said: “The 
long-anticipated return to inflation suggests that the speed of growth in the 
overall market will continue to hasten in 2017, and both consumers and 
retailers will be looking at ways to avoid increasing the cost of the weekly 
shop.

“Last year retailers focused on simplifying their discounts and offers, and 
the level of promotional sales has fallen to 37% as a result, the lowest level 
over Christmas since 2009.”

The first rise in prices in two years at UK supermarkets reflects the broader 
economy, whereinflation has started to rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
. Economists, including those atthe Bank of England, have said 2017 will be a 
tougher year for consumers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
, with household budgets squeezed as the sharp drop in the value of the pound 
pushes up inflation. Consumer price inflation is expected to rise to about 3% 
this year, from a current level of 1.2%.

Kantar said the supermarkets had enjoyed a record Christmas, with sales up 
1.8% over the quarter to 1 January compared with a year earlier. Of the big 
four, Tesco had the strongest growth, with sales up 1.3%. Asda was the worst 
performer, with sales down 2.4%.

McKevitt said: “Year-on-year market growth has been helped by comparisons to a 
weaker Christmas in 2015, but sales were also buoyed by strong consumer 
appetite for festive celebration after a turbulent year. Shoppers spent £480m 
more at the tills than in 2015, leading to record sales for the Christmas 
period.”

The research group Nielsen said Britain’s supermarkets  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets>had their best Christmas in 
four years as a last-minute rush for groceries triggered a surge in sales.

Takings at the tills in the four-week period ending 31 December were up by 
3.3% compared with a year earlier, making it the strongest growth since 2012 
and a vast improvement on 2015, when sales were flat.

Mike Watkins, Nielsen’s UK head of retailer and business insight, said 2016 
was one of the biggest-ever end-of-year trading periods for supermarkets.

He said: “The remarkable buoyancy in shoppers spending freely in the final two 
weeks of the year to enjoy the festivities was good news for retailers 
consideringthe consumer headwinds expected in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
 with the return of cost price inflation – after three years of deflation – 
plus the ongoing uncertainty about the impact ofBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> on UK grocery sales.”
 