
When it came to the family business, Hetalbai Laktaria knew that it was best 
to keep her opinions to herself. In the village of Ranmalpur in westernIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, the men tend to look after the farms 
and the women stay at home. In Laktaria’s home, her husband and brother-in-law 
managed the cotton fields, while she cooked, cleaned and looked after the 
children.

“If my husband and his brother are talking about work, I can’t interrupt or 
start speaking,” she says. “I couldn’t tell my brother-in-law what to do on the 
farm. The men control this. We don’t intervene.”

Three years ago, those unwritten rules started to change with the start of a 
new project 
<http://www.cottonconnect.org/news/news-stories/new-report-identifies-gender-equality-as-key-issue-in-developing-a-sustainable-cotton-industry.aspx#.V-4YrzYrJyp>
 aimed at female cotton farmers. “A woman named Roopaben came to our village 
and started teaching all the women about different methods for farming. She 
taught us to use less chemical fertiliser because it was bad for the crop. She 
taught us to tie a cloth around our faces and use gloves on our hands when 
spraying the fertiliser. She taught us that we didn’t need to flood the entire 
field to grow cotton, and that too much water could even spoil the crop,” 
Laktaria says.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fprimark-tackles-fast-fashion-critics-cotton-farmer-project-india-gujarat-cottonconnect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9da08c61ceffc5b915cee02be40f6c1b5d06bf8c%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Primark%20tackles%20fast%20fashion%20critics%20with%20cotton%20farmer%20project%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fprimark-tackles-fast-fashion-critics-cotton-farmer-project-india-gujarat-cottonconnect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Primark%20tackles%20fast%20fashion%20critics%20with%20cotton%20farmer%20project%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fprimark-tackles-fast-fashion-critics-cotton-farmer-project-india-gujarat-cottonconnect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9da08c61ceffc5b915cee02be40f6c1b5d06bf8c%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Hetalbai Laktaria. Photograph: CottonConnect 
In drought-prone Gujarat, the conventional wisdom is that more water means 
more crop. Laktaria went home that evening and told her husband what she’d 
learned at the training camp. For Laktaria, who had dropped out of school at 
13, and married at 19, her knowledge about cotton farming heightened her status 
in the family. “My husband listened to me and we tried the things they taught 
us,” she says.

The new techniques worked. Laktaria’s farms produced 300kg more cotton than 
the previous year. “We earned enough money that we could move out of the family 
home and build our own. We bought a fridge, and we had enough to pay for our 
two kids’ education. We saved some money for our daughter’s marriage. Our lives 
have changed.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqC93avtU-50&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqC93avtU-50>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqC93avtU-50&media=>
 CottonConnect programme 
About 380 women from Ranmalpur have been attending the training camps in the 
village for the last three years. The camps are run by a social enterprise 
called CottonConnect and supported financially byPrimark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark>.

Although Primark does not have a figure for how much cotton it buys, it is the 
most common fabric in its clothes. The budget fast-fashion retailer has been 
criticised for profiting from cheap fashion in developed nations by sourcing 
from clothing suppliers in poorer parts of the world, where unethical or 
exploitative labour practices are much harder to regulate.

In 2013, Primark was one of many high-street fashion brands criticised for the 
horrific labour practices in garment factories from which they sourced in 
Bangladesh,where 1,135 factory workers died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/rana-plaza-collapse-murder-charges-garment-factory>
 after the collapse of the Rana Plaza complex.

India is the world’s second largest producer of cotton 
<https://www.cottonyearbook.com/featured_stories/indias-growing-role-in-the-world-textiles-industry/>
 after China. The majority of the world’s 100 million cotton farmers are 
smallholders in developing countries, says Orsola de Castro, founder and 
director of ethical fashion campaign group Fashion Revolution, and, far away 
from the shiny stores of brands like Primark, the industry can be brutal for 
farmers who face competition from unfair world prices and unscrupulous middle 
men.

“Many farmers find themselves caught in a vicious cycle of debt and poverty,” 
she adds. “For farmers, the challenges range from the impact of climate change, 
poor prices for seed cotton, through to competition from highly subsidised 
producers in rich countries and poor terms of trade. In particular, government 
subsidies for cotton farmers in rich countries, particularly the US, create a 
market with artificially low prices in which small-scale farmers are unable to 
compete.”

Bangladeshi factory deaths spark action among high-street clothing chains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/23/rana-plaza-factory-disaster-bangladesh-primark>
Primark’s involvement in the Ranmalpur programme is part of the company’s 
efforts to improve ethical standards in the retail brand’s £19bn business, 
which sources most of its garments from developing countries. Already 1,251 
women have participated in the retailer’s schemes, which include 
yield-increasing programmes and healthcare drives. Primark hopes to increase 
that figure to 10,000 in the next six years.


A spokesperson said, “Although Primark buys no cotton direct from producers, 
our long-term ambition is to ensure all the cotton in our supply chain is 
sourced sustainably.”

But what about the low-cost retailer’s own influence on low prices? The 
company argues that buying Fairtrade cotton or paying farmers more is not a 
suitable strategy for them – although a statement on its website refers to a 
plan to sell Fairtrade in the future“depending on market demand” 
<https://www.primark.com/en/our-ethics/resources-for-students-and-teachers/faqs>
.

Rock-bottom cotton prices are a major issue, says Subindu Garkhel, cotton 
product manager at Faitrade, but “it’s not just one company or a few that have 
this problem, it’s part of the climate of pricing at the moment”. She says it’s 
a good sign that Primark has started doing something, as it sets an example for 
brands that are making no commitment on cotton, but warns “just doing one 
project is not a solution.”

The scheme has not been audited but according to Alison Ward, CEO of 
CottonConnect, its interventions have increased average yield by at least 10% 
and increased profit per household by £1,819 on average over two years. “Its 
been great for the women. On one of my visits, a woman told me that her husband 
wasn’t initially very keen on her participating. But she’s just bought him a 
tractor as a gift, so now he’s very happy.”

Primark would not disclose the exact amount it had invested in the programme, 
but told the Guardian that a “significant investment” had been made in two 
phases, a three-year pilot and a further six-year programme.
 