
UK funding to major multi-lateral organisations that deliver aid, such as the 
World Bank 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/466138/UK-engagement-world-bank-2015-16.pdf>
, could be cut unless they provide “value for money”, the international 
development secretary has said.

Priti Patel was speaking on a trip to Kenya 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37758164> where she also indicated she 
wanted to useBritain’s £12bn aid budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/20/oecd-redefines-foreign-aid-to-include-some-military-spending>
 to help deliver trade deals in the wake of Britain’s departure from the EU.

Britain gives more than £4bn of its aid budget to global organisations 
including the EU and theGlobal Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/global-development/2016/sep/18/priti-patel-justin-trudeau-uk-11bn-global-fund-aids-tb-malaria>
. The Department for International Development (DfID) is preparing to publish a 
review of the work of such organisations.

Aid reforms could see big increase in private sector subsidies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/10/aid-reforms-could-see-big-increase-in-private-sector-subsidies>
“The government’s approach is focused on ensuring that we drive taxpayer value 
– so when it comes to multilateral organisations, focus on performance 
agreements,” Patel told the BBC. “If they are not performing, then obviously 
we’ll look at the contributions that we give to them. We need to be 
challenging.”

Patel’s comments on trade come as wealthy donor countries debate the biggest 
changes to development aid in more than 40 years, and as the British government 
sketches out a new role for itself outside of the EU. Right-leaning media in 
Britain have also been waging a campaign to get the Conservative government to 
end what they regard as“wasteful” aid spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/14/uk-development-minister-challenged-over-wasted-aid-claim>
.

Patel said that when it comes to free trade agreements, and life after Brexit, 
“British soft power is exactly where DfID and our aid and other relationships 
around the world come together to deliver in our national interest and deliver 
for Britain”.

One major obstacle to Patel’s ambitions is likely to be the ban on directly 
linking aid to trade –known as “tied aid” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/sep/07/aid-benefits-donor-countries-companies>
 – introduced by Britain’s Labour government in 2001.

However, changes being considered to OECD rules could yet result in a “massive 
increase” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/10/aid-reforms-could-see-big-increase-in-private-sector-subsidies>
 towards aid that supports the private sector.

According to a leaked official document seen by the Guardian, proposed reforms 
to official aid would allow a wide variety of “private sector instruments” to 
be used as vehicles for development, meaning that aid could be used to invest 
in, or give loans to, private companies.

Patel insisted that the focus of DfID under her watch would be on poverty 
reduction and sought to link the support for developing economies to strategies 
aimed at stemming migration and instability.

On her trip to Mombasa, she launched a new Invest Africa programme designed to 
encourage at least £400m of foreign direct investment into the most productive 
sectors – such as manufacturing – and create 90,000 direct and indirect jobs in 
Kenya and its neighbours.


Priti Patel plans foreign aid overhaul based on 'core Tory values'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
Other pledges from Britain include spending £95m over the next four years to 
increase Kenya’s trade by £1.3bn through building onTradeMark East Africa 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-uk-support-for-jobs-trade-and-investment-to-boost-economic-development-in-africa>
, a programme that aims to facilitate commerce.

“No country can defeat poverty without sustained economic growth and in Kenya 
I saw how UK support is creating job and trade opportunities for the many, not 
the few,” added Patel.


However, she came under fire from opposition politicians at home and some aid 
campaigners.

Aisha Dodwell, of Global Justice Now, said: “Numerous reports and research, 
including one from the Independent Commission for Aid Impact, have raised very 
critical concerns about the UK’s growing tendency tospend aid money on 
partnerships with large corporations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/21/uk-aid-watchdog-dfid-public-private-partnerships-icai>
, which means that taxpayers’ money is often going to subsidise big business 
rather than helping vulnerable communities around the world.


“If Patel is committed to shutting down ‘wasteful’ aid programmes, then we’d 
welcome these sorts of partnerships [as] the first to get the chop.”


Malcolm Bruce, a Liberal Democrat peer and former chair of the international 
development committee, said: “She can make these rhetorical speeches to please 
the right wing and aid sceptics, but the reality is that she is constrained 
both by UK law and international law, and the prime minister’s commitment that 
the UK would continue to spend0.7% of gross national income on aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
.

“The definition of 0.7% has to meet internationally agreed criteria, and while 
we know there is some scope for change, what you cannot do under UK law and 
international law is to make a trade deal conditional on aid.”
 