
Real progress in driving down infections and deaths from malaria will be at 
risk if substantially more funding is not forthcoming, according to the latest
annual report <http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/world_malaria_report/en/>
 on the epidemic.

How Sri Lanka bit back at mosquitoes and wiped out malaria – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/oct/24/how-sri-lanka-bit-back-mosquitoes-wiped-out-malaria-podcast>
Last year, more than 400,000 people 
<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/205224/1/WHO_HTM_GMP_2016.2_eng.pdf?ua=1>
 (pdf) – mostly small children and pregnant women – died from malaria. 
Insecticide-impregnated bed nets to sleep under and effective drug treatments 
have brought the number of deaths down by nearly 30% worldwide in the five 
years from 2010 to 2015; the number of new cases over the same period is down 
by more than 20%. But the report, published by the World Health Organisation, 
shows there are substantial gaps in the coverage.

Some countries such as Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/09/malaria-sri-lanka-china-iran-malaysia-end-for-disease>
 and Kyrgyzstan have eliminated malaria and the WHO says the target of 
elimination in ten countries by 2020 will be met. Last year at least ten 
countries had 150 cases or fewer and nine more had between 150 and 1,000.

But the task of reducing the toll of malaria in the heavily endemic countries 
of sub-Saharan Africa, which have 90% of cases and 92% of deaths, is hard and 
needs more resources, says the report.

“We are definitely seeing progress,” said Dr Pedro Alonso, director of the WHO 
GlobalMalaria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaria> Programme. “But the 
world is still struggling to achieve the high levels of programme coverage that 
are needed to beat this disease.”

On the positive side, more children are being tested to determine whether they 
have malaria, so that the treatment is effective, and more pregnant women are 
being given drugs to prevent them getting malaria.

But an estimated 43% of the population of sub-Saharan Africa was not protected 
by nets or indoor spraying to kill the mosquitoes that transmit the disease 
last year. A third of the children with fever in 23 African countries were not 
taken to a health facility where they could be tested and appropriately treated.

While funding went up steeply between 2000 and 2010, it has flatlined for the 
last five years. It is estimated that $6.4bn (£5bn) per year is needed to keep 
the global malaria elimination efforts on target in 2020, but in 2015 it was 
only $2.9bn, or 45%. A third of that is provided by the governments of 
countries where malaria is endemic. Last year the US contributed 35% of the 
total and the UK put in 16%. The report says that substantially more money is 
needed both from international donors and from the affected countries.

“If this flatlining remains, we will not be able to achieve the ambitious 
goals and targets the world agreed on a year ago,” said Alonso. In 2015, the 
World Health Assembly adopted aglobal technical strategy for malaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/09/malaria-sri-lanka-china-iran-malaysia-end-for-disease>
, with milestones every five years until 2030. It calls for a 40% reduction in 
malaria cases between 2015 and 2020. Only 40 of the 91 countries with endemic 
malaria are on track to achieve that.
 