
Progress on shifting humanitarian funds from international to local 
organisations has been stalled due to red tape and weak policy, campaigners 
say, six months after an international summit agreed a ground-breaking new 
target in favour of the global south.


Less than 2% of humanitarian funds 'go directly to local NGOs'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/16/less-than-2-of-humanitarian-funds-go-directly-to-local-ngos>
The Grand Bargain, widely seen as the World Humanitarian Summit’s most 
significant success, promised significantly stronger support to local NGOs by 
increasing thecurrent rate of direct local humanitarian financing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/16/less-than-2-of-humanitarian-funds-go-directly-to-local-ngos>
 from 2% to 25% by 2020. The agreement, negotiated in Istanbul in May between 
30 major donors and aid agencies, was a nod to activists like Kenyan-based NGO 
Adeso’s Degan Ali, who haslong called for more direct financing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/21/degan-ali-somali-woman-taking-on-the-humanitarian-system>
 for organisations in the global south such as hers.

“The WHS process brought forward the frustration and desire for a genuine 
shifting of power and enhancing local leadership,” Ali told the Guardian. 
“Ultimately the biggest indicator of success is if we are more accountable and 
responsive to affected people in a meaningful way; decision making is 
decentralised to national and local governments; and we surpass the 25% target 
of direct financing to local organisations.”

But even meeting the 25% target may prove difficult, warn campaigners, who 
claim that the Grand Bargain’s 25% deal, earmarked for “local and national 
responders”, is watered down by weak language, which could cloud its capacity 
to promote change in the sector.


When large INGOs set up a local organisation ... will they be getting this 
international funding?

“There are many things that are still unclear, particularly when it says this 
funding is meant to be ‘as direct as possible’,” says Ed Schenkenberg, 
executive director of humanitarian thinktankHERE-Geneva 
<http://here-geneva.org/>. “Who are these ‘local and national responders’? Are 
they local organisations? Are they indigenous or government actors? At which 
level do they work? Are they franchised organisations – for example, when large 
INGOs like World Vision set up a local organisation, like a local Starbucks if 
you will, will they be getting this international funding? And is it new 
funding or reallocation of existing funding? All that remains to be sorted out.”

Charlotte Lattimer, policy and engagement adviser at Development Initiatives 
(DI) <http://devinit.org/#!/>, agrees. “Some of the wording in the commitments 
is unclear,” she says. “The implementation really needs to start getting more 
concrete. For example, in the commitment on more support for local and national 
responders, who are we talking about? NGOs as well as local authorities? And 
what does ‘as directly as possible’ mean? Discussions to clarify these 
questions are happening now. Once agreed, the commitments should be clearer and 
the tracking of their implementation more focused.”

Will a 'grand bargain' solve the humanitarian funding crisis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/18/will-a-grand-bargain-solve-the-humanitarian-funding-crisis>
Medecins Sans Frontieres also pointed to this lack of clarity in a recent paper
 
<https://emergencygap.msf.es/papers/emergency-gap-challenges-localised-humanitarian-aid>
 on armed conflict and localised aid, warning that “the current thinking 
driving the localisation agenda fails to make an essential distinction between 
the different humanitarian contexts, and ignores the challenges faced by local 
actors in conflict settings”.

The Grand Bargain’s promise of aid efficiency is another issue. While the 
summit agreed on reducing overhead costs, introducing collective needs 
assessments, and increasing transparency among aid agencies and the UN, just 
how these agencies will report and manage their finances is unknown, 
particularly as donor states are under no commitment to do so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fprogress-stalls-funds-local-ngos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bf8c37744eae094749584eabfcb0686f749db0e%2F0_0_5067_3327%2F5067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Progress%20stalls%20on%20getting%20funds%20to%20local%20humanitarian%20groups&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fprogress-stalls-funds-local-ngos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Progress%20stalls%20on%20getting%20funds%20to%20local%20humanitarian%20groups&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fprogress-stalls-funds-local-ngos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bf8c37744eae094749584eabfcb0686f749db0e%2F0_0_5067_3327%2F5067.jpg>
 Food aid distributed in parts of Angola, by international agencies. 
Photograph: Travel Ink/Getty Images/Gallo Images 
“The big question for the WHS writ large, is about what the monitoring and the 
reporting will be,” says Lattimer. “I am very happy to see IATI [International 
Aid Transparency Initiative <http://www.aidtransparency.net/>] mentioned in the 
commitment and DI, which acts as technical lead within the IATI secretariat, is 
also offering support to organisations that are facing challenges regarding the 
standard. But [transparency] is one of those issues that cross-cuts with other 
areas: to know whether people are actually achieving the target they set, there 
needs to be greater transparency. The ‘holy grail’ now is to set up some kind 
of process, which can link to IATI reporting, to track the indirect 
humanitarian funding that local and national actors receive.”

Schenkenberg, who points to the fact that 60% of World Food Programme-provided 
aid in Syria is currentlydelivered by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent 
<http://www.ifrc.org/en/news-and-media/news-stories/middle-east-and-north-africa/syria/red-crescent-volunteers-bring-relief-to-the-al-waer-suburb-of-homs-70739/>
, argues that much more research is needed into tracing humanitarian funding as 
a whole, both direct and indirect, before changes can be made.

Aid agencies are often very unclear as to who in the end is actually doing the 
implementation

“At this stage, it would be a Herculean task to calculate,” he says. “My 
estimate is that it’s much higher than the 2% figure, as local agencies work as 
implementing partners for the UN and international NGOs. But this does not show 
in the statistics.Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> 
agencies are often very unclear as to who in the end is actually doing the 
implementation. Instead of working top-down [to figure it out], we need to work 
from the bottom up.”


In September, UN secretary-general Ban Ki Moon launched an online database, the
Platform for Action, Commitments and Transformation 
<http://www.agendaforhumanity.org/>, where aid agencies and donors are invited 
to submit progress reports, showcase results and make new partnerships in 
regards to commitments made at the WHS. As for greater transparency in 
humanitarian funding, Lattimer hopes to see agencies and donors commit to 
reports that provide quality data, rather than just “tick in the box 
reporting”, and believes that agreeing publicly to do so may force them into 
action.

The man who deals with disasters: 'If it was an impossible job I would not be 
trying to do it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/17/stephen-obrien-un-ocha-humanitarian-summit>
More generally, feelings are mixed about the summit, which took four years to 
organise and is rumoured to have cost tens of millions of dollars. Campaigners 
agree that strides were made in technical areas of education, innovation, 
cash-relief programming and emergency preparedness. But on greater political 
issues, including conflict security and respect for humanitarian law, progress 
is debatable.


Overall, says Schenkenberg, who calls the conference “a waste of money”, the 
mood regarding the summit has been sour. “The summit could not have come at a 
worse time,” he says . “If you look at the political stalemate in Syria, the 
outgoing UN Secretary-General [Ki Moon] in his final months, the state of 
multilateralism in the first place – the whole timing of it and the lack of 
clear agenda or clear objectives on what it was meant to do or deliver, made it 
a failure.”

However, Sara Pantuliano, managing director of the Overseas Development 
Institute, told the Guardian that the summit was productive as it “generated a 
global discussion about critical issues that brought to the fore key players 
who were not in the discussion until now”.

“The global conversations were valuable and led to spontaneous initiatives,” 
she said. “But the process was not well conceptualised, and the amount of money 
that went into generating that conversation was not desirable.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 