
High-profile Australians have renewed calls for a federal independent 
commission against corruption (Icac) after weeks of political expenses scandals 
that have led to the resignation of a federal minister.

They have labelled corruption a “national issue that cannot be ignored any 
longer”.


The call comes as more than 85% of Australians polled this week said they 
supported a federal body to investigate corruption.

Asked “do you think there is corruption in federal politics?”, 85.3% of 
respondents said yes,Fairfax reported on Saturday 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/federal-corruption-watchdog-needed-say-80-per-cent-of-australians-poll-20170113-gtqva3.html>
. More than 55% believed there was “a lot”.

About 82% supported the establishment of a federal independent commission 
against corruption, and 11% were undecided.

Sussan Ley quits as health minister as Turnbull outlines reform to expenses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/sussan-ley-quits-health-minister-turnbull-outlines-reform-expenses>
The poll was conducted by the Australian Institute – a progressive think-tank, 
which has previously lobbied for the federal investigative body.

The open letter calling for an Icac 
<http://nb.tai.org.au/federal-anticorruption-watchdog> was signed by more than 
40 leading Australians, including the former Western Australia premier Geoff 
Gallop; the former New South Wales director of public prosecutions Nicholas 
Cowdery; the president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Ged Kearney; 
and others including barristers, judges and academic heads.

“The public is sick and tired of the lack of accountability revealed by 
repeated scandals involving federal politicians and others,” the letter said.

“In NSW where an anti-corruption commission is active, serious cases of 
corruption in political and government circles have been uncovered. Ongoing 
federal scandals involving federal politicians, whether concerning breaches of 
travel entitlements, political donations or otherwise, show that the serious 
wrongdoing uncovered in NSW is unlikely to be limited to the state governments 
and state politicians.”

People 'expect' politicians to claim expenses for sporting events, says Steven 
Ciobo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/people-expect-politicians-to-claim-expenses-for-sporting-events-says-steven-ciobo>
Sussan Ley <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley> resigned 
from her post as health minister on Friday after mounting revelations of 
questionable travel expenses.

Several other ministers and politicians from the Coalition and Labor were also 
found to have made questionable claims. FourCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> ministers had charged 
taxpayers for their trip to Sydney to attend Malcolm Turnbull’s New Year’s Eve 
party. Others, including the foreign minister, Julie Bishop, and the trade 
minister, Steve Ciobo, claimed entitlements to attend sporting events.

No other ministers have stepped down or admitted fault, saying their 
entitlements are within the rules.

The acting special minister for state, Kelly O’Dwyer, announced on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/parliamentary-expenses-government-to-clarify-what-official-business-means>
 that those rules would be changed and the government would now act on all 36 
recommendations from last year’s review into the system, sparked by Bronwyn 
Bishop’s helicopter scandal.

Turnbull announced Ley’s resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/sussan-ley-quits-health-minister-turnbull-outlines-reform-expenses>
 after receiving the findings of an investigation into her travel claims from 
the secretary of his department, which he refused to release publicly. During 
the news conference, he also announced a new plan to create an independent 
agency to regulate and adjudicate MPs’ expenses, and to require them to report 
expenses every month rather than just twice a year.


Jonathon Hunyor, chief executive of the public interest advocacy centre, and a 
signatory to Saturday’s letter, said Turnbull’s pledge was a step in the right 
direction, but more detail was needed.

“One of the concerns people have is there are a range of mechanisms at the 
moment for looking at government accountability and integrity issues, but there 
is a case for an overarching body that can coordinate those and possibly beef 
them up.”

Where there is a “systemic pattern of problems” an Icac would have a role, he 
said, but a lot of work was needed to get the right model.

“[The NSW Icac] has been very very successful in many respects but there are 
concerns about the impact on people’s reputations and the way it has gone about 
its business. They’re legitimate things to be discussed.”

The issues are wider than just travel entitlement concerns, Hunyor said, 
citing political donations as an example, but the past week’s controversy had 
provided another opportunity to bring attention back onto government 
accountability.

Minor parties and crossbenchers are in favour of Turnbull’s plans to increase 
transparency, but said on Saturday it should be within a national 
anti-corruption watchdog.

Parliamentary expenses: government to clarify what ‘official business’ means
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/parliamentary-expenses-government-to-clarify-what-official-business-means>
The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, said on 
Saturday changes were necessary “to build a bit more trust back into our 
institutions”.


“Let’s have this parliamentary authority established,” he told the ABC.


But it was critical, Di Natale said, that the body sat within a national 
anti-corruption regulator.


“The idea that that federal parliament is immune to corruption, I believe, is 
ludicrous,” he said.


Senator Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> said independent 
pressure on MPs to cover their own expenses rather than rely on taxpayers would 
be effective.


“There’s nothing like pinching a pollie’s hip pocket nerve to make them change 
their ways,” he told Nine Network.

 