
Forget billion-euro financial results, the more accurate marker of the power a 
label wields in the world of luxury fashion was on display backstage at the 
Louis Vuitton menswear show in Paris yesterday. There was the world’s most 
famous supermodel, Kate Moss, dressed head to toe in silky zebra pyjamas from 
the label’s latest collection, bossing the world’s most famous footballer,David 
Beckham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham>, to take his turn 
in front of the cameras and pose for the brand’s Unicef initiative.

Asked whether he was there for the fashion or the football, Beckham 
emphatically declared: “I’m here for the fashion.” In a week where football and 
fashion have collided in Paris, the bandwidth for brands and sponsors to flex 
their muscles has been tight, but there can be no doubt thatLouis Vuitton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/louis-vuitton> is the most powerful of 
them all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpunks-on-safari-louis-vuittons-menswear-goes-back-to-its-roots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cefdae110d9400ed4a22fbf8c09a160a0117aab%2F0_0_3752_2251%2F3752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Punks%20on%20safari%3A%20Louis%20Vuitton's%20menswear%20goes%20back%20to%20its%20roots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpunks-on-safari-louis-vuittons-menswear-goes-back-to-its-roots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Punks%20on%20safari%3A%20Louis%20Vuitton%27s%20menswear%20goes%20back%20to%20its%20roots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpunks-on-safari-louis-vuittons-menswear-goes-back-to-its-roots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cefdae110d9400ed4a22fbf8c09a160a0117aab%2F0_0_3752_2251%2F3752.jpg>
 David Beckham and Kate Moss flank Kim Jones backstage at the designer’s show. 
Photograph: Swan Gallet/WWD/Rex Shutterstock 
Moss whipped around the backstage portable building in the grounds of the 
Palais-Royal, chatting with the Chapman brothers, who have again collaborated 
with the label’s artistic director, Kim Jones, on prints depicting animals on 
top of the Louis Vuitton monogram. Meanwhile, Rio Ferdinand tried to stay cool 
in the boiling heat as Beckham betrayed a supernatural ability to defy Celsius 
in a simple black jumper.

A veteran of post-match/catwalk analysis, Beckham told the Guardian that he 
had loved it. “Kim is a good friend of mine, and it’s great to see him working 
on his passion. He is so talented and that was such a strong collection.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpunks-on-safari-louis-vuittons-menswear-goes-back-to-its-roots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4064939a4c884c9622b663d67447a8d0d6a4ccbc%2F0_203_3004_3755%2F3004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Punks%20on%20safari%3A%20Louis%20Vuitton's%20menswear%20goes%20back%20to%20its%20roots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpunks-on-safari-louis-vuittons-menswear-goes-back-to-its-roots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Punks%20on%20safari%3A%20Louis%20Vuitton%27s%20menswear%20goes%20back%20to%20its%20roots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpunks-on-safari-louis-vuittons-menswear-goes-back-to-its-roots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4064939a4c884c9622b663d67447a8d0d6a4ccbc%2F0_203_3004_3755%2F3004.jpg>
 Mohair on show on the Louis Vuitton catwalk. Photograph: WWD/Rex Shutterstock 
Beckham was not wrong. This collection was entitled “Blueprint”. It took 
inspiration from African safaris and punk, and was one of Jones’s best shows in 
his five-year tenure at Vuitton. Saharan-coloured zip blousons and zebra 
patterns worked unexpectedly well with mohair jumpers and leather studded dog 
collars. This show recalled Jones’s first for the brand, which was inspired by 
the designer’s childhood in Kenya and Botswana. He explained that the two 
seemingly disparate influences – Africa and punk – were inspired by South 
African photographer Frank Marshall’s Renegades portrait series ofBotswana 
biker gangs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/feb/10/botswana-heavy-metal-pictures>
 wearing heavy leather.

As ever, it was the execution that set this collection apart from the way 
another brand might have tackled such a theme. There was a delicacy and 
intricacy to fabrics – silk shirts with giraffes on them fluttered, while 
paper-thin leather was woven like baskets into blouson coats. Zip-detail 
trousers and mohair jumpers had an easy elegance to them which betrayed the 
deft skill of the Louis Vuitton atelier.
 