
People often put up with unacceptable conditions at work. Sometimes, it’s 
because they don’t know that how they are being treated is contravening their 
rights. Other times, they know that things aren’t ideal, but feel that there is 
too much at stake to speak up.

“Fair treatment in the workplace has come up again and again right throughout 
time,” says Maurice Blackburn employment and industrial law principal, Kamal 
Farouque. “And the sharing economy is the new frontier of this.

“For emergent businesses such as Uber and Deliveroo, the model is premised on 
taking people outside the scope of the ordinary protections of employment law.”

Fellow Maurice Blackburn employment law principal, Giri Sivaraman, says 
dispersion of labour is another reason that, increasingly, workers are finding 
themselves in unfair workplace situations.

“Big corporations keep profits up by dispersing labour costs to other 
entities, who then break the law to keep costs down to meet the stringent, or 
almost impossible, contractual requirements of the big corporations,” Sivaraman 
says.

“The law hasn’t caught up with these precarious new work arrangements, such as 
the massive casualisation of the workforce, and the treatment of people as 
contractors and not employees. The reality is that it’s often just precarious 
work without any safety nets.”

The following examples are based on true stories about people who were treated 
unfairly in their workplaces.

The reality is that it’s often just precarious work without any safety nets.

Jonathon’s Story

Jonathon was employed by an Australian Disability Enterprise (ADE) to wrap 
meat-trays for the local pub raffle. Because Jonathon has an intellectual 
disability he needed to be formally assessed by a wage assessment tool to 
determine what his pay will be.


Jonathon was assessed using a tool known as the Business Supported Wages 
Assessment Tool (“BSWAT”). BSWAT was used to assesse his productivity and his 
competency. To assess his competency, Jonathon was asked “what meetings does 
your boss go to?”, but because of his intellectual disability, Jonathon could 
not answer the question. And because he didn’t know the answer, BSWAT 
automatically scored him zero for his competency assessment, even though it was 
not relevant to his job. This reduced the overall score of competency to zero. 
And as a result of the zero score, his pay rate was drastically reduced.

How did this happen?

ADEs, formerly known as sheltered workshops are businesses that employ people 
with disability, explains Mary Mallet, from the Disability Advocacy Network 
Australia (DANA). All employees with disability are assessed at regular 
intervals by one of many wage assessment tools, such as BSWAT, to determine 
what they should be paid.

Kairsty Wilson, principal at AED Legal Centre, says the trouble is that these 
tools are discriminatory.

The fight for equal rights for Australia's disabled
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/maurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all/ng-interactive/2016/sep/30/the-fight-for-equal-rights-for-australias-disabled>
“How do you teach someone with an intellectual disability what meetings their 
boss goes to?” Wilson asks. “Why is it relevant? These tools are subjective and 
discriminatory.”

Tools such as BSWAT have resulted in workers with intellectual disabilities 
receiving as little as 33c an hour in return for their labour.

“Already, 45% of people with a disability in Australia live below the poverty 
line,” Mallett says. “And that excludes them from society.”

What can be done about it?

In 2012 BSWAT was found to be discriminatory by the Federal Court. Maurice 
Blackburn Lawyers, in conjunction with AED, brought a class action on behalf of 
all workers with intellectual disabilities for back pay. Recently, they formed 
an agreement to settle the class action with the Commonwealth for workers to be 
back-paid through the government scheme, which remains subject to Federal Court 
approval.


“This is a huge win for workers with intellectual disabilities, when no one 
else had their back.” says Kelly Thomas, who worked on the case. She encourages 
all workers assessed using BSWAT, or their families, to contact the Department 
andregister 
<https://www.dss.gov.au/our-responsibilities/disability-and-carers/programmes-services/for-people-with-disability/bswat-payment-scheme/bswat-payment-scheme-process#register>
 for the back payment they are entitled to.

Alison’s story

Alison works full-time as an admin assistant at a major Melbourne University. 
To earn some extra cash, she began work as a meal delivery bicycle rider with 
Deliveroo in November last year. She was paid $18 an hour and $2.50 per 
delivery (the pay rate has dropped since then). She was provided with no 
insurance, even though delivery cyclists are often involved in accidents. She 
worked nights and public holidays, but received no penalty rates.


When she was sick, Alison had to “trade” shifts with other cyclists, with no 
guarantee of getting those shifts back. This year she took a month off because 
things were busy at her daytime job. She received a text message from Deliveroo 
saying she had been “removed due to inactivity”. She emailed Deliveroo, 
requesting to keep her job, but did not get a reply.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fputting-an-end-to-unfair-treatment-in-the-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbc7173af559da6921170e5f26e336d3302b4df5%2F0_0_4435_2957%2F4435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Putting%20an%20end%20to%20unfair%20treatment%20in%20the%20workplace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fputting-an-end-to-unfair-treatment-in-the-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Putting%20an%20end%20to%20unfair%20treatment%20in%20the%20workplace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fputting-an-end-to-unfair-treatment-in-the-workplace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbc7173af559da6921170e5f26e336d3302b4df5%2F0_0_4435_2957%2F4435.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
How did this happen?

People who are working for organisations in the so-called sharing economy, 
such as Deliveroo, Uber and Foodora, are individual contractors, says Farouque.

“They are people who are rendering labour in return for reward, and it’s 
characterised as being free to be your own boss, but the freedom I think is 
illusory,” he says.

“These workers are subject to the control of the person who is engaging them, 
and they are putting risk back onto the workers because it saves the businesses 
money.”


As Josh Bornstein writes in The Guardian article, The great Uber fairness 
fallacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/24/uber-fairness-independent-contractors-employees-rights>
, businesses are “profiting from the work performed by ‘independent 
contractors’ without the cost, risk or aggravation of actually dealing with 
employees”.

What can be done about it?
 Photograph: Young Workers Centre 
Employees at food delivery companies such as Deliveroo are part of a new 
workers’ rights campaign, The Rights for Riders campaign, developed through the 
Young Workers Centre in partnership with Maurice Blackburn lawyers.

The action aims to improve pay rates, job security, occupational safety and 
other conditions for food delivery riders in Melbourne.

“We are hoping this campaign will help us explore these and other concerns so 
we can consider the legal avenues available to any workers who are being 
exploited,” Young Workers coordinator Keelia Fitzpatrick says.
 