
Pyotr Pavlensky is not exactly a subtle artist. The radical Russian 
performance artist made world headlines in 2013 when henailed his scrotum to 
Red Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/05/petr-pavlensky-nailed-scrotum-red-square>
. Now he has been arrested for setting fire to the front door of the Federal 
Security Service Building on Lubyanka Square in Moscow.

Pavlensky has been charged with “hooliganism” – yet this is a superbly 
well-aimed piece of political art. Normally, setting fire to a building would 
not win my approval. Someone might get hurt.And this is a historic front door, 
on a historic building 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lubyanka_Building#/media/File%3ALubyanka_Building.jpg>
.

Russian artist arrested for setting fire to security service HQ
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/09/russian-artist-pyotr-pavlensky-sets-fire-to-fsb-hq>
But what a history. In assaulting the FSB headquarters, Pavlensky has drawn 
attention to an architecture of terror. This building is a living symbol of all 
that has gone wrong inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> since 
the 1990s.

In the early 90s as the USSR came to an end I was actually shown the 
“Lubyanka” as a relic of an old and terrible past that no one mourned – it 
seemed a place that might soon become a museum of past crimes (as its 
equivalents in other east European capitals have) or even be demolished. It 
does indeed have a KGB museum. But it also has an actual ongoing “security” 
function.

In 1919 the Cheka – the secret police of the new utopia created by the 
Bolshevik revolution in 1917 – took over this magnificent building that 
formerly belonged to an insurance company. The Cheka’s first job was to help 
win the civil war against the Bolsheviks’ enemies. Its agents used grotesque 
forms of torture, including boiling people alive. It also created the Gulag 
system of forced labour. Those who blame the failings of the Soviet Union 
solely on Stalin tend to ignore the fact that the Cheka started its reign of 
terror under Lenin. Later, in the 1950s, came the KGB.

Petr Pavlensky: why I nailed my scrotum to Red Square
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/05/petr-pavlensky-nailed-scrotum-red-square>
And later still came the FSB. It is utterly grotesque and shameless that 
Russia’s internal security services still occupy the building that oversaw the 
suffering and death of millions of people in the Soviet era. Pavlensky picked 
his target well. In torching the door of this sinister palace, he has nailed a 
truly sinister historical continuity.

The fact that the Lybyanka is still in use, still watching over Russians, is a 
bizarre image of the Putin era. It captures what is so hard to understand and 
predict about Putin’s Russia. How can such a poisonous legacy be reclaimed? How 
can the FSB cosily seat itself in the same building the murderers of the Cheka 
used?

Pavlensky’s gesture implies nothing has changed.

It puts our own fears of spies (or lack of such fears) into perspective. In 
Britain the intelligence services are accused of intruding on privacy. In 
Russia they are suspected of political murder.

Behind that burning door lies the true horror of state surveillance.
 