
In the wake of an election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-election-2016> that 
looks more like a vote against both major parties than a vote for either of 
them, ABC’s Q&A was a night of soul-searching about how to win back “stability” 
in Australian politics.

Josh Frydenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>, 
the minister for resources and energy, insisted that despite the public 
splintering their vote, voters still craved “stability”.

Nevertheless, he also said the instability – the revolving door of prime 
ministers and decreasing vote for major parties – was partly a result of 
“public demand”, but needed to stop anyway.

Backroom deals: we can't govern the nation on a wink and a nod | Ben Oquist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/05/backroom-deals-we-can-govern-the-nation-on-a-wink-and-a-nod>
“It’s not a good trend, because Australia needs stability,” Frydenberg said.

Holly Ransom an entrepreneur and youth advocate questioned whether it really 
did need to stop.

“I want to quickly jump in on the point of stability. I think that’s up for 
contention,” she said, saying the “stability” being offered by the major 
parties was one that the voters rejected this year. “This election, voter 
discontent was at the fore,” she said.

Paul Kelly, the editor-at-large of the Australian, said that whatever happened 
now, forming a stable government looked like it was going to be difficult. 
However, his example of a successful minority government took Twitter by 
surprise.

“Julia Gillard was relatively successful after she’d negotiated the 
arrangements with the Greens and independents,” Kelly said. “She got a lot of 
legislation through the parliament.”
Kerry Glover (@TheRealKerryG) 
*picks self off floor* Paul Kelly admitted Gillard was successful working with 
a hung parliament. Don't remember THAT being said, at all.
 <https://twitter.com/TheRealKerryG/status/749937794730987520> July 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TheRealKerryG/status/749937794730987520> The Daily Rupert 
(@TheMurdochTimes) 
Paul Kelly: "@JuliaGillard <https://twitter.com/JuliaGillard> was very 
successful." Took Paul Kelly 3 years to realise that? He attacked Gillard for 
Child Abuse RC#qanda <https://twitter.com/hashtag/qanda?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/TheMurdochTimes/status/749937721397784578> July 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TheMurdochTimes/status/749937721397784578> Ged Kearney 
(@GedKACTU) 
OMG did Paul Kelly just say Julia Gillard was effective? #qanda 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/qanda?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/GedKACTU/status/749937342715047936> July 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GedKACTU/status/749937342715047936> 
Ransom, one of the non-politicians on the panel, took the boldest stab at 
trying to diagnose what was behind the voter dissatisfaction with traditional 
politics.

Ransom said: “In three months, we’ve seen three examples – in the presumptive 
Republican nominee in the USbeing Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/republican-nomination-donald-trump-campaign-state-primaries-delegates-convention>
, theBrexit decision <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> and 
now this – of actually the general population expressing really major 
disaffection and apathy towards the establishment or the traditional way that 
things have been done.

“How do you evolve both your platform and communicating the message to people? 
That’s the big question that’s being asked of the parties after this election.”

The Labor shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen> acknowledged the rejection of 
the establishment.

“We’re seeing the rise of the disenfranchised and disillusioned, people who 
feel left out,” he said. “People feel they are not getting the benefits of 
economic growth because, in many instances, they are not.

“It also makes it incumbent on us to embrace inclusive growth, making sure the 
growth is properly shared, that everybody has the investment in them.”

Pauline Hanson's back, and the disaffection genie is well and truly out of the 
bottle | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/04/pauline-hanson-back-and-the-disaffection-genie-is-well-and-truly-out-of-the-bottle>
The Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sarah-hanson-young> argued a 
diverse parliament was the will of the people and should be respected.

“The voters want, they want us to have a diverse representation in the 
parliament because they don’t believe that the traditional two-party system has 
worked,” she said. “And they want to disrupt that. We’ve got to listen to why, 
and what it is that we do about that.

“It doesn’t mean it’s wrong. It actually doesn’t mean it’s wrong.” 

Despite voters abandoning the major parties, they did not appear to flock to 
the Greens. The Q&A host, Tony Jones, suggested that might have been caused by 
the Greens trying to look like a major party themselves.
Van Badham (@vanbadham) 
Greens got less than 10% of the vote. It's a smaller percentage than they got 
in 2010.#qanda <https://twitter.com/hashtag/qanda?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/vanbadham/status/749938814865379329> July 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/vanbadham/status/749938814865379329> 
“Do you think people might have been put off a bit by your leader saying, ‘I 
want to be part of the system, I want a ministry, I want to be in a 
power-sharing government, I don’t want to be the outsider throwing stones, I 
want to be part of it’?” Jones asked.

Hanson-Young replied: “No, I don’t think so. I think what people saw in that 
is that we’re a party who is saying, ‘It’s not winner-takes-all.’ We all have a 
responsibility to help shape this nation. You put your hand up for parliament, 
be prepared to have to do the hard work to get there.”
 