
The Australian Human Rights Commission says the Racial Discrimination Act 
strikes an appropriate balance between freedom of speech and freedom from 
racial vilification and has challenged the government to allow a deeper dive 
into other restrictions used by powerful people to curb speech, such as 
defamation and media regulation.


The commission has used a new parliamentary inquiry into freedom of expression 
–an inquiry triggered by rolling political controversy about 18C of the RDA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/government-to-launch-free-speech-inquiry-into-section-18c-of-the-racial-discrimination-act>
 – to ask the government for a formal reference to conduct its own free speech 
inquiry, examining media and internet regulation, intellectual property and 
defamation laws.

Its president, Gillian Triggs, has faced months of trenchant attacks from 
senior government figures who contend that 18C represents an unreasonable curb 
on free speech. MPs, including the prime minister,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, have also 
criticised the commission’s handling of race discrimination complaints.

Racial Discrimination Act debate a 'creep back to bigotry', says Pat Dodson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/racial-discrimination-act-debate-a-creep-back-to-bigotry-says-pat-dodson>
In early November Triggs signalled she was open to overhauling the RDA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/gillian-triggs-says-replacing-insult-and-offend-could-strengthen-18c>
, including replacing the terms “offend” and “insult” with “vilify”. A few days 
later the commission’s race discrimination commissioner, Tim Soutphommasane, 
put himself at odds with Triggs, sayingthere was “no case” to change section 18C
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/09/race-discrimination-commissioner-says-no-case-for-changing-18c>
.

The commission’s submission to the inquiry said the provision as interpreted 
by the courts did what it was supposed to do. It said part IIA of the act “as 
it has been interpreted by the courts strikes an appropriate balance between 
freedom of speech and freedom from racial vilification”.

It also emphasised that only a very small number of 18C complaints progressed 
to the courts. On average, each year over the past five years fewer than four 
had gone to court.

But the commission acknowledged the government might move to amend the 
legislation. It said it had not been asked to examine any government bill and 
“nor has this committee been tasked with considering any specific amendments to 
the RDA”.

“If that situation were to change, the commission would comment on any 
proposed amendments,” it said. “Any proposal to amend the RDA should involve 
extensive public consultation as it has the capacity to affect the human rights 
of all Australians. In particular, there should be consultation with those 
communities whose members are most vulnerable to experiencing racial 
discrimination.”

Although the Turnbull government has repeatedly criticised the commission’s 
processes on 18C complaints, it has also ignored its appeals to amend the 
legislation.

The commission has used the submission to resume its calls for amendments to 
its procedures that would allow it to terminate vexatious complaints earlier.

Government to launch 'free speech' inquiry into section 18C of the Racial 
Discrimination Act
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/government-to-launch-free-speech-inquiry-into-section-18c-of-the-racial-discrimination-act>
The submission asked for statutory improvements to the Australian Human Rights 
Commission Act, including:

 * Raising the threshold for lodging a complaint with the commission, 
requiring the person lodging the complaint to allege an act which, if true, 
could constitute unlawful discrimination;

 * Requiring that the written complaint to the commission set out details of 
the alleged unlawful discrimination which are reasonably sufficient to indicate 
an alleged contravention of the relevant legislation;

 * A new process requiring that if the president terminates a complaint on any 
grounds set out in the legislation – including that the complaint is trivial, 
vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance – then an application cannot be 
made to the federal court or the federal circuit court unless that court grants 
leave. 
It also wanted the government to restore its $3m budget cuts. 

The parliamentary inquiry is examining whether sections 18C and 18D imposed 
unreasonable restrictions on free speech, and whether the complaints-handling 
procedures of the commission should be reformed.

The hedged terms of reference follow a fault line within the government. A 
number of MPs, including the Sydney Liberals Julian Leeser and Jason Falinski, 
and the Victorian Liberal MP Russell Broadbent, have argued that complaints 
about the commission and 18C can be fixed with a procedural change, not a 
rewrite of a legal provision.

But a number of other government MPs, including the large group of Coalition 
senatorswho signed on to the Liberal senator Cory Bernardi’s private member’s 
bill earlier in the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/cory-bernardis-racial-discrimination-revolt-supported-by-up-to-20-senators>
, believed the words “insult” and “offend” should be removed from 18C.


Section 18C says 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18c.html> it is 
unlawful for a person to do an act in public which is “reasonably likely, in 
all the circumstances to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate” another 
person or a group of people.Section 18D makes 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18d.html> 
exceptions for artistic works, discussions, debates, event reports in the 
public interest and fair comment if it was in “expression of a genuine belief” 
held by the person making the comment.

The Liberal senator Dean Smith, who is on the parliamentary human rights 
committee,had lobbied for a more broad-ranging parliamentary inquiry into curbs 
on free speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/28/broaden-free-speech-debate-beyond-racial-discrimination-act-says-liberal-senator>
, not just the 18C and 18D restrictions.

The terms of reference refer to a wide-ranging report from the Australian Law 
Reform Commission 
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/publications/freedoms-alrc129-summary> released this 
year which examined the encroachment of commonwealth laws on free speech.

The terms of reference point to chapter four of the ALRC inquiry, which 
canvassed freedom of public discussion and conscience, academic and artistic 
freedom, freedom of religious worship and freedom of the press.

But the Human Rights Commission wanted its own reference to undertake an 
independent inquiry into curbs on speech.

“For many years, the commission has been active in promoting freedom of speech 
including by making submissions about proposed laws that may infringe freedom 
of speech, intervening as amicus curiae in court proceedings that raise freedom 
of speech issues, and convening public forums to discuss a range of areas 
including media and internet regulation, intellectual property and defamation 
laws,” the submission said.

“The current human rights commissioner [Edward Santow] has announced that he 
plans to address these free speech issues in his term as commissioner.

“The commission would welcome a reference from the government to report on 
these issues in more detail.”
 