
Reading the business pages, it would be easy to conclude that it’s shaky times 
at Ralph Lauren, with sales down 11% in North America in the first quarter of 
2016, 8% of its workforce cut this year and 50 stores closing. There was 
somewhat of a different impression on Wednesday evening atNew York fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/new-york-fashion-week>.

Lauren still has the clout to close a block of the Upper East Side’s Madison 
Avenue to stage not one but two fashion shows in a temporary structure erected 
outside the brand’s flagship store.

The concept behind the show was equally confident. With See Now Buy Now in 
full effect in New York, the game is to see how it can do it bigger, better and 
bolder. At Lauren’s show, everything seen could be bought immediately. The 
designer’s show notes on the seats elaborated: “Today I am proud to share with 
you, for the first time ever, my new women’s collection right off the runway 
and into your lives.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fralph-lauren-goes-for-cowboy-chic-in-a-traffic-stopping-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1224dd1d2b3364e679e4ef00a60fdd11dc07b9fb%2F0_0_3056_4563%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ralph%20Lauren%20goes%20for%20cowboy%20chic%20in%20a%20traffic-stopping%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fralph-lauren-goes-for-cowboy-chic-in-a-traffic-stopping-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ralph%20Lauren%20goes%20for%20cowboy%20chic%20in%20a%20traffic-stopping%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fralph-lauren-goes-for-cowboy-chic-in-a-traffic-stopping-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1224dd1d2b3364e679e4ef00a60fdd11dc07b9fb%2F0_0_3056_4563%2F3056.jpg>
 Buy it now: Native American chic at Ralph Lauren’s spring summer show. 
Photograph: Giannoni/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
Accordingly, the show began with two suited young men unlocking the store 
doors. Each model then walked out on to the catwalk. The sound of tills ringing 
was almost audible. The collection was themed around a Lauren classic - the 
American west. Most models wore Stetsons and fringing, while cowboy leathers 
and ponchos were present and correct.

It was all targeted at the women in the surrounding area. The Upper East Side 
is the heartland of the very wealthiest Lauren customer – the woman who will 
buy these clothes. She’ll be wearing dryclean-only ivory coats, intricately 
crocheted dresses and wide-legged, swishy trousers. The series of brightly 
coloured beaded gowns at the end of the show will no doubt turn up at New 
York’s autumn schedule of galas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fralph-lauren-goes-for-cowboy-chic-in-a-traffic-stopping-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f03be365b285ae6c5fd34592028b580016b21bf%2F0_68_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ralph%20Lauren%20goes%20for%20cowboy%20chic%20in%20a%20traffic-stopping%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fralph-lauren-goes-for-cowboy-chic-in-a-traffic-stopping-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ralph%20Lauren%20goes%20for%20cowboy%20chic%20in%20a%20traffic-stopping%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fralph-lauren-goes-for-cowboy-chic-in-a-traffic-stopping-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f03be365b285ae6c5fd34592028b580016b21bf%2F0_68_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Kendall Jenner at the Ralph Lauren spring summer show. Photograph: Andrew 
Kelly/Reuters 
Lauren, now 76, has a lot of good will in his native city. Each look here was 
greeted with cheers from the audience, and his post-show bow prompted a 
standing ovation, complete with the flash of camera phones. The designer is 
approaching national treasure status. Lauren stepped down as chief executive of 
his company late in 2015 and was replaced by Stefan Larsson who previously 
worked at H&M.

A 17,000 sq ft Polo Ralph Lauren store opens today on Regent Street in London, 
and the brand outfitted Team USA for the Rio Olympics this June.

Financially, perhaps, not everything looks so positive for Ralph Lauren, but 
Wednesday’s show adds further proof that things might be looking up for the 
brand on the eve of its 50th anniversary. It’s not everyone who can bring a 
city block to a standstill, after all.
 