
The Kentucky senator and one-time Republican presidential candidate Rand Paul 
<https://twitter.com/RandPaul> staged his annual Festivus “airing of 
grievances” on Friday, releasing a storm of tweets critical of government waste 
and other Republicans, in tribute to the sitcom Seinfeld.

'Let it be an arms race': Trump appears to double down on nuclear expansion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race>
Paul began with an explanation of the event, which takes its name from a 
holiday celebrated as an alternative to Christmas by the character Frank 
Costanza. “The airing of grievances” is one of the traditions of Festivus.

“On the media & #fakenews <https://twitter.com/hashtag/fakenews?src=hash>,” 
Paul wrote, “Festivus is real, media, so don’t try 2 fact check it.”

In reference to a recently suspended and rehabilitated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/22/brian-williams-returns-pope-francis-visit>
 NBC News anchor, he added: “And@TheOnion <https://twitter.com/TheOnion> is 
more accurate than a Brian Williams report.”

“New administration is lookin [sic] good,” he continued. “Haven’t seen this 
many billionaires in 1 place since I staked out Bilderbergs w/ [conspiracy 
theorist and Trump supporter] Alex Jones. Good times.”

Subsequent tweets were critical of the tech billionaire Peter Thiel 
<https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812317882684153857>, who shares some of 
Paul’s libertarian views but who has been supportive of Donald Trump, and 
potential Trump appointments.

Of the George W Bush-era UN ambassador and noted foreign intervention hawk 
John Bolton, much to Paul’s dismay touted as a possible undersecretary of 
state, the senator wrote: “I know I’ve said a lot about@AmbJohnBolton 
<https://twitter.com/AmbJohnBolton> so you’re probably expecting me 2 say 
something nice for the holidays. Nope.#AiringofGrievances 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AiringofGrievances?src=hash>.”

Of Rick Perry, who famously failed to name the Department of Energy as one he 
would abolish but who has now beennominated to lead it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/rick-perry-wind-power-energy-secretary-trump-administration>
, Paul wrote: “My favorite cabinet pick is what’s his name, umm it’s that guy 
who wanted to eliminate the Dept of@ENERGY <https://twitter.com/ENERGY>. Hang 
on I’ll think of it...”

Lest proceedings become too riotous, Paul proceeded to aim a barrage of tweets 
at what he alleged to be examples of federal government profligacy with 
taxpayers’ dollars.

Such targets included a state department grant to develop a Pakistani superhero
 <https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812359825044672512>, a study of Ugandan 
gambling practices <https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812358595811639296>, 
and a National Parks Servicestudy 
<https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812357045366226944> of “Knowledge, 
Experience and Beliefs of the Supernatural Environment”. The last tweet came 
complete witha cat gif <https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812357045366226944>.
Senator Rand Paul (@RandPaul) 
The national Park Service announced a grant 2 study “Knowledge, Experience and 
Beliefs of the Supernatural Environment.”#AiringofGrievances 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AiringofGrievances?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/8XVRwhdKe3 <https://t.co/8XVRwhdKe3>
 <https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812357045366226944> December 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812357045366226944> 
With what may have been a nod to another Costanza family tradition, the trials 
of strength, Paul also promised tweets about “nonbinding resolutions against my 
Senate colleagues”.

Rand Paul celebrates Festivus with 'airing of grievances' against 2016 rivals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/23/rand-paul-festivus-airing-of-grievances-republicans-2015>
Subsequent targets included Tea Party Republicans Mike Lee and Ted Cruz, the 
New Jersey Democrat Corey Booker, and the retiring Democratic minority leader,
Harry Reid of Nevada <https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812378196117168133>.

He also took a balanced shot at a favourite bugbear of Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> and Trump himself, the 
supposed failure of liberal Americans to accord the proper respect to Christmas.

“I’m gonna have to stop tweeting about Festivus soon, @FoxNews 
<https://twitter.com/FoxNews> just asked me to come on & talk about my own 
personal#WaronChristmas <https://twitter.com/hashtag/WaronChristmas?src=hash>. 
Rude.

“For the folks at @MSNBC <https://twitter.com/MSNBC>, that was a joke.”

Lest anyone grow too excited, the senator also had a message for members of 
the press looking for something to write about on the last Friday afternoon 
before Christmas.

“For those of you ‘media’ writing serious stories about my Festivus jokes,” he 
wrote <https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/812371593095680000>, “I don’t even 
know what to say, just stop...”
 