
With more than half of all Africans expected to live in cities by 2050, can 
rapid urbanisation act as a catalyst for development and growth? The latest
African Economic Outlook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/07/africa-urbanisation-megatrend-needs-to-deliver-growth-says-report>
 says it is possible, but only if authorities prioritise inclusive growth, 
jobs, better housing and social safety nets, and improve links with rural 
areas. “To seize this ‘urbanisation dividend’, a number of bold policy reforms 
are necessary,” the report says.


Conflict and terrorism cost the global economy $13.6tn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/08/conflict-and-terrorism-cost-the-world-trillions-says-global-peace-index>
 (£9.3tn) last year, according to theglobal peace index 
<http://www.visionofhumanity.org/>. It rated Syria as the least peaceful 
county, followed by South Sudan and Iraq. Iceland, Denmark, Austria and New 
Zealand were among the world’s most peaceful countries.

Elsewhere on the site

Mafia at a crossroads as Nigerian gangsters hit Sicily’s shores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/11/mafia-palermo-nigerian-gangsters-hit-sicily-shores>


Jordan’s first self-defence centre for women boosts fight for rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/10/jordan-first-self-defence-centre-women-fight-for-rights>

Experts sound alarm over mental health toll borne by migrants and refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/08/experts-sound-alarm-mental-health-toll-migrants-refugees-depression-anxiety-psychosis>


‘Free, local and special’: argan oil co-ops booming in Morocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/07/free-local-and-special-argan-oil-co-ops-booming-in-morocco>

Indonesia’s forest fires threaten Sumatra’s few remaining Orang Rimba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/07/indonesia-forest-fires-threaten-sumatras-few-remaining-orang-rimba>


The lonely struggle of India’s anti-nuclear protesters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/06/lonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai>

Opinion

Inequality is the biggest obstacle to eradicating Aids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/09/hiv-rates-eradicating-aids-inequality-social-stigma>
, says Lilianne Ploumen, Dutch minister for foreign trade and development 
cooperation. Despite innovations in diagnosing and treating HIV and Aids, last 
year, 19.7 million people living with HIV were not receiving antiretroviral 
treatment. Ploumen says social, cultural, economic and gender-based inequality 
is to blame.

The UN has failed to prevent the bombing of schools and hospitals in Yemen, by 
removing Saudi Arabia from a blacklist of those violating children’s rights,
writes Rob Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/08/saudi-arabia-has-been-given-a-free-pass-to-bomb-schools-and-hospitals-in-yemen>
, CEO of War Child UK. “The UN appears to be acting as a club for the rich and 
powerful, pointing the finger at rebel groups and obscure militia but covering 
up for the violations committed by its member states,” Williams says.

And what can Africa learn from China’s economic boom? Allow elites to have a 
stake in development and poverty reduction,argues Jonathan Glennie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/09/cut-poverty-africa-china-economic-boom-self-interest-development>
.

Multimedia

Globally there are 168 million child workers. Take a look at some of the 
everyday items 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/jun/12/world-day-against-child-labour-nice-cup-of-tea-products-may-be-linked-child-labour-in-pictures>
 that may involve child labour in their production, from smartphones to 
cigarettes.

Myanmar’s Chin state is experiencing an exodus as young women migrate to 
countries including Saudi Arabia and Singapore to work and send money home to 
their families. But many become trapped in exploitative work conditions and are 
unable to return.Watch their story. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/jun/06/lost-girls-of-myanmar-chin-state-women-migrate-video>

What you said

On the growing threat to activists and indigenous people defending the 
environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/05/world-environment-day-protecting-activists-human-rights-issue>
,DogsLivesMatter wrote:

The activists who are out doing the dangerous work are the true heroes. All 
activists and aid workers should be protected by their respective governments. 
It’s a sad state of affairs that corporations are given carte blanche to ride 
roughshod over the environment and those risking their lives to protect the 
environment.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Do middle-income countries really get more aid than low-income countries? Owen 
Barder, writing on the blog Owen Abroad, investigates 
<http://www.owen.org/blog/8585>.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 