
The actor, writer and producer Rashida Jones 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0429069/> suggested we meet at a private members' 
club near her home in West Hollywood, which seemed like a fine idea at the 
time. But, as I wait for her, I worry that there must be a dress code that 
I didn't know about, because every single woman but me is wearing skinny 
designer jeans, metallic heels, a sexy top, a full face of makeup and an 
enormous designer handbag, at 3pm on a sunny Saturday. After a few long minutes 
in which I shift self-consciously around in my floral cotton dress, Jones comes 
clattering towards me, barefaced and dressed, in her words, "like a mime": in 
flats, wide-legged cropped black trousers and a Breton top. She looks – and I 
mean this in the non-infantilising sense – adorable. She also looks a little 
out of place here, but her reason for suggesting the venue becomes quickly 
apparent.

"They have the best chocolate chip cookies," she says, ordering a plateful as 
soon as she sits down.

I tell her I was worried the club had a dress code. "Oh God, that whole LA 
Barbie doll look, right?" she says. "It's weird that everybody wants to look 
like everyone else. I love what you can do with fashion, but that look is just 
not my nature. I like conservative dressing. I don't like to dress to tell 
people that they want to have sex with me."

While I was waiting for her, I say, men kept approaching the two women sitting 
near us, who are wearing extremely sexy versions of this LA uniform, and one 
chat-up line was, "Can I just charge my iPhone here?"

"Yeah, more like, 'Can I just charge my penis over here?'" Jones cackles.

In Los Angeles, most celebrity offspring ride a merry-go-round of reality TV, 
sex tapes, rehab and mug shots, but Jones, 37, the daughter of musicianQuincy 
Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/music/quincy-jones> and actor Peggy Lipton 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005152/>, has done things a little differently. A 
Harvard graduate (religion and philosophy) who once planned on being a judge or 
the president, she is most famous as a comedic actor, particularly for her role 
as Ann Perkins inParks And Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/mar/06/parks-and-recreation-meet-characters>
. Made by the same team that brought The Office to America, it bears a 
resemblance to its predecessor, only with a more female focus; the show also 
stars the brilliantAmy Poehler <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0688132/>.

Before Parks And Recreation, Jones spent years appearing on TV shows such as 
Freaks And Geeks <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0193676/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_46> and 
Boston Public <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0247081/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_44>; more 
recently, there have been feature films –I Love You, Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128965/i-love-you-man> with Paul Rudd, 
andThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137709/social-network>. Whatever 
the role, Jones brings both sweetness and realism, with a touch of goofiness 
(she is especially good at heartbreak), and manages to rise above the, to put 
it bluntly, somewhat generic roles into which she has been pushed. In the 
decidedly bro-centricI Love You, Man <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1155056/>, 
she played Rudd's fiancee, a woman who doesn't understand his close male 
friendship with Sidney (Jason Segel <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0781981/>). But 
instead of simply playing the nagging girlfriend, Jones made the character 
sympathetic, conveying her understandable bafflement at why her fiance would 
discuss their oral sex habits with his new friend. Her most recent role, in the 
salsa dancing British romcomCuban Fury 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2390237/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_2> (she plays Nick Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nick-frost>'s love interest), doesn't 
really do her justice. But she talks excitedly about how much she loved the 
classic British TV showSpaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/oct/30/spaced-your-next-box-set>
, in which Frost appeared. "I'm obsessed with Nick Frost – he's so dreamy," she 
says, and then adds, less controversially, "I also wanted to learn how 
to salsa."
 Rashida wears jacket, £2,075, and top, from a selection, both barbarabui.com 
<http://barbarabui.com>. Skirt, £193, camillaandmarc.com 
<http://camillaandmarc.com>. Right: coat, £2,480, skirt, £550, and top, £495, 
allmiumiu.com <http://miumiu.com>. Styling: Wyman Chang. Hair: Conrad Dornan at 
Art Dept. Makeup: Jamie Greenberg at the Wall Group. Photograph: Philip Gay for 
the Guardian 
"Weird, right? A Hollywood kid who doesn't seem like a total asshole?" the 
feminist websiteJezebel <http://jezebel.com/> wrote about Jones last year. And 
it's true. She has all the credentials to be a total cliche – she even went to 
the same school asParis Hilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/paris-hilton> and the Kardashians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> – yet she's 
thoughtful, unselfconscious and funny. I have interviewed some of those 
"Hollywood kids". One – so thin I could nearly see through her – binge-ate 
throughout the interview; another informed me that he "refused to be 
interviewed by the work-experience girl" (I was 27). Jones, by contrast, 
extends our time together twice over and sends me off with a box of cookies.

Did she consciously react against the brat cliche?

"It was never a reaction, really. I'm obsessed with the nature/nurture 
argument, and the older I get, I think nature is paramount to everything. I am 
who I am, and I wanted to go to Harvard when I was four years old, and I still 
wanted to go when I was 18, and so I went. I was never going to be like, 'You 
know what my last name is, right?'"

As a teenager, she says, she was "a chubby nerd. Nobody was trying to have sex 
with me, so I had to find other things, like reading and being good at school."

Your identity as a teenager shapes you for ever, I say.

"That is so it. Every time I look at a photo of myself as a teenager, I think, 
this is who I feel like." She shows me a photo she keeps on her phone of an 
overweight, solemn-faced girl who looks vaguely likeRashida Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/rashida-jones>. "There I am. So 
uncomfortable, so sad, so much food… On family vacations, I used to wake up 
before everyone else and make a sourdough bread sandwich with butter, eggs, 
bacon and cheese, and then go back to bed and, like, one hour later be, 'So 
what's for breakfast?'" She laughs. "So sad."

With parents like hers, I say, it must have been awful being a chubby nerd. 
Her father was producing Michael Jackson's Off The Wall and Thriller albums 
when Rashida was a child; her mother was a famous beauty, now best known as the 
blonde who runs the Double R Diner in Twin Peaks. "I definitely felt different 
as a kid. But my parents are hippies in the right way, in that they supported 
anything I was interested in. So when I would talk about being interested in 
the law as a kid, they would be like, 'That's so cute! She has her own thing!' 
The big twist in events is that, after college, I realised I wanted to be an 
actor, because that wasn't what I had thought I wanted from my life."
 Rashida in Parks And Recreation. Photograph: BBC/NBC 
Now Jones is stepping away from acting and, tragically for fans of Parks And 
Recreation, this means she is leaving the show in the middle of the sixth 
series.

A few years ago, she and her best friend, Will McCormack 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0566489/>, wrote the lovely and bittersweet romcom 
Celeste And Jesse Forever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/06/celeste-jesse-forever-review>, in 
which she starred alongsideAndy Samberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/sep/24/andy-samberg-cuckoo-bbc-sitcom?INTCMP=SRCH&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. The criticRoger Ebert <https://www.theguardian.com/film/roger-ebert> praised 
Jones's acting and screenplay, saying that she and McCormack "write dialogue 
and create supporting characters who don't seem like airheaded plot puppets, 
the way so many romcom characters do. There's a certain respect for their 
feelings." Now they are developing six TV shows, both comedy and drama, 
featuring different kinds of female protagonists. "We're trying to inundate the 
market with women characters and create choices based on quality and not on 
stereotypes," Jones says.

It feels redundant to ask, but has she struggled to find interesting roles? 
She nods emphatically. "I realised I was in this small space with all these 
super-talented women vying for one part in one movie, and it was always the 
shitty part in that year's one good movie: someone's wife, or someone's shrew 
girlfriend. So that has definitely played a part in my decision to act a little 
less and create a little more, because I want to add more to that conversation 
about what it takes to be a woman."

She has already started doing just that. She has tended to be cast as bland 
and inoffensive, but in Celeste And Jesse Forever she created for herself, if 
not an unlikable character, then certainly a complicated one: a woman who 
suddenly realises she doesn't know what she wants from life and lashes out at 
those she loves most.

I tell her that one of my favourite things about Parks And Recreation is the 
friendship between Jones's character, Ann, andAmy Poehler 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0688132/>'s character, Leslie. It's a rare 
depiction of female friendship that isn't predicated on the two women talking 
about men, or fighting and then making up. "It was really important to Amy that 
it be like that, and I think it helped that we were friends before, so there's 
a lot of us in Ann and Leslie."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuRZ9sogFHE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuRZ9sogFHE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuRZ9sogFHE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Jones is still close to her girlfriends from school, but she also has a tight, 
supportive group of female friends in the industry. Whereas other Hollywood 
kids tend to stick together, Jones branched out to find a more interesting set 
of smart female comedians, many ex-Saturday Night Live performers, including 
Poehler and Tina Fey. If in her 20s she wanted to hang out with "the cool 
crowd, because I wanted to be cool, now I look for people with good hearts". 
When the legendary 80s film-makerJohn Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-hughes> died in 2009, Jones spent the 
day swapping favourite quotes from Hughes's films with Poehler,Tina Fey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tina-fey> and actor Maya Rudolph 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0748973/>, in what sounds like the best email 
chain ever. "I definitely like women in comedy," she says, "but I feel a little 
on the outside because I generally play the straight guy. So I'm just like a 
fan with them."

Last year, Jones wrote an article for Glamour magazine 
<http://www.glamour.com/entertainment/2013/12/rashida-jones-major-dont-the-pornification-of-everything>
, despairing about the pornification of pop culture. "Stripper poles, 
G-strings, boobs and a lot of tongue action [are] all now normal accessories 
for mainstream pop stars," she wrote. She also addressed the accusation that 
she was "slut-shaming" by criticising women's overly sexualised clothes: "I 
consider myself a feminist… There is a difference, a key one, between 
shaming and holding someone accountable."

"I'm just asking people to take a breath and talk about it," she tells me now. 
"I also wanted to say there's more than one way to be a woman and be sexy – 
like, you're a really great dancer, or you're really fucking smart."

She recently signed a deal to write a monthly relationships column for 
Glamour. "I'm totally obsessed with relationships, female friendships, romantic 
relationships, all of it. It just fascinates me, thinking about what works, 
what doesn't. I'm single, you know, so how does that make me different from my 
friends with kids? Do I want kids?" she says.

Jones has had several long-term relationships, including with Tobey Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tobey-maguire> and DJ Mark Ronson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mark-ronson>. Did she have an idealised 
image about relationships when she was younger? "I had the full princess 
fantasy: the white horse, the whole being saved from my life, which is 
ridiculous. What do I want to be saved from? My life's great! But it's just 
this weird thing that's been hammered into my head culturally: that's the only 
way to succeed, that's the only thing that counts for a woman. I'm happy, but 
the fact that I'm not married and don't have kids – it's taken me a long time 
to get to a place where I actually am OK with that, where I actually don't feel 
like I'm some sort of loser."

When it was announced that Jones would be writing a relationships column, 
Jezebel – the blog that had praised her just months before – sneered, "I'd 
rather someone in a successful relationship tell me about relationships", 
apparently oblivious to the irony of a self-styled feminist website criticising 
a woman for being single.

"I saw that, and I'm old enough to say, just fuck off," she says, her eyebrows 
diving down at the memory. "But to suggest that the way to be a feminist is to 
snark about other women is such a dangerous example to set."
 Rashida with her father, Quincy Jones. Photograph: Corbis 
Jones was born in 1976, the second daughter of a black man and a white Jewish 
woman, who married in 1974 when mixed-race couples were a definite anomaly, 
certainly in the US; they divorced when Rashida was 10. In a 1993 interview, 
the lateTupac Shakur <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2pac> attacked Quincy 
Jones for having children with a white woman. Rashida, then only 17, wrote 
a furious letter to the magazine. She reels in embarrassment when I mention 
this. "Oh God, I can be self-righteous to a fault, but I think it says a lot 
about my parents that I felt able to speak up like that, you know."

The twist to this tale is that a few years later, Shakur met Jones's older 
sister Kidada, and apologised for what he had said. The pair later got engaged. 
"That was a nice full circle, and it was a good lesson for me, because I knew 
in my heart of hearts that I'd never forgive anyone for talking like that about 
my family, and I was wrong."

It has taken Jones some time, but she has reached a point where she can talk 
proudly about her parents' achievements without worrying about people thinking 
she owes her career to them.

"I would never say 'poor me', but there definitely was a lot of pre-judgment 
about how I got my job in the beginning, when the truth is I was just another 
actress getting knocked back at auditions for years. I do have a hang-up about 
it sometimes," she says, and then changes her mind. "No, I just don't care any 
more." These days she is just happy no longer "having to fight for the shitty 
role. I feel things are changing, and there are real female comedy stars now – 
and that's exciting, isn't it?" she says, eating her last cookie, a mime among 
Barbie dolls.
 