
Two forces are sending shockwaves through the world of storytelling. The first 
is that digital technology now offers creative artists myriad platforms to tell 
their stories in new ways. “We are using code as the canvas,” says Charles 
Melcher, book publisher and founder of the inauguralFuture of Storytelling 
festival <https://futureofstorytelling.org/>. In other words, whatever you can 
dream up, today’s advanced software capabilities can make it happen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fvirtual-reality-future-of-storytelling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e465809c904af47f5ba454a8f8413e8c8e71cd2%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Read%20it%20and%20bleep%3A%20is%20virtual%20reality%20the%20future%20of%20storytelling%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fvirtual-reality-future-of-storytelling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Read%20it%20and%20bleep%3A%20is%20virtual%20reality%20the%20future%20of%20storytelling%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fvirtual-reality-future-of-storytelling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e465809c904af47f5ba454a8f8413e8c8e71cd2%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
 ‘Experimenting with shifts in the authorship and ownership of stories’: 
Sherlock Holmes and the Internet of Things. Photograph: Digital Storytelling Lab
At the same time, a younger, digital-savvy audience now wants to drive the 
narrative from start to finish. Lance Weiler, director of the Digital 
Storytelling Lab at Columbia University, discovered this first-hand through his 
work onSherlock Holmes and the Internet of Things 
<http://2016.sherlockholmes.io/welcome/>, an online global detective narrative 
collaboration. The Lab set up a crime scene and provided clues to solve a 
murder, but that wasn’t enough. The participants wanted to imagine the crime 
and write the clues themselves. “A new creator class is rising up,” he says. 
“And it’s challenging the authorship and ownership of stories.”

The FoST festival, which ran from 7-9 October in New York, showcased the 
extraordinary range of work emerging as a result, bringing together leading 
storytellers from the worlds of gaming, theatre, film, publishing, television 
and virtual reality (VR). In a Harlem warehouse – imagine Charlie Kaufman’s 
Synecdoche, New York meets The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus – a cornucopia 
of interactive experiences beckoned. I wandered between real and imaginary 
worlds, as if dreaming while awake – from acting a part inStar Trek: Bridge Crew
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=romB8e5nMp8>, to entering the curious and 
desolate world ofSENS VR <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KoJLZ2u_Asg>, the 
first graphic novel to get VR treatment. Participating in a collective 
immersive session in the 30-person VR theatre, I even pondered the nature of 
free will while inhabiting the mind of an android re-creation of Philip K Dick, 
in the 360-filmI, Philip <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rwNVKDOniQU>.


Samsung thinks the 'future of children's bedtime' is virtual reality stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/29/samsung-thinks-the-future-of-childrens-bedtime-is-virtual-reality-stories>
The experiences that most captured my imagination were those that brought me 
into the world of the characters and allowed me to influence the story. We say 
we “enter the minds of characters” when we read books, but role-playing in 
immersive worlds, such as VR narratives or theatre, takes that sense of 
immediacy to a whole other level: the narrative feels like something you 
actually experience. Speaking at the FoST Festival, Beau Lotto, neuroscientist 
atRipple <https://ripple.com/>, Lab of Misfits <http://www.labofmisfits.com/> 
and development studio The Chinese Room, explains the satisfaction of being in 
the driver’s shoes as “the Ikea effect”. “If you put effort into something, you 
perceive a higher value.” Felix Barrett, artistic director at Punchdrunk 
theatre company that makes the immersive showSleep No More 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/31/sleep-no-more-avant-garde-theatre-new-york>
, agrees; as immersive narrative VR experiences become more commonplace, 
theatrical experience is becoming more about audience empowerment: “They own 
their night … it’s their narrative.”

 A still from Sleep No More. Photograph: Punchdrunk 
Creating a feeling of agency is no simple task, and today’s narrative 
architects employ sophisticated game mechanics and crafty tricks to make 
decision-making feel fluid and natural for the user. “Too much agency and the 
story won’t have a good arc,” says Barrett. Audiences can choose their route 
and tempo, but there are anchor points and the finale must deliver: “There is 
the illusion of agency, but they are on rails.” This nuanced approach suggests 
we are entering a sophisticated new era in which the exchange between author 
and participant creates a better outcome for both, leaving questionable 
author-fan collaborations of the past behind.

Pixar co-founder warns virtual-reality moviemakers: 'It's not storytelling'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/03/pixar-virtual-reality-storytelling-ed-catmull>
To be successful in this emerging genre, storytellers, especially those moving 
from traditional roles in publishing, television and film, will need to adapt, 
in particular by learning new methods of collaborating with users and the new 
languages of VR technologies. Dan Pinchbeck, creative director at The Chinese 
Room, points out that already in the gaming industry there is no single writer 
churning out a plot; what is most important is the focus on developing complex 
characters, as that offers greater possibilities in a branching, emergent 
narrative. InEverybody’s Gone to the Rapture 
<http://www.thechineseroom.co.uk/games/everybodys-gone-to-the-rapture/>, a game 
about the end of the world, the writers focused on creating compelling 
characters. The end of the world became the least interesting thing about it; 
what mattered was how the characters dealt with it.

At Apelab, a studio currently working on Sequenced 
<http://apelab.ch/sequenced/> – an episodic adventure where the story adapts in 
real time depending on where you look and focus – they begin with paper, 
pencils and role-playing. Apelab’s founder, Emilie Joly, says that very early 
on in the creative process they thought about interactivity and how the 
narrative was going to be directed by the user, as well as where the user was 
going to be in space. Early experience testing is also important. While working 
onInvasion <http://www.baobabstudios.com/>!, an immersive VR short film, the 
team at Baobab Studios did a lot of early prototype testing. Decisions 
including bringing a spaceship in above the user, with only the sound behind, 
didn’t have the desired effect. But once a key character – a cute big-eyed 
bunny – looked up at the spaceship, 99% of the audience turned around. It has 
never been more important to understand how audiences experience and react to 
the interactive world you are trying to create. As Kane Lee, head of content at 
Baobab Studios, says: “It’s about letting go of your ego … letting the user 
help you navigate.”


Virtual reality needs real writers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/feb/23/video-games-writers-novelists>
As exciting as it is to work with diverse technologies and audiences in new 
ways, almost everyone speaking at FoST festival agreed that the story should 
always come first, then the technology. “Stories can have many different 
platforms to live in, but it’s important to figure out which is the right 
medium for the story,” said Melcher, who decided tomove to the storytelling 
business 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/nyregion/storytelling-in-the-virtual-age-at-fost-fest.html>
 when his book publishing enterprise stalled. At the end of the day, agrees 
David Eisenman, producer of Google Spotlight Stories, his main priority is to 
work with great storytellers and collaborators. As content creators 
increasingly cede control, the need for expert storytellers has never been 
greater.

Three digital experiences to look out for


Late Shift
Watching the Late Shift <http://lateshift-movie.com> teaser at FoST festival, 
I joined an audience of people collectively deciding the fate of the 
protagonist, a car park attendant whose night gets interesting when he’s 
coerced, at gun point, into helping a dubious character escape in a stolen car. 
With smartphones in hand, the majority vote decides the character’s fate, while 
the film keeps running seamlessly. I’m surprised to find that my choices are 
often in the majority, pushing the protagonist into greater and greater peril. 
Should I admit that my enjoyment rises as his situation deteriorates? It isn’t 
hard to imagine, as the full feature story progresses, that the stakes will be 
raised with every new decision, and, concomitant with my role in influencing 
the outcome, my investment in the story.

The Abbot’s Book
When it comes to the best way to experience a 3D or 4D narrative, many 
storytellers are gravitating towards the first person perspective. For the team 
at Blackthorn Media working onThe Abbot’s Book 
<http://store.steampowered.com/app/434430/>, featured at the Sundance film 
festival’s New Frontier program this year, the whole reason to do VR came into 
focus when they put the user into the protagonist’s shoes. “The most 
forward-looking way, the best way to jump into this world, was to literally put 
on a second skin and be different characters in the story,” says Michael 
Conelly, creative director at the LA-based VR start-up. The Abbot’s Book is an 
immersive VR narrative series based on a gothic novella by the same name, 
written by Conelly in 1989. I demoed it with the handheld controllers of the 
HTC Vive in their LA offices and was as enthralled by the mysterious magic of 
the world as I was by my mission: to explore the ancient catacombs below the 
ruins of an 18th-century abbey and uncover the horror of the ancient pagan 
religion contained within.

1979 Revolution: Black Friday
In this choice-driven narrative game set in Tehran, and based on true stories 
and historical events, you are thrown into the turmoil of a real-life 
revolution and must make vital choices in the fight to survive. Playing Reza, 
an aspiring photojournalist during an uprising against the ruling king, the 
user’s choices subtly shape the narrative and the fates of characters around 
them. I demoed a six-minute section ofthe game 
<http://inkstories.com/1979revolutiongame/#quotesandtrailer> on an iPad at the 
FoST festival and was immediately drawn in by the realistic characters, 
beautiful CGI graphics and documentary-style narrative.With 19 chapters to 
explore <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_50OJ1uuGoc>, new storytelling forms 
like this can be vital – bringing diverse stories about the world to new 
audiences and allowing us the rare opportunity to experience life through 
someone else’s eyes.
 