
Here is this week’s playlist – songs picked by a reader from your suggestions 
afterlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/15/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-nightmares>
. Thanks for them all. Read more about how our weekly Readers Recommend series 
works at the end of the piece.

We’ll begin with the comment that set the nominations off – a note on the year 
and how in tune we thought the theme to be this December ...

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3465060> Guardian contributor 
sonofwebcore  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3465060> 15 December 
2016 8:09pm <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89544822> 
2016; the nightmare before Christmas. We're looking for real nightmares, but 
metaphorical ones will be equally considered. Fill yer boots, folks.

And we start the playlist with Symphonie Fantastique 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cao6WyF-61s> (Fifth Movement – Dream of the 
Night of the Sabbath) byHector Berlioz. Picture the scene: it is the sabbath. 
No, not that one, the witches’. All the scary ones are there. In comes a street 
drinker – in a charity-shop suit. He picks up the conductor’s baton and does a 
Boris Yeltsin on them. It didn’t turn out too bad, though. Somewhat psychedelic 
for the 19th century, but then the composer wasa noted opium user 
<http://mikejay.net/opium-and-the-symphonie-fantastique/>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyRCt34qNJODtHfQdwwIrGrZ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyRCt34qNJODtHfQdwwIrGrZ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyRCt34qNJODtHfQdwwIrGrZ&media=>
 The YouTube playlist. 
Next, a song with something compelling about it. Randy Newman’s Last Night I 
Had a Dream <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fPIVZo6QpBg> doesn’t sound like a 
construction, more like a genuine dream, with vampires and ghosts … And there’s 
no hint of the gender of the addressee, apart from the fact that at one point 
the person is lying on the ground, and nobody knows what the other’s name is. 
Newman admits to being scared, but still insists, “You know what my name is.”

Now we have Joy Division with Dead Souls 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yGs0g2m2Mxc>. Now that is scary stuff. It’s 
probably best not to speculate on Ian Curtis’s state of mind when he wrote the 
lyrics, but we have to acknowledge that this gifted young fellow was also 
burdened with epilepsy and depression. His suicide at 23 was the epitome of 
tragedy. Purely as an afterthought, Peter Hook’s bass playing on this track is 
up there with the very best.

Peter Green, who is thankfully a still-playing survivor, was at a very low ebb 
when he had a perhaps LSD-induced visitation; a green, long-dead dog came to 
him in a dream, apparently. He knew that the dog represented money, and that he 
had to get shot of the lucre by giving all ofFleetwood Mac’s money to charity. 
There, the worst of his troubles began.The Green Manalishi 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kTvKaLW5bu8> was one of the last recordings he 
made with his band.

Eminem’s 3 am <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hAuo8IOFNuE> is a tough one. 
It’s certainly a nightmare, but there are more words than you can shake a stick 
at, which isn’t a crime. One could pick a random verse and elucidate on it, but 
it wouldn’t sum up the entire song. Basically, Eminem has woken up surrounded 
by mutilated bodies. There’s claret everywhere, and he’s perfectly prepared to 
accept that he’s topped the lot of them – in his sleep.

In Cam’s Burning House <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uyGSe76rAJc>, the 
boxer dreams that his punches don’t land, they are slow like the tide at slack 
water. The footballer dreams that he can’t find his boots while the match 
carries on without him. The musician dreams that he can’t find his instrument, 
or the strings are broken, or the reed is useless, yet the band plays on 
regardless. Cam wants to rescue her man. It’s a real dream. There are some 
people you would kill for, and some you would die for, and they all turn up in 
the middle of the night.

One man’s fantasy is another man’s nightmare. The Living Colour singer seems 
to think that marriage will be the death of him inLove Rears Its Ugly Head 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQcPB1WkISI>, and then wakes up. I dunno ... 
On the one hand you get stability, friendship, closeness, harmony and a loving 
future; on the other you get possessed, dominated, martialled and trodden on. 
Never did me any harm.

The lyrics are tricky here so I’m not sure exactly what Dogbowl’s I Had a 
Dream of the Plague <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6459Pkj8Pow> about, but 
the title takes us thereabouts. It makes my playlist because I liked the music, 
and its 1989 video; two flabby fellas hammering out a two-chord masterpiece.

Languid yet insistent; dreamy yet punchy. In Suspended 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yYZV9jv0Dp8> by Kelis, the dreamer doesn’t 
want to awaken. Dreams are her refuge, and reality her nightmare. But in this 
dream dimension, space and time are suspended, and only her spirit is free.


With this next song, Monsters Under the Bed 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lb1YMQYqcd0>, Eugene McGuinness nails what 
it’s like to be a child in a dark bedroom. I used to get wolves. Their claws 
clicking on the lino. I’d lie awake listening to them padding around the bed, 
then crawling beneath it, waiting for me to dangle a naked foot over the edge 
of the mattress …

Finally, in Nick Garrie’s The Nightmare of J.B. Stanislas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L9jLqsd9PQ4>, we have a chap who knows his 
name but not much else. He’s met a nice lady, but things don’t really seem to 
be happening for him. It’s a lovely jaunty tune, but it seems to be masking a 
deeper malaise. There’s self-doubt in there, and a lack of confidence. It’s 
admirable that he can put a brave face on things, but dreams, in their own 
strange logic, always tell us the truth about ourselves.

Next theme: how to join in

Readers Recommend takes a break for Christmas, but will be back with a new 
theme at 8pm (GMT) on Thursday 29 December.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>. 


 