
We had readers recommend songs about dreams back in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/readersrecommend/story/0,,1841621,00.html> 
but, in the words of this week’s guru, who will select the new, darker list, 
they were “all a bit nicey-nicey”.

Readers recommend playlist: your songs about finishing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/15/readers-recommend-playlist-your-songs-about-finishing>
You have until 11pm on Monday 19 December to post your nomination and make 
your justification. RR contributorGeorge Boyland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/george-boyland> (who posts as sonofwebcore 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3465060> in the comments) will select 
from your recommendations and produce the playlist, to be published on 22 
December.

Here is a list of all songs previously picked 
<http://www.rrindex.com/azsong.htm> and therefore ineligible for the series.

If you want to volunteer to compile a playlist from readers’ suggestions – and 
potentially blog about the process/selection for the Guardian – please email 
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com with the subject line “RR guru”, or make 
yourself known in the comments.

Here’s a reminder of the guidelines for RR:

 * Tell us why it’s a worthy contender. 
 * Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of 
a song’s words. If sharing links, make sure there is appropriate copyright 
permission.

 * Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist. 
 * If you have a good theme <http://www.rrindex.com/aztopic.htm>, or if you’d 
like to volunteer to compile a playlist from readers’ suggestions, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com> 
 * There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>. It also tells you the 
meaning of “zedded” (picked for a previous playlist so ineligible), “donds” and 
other strange words used by RR regulars. 
 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  