
Below is this week’s playlist – picked by a reader from the comments on last 
week’s blog, whichsought songs with titles including girls’ names 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/31/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-with-girls-names#comment-71608486>
. Thanks for your suggestions. Read more about the weekly format of the Readers 
recommend series at the end of the piece.

Our emotionally charged story this week is one of femmes fatales, loves won 
and lost, infidelity, betrayal and tragedy. Many characters feature, all with a 
story to tell.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQfnIpuXgC_0I7ng8zJxxSC&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQfnIpuXgC_0I7ng8zJxxSC>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQfnIpuXgC_0I7ng8zJxxSC&media=>
 The YouTube playlist.Click here if you use Spotify 
<https://play.spotify.com/user/sarahbridges/playlist/44gPEMOFMvpHjagI8q77xD>. 
The first chapter introduces us to the femme fatale, Maggie May 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2Lc2ZWWwhA> (Rod Stewart). She’s turned her 
younger lover’s life upside down, probably intensifying his teenage angst and 
confusion. I’m sure she enjoyed herself in the process!

In chapter two we witness the aftermath of a plate-smashing, door-slamming 
argument that leavesJimi Hendrix’s Mary 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pkbzzRlhFZk&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQfnIpuXgC_0I7ng8zJxxSC&index=2>
 in The Wind Cries Mary staying the night on a friend’s sofa. Meanwhile, her 
partner is overhis irritation with her lumpy mash 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b039g8pp> and has written a song as a peace 
offering – lovely it is too.

In chapter three we find ourselves in the sweltering heat of the deep south, 
home of ice-maiden[Hard Hearted] Hannah 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kdb--NSa_kA> (Ella Fitzgerald), the vamp of 
Savannah, Georgia. Ella reliably informs us: “She’s as sweet as sour milk.” 
Steer clear, guys!

There’s more trouble in chapter four, where our hero describes the moment his 
wife catches himSneakin’ Sally Through the Alley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GynyeueaaQM> (Lee Dorsey), trying to keep her 
out of sight. His explanations hold no sway. By the end he seems to have worked 
out that “all that running around is all right until it interferes with my home 
life, something’s got to stop!” Not before time, I’d say.

Chapter five reads like an advice column. Dandy Livingstone is fond of dishing 
out tips having previously offered guidance to Rudy, he now gives Suzanne some 
wise words about watching out for the guy with the pitchfork (Suzanne Be Wise 
of the Devil <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6JVixZXRfrc>) – I suspect it fell 
on deaf ears.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1347436> suzi  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1347436> 01 April 2016 9:19pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/71675207> 
This has got to the stage where searching has become tedious...so I'll just 
say donds if already mentioned. Someone noted that most songs with girl's names 
in them are sung by men - and I'll add, that if they're sung by women they're 
often tragic. Here's one set during the time of the American Civil War, 
concerning the punishment meted out to a young single mother who'd fraternised 
with the enemy...

Mary Danced With Soldiers - Emmylou Harris and the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Rgc_QAMVKE 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Rgc_QAMVKE>

Chapter six is the low point in our tale. Tragedy strikes Mary [Danced With 
Soldiers] <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Rgc_QAMVKE> (Emmylou Harris and the 
Nitty Gritty Dirt Band), the shawl-wearing quadrille dancer, when she is set 
upon by a mob and left for dead, orphaning the son she works so hard to support.


As we gulp down our tears, let’s start the next half of our story by revelling 
in the warmth and trumpets of the song written in a cold climate,For Emma 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T0yaQ20dpWI> (Bon Iver). It should restore our 
faith in the ability to see past bad behaviour when we hear the line: “With all 
your lies, you’re still very lovable.”

Or maybe we spoke too soon, the story in chapter eight being a confession in 
epistolary form, confiding inA Letter To Elise 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-AUCSkHCrwY> (the Cure) an inability to 
maintain a pledge … She’s probably better off without him.

Like chapter five, the story in chapter nine offers up some spirited advice 
about burning homework, kicking undesirables in the nuts and heading out to 
find love; trouble is, I finish this chapter unsure whetherSheila [Take a Bow] 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q-8kKH4COvg> (the Smiths) is a girl or not. 
But who cares? I just hope she has some fun.

The betrayal in chapter 10 is absolute. Operation Julie[’s Been Working for 
the Drug Squad)] <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rPMsaxqiL5Q> (the Clash) 
busts openthe prolific Wales-based LSD production and supply ring 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-14052153>, sending those involved on their 
worst trip ever, at Her Majesty’s pleasure for long enough to count all the 
hairs on your head.

We’re nearing the end of our story, and things are beginning to sound more 
upbeat. Chapter 11 is all about rebellion and breaking the mould. OurSheena [is 
a Punk Rocker] 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zGgfHZ02I2k&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQfnIpuXgC_0I7ng8zJxxSC&index=11>
(the Ramones) just doesn’t want to conform, go surfing or head to the disco. 
New York is where it’s at.

We finish this tale with a yarn about triumph over adversity for Bruce 
Springsteen’s Rosalita (Come Out Tonight) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HC4bf67s5lQ> and her beau: “I’m comin’ to 
liberate you, confiscate you, I want to be your man.” Finally, love conquers 
all. I do like a happy ending!

New theme 

The theme for next week’s playlist will be announced at 8pm (UK time) on 
Thursday 7 April. You haveuntil 11pm on Monday 11 April to make nominations.

Next week’s playlist will be assembled by a reader who posts in the comments as
Pairubu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/10/readers-recommend-playlist-all-songs-bright-and-beautiful>
.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com> or add it
here via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/56bc5e1fe4b072fd3ded30fa>.

 * There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.



 