
This year the Guardian published the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/nauru-files>, an exposé of abuse, 
mistreatment and widespread trauma among refugees and asylum seekers in the 
Australian-run offshore immigration centre. Through more than 2,100 leaked 
incident reports, the public gained the largest insight yet into the mix of 
desperation and banality in these lives in limbo.

We were very distraught at the Nauru files, even though we were all aware that 
terrible things were happening
Sarah Keenan, International Alliance Against Mandatory Detention 
The files, written by guards, caseworkers and teachers who worked on the 
Pacific island nation, contained reports of mental trauma, self-harm, sexual 
assaults, child abuse, hunger strikes, assaults and injuries. While Australia’s 
Coalition governmentlargely dismissed the concerns raised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/11/comparing-nauru-to-guantanamo-bay-is-ridiculous-says-australian-immigration-minister>
, the series of reports prompted international condemnation and rebuke,
including from the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/13/united-nations-reiterates-demand-for-australia-to-close-dire-detention-centres>
, and sparked a parliamentary inquiry.

Among grassroots groups it inspired an unusual form of protest, as activists 
and othersread the files aloud in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/27/nauru-files-leaked-reports-read-aloud-in-10-hour-vigil-outside-australia-house-in-london>
 and several Australian cities, including Brisbane, Adelaide, Melbourne, Perth, 
Sydney, Newcastle, Hobart and Canberra. The protests, organised independently 
of the Guardian, took on their own life as groups from across advocacy, activism
and organised religion 
<http://catholicleader.com.au/news/catholics-were-reading-the-leaked-nauru-files-in-public-when-the-senate-proposed-an-inquiry-into-the-document>
 congregated outside shopping hubs and immigration department offices.

“We were all very distraught at the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nauru-files>, even though I think 
we were all aware that terrible things were happening,” says Sarah Keenan, a 
member of the International Alliance Against Mandatory Detention and a main 
organiser of the London event.

“Just taking the time to read through the incident reports day by day and 
seeing how things build up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/11/from-pleas-to-threats-to-harm-files-reveal-escalation-of-trauma-on-nauru>
. I think those of us who read them were very emotionally affected by it, so we 
wanted to do something publicly that was a bit confrontational to the 
Australian embassy but was also peaceful.”

For 10 hours at the gate of the Australian high commission in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, protesters read from beginning to end 
each of the redacted Nauru files reports. “It was a very exhausting day,” says 
Keenan.

Nauru files 'an extraordinary trove of short stories', says Richard Flanagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/sep/01/nauru-files-an-extraordinary-trove-of-short-stories-says-richard-flanagan>
The group passed out flyers informing spectators that the performance sought 
to highlight the contradiction between the “narrative of abuse” revealed in the 
files and Australia’s image as “a progressive nation and a desirable 
destination for tourists, students, highly skilled workers and international 
investors”.

“The duration, monotony and repetition entailed in the reading of each file 
echoes the normalisation of the violence and tedium endured by refugees in 
indefinite detention,” it read.

Keenan says the response was mixed but largely supportive, with many passersby 
stopping to listen.

“The only negative response I think we got was from a couple of Australians 
who were exiting Australia House. One guy really didn’t like it,” she recalls. 
“He just said something to the effect of, ‘It’s a policy that works and we have 
to stop the boats,’ and he dropped the flyer.”

Our Nauru vigil highlighted the abuse asylum seekers also face in the UK | 
Lola Okolosie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/30/nauru-vigil-abuse-asylum-seekers-uk-nauru-files-australian>
Keenan is unsurprised to hear there was more negative reaction in Australia, 
where a coalition of activist groups inspired by the UK efforts held their own 
readings in capital cities.

Matt Anslow, an organiser for Christian refugee advocacy group Love Makes a 
Way, says thousands of people witnessed theSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> reading but the reactions 
varied.

“We had some people walk past and shouting abuse, ‘Send them all back’ – that 
sort of thing,” he says. “Usually it wasn’t exactly what you’d call coherent. I 
think some people responded out of anger and occasionally said things which 
weren’t exactly rational. But that was expected.”

Some people were “amused” but others stopped and listened, Anslow says.

“One woman sat there for 90 minutes and she wept. She told us she didn’t know 
anything about the issue and she didn’t know any of it.”

Both Keenan and Anslow say they were most affected reading the more than 50% of
reports which related to children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/10/i-want-death-nauru-files-chronicle-despair-of-asylum-seeker-children>
, and about people wanting to die.

“I talk about the trauma of having read them but that’s nothing compared to 
the trauma of having lived it,” says Anslow. “I can’t even comprehend what kind 
of damage we do for someone to get to that point.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Freading-the-nauru-files-the-people-who-took-the-story-to-the-streets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff44affef99479ee458b1a3a0e7a1d0c376ff211d%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20the%20Nauru%20files%3A%20the%20people%20who%20took%20the%20story%20to%20the%20streets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Freading-the-nauru-files-the-people-who-took-the-story-to-the-streets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20the%20Nauru%20files%3A%20the%20people%20who%20took%20the%20story%20to%20the%20streets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Freading-the-nauru-files-the-people-who-took-the-story-to-the-streets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff44affef99479ee458b1a3a0e7a1d0c376ff211d%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 A member of the ‘Love Makes A Way’ Christian movement reading from the Nauru 
files outside the department of immigration in Melbourne to highlight abuses 
against people in detention. Photograph: Melissa Davey for the Guardian 
Anslow says he wanted the confronting distress of the reports to be just as 
unavoidable for those walking past. “What we wanted to do was provide a public 
platform right in the middle of Sydney and other cities where people would have 
to be confronted by those files by hearing them,” he explains.

“Even if they were just walking past and even if they didn’t care, they had to 
hear them in some way.”

It’s this quality which perhaps led the novelist Richard Flanagan, the Man 
Booker prize winner, todescribe the files as “an extraordinary trove of 
anonymous short stories” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/sep/01/nauru-files-an-extraordinary-trove-of-short-stories-says-richard-flanagan>
 in his keynote speech at the Melbourne writers’ festival.

“I suspect they will continue to be read in coming decades and even centuries 
when the works of myself and my colleagues are long forgotten,” Flanagan said.

“And when people read these stories – so admirable in their brevity, so 
controlled in their emotion, so artful in their artlessness; their use, for 
example, of the term NAME REDACTED instead of a character’s actual name to 
better show what is happening to a stranger is not an individual act, but a 
universal crime.”

After the publication of the Nauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> 
files, the Australian government launched an internal review of the incident 
reports, despite being in possession of the originals.


The review confirmed what had already been reported by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/15/nauru-files-review-confirms-19-police-referrals-over-abuse-claims-yet-no-prosecutions>
: 19 cases of violence or sexual abuse – including eight cases involving 
children – had been referred to Nauruan police, but with no prosecutions.

The Nauru files: the lives of asylum seekers in detention detailed in a unique 
database – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
The Nauruan government has made legislative changes to strengthen its child 
protection laws and system but there have been few prosecutions since and no 
convictions.

The detention centre on Nauru is no longer a closed centre, with those who 
still live inside it (as opposed to the community dwellings outside) relatively 
free to come and go. But reports of hostility from local Nauruans, as well as 
violent attacks by locals and other refugees continue, as do claims and 
evidence of mental and physical ailments. No refugee from the centre can settle 
in Nauru. The government has offered only short residency visas.

Calls for Australia to resettle people on the mainland continue, but both the 
government and opposition are resolute that doing so would encourage people 
smugglers to restart their business.

Many refugee families are now seeking resettlement in the US under a newly 
announced deal with the Australian government. The deal is far from set in 
stone –details are scant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/us-australia-refugee-deal-only-400-dutton>
 and there is speculation that the incoming president, Donald Trump, may 
reverse the agreement made with the Obama administration.

It is still not clear if the deal applies to the single male refugees held on 
Manus Island in Papua New Guinea, where the supreme court this yearruled 
Australia’s detention centre unconstitutional. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/17/manus-island-detention-centre-to-close-australia-and-papua-new-guinea-agree>

Australia’s hardline immigration policies remain in place, with the government 
throwing everything at the wall in the face of mounting international disgust 
and an apparent decline in local public support. Fewer Australians are against 
immigration than in years past, andmore are pushing the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/two-thirds-believe-australia-should-resettle-refugees-in-detention-by-2017-poll>
 to find a solution to the offshore detention crisis. In the meantime, people 
on Nauru wait and hope.
 