
We’ve taken the children for walks since they were tiny – proper walks, with 
rucksacks, cagoules and appropriate footwear. And, yes, we’ve met with 
recalcitrance from time to time, but we’ve always managed to have enough fun 
along the way to edge out memories of sulkiness. Borrowing friends’ dogs has 
been the greatest bonus recently, but when the children were very small, we 
would secretly take along a favourite toy. One of us would stride ahead to hide 
it, legs dangling, on the branch of a tree, then we’d engineer some delay – an 
untied shoelace or something – to allow the kids to spot it inexplicably 
sitting there, waiting for them. The rest of the walk would be spent discussing 
how on earth that bear or pig or whatever could possibly have got out of the 
house without our knowing about it.

The reason it mattered went deeper than the fact that we wanted a walk and we 
couldn’t leave them behind. Because when you’re walking with your child, side 
by side and with nothing to distract you, rarely even making eye contact 
because you’re too busy looking at the view or the uneven ground, then you are 
properly together. You may share little but a companionable silence (though, in 
my experience, you almost always end up talking about stuff that’s big and 
complicated and unexpected), but you’re together. Listening to each other. 
Sharing an experience. Creating memories. And it doesn’t get any better than 
that.

So I wanted Tilly to come on a walking holiday with me. She’s 13 now, and 
frankly there are so many more important things for a girl such as her to be 
doing, but she was persuadable, I felt sure. I just needed the hook, the 
teenage equivalent of the teddy in the tree. And then it came to me.

“How about a walking holiday abroad?” I suggested.

“Where?”

“Rome? Ancient sites, beautiful piazzas…” – and here I untied my metaphorical 
shoelace to allow her to spot the toy – “maybe some shopping.”

Bingo. She was in. And I would have her to myself for three glorious days.

Because this was a walking holiday, I wanted to make sure we clocked up some 
miles. I got hold of someJawbone wristbands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/05/jawbones-up3-fitness-tracker-monitors-heart-rate-sleep-cycles>
 – pedometers areso last decade – which add up your footsteps and send the 
total to your phone. We decided we’d aim for seven miles a day, based on the 
length of a favourite walk in Somerset that is not so far as to be a chore, but 
far enough to make you feel smug at the end of it.

Now this was all very laudable, but I’d failed to consider two salient points:

1) Walking seven miles on an autumnal day in the West Country is not the same 
as walking seven miles in Rome in the middle of August. Rome is, if you’ll 
permit the meteorological jargon, arse-frazzlingly hot and humid. Indeed, it 
occurred to me after only a few hours that one of the main reasons there are so 
many clothes shops in Rome is that you’d need an extensive wardrobe if you had 
to get changed four times a day. After our first walk, I had to peel my T-shirt 
off my skin. The fibres appeared to have melted into my epidermis. This is not 
a problem I’ve ever had after a ramble on Exmoor.

2) Seven miles a day is a doddle in the right footwear. But it turns out you 
can’t wear 20-year-old walking boots in a city of stylish women and luxury shoe 
shops. “You just can’t, Mum. It’s embarrassing.” I’m paraphrasing, but you get 
the idea. The whole enterprise was starting to look ill-conceived.

We arrived on an early flight, dumped our bags and decided to start right 
away. We walked from the Via Veneto, where our hotel was, tothe Spanish Steps 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spanish_Steps>. This glorious baroque stairway 
mounting the hill between the Piazza di Spagna and the Piazza Trinità dei Monti 
has been a shrine for poetry fans sinceKeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/13/john-keats-my-hero-andrew-motion>
 andShelley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/percy-bysshe-shelley> went to 
live (and, in the case of the former, to die) here. It wasn’t a massive first 
hike, but long enough for me to bang on about the Romantics, and for Tilly to 
clock the shops she wanted to come back to over the next couple of days. On the 
way, we’d been talking about the Grand Tour (well, I had and she’d been 
pretending to listen), so I thought it would be appropriate to have a light 
lunch inBabington’s Tea Rooms <http://www.babingtons.com>. Opened in 1893 by 
two Englishwomen shrewdly aware of their countryfolk’s innate resistance, when 
in Rome, to eating Italian food like the Romans do, Babington’s is a quaint 
historical throwback. The whole experience was pleasantly odd, like being in
Bettys of Harrogate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/27/restaurant-review-bettys-harrogate>
 during some freak heatwave. But for Tilly, it was an opportunity for a little 
filial outrage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-rebecca-front-rome-on-foot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421149783236%2F2b1761db-99e0-4caf-9fc8-75d6ba3ca2e6-677x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebecca%20Front%20sees%20Rome%20on%20foot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-rebecca-front-rome-on-foot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebecca%20Front%20sees%20Rome%20on%20foot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-rebecca-front-rome-on-foot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421149783236%2F2b1761db-99e0-4caf-9fc8-75d6ba3ca2e6-677x1020.jpeg>
 On the Spanish steps. Photograph: Gianni Cipriano for the Guardian 
“An English tearoom?”

“Yes,” I confirmed.

“Really? And if I’d suggested going to Nando’s, what would you have said?”

“I would have said, I don’t think they have Nando’s in Rome.”

“Really?” she said again, with even more scepticism than before. “I don’t 
think so. You would have said…” (And here she did a scathingly accurate 
impersonation of me. Seriously, if ever I’m not available for a voiceover, no 
one would notice the difference.) “You would have said, ‘Darling, we’re in 
Rome. One of the culinary capitals of the world. We can’t just eat the sort of 
stuff you can get at home.’ And I would have said, ‘We can get pasta at home’ 
and you would have said, ‘That’s not the point’ and I would have said, ‘Well, 
it kind of is’ and you would have had to agree. But then we would have eaten 
something typically Roman and it would have been great.”

Yup. I couldn’t argue. That’s exactly how it would have gone. So, several more 
miles and a couple of changes of clothes later, we found ourselves inLa 
Fraschetta di Castel Sant’Angelo <http://www.fraschettadicastelsantangelo.it>, 
a far more typically Roman joint: bright orange walls, paper table cloths and 
bowls ofamatriciana <http://www.bbcgoodfood.com/recipes/5211/amatriciana-pasta> 
andarrabbiata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/oct/22/foodanddrink.features3> 
to knock your socks off. It was cheap, too, which was a mercy, since on the way 
there Tilly had spotted several shops selling the sort of clothes, hair 
products and earrings that she “actually really needed”.

The next morning, we were already feeling the effects of walking on cobbles in 
thin-soled flats. Not only that, but I’d been forced to break the news to Tilly 
that today’s shopping would have to be of the window variety, after blowing 
pretty well all of our spending money in the first afternoon. But she’s an 
actor’s daughter – she’s used to there being money one day and none the next – 
so she gamely suggested we start off by walking downVia Condotti 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Via_Condotti>, on the basis that there would be 
nothing there we could possibly have afforded anyway. Via Condotti is an 
elegant thoroughfare, crammed with shops such as Prada, Gucci and Cartier that 
are way too scary to go into. We passed a merry hour or so looking at window 
displays and pretending we wouldn’t be seen dead in this stuff, while silently 
wondering how one might conceivably earn enough to buy it. I did have an 
affordable treat up my sleeve, though.

Hidden away in the Largo di Torre Argentina, among the ruins of the theatre of 
Pompey where Caesar was killed, is acat sanctuary 
<http://www.romancats.com/index_eng.php>. You’re not allowed near the crumbling 
masonry – that’s strictly cat territory – but you can go into the sanctuary 
itself and visit its more vulnerable residents, hobbling on three legs or with 
blinded eye-sockets covered in fur. The whole place seems to be clean and 
caring, in spite of having no funding other than donations. Honestly, I’m not 
much of a cat person, but Tilly fell madly in love with a cute little scrappy 
thing, and didn’t want to leave.

Anything would have been a disappointment after that, I suppose, but I was 
hoping for a better response tothe Pantheon 
<http://www.turismoroma.it/cosa-fare/pantheon>. This extraordinary church, 
famed for its massive rotunda, has been in continuous use for nearly two 
millennia. But the hole in its roof – which I think we can assume was very much 
a design feature – didn’t impress my daughter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-rebecca-front-rome-on-foot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421149874650%2Fdee8c5eb-c9ec-415e-9a37-b98fd862fae2-1213x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebecca%20Front%20sees%20Rome%20on%20foot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-rebecca-front-rome-on-foot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebecca%20Front%20sees%20Rome%20on%20foot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-rebecca-front-rome-on-foot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421149874650%2Fdee8c5eb-c9ec-415e-9a37-b98fd862fae2-1213x2040.jpeg>
 Photograph: Gianni Cipriano for the Guardian 
“What happens when it rains?” she sniffed. “They really didn’t think that 
through.”

Her mood was restored, though, by the afternoon’s main event, the Imperial 
Forum. It’s a massive site crammed with the tumbledown remnants of a noble 
city. Its pathways may be dessicated and shade-free, but tourists swarm here 
even in the heat of the midday sun, to gawp at how unfathomably, well, old 
everything is.

We’d actually brought the children here when they were little, and by a 
strange coincidence the way we had brought it to life was through shopping. 
We’d pretended to be a family of ancient Romans, going to the forum for a 
little light praying and to stock up on groceries. I remember handing Tilly an 
invisible bag of denarii and sending her off to get fish – “But not from Marcus 
Lucilius. Last time it was full of maggots.” It had kept her busy for hours, 
running in and out of doorways and coming back with bundles of imaginary food. 
I knew that strategy wouldn’t work any more, but this time she was gripped by 
the scale of the place, the mysterious gaps between what’s known and what’s 
unknown, and the sheer unlikelihood that it could have lasted this long.

We’d achieved our mileage, so for more sedentary sightseeing we ate that night 
in a restaurant overlooking the Colosseum.Aroma 
<http://www.aromarestaurant.it/it/> is on the rooftop terrace of a smart hotel. 
The food was cooked with extraordinary skill, the wine was indigenous and 
irresistible, and we felt genuinely welcome.

We decided, for our final day, to cut ourselves a little slack: five miles 
would be plenty. We headed back toPiazza di Spagna 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piazza_di_Spagna>, chiefly so that I could visit 
my mother’s favourite shop –Sermoneta 
<http://www.sermonetagloves.com/shop/sermoneta/>, purveyor of the softest 
leather gloves in the most sumptuous range of colours. She’s always been a 
demon for a matching accessory, and besides, I felt that this was an 
opportunity for Tilly to learn the enduring importance of buying gifts for your 
mother. After a little welcome shade in the formal elegance ofthe Pincio gardens
 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Attraction_Review-g187791-d522870-Reviews-Pincio_Gardens_Monte_Pincio-Rome_Lazio.html>
, we ventured back into retail heaven; then, remembering we were no richer than 
we had been the day before, decided to settle for a drink instead. On the chic
Via del Babuino 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Attraction_Review-g187791-d245845-Reviews-Via_del_Babuino_and_Around-Rome_Lazio.html>
, Tilly spotted a bizarre-looking cafe crammed from floor to ceiling with 
statuary, busts and friezes. It turned out to have once been the workshop of
Antonio Canova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2010/aug/24/antonio-canova-sculptures>
 (rememberthe Three Graces 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/t/the-three-graces/>, saved for the 
nation a few years ago? That’s the chap) and it looks for all the world as if 
he still works there. There aren’t enough cafes in the world boasting 8ft 
statues of cardinals, in my opinion. Interior designers, take note.

By the end of those three days, we had talked and listened, gossiped and 
bickered, made each other laugh and created memories that, while they may not 
outlast the Eternal City, will certainly keep us going for a while. And we had 
walked a total of 20 miles (having got lost on our five-mile day and ended up 
doing six) in scorching heat and inappropriate shoes. A walking holiday in 
Rome: it wasn’t such a stupid idea after all.

Factbox

The trip was provided by Kirker Holidays <http://www.kirkerholidays.com>; t
hree nights B&B for the price of two atRome’s Regina Hotel Baglioni 
<http://www.baglionihotels.com/category/regina-hotel-baglioni-rome/> costs from 
£789 per person (saving £220 until 2 April), including flights, private 
transfers, entrance tickets to the Vatican museums and Sistine Chapel or the 
Villa Borghese, Kirker Guide Notes to restaurants and sightseeing, and the 
services of the Kirker concierge. Dinner at Palazzo Manfredi’s Aroma restaurant 
<http://www.palazzomanfredi.com/en/restaurant-and-bar/> costs from €125 a head, 
excluding wine, for seven courses



 