
When dawn came Mohammed could see both the shore and the dirt road that led 
away into the forest. The fishing boat, which had dropped him on a deserted 
stretch of coast in northern Tanzania, had long since disappeared. Now, as the 
sun came up, the 28-year-old teacher hoped the next stage of his journey would 
begin.

The day passed. Mohammed and the 12 other Somali men who had joined him on the 
boat sought shade under the thorny scrub. They had little water but shared a 
packet of biscuits bought in Kenya before their departure. By late afternoon it 
was clear they was not going anywhere. Night came again, bringing the roar and 
howl of wild animals.

“We felt very lonely,” Mohammed remembered.

Another day crawled by, and another night. Then, finally, the men heard 
shouting. Their guide had come. Their journey could continue.

Though they may have felt alone, the small group were part of something much 
bigger. The African refugees heading to Europe have received massive media 
coverage in recent months, but a far larger number seek security and prosperity 
elsewhere on their own continent.


“Immigration to the European countries is a huge thing in the media … but in 
the rest of African there is a lot of movement too,” said Marc Gbaffou, of the 
African Diaspora Forum, a Johannesburg-based NGO.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
South Africa’s victims of xenophobia: ‘We are not rebels. We are refugees’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2015/nov/09/south-africa-victims-xenophobia-refugees-video>
Exact figures are hard to come by but no one disputes that the numbers moving 
around Africa are much greater than those heading to Europe. The idea of an 
“exodus” from the continent is misplaced, experts say. Only two African nations 
were among the top 10 source countries for refugees heading to Europe in 2015:
Eritrea in sixth, and Nigeria in seventh position 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-34131911>. Of the world’s 17 million 
displaced Africans, approximately 3% are in Europe; the vast majority remain in 
Africa.

Those travelling within the continent face the same hardships as those seeking 
to escape it. Few African states welcome newcomers and transit visas are 
impossible to obtain. So many travel clandestinely. A dense network of 
interconnecting routes and trafficking operations carries migrants east to 
Saudi Arabia and Yemen, while the “southern route” leads 4,000 miles from the 
Horn of Africa to the continent’s richest nation,South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>.
 Gemechu Alemu Lama, 18, and Tigisti Kebede, 17, crossed their arms in a 
symbol of protest while representing Ethiopia in an athletics tournament in 
Durban. They are now seeking refuge in South Africa. Photograph: James Oatway 
for the Guardian 
Mohammed fled his home on the outskirts of Mogadishu because Islamic militants 
from al-Shabaab had threatened to kill him for refusing to send his teenage 
students for military training. His first destination was Kenya, but he decided 
to move on after a year earning a pittance giving religious instruction to the 
children of refugees. He thought briefly of Europe. But to reach the west 
without contacts, more money and better English was impossible. He headed south 
instead.

Recent years have seen a surge in numbers of those travelling within Africa. 
New conflicts in Burundi, Libya, Niger and Nigeria, as well as unresolved 
crises in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
and South Sudan have led to an overall increase of about 20%in the number of 
people displaced in Africa. <http://www.unhcr.org/576408cd7.pdf>

South Africa has attracted migrants from elsewhere in Africa for more than a 
century and the relative wealth and stability of the “Rainbow nation” still 
draws many today. The exact number of migrants in South Africa is hotly 
contested but it is likely to be between1.5 million and 3.2 million 
<https://africacheck.org/factsheets/data-migrants-numbers/>, two-thirds of whom 
come from elsewhere on the continent, mainly neighbouring countries but also 
from as far away as Morocco or Eritrea.
 See the full visual 
Neighbourhoods such as Mayfair in Johannesburg are almost entirely populated 
by east Africans, with each nationality, ethnicity and faith clustered around a 
mosque or church and a restaurant serving a specific cuisine.

Over stew and flatbread, tales of the journey are told. Most migrants are 
forced to rely on traffickers and corrupt officials to reach their destination. 
Criminal gangs charge according to the needs of their customers. Equipped with 
visas and passports, a Somali in Kenya could travel to SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> by bus in relative comfort and 
safety for about $2,000 (£1,600) in less than a week.

However, for someone with neither a passport nor visas, the cost would be 
greater and the risks much higher, as Mohammed found out.

He boarded a fishing boat that took him to the desolate shoreline in northern 
Tanzania in the Kenyan port of Mombasa. When their guide finally arrived, 
Mohammed and his fellow migrants were taken 800 miles by bus towards the border 
with Mozambique. Then, dropped far out into the bush, they started walking.

“We walked for seven days. Sometimes we had some food, sometimes nothing. We 
slept on the ground, and all the time we were scared, of animals, of just being 
left behind and dying there, or of the police,” Mohammed said.

Such fears are justified. Migrants often end up detained for months, or even 
years, in the states they try to cross to reach South Africa. Many hundreds of 
Somalis are held in Kenyan prisons. Scores of foreigners aredetained in 
Zimbabwe. 
<https://malawi24.com/2016/11/27/twenty-malawians-stuck-zimbabwean-prison/>
 Getachew Sugebo left his home in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia to escape ethnic 
violence. He has been in South Africa for 12 years. He has been a victim of 
xenophobic violence and his shop has been broken into many times. Photograph: 
James Oatway/the Guardian 
Others do not survive at all. “We hear of drownings in rivers, of people dying 
of snake bite, or being attacked by animals, or simply the thirst and hunger. 
For the young men it is better, but sometimes there are older people and 
children,” said one Ethiopian dissident who made the journey to Johannesburg 
last year.

Few such deaths are recorded, and only the most lethal accidents make 
headlines. In 2012, 47 people from east Africa died when their boat capsized in 
Lake Malawi. In June, the bodies of 19 Ethiopians who suffocated in the back of 
a Zambian container truck werediscovered  
<http://af.reuters.com/article/drcNews/idAFL8N19A0HO>by DRC authorities.

In Mozambique, Mohammed and his group were met by a new guide who led them 
into Malawi. Once more there was a nocturnal border crossing. “My shoes were 
finished. I was feeling much pain. One guy fell and broke his arm, twisted his 
ankle. We had to carry him. At night it was too cold,” Mohammed said.

We walked across and found the police. They were kind to us

Once across, the group found shelter in a camp run by an NGO where they stayed 
for two weeks, gathering wood to sell for food. Then came the final leg of 
their journey: back into Mozambique, another march through the scrub at night 
into Zimbabwe followed by a long drive in a truck to the border with South 
Africa.

“We walked across and found the police and said we were refugees. We were 
bleeding; we had no food or water for so long. They were kind to us,” Mohammed 
said.

 But the welcome soon soured. There have been repeated outbreaks of xenophobic 
violence in South Africa, 
<http://www.latimes.com/world/africa/la-fg-south-africa-somalis-xenophobic-attacks-snap-20161029-story.html>
 most recently in January and April 2015. More than 60 migrants were killed in 
one bout of attacks in 2008. The small grocery shops run by many new migrants 
are frequent targets of mobs.

Mohammed’s early enthusiasm for South Africa has dissipated. Earlier this year 
a gang burned and looted the shop he had started with a friend with savings 
painfully accumulated over the months since their arrival. His wrists bear the 
scars of where the attackers tortured him with implements heated on a stove, 
and he has depression and other symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder.

“They burned me, nearly killed me. This was the lowest time of all. After so 
much, so many sacrifices, to lose it all, to have nothing again. It is hard to 
get up again after that,” Mohammed said.

Of the four closest friends with whom he travelled from Somalia, three have 
been killed in violent incidents since reaching their destination.

Such attacks are fuelled by chronic shortage of jobs, housing and services. 
But researchers say violence is whipped up by political leaders,researchers at 
the University of the Witwatersrand, in Johannesburg, found. 
<https://www.wits.ac.za/news/latest-news/general-news/2016/elections/election-news/news/the-link-between-public-violence-and-xenophobia-in-south-africa.html#sthash.PieFUW7L.dpuf>
 Abenego Mokom, 32, from Cameroon, arrived in South Africa four years ago to 
help his brother run a business. Photograph: James Oatway for the Guardian 
Malusi Gigaba, South Africa’s home affairs minister, denied that planned 
reforms of the country’s overloaded immigration and asylum system would“shut 
the door” 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/10/13/south-africas-tough-lessons-on-migrant-policy/>
 on foreigners. The new policy aimed “to build [an] industrial base and 
knowledge economy based on services and trade integrated with Africa and the 
world”, he said, though insisted his country needed migrants “who complement 
but do not replace domestic skill development”.

South Africa has the highest number of pending asylum claims in the world, 
with more than a million people waiting to be processed.

Gigaba told the Guardian “the country of [Nelson] Mandela [could] rise to the 
challenge”, adding : “We are working to expand our understanding of what it 
means to be South African. We are the country of the internationalist freedom 
struggle.”

Few think the flow of migrants on the southern route will diminish 
significantly soon, particularly as European resistance to accepting new 
migrants stiffens.

“Most countries make immigration decision based on national interests and 
don’t … care about the impact on other countries. You can’t intentionally 
destabilise other countries and then close down your borders,” Gigaba said, 
though he admitted official statistics so far showed no increase in arrivals in 
South Africa that could be linked to tougher western policies.

Others see the flow as inevitable, whatever happens in Europe. “They will 
come,” said Mark Gbaffou, the activist. “Some are rich and come here to get 
richer. Others are poor and are coming here to change their lives. Many just 
tell themselves they will be free in a foreign land, and that is enough.”
 