
A brutal attack by police on garment workers protesting in Phnom Penh in 
January 2014 – in which four people were killed and 20 detained – prompted 
global brands including Puma, Gap and H&M to write to Cambodia’s government 
condemning the violence.

The incident is one of four case studies presented in a controversial new 
report <https://www.cafonline.org/about-us/global-alliance/beyond-intergrity> 
published by the UK-based Charities Aid Foundation (CAF) which seeks to make 
the case for companies as a “force for good” in defending human rights and has 
angered human rights organisations.

Thulsi Narayanasamy from campaign group War on Want said the report was a 
“tool to whitewash the exploitative nature of many private sector industries, 
from the extractive companies through to fashion and electronics brands”.

Brazil's dam disaster one year on – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/oct/15/brazil-dam-disaster-samarco-bhp-billiton-vale-year-on-in-pictures>
Liam Barrington-Bush from the London Mining Network 
<http://londonminingnetwork.org/>, a coalition of anti-mining campaign groups, 
was equally outraged. “It is often companies themselves that are the cause of 
the problems civil society seeks to address, bullying governments into avoiding 
regulatory responsibilities and lobbying for ever-more pro-business 
legislation,” he said.

While CAF accepts that not all corporations are saints, it maintains that 
responsible companies can and do make meaningful contributions to the promotion 
of human rights and the defence of civil society organisations being oppressed 
by states.

Among the other case studies cited in the report is that of Rafael Marques de 
Morais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/23/this-week-i-may-be-jailed-for-writing-a-book-on-human-rights-abuses>
, an Angolan journalist charged with libel and defamation after publishing a 
book about human rights abuses in Angola’s lucrative diamond industry. Diamond 
retailers Tiffany & Co and Leber Jeweler issued a public statement condemning 
the trial, which was held behind closed doors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Freport-praising-companies-on-human-rights-criticised-as-whitewash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdf00c169e38b6aa8491c60f221e730f81c15ffa%2F0_0_2407_1598%2F2407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Report%20praising%20companies%20on%20human%20rights%20criticised%20as%20whitewash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Freport-praising-companies-on-human-rights-criticised-as-whitewash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Report%20praising%20companies%20on%20human%20rights%20criticised%20as%20whitewash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Freport-praising-companies-on-human-rights-criticised-as-whitewash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdf00c169e38b6aa8491c60f221e730f81c15ffa%2F0_0_2407_1598%2F2407.jpg>
 Journalist Rafael Marques de Morais. Photograph: Herculano Coroado/Reuters 
Determining the precise influence of such interventions is never clear as 
oppressive governments rarely wish to be seen to bow to external pressure. 
Similarly, private companies typically try to stay quiet about their political 
interactions with oppressive regimes. In Marques’ case, he waseventually given 
a six-month suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/28/angolan-suspended-jail-blood-diamonds-rafael-marques-de-morais>
sentence. Cambodia’s garment workers would gain a “disappointingly low” $12 
(£9.70) rise in the monthly minimum wage over a year after the police brutality.

“We have a responsibility to promote these good examples because that 
hopefully will become a self-fulfilling prophecy and … will encourage more 
companies to engage in defending civil society activists,” says Adam Pickering, 
international policy manager at CAF.

The report, which was written with research input from the London School of 
Economics, contains a list of proactive steps that companies should take. The 
recommendations include: putting direct pressure on governments to desist from 
abuses; participating in formal and informal networks that promote collective 
action; and using “organisational arrangements” such as structured partnerships 
with charities to ensure support over the long-term.

It is imperative that corporations are involved in a “long-running 
conversation” with civil society organisations about human rights, Pickering 
emphasises. “If there’s only a relationship when an issue flares up, then it’s 
difficult for companies to engage,” he says, adding that a better solution 
would see companies regularly meeting with NGOs and familiarising themselves 
with issues.

CAF isn’t dewy-eyed; the motivation for business to get involved is far from 
being purely altruistic. A robust, well-protected civil society is essential to 
guaranteeing the kind of high political and economic governance standards that 
businesses need for long-term investment, its report maintains.

This “business case” argument is echoed elsewhere. A recent report 
<https://www.ihrb.org/uploads/reports/2015-12-Human-Rights-Defenders-and-Business.pdf>
 [pdf] by the London-based Institute for Human Rights and Business (IHRB), for 
instance, notes that the short-term advantages of corporate collusion with 
abusive regimes invariably backfire and end up harming companies’ longer-term 
interests.

Sustainable development goals: what business needs to know #SDGs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/sep/24/sustainable-development-goals-business-sdg-targets>
The classic case study is Shell in Nigeria. The Anglo-Dutch company was 
alleged to havecosied up to the country’s military dictatorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/03/shell-oil-paid-nigerian-military>
 for years to suppress resistance to its activities in Ogoniland. When the 
Nigerian juntaexecuted Ogoni leader Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight others in 1995 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/02/shell-nigeria-court-oil-spills-pollution-niger-delta>
, the oil major suffered catastrophic reputational damage that remains a stain 
on its brand to this day.

Salil Tripathi, director of policy at IHRB, says civil society organisations 
are “missing a trick” by not recognising the common ground they have with 
companies regarding human rights. “Both want the rule of law, both want 
transparency, both want due process, both don’t want violence and both want a 
confrontation-free operational timeline,” he states.

This harmonious picture of shared interests isn’t always obvious in the rough 
and tumble of real life, he’s ready to concede – especially in countries where 
human rights defenders are threatened, imprisoned and worse.

“A lot of people in the civil society space see themselves as confronting the 
establishment, which has the capacity to improve lives of people and yet it 
gets it wrong,” says Tripathi.

That’s certainly the mindset at the London Mining Network. It believes asking 
companies to take a more proactive stand in defending human rights merely 
reinforces corporations’ growing dominance, says Barrington-Bush.

“By expecting companies to leverage their power against elected governments, 
CAF is setting the stage for the continued decline of our already-frail 
democracy, rather than actively working to protect it,” he adds.


 