
A rapid response fund <http://www.aidsalliance.org/rapidresponsefund> backed 
by Sir Elton John that provides emergency support to LGBT communities under 
threat around the world has received 235 applications in its first month of 
operation.

The money is funding safe houses, legal fees and medical support in 29 
countries, according to a report on its work to support HIV services, published 
ahead of WorldAids <https://www.theguardian.com/society/aids-and-hiv> Day on 
Thursday.

Elton John pledges millions to support LGBT people in Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/20/elton-john-pledges-millions-to-support-lgbt-people-in-africa>
The $4m (£3.2m) fund – launched in October and run by the International 
HIV/Aids Alliance <http://www.aidsalliance.org/> with support from the Elton 
John Aids Foundation <http://ejaf.org/>, the US President’s Emergency Plan for 
Aids Relief (Pepfar <http://www.pepfar.gov/>) and the UN – issues grants of up 
to $20,000 to civil society organisations that represent LGBT people and men 
who have sex with men (MSM) in the countries where these communities are at 
high risk of discrimination.

Elton John said each request for help made it “horribly clear just how much 
LGBT human rights abuses serve as a barrier to ending Aids. Now more than ever 
it’s time for government leaders and philanthropists to join efforts to 
overcome the anti-LGBT stigma, discrimination and violence that is making the 
HIV epidemic worse.”

Among the fund’s beneficiaries is an Ethiopian HIV advocacy group working with 
LGBT people and men who have sex with men (MSM). One of its members who says 
that he fled to London following persecution told the Guardian that the 
situation for gay people in Ethiopia had deteriorated in the past few years as 
civil society came under pressure from the authorities.

“The starting point is that Ethiopian government officials say, ‘There are no 
gay people in our country’, but there have also been continual crackdowns by 
the authorities on those of us who are attempting to organise in civil 
society,” said the man, who has chosen to remain anonymous.

“We started to organise in a very low – under the radar – way and have been 
distributing condoms and lubricants and doing sexual health training. Because 
the government refused to accept that we exist, the result is that MSM people 
are not recognised as a community within the HIV national strategy. So, at the 
end of the day, while the funding we have received allowed us to continue with 
some of our projects, it is also just about our very survival.”

Ethiopian authorities deny that LGBT people have been subject to a crackdown 
and insist all are treated according to their needs when it comes to HIV and 
Aids policies.

Elsewhere, an organisation providing one of the only confidential sexual 
health services to the MSM community in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
was able to fend off closure as a result of a grant from the fund that enabled 
it to replenish its stocks and continue with HIV testing and treatment services.

How can we tolerate anti-LGBTQ rhetoric at a major human rights forum? | 
Gillian Kane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/15/anti-lgbtq-rhetoric-organisation-american-states-human-rights-orlando-shooting>
In Uganda, a transgender woman who was named in media coverage of a police 
raid on a Gay Pride event was helped to find secure and safe accommodation and 
have her HIV medication reinstated. In Kingston, Jamaica, emergency shelter, 
medical packages and food were provided to dozens of homeless LGBT people whose 
belongings and homes had been destroyed by Hurricane Matthew.

Shaun Mellors, director for knowledge and influence at the International 
HIV/Aids Alliance, said that while the report, published on Wednesday, 
highlighted the needs of many who were being persecuted, there had also been a 
greater realisation and understanding of LGBT people, who were becoming more 
vocal about their rights.

“We also know that if we are ever going to get close to the rhetoric of ending 
Aids that we do need to ensure that those who are affected by HIV are able to 
access services without being stigmatised,” he said.

“What they are being confronted with and challenged by is, in many cases, a 
political agenda strongly influenced by and with funding sources from the 
global north, particularly when it comes to some of the more fundamentalist 
religious organisations that are engaging with Africa.”
 