
The discount retail chain B&M has revealed a bumper Christmas trading period 
as cautious shoppers looked to save money.

Sales rose 7.2% at the group’s UK established stores in the 13 weeks to 
Christmas Eve, with 1.1% of that lift coming from an extra day of trading. The 
company said underlying growth had increased thanks to strong seasonal product 
ranges and better service from one of the group’s two distribution centres, 
which had problems last year.

Next's gloomy 2017 forecast drags down fashion retail shares
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
Sales of gifts, decorations and confectionery performed particularly well and 
B&M, which ischaired by Sir Terry Leahy, a former boss of Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/12/b-m-stock-market-float-ipo-terry-leahy>
, told analysts it had to bring in sale stock early to meet customer demand.

B&M’s chief executive, Simon Arora, said: “We have once again demonstrated the 
strength, relative appeal and popularity of our model at a time of uncertainty 
for consumers generally and continuing structural change in the retailing 
sector. We have delivered our best ever Christmas trading and served over 5.5 
million customers in a single week in the UK alone as we continue to gain 
market share.”

Total group sales rose 20.5% in the quarter to £789.1m as B&M opened 14 more 
stores in the UK, taking the total to 533, and seven more Jawoll stores in 
Germany, taking its total there to 73.

Its shares rose 7% to 296.5p in morning trading on Wednesday, the best 
performer across the FTSE 100 and 250 indexes, as some analysts said they 
planned to upgrade their profit forecasts for the year.

The strong sales at B&M – which Arora bought in 2005 with his brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/21/bm-bargains-european-expansion>
 – bode well for discounters despite talk of afightback by the major 
supermarket chains before Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-grocery-prices-tesco-kantar>
.

Strong sales from Nisa suggest the convenience store sector also had a good 
Christmas. The convenience store wholesale group reported a 2.2% rise in 
underlying sales in the 10 weeks to 1 January, partly thanks to a promotion on 
traditional festive veg.

David Jeary, an analyst at Canaccord Genuity, said: “B&M delivered the first 
positive surprise of the retail Christmas reporting season.” He said the group 
had enjoyed its strongest quarter since 2013 with a performance well ahead of 
the basically flat figures of the prior four quarters.


Jeary, however, said it was surprising that B&M had indicated only that it was 
confident of meeting profit forecasts for the year, rather than beating them.

“Clearly, the strength of Christmas trading has translated into improved 
management confidence. The lack of upgrade we believe stems from some natural 
management caution with regard to the remainder of the year,” he said.
 