
Two years ago, at a Democratic fundraiser in Seattle, President Obama spoke 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/07/22/remarks-president-dnc-event-seattle-wa>
 of “the sense that around the world the old order isn’t holding and we’re not 
quite yet to where we need to be in terms of a new order that’s based on a 
different set of principles”. To be clear, he was talking about Ukraine and 
Syria and Israel, not about fashion week. But asCoco Chanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/feb/24/top-10-amazing-facts-you-didnt-know-about-coco-chanel>
 so wisely remarked, fashion reflects the world we live in, and Obama’s words 
are as true of the current state of the fashion industry as they are of 
international relations. In fashion as in politics, the system is outmoded, the 
establishment is at breaking point, the mood is fractious and unrest is in the 
air.

This sounds a grandiose starting point from which to debate See Now, Buy Now, 
the trend to ditch fashion’s six-month lead time and synchronise catwalk shows 
with store deliveries. But See Now, Buy Now is a crucial tipping point, at 
which the impact of technology, globalisation and democratisation on the 
fashion industry is felt not just by buyers in the retail industry sense, but 
by buyers in the me-and-you-on-a-Saturday-afternoon sense.

On Monday evening, when Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> stage their London fashion 
week catwalk show, it will break with a format that has held for more than half 
a century. This will not be a trailer for clothes that will go on sale six 
months later, but a starting gun for a collection designed to be bought, and 
worn, immediately.Paul Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jun/10/paul-smith-design-museum-exhibition>
,Tom Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford> and Tommy Hilfiger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/05/hilfiger-tommy-30-anniversary>
, among others, are adopting the same model.

Christopher Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/11/new-double-role-at-burberry-may-be-better-fit-for-christopher-bailey>
, who as president and chief creative officer at Burberry is at the forefront 
of the change, calls See Now, Buy Now “an ongoing evolution”. The word 
evolution is interesting, because when the world is in a period of rapid 
change, Darwin’s process of natural selection goes into fast forward. Take the 
case of the peppered moth in the Industrial Revolution. At the beginning of the 
19th century, the peppered moth was light with dark spots. When the atmosphere 
in London became filled with soot, the white trees became darker and the 
lighter coloured moths were more visible to birds. Within a few decades, the 
moths had evolved to become darker. In the same way, in our era of 
technological revolution, instant gratification has become the new normal and 
slow-moving fashion houses look suddenly vulnerable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftime-lag-catwalk-highstreet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98f7b1f96db72315e13c299da1d4ab7fdc1286bf%2F0_0_2448_2331%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Retail%20to%20runway%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20clothes%20are%20sold%20direct%20from%20the%20catwalk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftime-lag-catwalk-highstreet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Retail%20to%20runway%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20clothes%20are%20sold%20direct%20from%20the%20catwalk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftime-lag-catwalk-highstreet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98f7b1f96db72315e13c299da1d4ab7fdc1286bf%2F0_0_2448_2331%2F2448.jpg>
 Fashion shows will no longer be teasers for products that you can buy in six 
months time, but instead, they will be the starting gun for selling a new 
collection. Illustration: Clym Evernden 
The messy and confusing phase the fashion industry finds itself in while See 
Now, Buy Now is in this experimental period need not concern us here. In the 
end, the success or failure of the concept will be determined not by whether it 
is convenient for those in the industry, but whether it delivers for the 
consumer. At first glance, this seems a no-brainer. You see a look you want on 
the catwalk, you can buy it straight away. Yay! Right? Except it’s a bit more 
complicated than that. The grand, sweeping narrative of fashion – the lyrical 
view, which says that we crave full skirts in times when we yearn for 
old-fashioned values, or that hemlines get higher when economic confidence goes 
up – has traditionally been a folktale woven together in the months after the 
catwalk season, and presented as a delicious, page-turning big reveal in 
magazines and shop windows at the moment those collections go on sale. If 
fashion is reduced to clicking-to-buy on a new pair of boots, will this 
romantic element be lost?

Not necessarily. The runaway success of the box set proves that storytelling 
can survive – even thrive – when an audience consume episodes at their own 
pace. Primetime slots no longer have the significance they once did, but TV is 
in a golden age nonetheless. The same could prove true of fashion and catwalk 
shows.

“I feel like the idea of seasonal trends is antiquated already,” says Imran 
Amed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/21/business-of-fashion-imran-amed-blogging>
, founder ofBusiness of Fashion <https://www.businessoffashion.com/>. The 
two-season model, designed around “autumn/winter” and “spring/summer” as two 
opposite wardrobes is outmoded in an era of air conditioning, of mass-market 
long-haul travel, and of a global economy. “When we are designing a collection, 
we are not just creating it for people who live in one climate, one culture, or 
one way of thinking,” Bailey says. Or as Zach Duane, CEO of Victoria Beckham, 
puts it, “Whose autumn/winter are we talking about, anyway?”

The twice-yearly trend roundup is dead, and in its place has arrived an 
ongoing “digital campfire” where stories are shared, embellished, made into 
myth. Social media has been key to this – “The reader has got used to seeing 
new trends every single day,” saysLorraine Candy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/01/lorraine-candy-editor-elle>, 
Elle’s editor-in-chief – but the rising influence of menswear within fashion 
has had an impact, too. Womenswear and menswear are increasingly shown together 
on the catwalk, with the result that an industry that was once divided into a 
girls’ school and a boys’ school, and only met at parties, is now integrated. 
This has brought elements of menswear culture into mainstream fashion, and in 
particular a more drip-feed notion of trend. As Fiona Firth, buying director at
Mr Porter <https://www.mrporter.com/>, says, “Menswear is an evolution from one 
season to the next, so the trends follow suit, and do not change dramatically 
seasonally.”

See Now, Buy Now is “absolutely logical” for the huge brands who can afford to 
make a big noise with their shows, Duane says. “If you are spending millions of 
pounds promoting a collection, why on earth would you be doing that six months 
before it hits store, when you could drive desire at the moment it goes on 
sale?” But if those brands can utilise the new model to amplify their voice, 
will that be at the expense of smaller labels, whose point of view will get 
drowned out? And if fashion becomes more commercial at the expense of 
experimentation – is the consumer not, in the end, the loser? If catwalk 
collections are a direct showcase of, rather than a teaser for, the clothes 
that will go in store, then it seems logical that the catwalks will be more 
wearable. “I am the first to raise my hand and say I don’t want to watch a 
bunch of trenchcoats and T-shirts on the runway,” Amed says. “What’s the point? 
But smart brands will figure out a way to make the show interesting to the 
audience.” Candy sees a positive in catwalk shows becoming truer 
representations of the clothes on the shopfloor. “We always want to shoot 
things that will actually be in the shops, and in this system that can be a 
struggle. So actually, I think it’s quite a good thing.”

The most immediate impact of See Now, Buy Now on fashion will be on what you 
see rather than on what you buy. The details of timing are, in the big picture, 
less significant than the fact that the catwalk-as-trade-show is almost 
defunct; the modern catwalk show is an event for the wider fashion audience. 
This can be literal – as at Givenchy’s S/S 16 New York show, where 800 seats 
were reserved for the public – or virtual, as in the Chanel shows’ visual 
spectaculars which are instantly magnified through Instagram to reach an 
audience of millions. The model that triumphs will be the one that best pleases 
the global fashion audience. The industry is in upheaval, but the oldest adage 
in business still holds. The customer is always right.
 