
Bumper sales on Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> and Cyber Monday helped the 
retail sector to maintain strong growth in November and bolstered hopes of a 
busy Christmas on the high street.

Department stores and electrical goods sellers were the biggest beneficiaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/uk-retail-sales-halloween-brexit-inflation>
 as consumers sought out deals on the latest TVs and phones.

The Office for National Statistics said sales increased by 0.5% excluding fuel 
in Novemberfrom October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/uk-retail-sales-halloween-brexit-inflation>
 and by 5.9% on the same month last year.

Dixons Carphone enjoys record Black Friday as it shrugs off Brexit effect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/dixons-carphone-black-friday-brexit-shares>
The only blot on the generally upbeat picture was fuel sales after a spike in 
pump prices put an end to 18 months of low driving costs.

To emphasise the squeeze on drivers, the ONS said fuel prices increased at the 
fastest rate since 2011 to push sales to their lowest level of annual growth 
for two years.

Some analysts said the rising cost of imports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/why-is-uk-inflation-rising-quickly-blame-brexit-oil-price>
, including fuel, would combine with low wage growth to take the steam out of 
sales.

Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said: “A 
substantial correction is coming. Next year will be very different.”


Inflation jumped to 1.2% in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
 as the 15% fall in sterling since June forced firms tobegin nudging prices 
higher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/lego-to-raise-its-prices-in-uk-from-january-sterling>
.

Tombs said: “The squeeze on real incomes from higher inflation and slower 
employment growth will push the rate of growth of retail sales down sharply. 
For now, though, consumers’ spending continues to drive economic growth.”

Chris Williamson said it was understandable that retailers would feel buoyant 
after they enjoyed the strongest three-month spell of growth for almost two 
years in the third quarter, but figures for October and November showed “cracks 
may be appearing in the willingness of consumers to keep spending in the face 
of rising prices and wider financial worries”.

“The concern is that we may be starting to see signs that rising inflation, 
weak pay growth and job insecurityamong households 
<https://www.markiteconomics.com/Survey/PressRelease.mvc/25b61c5e2051471f924b855259a24555?s=1>
 are all starting to subdue consumer spending,” he said.

“Financial worries rose especially sharply among households where the main 
earner is employed in the private sector, with government workers perhaps 
feeling more secure in their jobs due to recent suggestions that government 
spending may soon start to rise as austerity is reined back. Private sector 
employees’ view on their future finances fell to the lowest for three years in 
October, boding ill for retail sales at the start of the fourth quarter.”
 