
Retailers are set for a strong end to the year as shoppers from overseas seek 
out bargains and Brits snap up big electrical goods and furniture before 
expected price rises next year.

Despite fears of a Brexit slowdown, retail sales growth picked up in the final 
quarter of the year, according to the latest Bank of Englandreport 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/2016/dec.aspx> 
on business conditions.

A monthly survey by the Bank’s network of regional agents found households 
were thought to be bringing forward purchases of larger items.

Retailers have said prices are likely to rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/black-friday-uk-last-hurrah-prices-rise-consumer-goods-retailers>
 because of the 15% fall in the value of the pound against the dollar since the 
EU referendum.

Caroline Gulliver, an analyst at Jefferies, said: “We believe Christmas 
trading for 2016 could be surprisingly robust compared to performances [so far 
this year] as a combination of weak comps [comparative figures], high 
disposable income and modestly helpful weather persuade consumers to spend. 
However, we do feel this will be a last hurrah ahead of a tougher 2017 as 
inflation accelerates.”

A monthly poll by market researchers GfK found that consumer confidence edged 
up in December, although it remains well below the levels seen before the vote 
to leave the EU.

The barometer’s main measure of consumer mood stood at -7 this month, up from 
-8 in November. People were marginally more upbeat about the prospects for 
their personal financial situation over the coming 12 months and they were more 
confident that now was a good time to make big purchases such as furniture.

But three other measures examined by GfK deteriorated: personal financial 
situation over the past 12 months, state of the economy over the past year and 
outlook for the economy over the coming 12 months.

Joe Staton, head of market dynamics at GfK, echoed economists in warning that 
the pound’s fall since the referendum wasstoking inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/brexit-economy-referendum-inflation-uk-2017>
 and starting to affect consumer spending patterns.

“Looking ahead to 2017 against a backdrop of Brexit negotiations, the decline 
in the value of sterling andthe prospect of higher inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
 impacting purchasing power, we forecast that confidence will be tested by the 
storm and stress of the year to come,” said Staton.

The CBI said in a separate report that its indicators from the private sector 
pointed to a solid close to the year but it highlighted challenges in 2017.

Its growth indicator, compiled from surveys of 788 respondents from 
manufacturing, the retail industry and the broader services sector, climbed to 
a balance of +17% in the three months to December, the highest in a year.

The manufacturing sector saw a strong rise in activity, and although retail 
sector growth slowed from November’s pace, the report said the rise in sales 
remained solid.

Alpesh Paleja, the CBI’s principal economist, said: “It’s great to see the 
economy end the year on the up, with growth strengthening across the private 
sector. However, economic growth is likely to soften next year, as heightened 
uncertainty hits business investment and higher inflation weighs on household 
spending.”

Retail analysts said high employment levels and low interest rates as well as 
higher levels of disposable income as wage rises outstripped inflation were 
likely to have a bigger influence on behaviour this Christmas than fears of 
inflation next year.

Clive Black, a retail analyst at Shore Capital, said people were yet to feel 
any financial pain from the approach of Brexit. “I don’t think that inflation 
is a material driver in consumer behaviour at the moment. I struggle to see a 
lot of people sitting down and saying ‘inflation is going to be 3.5% next year 
let’s go and buy a sofa,’” he said.

The fall in the value of the pound has helped luxury retailers, which are 
enjoyingbooming sales as foreign visitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/tourist-spending-uk-surges-following-pounds-brexit-slump>
 buy up handbags, jewellery and other designer products.

Meanwhile, fashion retailers – who account for one of the largest shares of 
spending at this time of year – are having a better season thanks to relatively 
normal winter weather after last year’s prolonged warm spell.

The Bank of England’s network of regional agents added that increased 
“staycationing”, as higher costs deterred Brits from holidaying abroad, was 
supporting growth in consumer services.
 