
Temporary workers at Sports Direct, the booming retail chain controlled by the 
billionaireMike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/mike-ashley-sports-direct-tycoon-empire-profile>
, are receiving effective hourly rates of pay below the minimum wage, an 
investigation by the Guardian can reveal.


Warehouse staff at the group, which is controlled by Britain’s 22nd richest 
man, are required to go through searches at the end of each shift, for which 
their time is unpaid, while they also suffer harsh deductions from their wage 
packets for clocking in for a shift just one minute late.

A day at 'the gulag': what it's like to work at Sports Direct's warehouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
The practices contribute to many staff being paid an effective rate of about 
£6.50 an hour against the statutory rate of £6.70 – potentially saving the FTSE 
100 firm millions of pounds a year at the expense of some of the poorest 
workers in the UK.

The discovery of the low pay being received by Sports Direct workers comes on 
top of astring of criticisms of the working conditions within the retailer’s 
warehouse in Shirebrook, Derbyshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/09/sports-direct-investors-revolt-against-chairman-and-pay-policy>
, where more than 80% of staff are on zero hours contracts. Workers are also:

 * Harangued by tannoy for not working fast enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
. 
 * Warned they will be sacked if they receive six black marks – or “strikes” 
(see document below) – over a six-month period for offences including a “period 
of reported sickness”; “errors”; “excessive/long toilet breaks”; “time 
wasting”; “excessive chatting”; “horseplay”; and “using a mobile phone in the 
warehouse”.

 * Banned from wearing 802 separate clothing brands at work. 
 * Have to go through rigorous searches – down to the last layer of clothing, 
asked to roll up trouser legs and show top of underwear – which typically takes 
15 minutes, because management is so concerned about potential theft. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCYSdH0y42OI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCYSdH0y42OI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCYSdH0y42OI&media=>
Daily body searches: workers are banned from wearing 802 brands 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CYSdH0y42OI&feature=youtu.be> 
Meanwhile:

 * Local primary schoolteachers have told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-staff-shirebrook-strikes-policy-sick-leave>
 that pupils can remain in school while ill – and return home to empty houses – 
as parents working at Sports Direct are too frightened to take time off work.

 * Union officers say the strict culture in the warehouse has resulted in 
workers being afraid to speak out over low pay and conditions as they fear 
immediately losing their jobs. 
The criticisms of Sports Direct – which have also included questions about 
whether its pricing policies are misleading, as well as the influence Ashley 
has on a company whose shares are held by many UK pension funds – come as the 
public company continues to dominate the UK sports retailing market and its 
trading performance flourishes.

The retailer is expected to announce more positive results to the City on 
Thursday – part of a financial success story that is almost entirely credited 
to the unconventional retailing nous of Ashley, a self-made man whose fortune 
amounts to £3.5bn, according to the Sunday Times Rich List.
 Transline rules for Sports Direct workers. 
By placing two undercover reporters inside Sports Direct’s warehouse, as well 
as interviewing former employees and speaking with workers about their roles 
while the journalists were employed on the site, the Guardian has established 
that many workers are in effect receiving less than the minimum wage per hour, 
over the total time they are required to spend in the warehouse and after 
financial penalties.

All warehouse workers are kept onsite at the end of each shift in order to 
undergo a compulsory search by Sports Direct security staff, with the 
experience of the Guardian reporters suggesting this typically adds another 
hour and 15 minutes to the working week – which is unpaid.


The discovery raises questions of whether such practices are within the law 
relating to the minimum wage. Lawyers said that paying workers for going 
through compulsory security checks had never been specifically tested under 
European law, but they added that a recent ruling by the European court of 
justice on the working time directive, which related to technicians travelling 
to customers’ premises to install equipment, appeared applicable to the 
policies employed in Sports Direct’s warehouse.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8rF_Pj9E_BM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8rF_Pj9E_BM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8rF_Pj9E_BM&media=>
Clocking out: staff are penalised for logging off early 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SYQHRA8cd3A&feature=youtu.be> 
That ruling stated that as the workers’ travelling time could “neither be 
shortened nor used freely by the technicians for their own interests” then they 
were “at the disposal” of their employer. Therefore, their time is covered by 
the directive 
<http://danielbarnettemploymentlaw.blogspot.co.uk/2015/09/working-time-travel-time-to-first-job.html>
 and counts as working time.

Mike Ashley: the ins and outs of Sports Direct tycoon's empire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/mike-ashley-sports-direct-tycoon-empire-profile>
Zoe Lagadec, a solicitor at Mulberry’s Employment Law Solicitors, said: “Given 
that the employees are not free to leave their place of work until and unless 
the security check has been completed, this time should be considered ‘working 
time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/29/sports-direct-chief-defends-zero-hours-contracts>
’ and therefore paid in accordance with the national minimum wage provisions.”

Furthermore, Sports Direct workers are docked 15 minutes of pay for clocking 
in as little as one minute late – even if they have arrived on the site on 
time. Conversely, staff are not paid extra for clocking out late, even when 
they have been finishing a job.

Literature handed to one of the reporters by The Best Connection employment 
agency, used by Sports Direct, said: “If you do not clock in by your shift 
start time then you will be recorded as LATE for that day and your hours and 
pay will be reduced by a minimum of 15 minutes.”

Lagadec added that docking 15 minutes of pay for clocking in slightly late is 
“arguably a breach of the national minimum wage, which carries both criminal 
and civil sanctions”.

The legal basis of her views was also confirmed to the Guardian by an 
employment law barrister at one of London’s top legal chambers.

The Guardian’s undercover reporters were employed during November by the two 
main agencies used by Sports Direct to supply temporary warehouse staff – 
Transline Group and The Best Connection.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMj5Ps2FGePk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMj5Ps2FGePk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMj5Ps2FGePk&media=>
Menial tasks, nine hours a day: inside the warehouse 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mj5Ps2FGePk&feature=youtu.be> 
The Best Connection worker was docked 15 minutes’ pay after arriving at the 
warehouse on time, but clocking in about five minutes late. Meanwhile, the 
Transline worker was not paid extra after clocking off five minutes later than 
the official end of the shift, when he had been finishing a job.

Sports Direct staff scared to take time off with sick children, teachers claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-staff-shirebrook-strikes-policy-sick-leave>
Overall, the reporters’ pay was 3% lower than it would have been without the 
penalty and including the time spent on the retailer’s compulsory searches. It 
averaged about £6.50 an hour over all the shifts the reporters worked in 
November.

Other workers also confirmed that these practices were longstanding and 
commonplace. If calculated over the whole workforce, the savings would amount 
to millions of pounds on the annual wage bill of a warehouse, where up to 5,000 
workers are thought to report for work each day. At busy times, wages have hit 
£1m a week within the facility, which is currently being almost doubled in size.


A Transline spokesperson said: “We do not breach national minimum wage 
legislation. Like many other retail warehouse operations throughout the UK, 
Shirebrook also has a policy of searches for all warehouse employees, office 
staff, senior management, directors and visitors. As with all policies, these 
are constantly under review. The searches are conducted in accordance with 
employment contracts and are completed as quickly as possible.”

He added that docking 15 minutes’ pay for being one minute late was “not 
standard procedure”.

Sports Direct said the Guardian’s findings contained “inaccuracies” but 
declined to comment further. The Best Connection agency declined to comment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cc7e43b160a9622f67846c892ff53381464bf83%2F0_13_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20Sports%20Direct%20effectively%20pays%20below%20minimum%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20Sports%20Direct%20effectively%20pays%20below%20minimum%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cc7e43b160a9622f67846c892ff53381464bf83%2F0_13_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
 Unite union members dressed as Dickensian workers protest against zero-hours 
contracts outside Sports Direct. Photograph: Matthew Taylor/Rex Shutterstock 
Luke Primarolo, regional officer at the union Unite, said: “HMRC needs to 
urgently investigate what looks like a breach of the minimum wage. The majority 
of these workers are on precarious agency contracts, which while not illegal, 
make it virtually impossible for them to challenge unfair treatment for fear of 
losing their job. The culture of fear at Sport Direct’s Shirebrook depot is 
more akin to a workhouse than a FTSE 100 company. It needs to change with 
agency workers being given permanent contracts by Sports Direct and paid a 
decent wage.”

The findings that Sports Direct workers are receiving less than the minimum 
wage follows recent controversy over redundancies at one of Sports Direct’s 
fashion chains, USC.

In October, Sports Direct’s chief executive, David Forsey, pleaded not guilty 
to a criminal charge of failing to give 30 days’ notice for redundancies at the 
subsidiary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/14/usc-administrator-charged-with-dave-forsey-over-job-losses>
. The case’s next hearing is scheduled for the spring.

Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said: “It will surprise no one 
that Sports Direct is hitting the headlines for the wrong reasons again. All 
workers should be paid at least the minimum wage for every minute they are 
required to be on company premises. If the allegations against Sports Direct 
are found to be true, the government must make sure all their staff receive the 
full pay they are entitled to.”

A spokesperson for the Department for Business Innovation and Skills said: “We 
are determined that everyone who is entitled to the national minimum wage 
receives it. HMRC investigates every complaint made to the Acas helpline. In 
addition, HMRC conducts risk-based enforcement in sectors or areas where there 
is a higher risk of workers not getting paid the legal minimum wage.”
 