
 * This article is the subject of libel proceedings issued on behalf of Lenny 
Hyde, Patrick O’Mahony and Labardie Fisher Limited.

African and Asian migrant workers are being routinely but illegally used as 
cheap labour on Irish fishing trawlers working out of some of the country’s 
most popular tourist ports, the Guardian can reveal.

A year-long investigation into the Irish prawn and whitefish sector has 
uncovered undocumented Ghanaian, Filipino, Egyptian and Indian fishermen 
manning boats in ports from Cork to Galway. They have described a catalogue of 
abuses, including being confined to vessels unless given permission by their 
skippers to go on land, and being paid less than half the Irish minimum wage 
that would apply if they were legally employed. They have also spoken of 
extreme sleep deprivation, having to work for days or nights on end with only a 
few hours’ sleep, and with no proper rest days.

Some migrant workers claim to have been deceived and appear to have been 
trafficked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/what-is-the-crime-of-human-trafficking>
 on to trawlers for labour exploitation, an abuse that would be a form of 
modern slavery.

Our evidence suggests that some boat owners and crewing agencies are smuggling 
African and Filipino workers in to Ireland through entry points at London 
Heathrow and Belfast airports, and then arranging for them to cross from 
NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> in to the Republic 
by road, bypassing Irish immigration controls.


Agents and owners appear to be exploiting a loophole designed for 
international merchant shipping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/02/ireland-exploiting-the-legal-tangle-on-work-permits-for-fishermen>
, which allows non-EU seafarers to transit through the UK for up to 48 hours if 
they immediately move on to join vessels working in international waters. These 
transit arrangements are not intended for fishermen working in national waters 
or constantly coming in and out of Irish ports. We understand the loophole was 
first exploited by agents to recruit migrant workers for the Scottish fishing 
fleet and the practice appears to have spread from there to the Irish fishing 
industry.


Many workers describe subsequently living in fear of deportation and being 
told to stay on their boats in port because the owners would be fined if they 
were spotted and stopped by the authorities.


Some workers said they were controlled by debt to the agencies that recruited 
them and charged them substantial and illegal placement fees to arrange visas, 
jobs and itineraries.


Abraham Okoh*, a Ghanaian fisherman (whose name we have changed), for example, 
told us he had been bonded by debt to an agent in Accra who had found him a job 
on an Irish trawler and promised to arrange all visas and travel. He entered 
via Heathrow and Belfast, and was told to catch the bus from Northern Ireland 
to the port in Ireland where his vessel was docked.

I worked continuously. We could be awake for two days …

He said he had not understood when he was recruited that he would be working 
illegally. He had to live on his trawler at all times and was told by the owner 
to hide and not talk to people in port. The crew would go fishing for four to 
five days at a time and then be required to mend nets and gear in harbour. “I 
worked continuously. We could be awake for two days with almost no sleep. It 
was horrible,” he told us.

European Communities minimum hours of rest regulations, which apply to 
employees, workers but not the self-employed, require no less than 10 hours in 
any 24-hour period and 77 hours in any seven-day period.

Abraham described being cheated of wages and being hungry when food ran out at 
sea. Eventually he jumped ship to escape.

He appears to be a victim of human trafficking, a criminal offence – defined 
as a form of modern slavery in the UK and Ireland – that involves the movement 
of people for exploitation. Whether the person consented to the journey is not 
relevant: key factors can include whether they were deceived, or their 
vulnerability or rights abused; how far they were controlled; and whether 
working and living conditions amount to exploitation. A person can only be 
definitively classified as trafficked once his or her experience has been 
assessed and a competent authority – in Ireland a senior police officer – has 
ruled.


Okoh’s story was echoed by others, including Antonio Santos* and Diego Cruz*, 
two undocumented Filipino fishermen, who described similar conditions of 
extreme sleep deprivation, long hours and low pay on fishing vessels around the 
Republic of Ireland. They said they too had been brought to the country 
illegally by agents and boat owners.

As well as worker testimony, our findings are based on extensive undercover 
interviewing and filming in Irish fishing ports. They are corroborated by 
detailed documentary evidence – from immigration records, letters and contracts 
from boat owners and agents, publicly available vessel-tracking data, and 
official reports into fatal marine accidents involving migrant fishermen – and 
by interviews with several well-placed sources.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa630a325778747c3ca79e329631a79b89e52933e%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20trafficked%20migrant%20workers%20abused%20in%20Irish%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20trafficked%20migrant%20workers%20abused%20in%20Irish%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa630a325778747c3ca79e329631a79b89e52933e%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Fresh Irish prawns on sale in a Cork market. Photograph: John Domokos for the 
Guardian 
Many migrant fishermen have described a climate of fear and spoke to us only 
on condition of anonymity; we have changed their names to protect them.

Others told us they were happy to work on Irish fishing boats even though they 
were paid far less than local or EU crew because it was more than they could 
earn back home. They nevertheless reported feeling oppressed by their lack of 
immigration status and the constant need to hide and forego their rights when 
the industry depended on their labour.

Several sources in both the seafood industry and Ireland’s authorities agreed 
to talk to us but said they could not go on the record without risk of 
reprisals.

One skipper in Wexford’s Kilmore Quay, who only employs Irish crew, waved at a 
West African worker on a neighbouring vessel and told one of our undercover 
reporters: “You can get one of them for €700 [£501] a month. Would you work for 
that?”.

Turning a blind eye ...

The International Transport Federation 
<http://www.itfglobal.org/en/transport-sectors/seafarers/> (ITF), the union 
that first sounded the alarm about conditions for migrants in the Irish and 
Scottish fishing fleets in 2008, said the Irish government was “turning a blind 
eye”. The Irish government denied this and said it was taking all trafficking 
concerns seriously.

The majority of Ireland’s high value prawn and fish catch is exported to 
supermarkets, restaurants and fish markets across Europe, the Americas and the 
Far East. The Irish government promotes its€850m ($936) a year seafood sector 
<http://www.bim.ie/media/bim/content/downloads/BIM%20Irish%20Seafood%20Industry%20Fact%20Sheet%202014_April%202015.pdf>
 (pdf) as a vital, sustainable and indigenous part of the economy.

But the case of an undocumented Filipino fisherman, which came to the 
attention of the Irish authorities only by chance last month, has made the 
problems in the sector impossible to ignore.


Part two: ‘Where’s my boat?’: Demie’s story

When he landed a job on an Irish fishing boat, Demie Omol hoped he would be 
able to support his family. But the dream quickly dissipated

On a housing estate in Cork city, Demie Omol, a 39-year-old migrant worker 
from the Philippines, laid out the dozens of boxes of medicines he has to take, 
and told us his story. He believes he was trafficked on to an Irish fishing 
trawler earlier this year to be exploited as cheap labour. He might have 
remained invisible except that he fell ill and had to be taken to hospital.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-boat-ordeal-please-stop-we-are-human-beings-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446053904813%2FKP_573529_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Please%20stop%2C%20we%20are%20human%20beings'%3A%20my%20Irish%20fishing%20boat%20ordeal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-boat-ordeal-please-stop-we-are-human-beings-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Please%20stop%2C%20we%20are%20human%20beings%27%3A%20my%20Irish%20fishing%20boat%20ordeal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-boat-ordeal-please-stop-we-are-human-beings-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446053904813%2FKP_573529_crop_640x480.jpg>
‘Please stop, we are human beings’: my Irish fishing boat ordeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/nov/02/irish-fishing-boat-ordeal-please-stop-we-are-human-beings-video>
Last March, at home in the Philippines, Omol felt hopeful. He had been 
recruited through theDiamond-H Marine Services agency 
<http://www.dhshipping.com/index_desktop.php> in Manila, run by the Turingan 
family, and had secured a crewing job on a fishing vessel which would pay him 
more money than he had ever earned. “When I was in the Philippines my work was 
driving a tricycle. I got paid €3 [$3.39] a day.” He was desperate for the 
promised salary which would support his wife and their three young children. He 
would have to live away from his family but it was a sacrifice he was ready to 
make.

The job he was offered was on the Labardie Fisher, a 30-foot Irish-flagged 
fishing vessel that trawls for luxury fish like cod, monkfish, haddock and 
plaice. The basic terms of the one-year contract drawn up by the agency seemed 
clear enough at the time. He would earn $1,000 (£654) a month, plus overtime 
and holidays, for working 48 hours a week – a rate that works out at less than 
half what someone on the Irish national minimum wage must be paid. He says he 
understood that his employers were the owners of the boat, as named in the 
contract, and that he would immediately join the vessel in Belfast harbour, 
from where it would set sail for Morocco.

His agency, Diamond-H, said it also understood from the owners that Omol would 
join the trawler in Belfast harbour to work somewhere in international waters, 
perhaps off Africa. It told us it knew that the Republic of Ireland does not 
grant Filipinos the necessary permits to work on trawlers coming in and out of 
Irish ports. Omol had no paperwork signed by the boat owners, however, and the 
owners told us he was employed by the agency and not by them.

The boat owners are in fact Pat O’Mahony and Lenny Hyde. The letters said that 
Omol would be joining the crew of the vessel and it would be “leaving from 
Belfast harbour” immediately. He was given a UK transit visa, which allowed him 
a maximum of 48 hours to get through the UK to his boat.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3900ec062f116edb3272d2be0fc177dbec33d52a%2F0_34_794_476%2F794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20trafficked%20migrant%20workers%20abused%20in%20Irish%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20trafficked%20migrant%20workers%20abused%20in%20Irish%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3900ec062f116edb3272d2be0fc177dbec33d52a%2F0_34_794_476%2F794.jpg>
 The Labardie Fisher. Photograph: MarineTraffic 
But when he arrived at Belfast airport, there was no boat in the harbour. 
Instead, according to Omol, a member of the Turingan family, who own the 
Diamond-H agency, met him at the airport together with Pat O’Mahony.

O’Mahony recorded his role that evening on his own Facebook page, posting that 
he was “feeling bored” in Belfast airport waiting for the Filipino to arrive. 
They took Omol into a car and he was driven overnight across the border into 
the Republic of Ireland. He did not present to Irish immigration. According to 
him, he was confused as to where he was being taken and wondered repeatedly, 
“Where is my boat? Where is my boat?” His answer came in the small hours of the 
following morning when they arrived in the small village of Crosshaven, south 
of Cork city, where the Labardie Fisher was docked. Omol was told that by 
sunrise they would set sail for a four-day fishing trip. Although he had 
equivalent safety training certificates from the Philippines, he had not 
undertaken the mandatory Irish safety training for fishermen. But within a few 
hours of arriving, Omol was at work.

I had no holidays or rest days … We had to prepare gear, fix cables, stitch 
the nets. It was constant, constant.

The owners said the agency was responsible for all legalities, paperwork and 
immigration and that it was always clear that he was going to work from Cork. 
Omol claims he was deceived about his immigration status and about the 
conditions, which he told us involved working almost without stop while at sea, 
without the statutory minimum rest periods. “It was continuous working, day and 
night.”

“I had no holidays or rest days … We had to prepare gear, fix cables, stitch 
the nets. It was constant, constant.” The Guardian understands that none of the 
mandatory records of rest for Omol had been logged. The owners vehemently deny 
that the crew worked such hours.


He lived on the boat. He said he would not always have time for regular meals 
and he would often eat only one proper meal a day. Most of his pay went 
straight to his family back home, but a small portion of it – about €200 ($225) 
a month – was paid to him in cash by the owners. He was warned not to leave the 
boat without permission, he says. When he did manage to get away, he visited 
local charity shops to buy secondhand clothes for his children.
 Demie Omol’s family. Photograph: Courtesy of Demie Omol 
He told us he was paid the basic $1,000 a month as set out in his contract but 
never received overtime payments or holidays. Omol says a fellow worker on 
board felt sorry for him because he was only earning about a quarter of the 
money paid to some local or EU crew members. When he asked, he says his agent 
then told him that the overtime and holidays were all part of the monthly 
salary.

The agency’s Manila-based family member Rommel Turingan told us it was made 
clear that the $1,000 was for unlimited hours. “We explain to the crew the 
working conditions – we know sometimes 24-hour shifts without rest. They know 
it is day and night. It’s the same in the Philippines, non-stop on fishing 
vessels. If you work 100 hours it is [the] same pay.”

 Omol’s name did not appear on the boat’s official logbook. It was only the 
events of early June that drew him to the attention of the authorities. While 
at sea, he felt sharp pains in his stomach and back, and within days he was 
feeling weak and breathless. He asked his owners to take him to Cork University 
hospital. Doctors soon discovered an 8cm tumour in his stomach and told him 
that he would need surgery. But as an undocumented worker in Ireland he was not 
entitled to free public healthcare. A social worker and a migrant support 
worker are understood to have intervened to get him a publicly funded medical 
card. “I was so very depressed in the hospital, wondering if my life [would be] 
very short, I felt like I [was] dying. Very, very far away from my family. It 
was a very bad time for me.”

Omol felt that he was abandoned by the boat owners. “I called them, but no 
answers. They accused Omol of tricking them and said he must have known he was 
not fit before he came. Omol said that was not true, and that he had received a 
full medical certificate before he travelled. His diagnosis was of a kind of 
gastrointestinal tumour that can be aggressive but symptomless until advanced.

O’Mahony and co-director of the Labardie Fisher Lenny Hyde, vehemently deny 
the allegations of trafficking and exploitation.

They said Omol’s account was completely inaccurate and defamatory. It was 
untrue, they said, that they were involved in bringing undocumented crew into 
Ireland to work illegally. They added that they had told the agency the crew 
would be working from Crosshaven in Ireland. They denied the Filipino worked 
continuously without statutory rest periods and said Omol had been fully paid 
for the period he worked. They later added that a second Filipino crew member, 
who we understand arrived on the same flights as Omol, had confirmed that he 
had 14 hours sleep every night, and had eaten three meals a day, including a 
full “hotel dinner” in the middle of the day. [
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Thi4d_iRzuY&feature=youtu.be 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Thi4d_iRzuY&feature=youtu.be> SEE FOOTNOTE 
BELOW] (He has now returned to the Philippines, according to sources.) The 
owners also said Omol was given the best of medical treatment and that they had 
been assured by police immigration that there was “no question of human 
trafficking for labour exploitation”.

Omol hasn’t seen his family since March this year. He said doctors had told 
him he was not fit to travel home. He has been staying with fellow Filipinos in 
Cork city for the past few months and recently began chemotherapy. He is 
anguished about how his family will manage without his financial support. His 
wife earns €3 a day working as a caretaker, which he says is not enough to feed 
his children. Sitting in his friend’s living room, he points upwards towards 
his bedroom where he keeps two large boxes full of secondhand clothes that he 
will give his children when he returns home. He doesn’t know when that day will 
come. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u3mKlu4sToY&feature=youtu.be 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u3mKlu4sToY&feature=youtu.be> SEE FOOTNOTE 
BELOW]

Part three: the allegations

Omol’s account highlights how vulnerable undocumented workers are. His illness 
is exceptional, but the conditions he alleges he worked in are not; similar 
allegations have been made to us by workers in many of Ireland’s leading 
fishing ports.

We have identified undocumented migrant workers employed in breach variously 
of safety, employment and immigration regulations on visits to Dublin’s port of 
Howth, Galway’s Rossaveel, Donegal’s Killybegs, Wicklow’s Arklow, Wexford’s 
Kilmore Quay, several of County Cork’s most productive ports including 
Castletownbere, Union Hall and Kinsale, and County Waterford’s Dunmore East.

An Irish official told us “There are a lot of good and decent owners doing the 
right thing, but they are competing against owners with untrained, underpaid or 
even unpaid trafficked crews. The fishing industry needs to be split for 
anything to really succeed: praise the good, shame the bad.”


Separate from the Labardie Fisher, the abuses reported to us – alleged in some 
but not all Irish trawlers, and in varying combinations – include:

 * Withholding of pay, arbitrary cuts to rates of pay agreed in recruitment 
contracts, forced unpaid labour on net and boat repairs in port.

 * Rates of pay a fraction of the legal minimum and a fraction of what local 
or EU fellow workers are paid.

 * Worker passports being withheld by owners/skippers.

 * Workers denied freedom of movement, told to hide when inspectors or the 
Navy board, and being required to live onboard because of their immigration 
status.

 * Severe sleep deprivation, with workers being required to work in near 
continuous shift for several days without mandatory rest periods.

 * Reports of verbal abuse and in occasional cases physical abuse such as 
slapping.

 * Exposure to dangerous working practices.

 * Workers fishing without mandatory Irish safety training certificates.

 * Workers being left hungry, with insufficient money for food and no access 
to shops. 
 * Workers living in cramped conditions on vessels in some cases without 
proper sanitary arrangements. 
The evidence presented to us in testimony and documents suggested some 
migrants were victims of trafficking into and out of the UK and into Ireland.


“There is a great deal of misunderstanding about the plight of trafficked 
migrant workers,” Parosha Chandran, a leading human rights barrister and UN 
expert on trafficking, said. “This is a community of trafficked persons whose 
cases have not been identified or focused on by the governments of Britain and 
Ireland. We risk a culture where one employer sees another employer 
under-paying or exploiting their workers and thinks that I can do that as well.”


Part four: a sector all at sea

Amid Ireland’s economic boom, many fishermen gave up life at sea in the years 
before the global crash, opening the door for migrant workers

The deterioration in conditions for crew on some boats began during Ireland’s 
economic boom years in the decade leading up to the 2008 crash, according to a 
former fisherman who asked not to be identified. During theCeltic Tiger period 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celtic_Tiger>, fishermen started leaving the 
tough life at sea to work on construction sites and it became increasingly 
difficult to find local crew. He explained how he had watched some boat owners 
bring in migrant workers, including EU nationals. Once the pattern had been 
established, owners worked out that they could get undocumented Asian and 
African crew even more cheaply. Because they lived on the boats, they were 
available 24/7. “It’s greed,” he said.

Trawler owners have also described feeling squeezed by the pressure on stocks 
from overfishing and competition over quotas, leading them to try to protect 
profits by cutting labour costs. Several of the migrant workers we spoke to 
described being involved in illegal fishing.


A Filipino worker for example told us that it was a regular event for the some 
of the trawlers he worked on to sail to an area where there were no prawns and 
pretend to fish, steaming up and down while transmitting a tracking signal for 
the authorities, so that they could then move to a fishing ground with good 
prawns but strict quotas. There they would catch double their quota but mark 
the prawns down in the electronic log as coming from two different fishing 
banks. Whenever the Irish navy appeared on the radar, and was likely to 
inspect, he said he was told by the skipper to hide.

An official source said that the authorities and the industry were aware of 
labour abuses but reluctant to act: “It’s a can of worms that needs to be 
looked at. Nobody [in government] is making a decision [to act] because nobody 
wants to take the decision.”


This view was echoed by another industry expert. In the tight-knit and often 
isolated communities around the main fishing ports, those prepared to break the 
law and exploit migrant workers could often do so with impunity. “There’s a 
culture of omerta. It’s very hard for people to stand up and speak out. Many 
migrants can’t understand what’s written on the controls on the boat. There’s a 
language barrier. Even making a cup of tea can turn into a roaring match. It’s 
leading to accidents.”


There have in fact been repeated fatal accidents involving foreign workers on 
Irish fishing vessels in the past decade, with major safety failings and 
breaches ofregulations 
<http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2003/si/709/made/en/print> identified in 
many cases. Those who spoke to us feared conditions made further accidents more 
likely.

The tragedy that befell the Tit Bonhomme, the Irish trawler that sank in 2012 
with the loss of five lives, is still seared in the memories of those in the 
sector. Of the six crew, four were Egyptian and two, including the skipper, 
were Irish. The sole survivor was an Egyptian. The vessel, which had been on 
autopilot, crashed on to rocks just outside the harbour of Union Hall in County 
Cork when it suddenly veered off course.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-industry-the-tragedy-of-the-trawler-tit-bonhomme-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446054284588%2FKP_573540_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20fishing%20industry%3A%20the%20tragedy%20of%20the%20trawler%20Tit%20Bonhomme%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-industry-the-tragedy-of-the-trawler-tit-bonhomme-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20fishing%20industry%3A%20the%20tragedy%20of%20the%20trawler%20Tit%20Bonhomme%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Firish-fishing-industry-the-tragedy-of-the-trawler-tit-bonhomme-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446054284588%2FKP_573540_crop_640x360.jpg>
Irish fishing industry: the tragedy of the trawler Tit Bonhomme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/nov/02/irish-fishing-industry-the-tragedy-of-the-trawler-tit-bonhomme-video>
 According to the official report on the sinking, one of the most significant 
causes is likely to have been the crew’s severe lack of sleep – just four to 
five hours in the 40 hours the boat was out. After the accident it emerged that 
three of the men had not completed the mandatory Irish government safety 
training and there had been none of the legally required emergency drills in 
the months leading up to the tragedy. The trawler was only carrying lifesaving 
equipment for five men, even though there were six on board.

“Fishing is allowed to be dangerous,” said one expert. “What’s the point in 
having regulations if they don’t enforce them?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd4cf818740a088da58cf5f4de098ce4401676e9%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20trafficked%20migrant%20workers%20abused%20in%20Irish%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20trafficked%20migrant%20workers%20abused%20in%20Irish%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd4cf818740a088da58cf5f4de098ce4401676e9%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 A memorial to the five men who lost their lives on the Tit Bonhomme. 
Photograph: The Guardian 
Changing the culture around safety in the industry appears to be difficult. 
The courts tend to deal with cases leniently. Earlier this month, a judge 
dismissed the case of a prawn trawler owner who pleaded guilty to taking an 
Egyptian migrant crew member fishing when he had no safety training, deciding 
not to convict him because he was providing employment and had a clean record. 
Instead, he ordered him to pay €1,000 to a local charity.

In a separate recent case, the skipper of a prawn trawler physically assaulted 
a government safety inspector on a fishing pier. The Guardian understands that 
officials had identified safety failings and undocumented migrant crew without 
Irish safety training on the vessel shortly before the incident. According to a 
witness account, the skipper repeatedly punched and kicked the inspector, 
threatened his life and shouted: “You fucked things up for me. Now I’m going to 
fuck you up … I’m going to fucking kill you.” The skipper pleaded guilty to 
assault and was ordered to pay just €500 by the court in September. The boat 
owner told us the incident had not happened on his vessel and had been dealt 
with by the courts.

Part five: the smuggling route

Few people think of the UK as a focal point for trafficking, yet Heathrow is 
among the routes used to get undocumented workers into Ireland

Egyptian fishermen without papers tend to arrive by means of well-worn 
smuggling routes across the Mediterranean and in trucks across the Continent

The UK route through Belfast used for African and Asian workers has become 
more common since Irish immigration authorities began clamping down on workers 
from outside the European Economic Area (EEA) flying in direct, deporting them 
on arrival at airports in the Republic.

Some have told us they were aware that they were being smuggled; others say 
they did not understand that they would be entering Ireland illegally or even 
that Ireland was a different country from Northern Ireland.
Graphic showing the route 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/ireland-ports/giv-31114q1PHrKDg2JpQ/>
The International Transport Federation’s Ken Fleming said: “There is no doubt 
in the mind of the ITF that there is a well rehearsed system of bringing 
individuals in to this jurisdiction and in to the domestic fishing fleet on the 
pretence of a better life. What’s waiting for them is an environment that ties 
them up in a web. They are trapped. They have no protection because they are 
here illegally.”


The transit loophole, designed for international merchant shipping, prohibits 
crew leaving the ship in territorial zones without express permission from the 
port authorities, explained Diego Archer, a leading expert in maritime 
immigration law at Fragomen Worldwide. This is why many migrant fishermen are 
told to stay on ship and hide.


To work on an Irish fishing vessel that operates in or passes through 
Ireland’s 12-mile territorial waters, or to work on ships docked in Irish 
ports, non-EEA migrants need an Irish work permit, a visa or immigration 
permission. But since 2006 non-EEA seafarers have been ineligible to apply for 
Irish work permits and they are generally not granted visas.


Because Irish trawler crew have traditionally worked as share fishermen – a 
system whereby workers are paid a share of the money made from the catch, 
divided in proportions agreed by the owner – they have generally been 
considered self-employed and responsible for their own tax and insurance. There 
has been considerableconfusion about the employment status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/ireland-exploiting-the-legal-tangle-on-work-permits-for-fisherman>
 of migrant fishermen and some of the boat owners we spoke to said that Irish 
police and officials had given them inconsistent signals about employment 
regulations and the immigration status of non-EEA crew. Simply declaring 
someone self-employed or a share fisherman does not, however, change their 
employment status, nor relieve their employers of their legal obligations if 
workers are de facto employed. How a worker is classified in law depends on 
what degree of autonomy he has. Several undocumented migrants who had been told 
by owners they were share fishermen said that, in fact, they had no control 
over their work and were being paid much less than the minimum wage that would 
apply if they were legally employed.

A pattern of experience emerged in our interviewing of undocumented African 
and Asian fishermen. Where they had been smuggled or apparently trafficked, 
their experience on their first boat was the most exploitative, with wages 
underpaid or unpaid, their fear and confusion greatest and the degree of 
control exerted over them strongest. Several described finding the courage 
after enduring terrible conditions for months to jump ship. Where they had 
found work as undocumented crew on other vessels subsequently, they were 
gradually able to improve their conditions. Some talked of developing good 
relations with the better boat owners and some were also able to make home 
visits and return voluntarily by similar routes. Although they still had to 
hide from the authorities, some were able to swap living on boats for shared 
accommodation in flats in port villages.




Part six: open secret

From the international transport union to seafarer’s missions, there is 
widespread concern that migrant workers are being routinely exploited

Last November the Irish Seal Sanctuary <http://www.irishsealsanctuary.com/> 
issued a warning, published in the industry’s trade magazine, theSkipper 
<http://maramedia.ie/the-skipper-home>, that illegal “black” overfishing and 
“modern slavery” were putting the future of the industry at risk.

“Anecdotally we have long been aware of this through speaking with fishermen 
on a local level and can only conclude authorities are aware?” the charity’s 
Sea Fishery Advisory group wrote.

Their assessment – that exploitation of foreign labour is an open secret in 
the Irish seafood sector – is supported not just by the union, the ITF, but 
also by migrant rights groups and seamen’s missions, charities that work in 
ports. They have confirmed that they are aware of cases of trafficking and 
exploitation on Irish and Northern Irish boats but have said that vulnerable 
workers are often hard to help because they fear reprisals and deportation.

Gráinne O’Toole, workplace rights coordinator for the Migrants Rights Centre 
Ireland <http://www.mrci.ie/> told us her organisation was having increasing 
contact with non-EU fishermen who were reporting exploitation. “Poor conditions 
and standards that go unchecked can fast deteriorate into forced labour. We are 
concerned about the potential for trafficking for forced labour to flourish 
within the fishing sector and MRCI is currently investigating cases in this 
regard,” she said.

The Cork-based Irish Immigrant Support Centre <http://www.nascireland.org/> 
(NASC) said it too was concerned about undocumented migrant workers in fishing 
who appeared to have been trafficked.

Workers themselves talked of their illegal employment and the routes for 
recruitment being an open secret.


Filipino Raoul Rodriguez*, an undocumented fisherman who has worked on Irish 
prawn trawlers for several years, said he met “illegal workers” in ports around 
the country.

I don’t want to go home inside a box …

The work was not only physically exhausting and dangerous but took a mental 
toll, he said. Loneliness, isolation, loss of freedom, and constant fear of 
deportation if you step out of line eat into the soul.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Flife-inside-irish-fishing-industry-i-hate-this-job-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20inside%20the%20Irish%20fishing%20industry%3A%20'I%20hate%20this%20job%2C%20but%20I%20have%20to%20do%20it'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Flife-inside-irish-fishing-industry-i-hate-this-job-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20inside%20the%20Irish%20fishing%20industry%3A%20%27I%20hate%20this%20job%2C%20but%20I%20have%20to%20do%20it%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Flife-inside-irish-fishing-industry-i-hate-this-job-video&media=>
Life inside the Irish fishing industry: ‘I hate this job, but I have to do it’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/nov/02/life-inside-irish-fishing-industry-i-hate-this-job-video>
“It’s like you are floating because you have not had enough sleep – you are 
hungry, everything feels bad, your head aches. You feel angry. You are alone 
and there are so many things that come inside your head and sometimes you hate 
yourself. I hate this job. But I need money for my kid’s future.”

Rodriguez has not seen his family in four years. During that time he has 
worked in Ireland without papers for illegally low pay, enduring 
round-the-clock shifts for days on end while at sea, but he thinks he’s the 
lucky one.

He was a close friend of Joel Alama, an undocumented Filipino who died in an 
accident on an Irish fishing boat in August 2015.
 Joel Alama, who died in August after an accident on an Irish fishing trawler. 
Photograph: The Guardian 
Alama, 46, is said to have gone into a fish hold to rescue an Irish crew 
member who had become overwhelmed. The build up of ammonia and hydrogen 
sulphide gases is recognised as a potentially lethal hazard when dealing with 
fish. (Official inquiries to determine the cause of the deaths are yet to be 
completed.) Joel, said to have been a quiet, private person who lived on his 
boat, was also overwhelmed and died a few days later in a Donegal hospital. He 
had been fishing without papers around Ireland for years. His status made home 
visits difficult, but he was due to go back to see his family at last this 
Christmas.

Rodriguez had been deeply troubled by his friend’s death: “I am lucky that I 
am going home still alive to my family. I don’t want to go home inside a box,” 
he said.

Rodriguez said he first arrived in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> illegally several years ago on 
a transit visa via Heathrow, on this occasion through Aberdeen, organised by 
agents in Manila and Peterhead. He worked on Scottish prawn trawlers for a few 
years, confined to the boats day and night, and was paid just $1,200 a month 
for unlimited hours. The contracts would mostly be for a year, and then the 
agents would organise a return to the Philippines and a new contract and 
transit visa.


He said he suffered verbal abuse and threats from his skipper and witnessed 
other crew members being slapped.

Eventually he couldn’t stand it any more and decided to jump ship. His 
opportunity came when his trawler put in to port in Northern Ireland’s Kilkeel. 
The Scottish crew left and when night fell he and another Filipino crewman 
grabbed their chance to run. Rodriguez then hid in the mountains outside 
Belfast in a friend’s house for three months. He was scared that the boat owner 
would hunt him down.


You are working but your eyes close …

He heard that Irish boat owners were hiring migrant workers so made his way 
across the border and found himself a job on an Irish prawn trawler. At first 
he worked in the Republic on similar terms, going out to sea for one or two 
weeks at a time to undertake gruelling labour for low pay. “You are working, 
but your eyes close. You sleep, then there’s the buzzer. There’s no choice.”

Later, by now with a boat owner he describes as “good”, he managed to 
negotiate a switch to the traditional share system.


He has worked on trawlers putting in to many of Ireland’s main ports – from 
Killybegs to Rossaveal, Galway, Howth, Cork, and Dunmore East – and says many 
of the foreign workers he meets in those ports are undocumented and often 
cheated of wages. “They are illegal, the government here does not allow 
fishermen from a different country [to get visas or work permits] because it’s 
still all about Irish people.”

He hopes that one day the Irish government will allow non-EEA seafarers to 
apply for work permits which would afford them the same health and employment 
rights as local crew members. We asked him what he thought would happen if 
undocumented migrant workers were not smuggled on to Irish trawlers? “I think 
most of the boats would be tied up, not sailing, because Irish people are not 
interested in work in fishing.”


Part seven: what next?

With the Irish government accused of turning a blind eye, the justice 
department has defended its efforts to address trafficking allegations

Migrant rights organisations would like to see the Irish government take 
robust action. NASC’s senior legal officer, Fiona Hurley, said the Irish state 
was “failing to protect undocumented migrants and victims of labour 
trafficking”.

“Victims are largely invisible in Ireland; this is especially true for those 
who are exploited in the fishing industry as they are living in remote coastal 
areas without access to support. The state may be considered complicit in this 
modern-day slavery by failing to take serious measures to encourage victims to 
come forward and failing to prosecute traffickers,” she added.


We put to the Irish government the allegation that it was turning a blind eye 
to the use of undocumented vulnerable workers in the fishing fleet.


The Department of Justice denied the criticisms, saying that “strong 
legislative, administrative and operational measures have been put in place in 
Ireland to combat and prevent trafficking in human beings”. Several dedicated 
anti-trafficking units had been established to tackle the issue and it was a 
police priority this year as in previous years, it said.

“Any suspicion of human trafficking that is reported to An Garda Síochána (the 
Irish police) is the subject of a comprehensive investigation. The maritime 
industry (including fishing) has been identified as an area of potentially high 
risk for human trafficking due to the nature of the work in the sector, and the 
employment structures that are used. A project led by An Garda Síochána has 
been established specifically to address the concerns in relation to potential 
human trafficking in this sector,” said the justice department in a statement.

The MRCI said that giving undocumented fishermen a way of regularising their 
status was essential to prevent abuse.

The UK government told us that it was aware of trafficking into Ireland and 
was acting on it.

 Karen Bradley, Home Office minister, said: “We will take the firmest action 
possible to stop human traffickers operating on our shores.

“Our historic Modern Slavery Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/30/contents/enacted> has also given 
the police greater powers. The UK uses intelligence to understand which routes 
are being used by traffickers and we have a number of ongoing investigations in 
relation to abuse linked to fishing vessels.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64251a410da4f62483a0a27b892e05931efb2ca9%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20trafficked%20migrant%20workers%20abused%20in%20Irish%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20trafficked%20migrant%20workers%20abused%20in%20Irish%20fishing%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Frevealed-trafficked-migrant-workers-abused-in-irish-fishing-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64251a410da4f62483a0a27b892e05931efb2ca9%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Mending nets quayside. Photograph: Chris Kelly for the Guardian 
“We are working closely with our partners, including the Irish authorities, to 
fight all types of organised immigration crime.”

The Guardian’s revelations come in the wake of a major police investigation 
into human trafficking and illegal labour in the Scottish fishing sector 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/456085/Boat-slave-shame-of-fishing-industry>. 
A series of raids across England and Scotland by the then Serious and Organised 
Crime Agency in 2013 led to dozens of migrant workers being freed from fishing 
boats and several arrests. Those involved cannot be named for legal reasons; 
police inquiries are continuing. Our findings of conditions in European waters 
follow a Guardian investigation in 2014 that exposedchattel slavery in the Thai 
prawn supply chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/supermarket-prawns-thailand-produced-slave-labour>
, which produces seafood for supermarket groups in the UK, the US and Europe.

Campaign groups fear pressures on the seafood industry arising from 
overfishing have created a crisis of labour abuse which has now become global.

* Names of some migrant workers have been changed to protect identities

 * 18 April 2016: links to two further videos which were posted online after 
this article was published have been added.
 