
Over the weekend, the annual Rezzed festival filled London’s Tobacco Dock 
venue with hundreds of forthcomingPC <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc>
 and console titles. As ever, the emphasis was on offbeat and independent 
titles, making it a fascinating place to pick up on the stars of tomorrow.

Despite such an embarrassment of riches, we managed to pick out our 12 
favourite experiences.

Reigns <http://reignsgame.com/> (Nerial)

This stripped-down kingdom management game is made more accessible, and thus 
more appealing, by its aesthetic and controls. You play as a series of monarchs 
trying to maintain a balance between the church, the people, the army and the 
treasury, which manifests as a series of requests from people in the kingdom, 
one per year of your reign. Each appears as a colourful, low-poly card with a 
short text description, and you choose your response from two possibilities by 
swiping left or right, which will then add or subtract from your resources 
shown above. With short- and long-term consequences for each decision, even 
into the rein of your current monarch’s descendants, Reigns is a great example 
of accessible complexity – kind of Age of Empires meets Tinder. It’s out this 
summer on PC, Mac and iOS.


Snake Pass <http://www.sumo-digital.com/snakepass/> (Sumo Digital)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50ee8af95a04adad23675e64911658c2ae8b009%2F0_0_740_444%2F740.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50ee8af95a04adad23675e64911658c2ae8b009%2F0_0_740_444%2F740.jpg>
 Snake Pass. Photograph: Sumo Digital 
The result of Sumo Digital’s first (hopefully of many) game jam, Snake Pass is 
the polishing of a prototype from Seb Liese, who gave up his job as a biology 
teacher in the Netherlands to join the LittleBigPlanet team, after they noticed 
his work as a creator in the game’s community. Originally a physics demo that 
showcased Liese’s fascination with the way snakes like his childhood pet move, 
Snake Pass is now a colourful 3D “action-puzzle” game. At Rezzed, the team were 
testing two control schemes to judge which should be default and which should 
be optional; one is forgiving, requiring little more than to push the analogue 
stick in the right direction, but the other, which requires wiggling the stick 
from side to side to more accurately represent a snake’s movement, led an 
onlooker to dub the game “Sumo’sGrow Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/16/best-games-2015-15-11>”.


Burly Men at Sea <http://burlymenatsea.com/> (Brain&Brain)

Described by its husband-and-wife development team as a “folktale adventure”, 
Burly Men at Sea is about three burly bearded fishermen who find a map in a 
bottle that sends them on a fantastical journey. It looks like a children’s 
story book, with white backgrounds and simple colourful illustrations and 
snippets of text, and it’s played by clicking and dragging to pan the 
round-edged view, and clicking on objects and people to interact. The build on 
show in Rezzed’s Leftfield Collection was limited but delightful. It’s coming 
to Steam and iOS later this year.


Shadowhand <http://www.greyaliengames.com/shadowhand/index.php> (Grey Alien 
Games)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd12816f948e8ed18fa97c2b23f5f9c0609d4d855%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd12816f948e8ed18fa97c2b23f5f9c0609d4d855%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Shadowhand. Photograph: Grey Alien 
Another card game adventure from husband-and-wife team, Shadowhand is a 
natural evolution from Regency Solitaire. Again, you play through a historical 
visual novel by winning solitaire-based card battles, but in response to 
younger players not understanding face cards, they’ve moved away from a 
traditional deck to one with more suits and only numbers from zero to nine. 
There’s a role-playing element too, as you collect gear and weapons with which 
to accessorise Lady Darkmoor, the aristocrat-cum-highwaywoman protagonist, as 
she battles rivals and royals to steal their riches. Publisher Grey AlienGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> says it will stand and deliver 
the game on PC and Mac later this year.

Mekazoo  <http://www.goodmoodcreators.com/mekazoo.html>(The Good Mood Creators)

This 2D platformer has you exploring colourful 3D worlds with a variety of 
“Mekanimals”, mechanical creatures that have different abilities: an armadillo 
that can roll up into a ball to accelerate Sonic-style up hills, a frog that 
can grab onto things with its long tongue, etc. You play each level as a pair 
of these creatures, though only one is on screen at a time and you switch 
between them when necessary. In two-player co-op, each of you can force a 
switch at any time but the creature you control switches every time you die, 
which makes things more complicated but also – with constant switching and 
shouts of, “I need to lick it!” – much more fun.


Raging Justice <http://www.makingames.com/> (MakinGames)

Once upon a time, a group of friends working at Rare Games, got together in 
their spare time and started working on a dream project: a tribute to Streets 
of Rage, Final Fight, Double Dragon and other great 2D beat-’em-ups of the 
16-bit era. Now its nearing completion and it looks wonderful, a thoroughly 
modern, visually detailed tribute, which sees uncomprimising cops Nikki Rage 
and Rick Justice trying to take down a gangland super boss – by fighting 
through waves of his henchmen. Filled with new ideas, as well as nods to genre 
conventions (and comedy moments like being able to commandeer a tractor to 
squish enemies), it’s coming toXbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one>, PC, Mac and mobile soon.

It Found, Please Return <http://dreamfeel.org/#/iff/> (dreamfeel)

Part visual novel, part hidden object game, the latest work from independent 
developer Laura Dreamfeel is a beautiful collaboration with artist Liadh Young. 
It tells the story of a space drifter named Kasio, returning to Ireland in time 
for the apocalypse. The players sees vignettes from the character’s life, and 
uses the cursor to erase sketchbook images of those moments thereby revealing 
subsequent recollections, which you need to zoom in on to explore. In this way, 
you’re constantly digging though and deleting Kasio’s memories in a very 
tactile way. Accompanied by a minimalistLiz Ryerson <http://ellaguro.com/> 
score, it is a thoughtful, therapeutic experience that Dreamfeel is looking to 
fund through Kickstarter this summer.

Unbox <http://www.unboxgame.com/> (Prospect Games)

Of all the current adventure platformers featuring sentient cardboard boxes, 
this is definitely our favourite. Your job is to clatter over a series of 
bright, rich 3D environments – oil rigs, island resorts, jungle villages – 
beating enemies and working out how to interact with a variety of objects, from 
giant fans to helicopters in order to get yourself delivered to the next 
location. It’s infused with the silly humour that Rare used to cram into its 
games, but also offers depth in the form of side-quests and genuinely 
thoughtful puzzles. It’s coming to Steam soon.

Manual Samuel (Perfectly ParaNormal)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48dfce5fb7733e6df4d631c43a73247436cefb8a%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48dfce5fb7733e6df4d631c43a73247436cefb8a%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Manual Samuel. Photograph: Curve Digital 
One of the hits of Rezzed and certainly the busiest game on Curve Digital’s 
stand, Manuel Samuel is described by its creators as “Monkey Island meets QWOP” 
– in other words, a cross between a humorous adventure game and a bizarre rag 
doll physics engine. When lead character Sam is run over, he makes a deal with 
the devil: live for 24 hours performing every action manually, or spend 
eternity in Hell. Players then have to control his breathing and all his limbs 
independently while attempting a series of mundane tasks like dressing and 
going to the toilet – with hilarious results. It has a gorgeous comic book art 
style and the base comedy is handled with aplomb. It’ll stagger onto consoles 
and PC this summer.

Human: Fall Flat <http://www.nobrakesgames.com/human/> (No Brakes Games)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35c29ecee2267a6ceb6d25d6ec5378923d1f077d%2F0_0_2399_1440%2F2399.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35c29ecee2267a6ceb6d25d6ec5378923d1f077d%2F0_0_2399_1440%2F2399.jpg>
 Human. Photograph: Curve Digital 
Another amusing rag doll physics game from publisher Curve Digital, this time 
a puzzle-based action adventure, set in a surreal dreamworld where the lead 
character has to navigate his way out of a dream. Players need to drag objects, 
jump and climb, all using highly physical non-scripted controls. Created by 
Lithuanian indie No Brakes Games, the tasks are open-ended with many different 
solutions based on each player’s approach to the environment. Coming to PC 
soon, it’s funny, but also extremely involving as you wrestle with both the 
avatar and the environment to progress.

Lumo <http://triple-eh.net/> (Triple Eh, Ltd)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f0379c24dd3e31858126b75d8caa8b8bf986376%2F54_0_1175_705%2F1175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f0379c24dd3e31858126b75d8caa8b8bf986376%2F54_0_1175_705%2F1175.jpg>
 Lumo. Photograph: Rising Star Games 
A labour of love for veteran game programmer Gareth Noyce over several years, 
Lumo is an old-school isometric arcade adventure in the style of Knightlore and 
Head Over Heels. Players take control of a young child lost in a huge castle 
dungeon filled with death traps. There are pixel-perfect jumps, there are 
crates to move, there are hidden locations, but most importantly, the 
environment is non-linear and fully explorable, so make sure you have graph 
paper and a pencil ready. It’s coming to PC, Mac, Linux, PS4,Xbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> One and PSVita courtesy of 
publisher Rising Star.

Tokyo 42 <http://www.tokyo42.com/> (Smac)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2621597ff7eb9244676ceed756efb1868121c3d0%2F32_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rezzed%202016%3A%20our%2012%20favourite%20video%20games%20from%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Frezzed-2016-festival-best-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2621597ff7eb9244676ceed756efb1868121c3d0%2F32_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Tokyo42. Photograph: SMAC / Mode 7 
“Tokyo 42 is the lovechild of Syndicate and GTA 1,” declares the website – no 
wonder everyone we met at Rezzed was keen to see this open-world cyberpunk 
adventure. Set in an isometrically viewed tilt-shifted mini-metropolis, players 
explore the urban landscape as an assassin uncovering a vast conspiracy and 
shooting stuff. Developed by Smac and published by Mode 7 it oozes style and 
verve from every neon-drenched pixel.
 