
Britain’s wealth gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/19/inequality-uk-households-assets>
 will be passed down the generations as well-off older people bequeath property 
to their already thriving offspring, according to new research from one of the 
UK’s leading thinktanks.

The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) found that today’s young people were 
likely to inherit more wealth than their predecessors but the benefits would be 
skewed to those who were already well off.

The study concluded that inequality was likely to increase and social mobility 
hindered as pensioners bequeathed the wealth they had accumulated as a result 
of rising home ownership and property-price inflation.

“Between 2002-03 and 2012-13, the wealth of elderly households (those in which 
all members are 80 or older) increased by 45%, mostly as a result of higher 
homeownership and rising house prices,” the IFS study said. It added that 72% 
of those households now expected to leave an inheritance, up from 60% a decade 
earlier, with a sharp increase in the proportion expecting to leave a large 
inheritance.

Property wealth has increased and become more widely spread in recent 
generations.Owner-occupation rose from 30% at the end of the second world war 
to a peak of 70% at the turn of the millennium 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/census/2011-census-analysis/a-century-of-home-ownership-and-renting-in-england-and-wales/short-story-on-housing.html>
, while property booms in the 1970s, 1980s and 2000s have seenhouse prices rise 
by almost 300% in real terms in the half-century ending in 2010 
<https://static.halifax.co.uk/assets/pdf/mortgages/pdf/50-Years-Of-Housing-UK-20th-January-2010-Housing-Release.pdf>
.

As a result of these trends, the IFS said younger generations looked much more 
likely to inherit than their predecessors. Someone born in the 1930s had a 40% 
chance of an inheritance, rising to 61% of those born in the 1950s and 75% of 
those born in the 1970s.

But the thinktank warned that future inheritances were set to be highly 
unequal given that the richest half of elderly households held 90% of the 
wealth and the richest 10% held 40% of the wealth. “Hence a ‘lucky half’ of 
younger generations look likely to get the vast majority of inherited wealth.”

The largest inheritances would in the main go to those who were already well 
off. More than half of those likely to secure an inheritance of at least 
£250,000 had incomes in the top 20% of the population.

Andrew Hood, a senior research economist at the IFS, said: “The wealth of 
younger generations looks set to depend more on who their parents are than was 
the case for older generations. Today’s elderly have much more wealth to leave 
to their children than their predecessors did.

“At the same time, today’s young adults will find it harder to accumulate 
wealth of their own than previous generations did, due to the sharp fall in 
homeownership for that group, the dramatic decline of defined benefit pensions 
in the private sector and the stagnation in their incomes.”

 