
You know a fashion designer is leading the zeitgeist when the outfits they 
wear to take a bow become as influential as those they send down the catwalk. 
So it is withGucci <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci>’s creative 
director, Alessandro Michele, who is not just shaking up mainstream fashion 
with his playful approach to genderless fashions, but is also leading the trend 
for men wearing more and more jewellery.

Michele himself is known for wearing multiple rings – when he was interviewed 
by American Vogue last summer,the writer observed he was wearing no fewer than 
11 
<http://www.vogue.com/13275023/gucci-alessandro-michele-creative-director-profile/>
 – a styling approach that extended to his men’s spring/summer 2016 runway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89a2c34e434e964bdaacbbf91611e24151c91e1f%2F582_841_1659_1010%2F1659.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rings%20on%20his%20fingers%3A%20why%20men%E2%80%99s%20jewellery%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rings%20on%20his%20fingers%3A%20why%20men%E2%80%99s%20jewellery%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89a2c34e434e964bdaacbbf91611e24151c91e1f%2F582_841_1659_1010%2F1659.jpg>
 Playful … Alessandro Michele at Gucci’s spring/summer 2016 show in Milan. 
Photograph: Luca Bruno/AP 

On social media, male models including Lucky Blue Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/11/up-all-night-to-get-lucky-blue-smith>
 andLaurie Harding <https://www.instagram.com/laurieharding_/> have been 
posting images of themselves with several fingers decked out with rings. 
Meanwhile, backstage after theValentino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/nov/27/valentino-big-love-england-couture>
 men’s show in January, I was busy snapping pictures of models wearing several 
rings and bracelets on each hand.

Luke Day, editor of GQ Style, is one of the most photographed people during 
the men’s shows, and has been shot recently wearing lots of rings. Day explains 
that he has some jewellery that he wears all the time, which is of deep 
sentimental value while the rest of his jewellery choices he just switches up. 
“I have eightGucci <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> rings that can 
be worn as anything, from two at a time to all eight, but the plan is to get 
another eight and wear all 16, two on each finger. Liberace style. I never do 
anything by halves,” he says.

At the last round of shows in January there was a notable increase in 
jewellery on show on the catwalks while on the high-street, Topman reports 
strong sales across its entire jewellery category. “These things always come 
around in cycles,” says Day. “Suddenly, jewellery is back in a big way. And 
it’s everything, all at once. A necklace, multiple rings, a pin or a few, with 
a neck scarf, a beret or some other adornment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c8913e79e889231516b1d5cbb85c561f0057b22%2F0_78_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rings%20on%20his%20fingers%3A%20why%20men%E2%80%99s%20jewellery%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rings%20on%20his%20fingers%3A%20why%20men%E2%80%99s%20jewellery%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c8913e79e889231516b1d5cbb85c561f0057b22%2F0_78_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
 Alexander McQueen’s pierced models. Photograph: 
WWD/Rex/Shutterstock/Shutterstock 
At Alexander McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen>’s 
autumn/winter 2016 show last month, models wore pins on their lapels, single 
earrings and, in some cases, extreme, punky face jewellery that went from ear 
to cheek to mouth. Jonathan Anderson’s collection for Loewe next season 
features a gold giraffe brooch andgold pendants on rope 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/fall-2016-menswear/loewe/slideshow/collection#1>
. After his latest catwalk show in Paris, Kim Jones, men’s designer for Louis 
Vuitton, spoke with enthusiasm backstage about a jewellery collaboration he has 
worked on with Jade Jagger.Outfits here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/21/louis-vuitton-celebrates-stoic-paris-in-menswear-show>
 were finished with silver necklaces that danced with diamonds and LV pendants, 
brooches adorned suit-jacket lapels and berets were offset with a single LV 
shield earring.

Ben Cobb, editor of bi-annual style magazine Another Man, whose autumn/winter 
2015 issue was somewhat ahead of the curve in featuring the musician Arca 
sporting some pretty major earrings, believes the current interest in men’s 
jewellery is a natural development. “Men have been embracing ever more 
embellishment and detail in their wardrobes, so jewellery is the next level of 
expression,” he says. “It’s also maybe an extension of the 1970s influence on 
fashion at the moment, the era when men freely explored jewellery.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe70e8f00b9ee0ce21057b1faf9ed742666badfec%2F0_0_3280_4493%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rings%20on%20his%20fingers%3A%20why%20men%E2%80%99s%20jewellery%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rings%20on%20his%20fingers%3A%20why%20men%E2%80%99s%20jewellery%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Frings-men-jewellery-gender-fashion-gucci%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe70e8f00b9ee0ce21057b1faf9ed742666badfec%2F0_0_3280_4493%2F3280.jpg>
 Accessorised … Louis Vuitton Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
“It’s not just about buying the right jacket any more,” says Day. “You need 
“the hat/glasses/courage etc to complete the look.” He adds: “I think the 
interesting thing about jewellery now is it definitely adds more character, and 
fashion has really taken that idea recently and run with it. Fashion certainly 
isn’t boring right now.”
“I don’t think men have ever been so open to wearing jewellery, and we’ve seen 
this with the Topman customer,” says Gordon Richardson, global creative 
director for the brand. “I wear a skull ring every day and have done for years 
and would feel lost without it. The only thing I’d say is don’t over-do it. 
Wearing one strong piece you love has a lot more impact than wearing a bit of 
everything all at once.”

For the designer Sebastiaan  <http://www.sebastiaanpieter.com/>Groenen, whose 
critically acclaimed label Pieter launched for autumn/winter 2014 and is shown 
duringLondon Collections Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-collections-men>, jewellery has 
been integral to the overall vision of the label. His MASC earrings 
(autumn/winter 2015) and his Cruise necklaces (autumn/winter 2016) are “an easy 
way to express little sexual jokes,” the designer says. For example the word 
“cruise” means something quite specific in gay culture, rather like the 
designer’s “FUN NOW” jumper from his debut collection, which made a deliberate 
reference to the language of Grindr. This season’s collection also features 
clothing with fastenings that are based on piercings.

Groenen had his ear pierced specifically to wear his own earrings. “I do feel 
that men are a lot more open – especially young men – to wearing things than 
had previously been labeled as feminine,” he says. “I design my collections to 
express masculinity, but I do think that what is happening now means that guys 
are much more interested in wearing a single earring, and so on. The boundaries 
between masculine and feminine are falling away.”
 