
1 September 

Rubbish collectors have finally cleared up the trash from an area of the 
favela that is usually inhabited by users of crack cocaine. It feels strange 
because we have grown used to that place being filthy. I find it hard to accept 
that there are so many people who have lost their family, home, work and 
studies. Instead, they use drugs as an escape from their problems. Many of 
these people were evicted from the Jacaré favela when it was occupied by 
Pacifying Police Units, known as UPP. They came to Maré as a short-term 
solution and have been here for three years. During that time, the government 
has done nothing to improve their situation. Instead, residents have taken the 
initiative to improve their lives by donating food and clothing, and putting on 
film screenings and religious activities.

3 September
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-we-need-the-freedom-to-be-ourselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feec88ba3e9c6c0d4adea9b8961351df9d88e8549%2F1950_0_2560_3840%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'We%20need%20the%20freedom%20to%20be%20ourselves'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-we-need-the-freedom-to-be-ourselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27We%20need%20the%20freedom%20to%20be%20ourselves%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-we-need-the-freedom-to-be-ourselves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feec88ba3e9c6c0d4adea9b8961351df9d88e8549%2F1950_0_2560_3840%2F2560.jpg>
 Thaís Cavalcante: ‘We are woken at 6am by police helicopters.’ Photograph: 
Jonathan Watts for the Guardian 
The Parque União and Nova Holanda favelas in the Maré complex are woken at 6am 
this morning by police helicopters buzzing close to our homes. The noise 
frightens me as it often means there will be a police operation soon after. 
Fearing this, several schools, health centres and nursery schools close their 
doors. But you have to try to get on with life so I go out to college as usual.

When I return, the atmosphere is calmer. Today is also the start of an LGBT 
rights campaign in the favela. There is a photo exhibition, public debate, 
health fair and a gay parade. The aim is to demand gay rights, combat physical 
violence and educate people about sexual health. By uniting, campaigners can 
strengthen resistance against prejudice.

8 September 

Once again, we are awoken by helicopters. The police special shock battalion, 
known as Bope, is carrying out a stop and search operation. For us, this means 
another day of disruption and violence. On police orders, all shops and schools 
are closed to ensure the safety of residents. Almost no one is in the streets. 
Shots are heard in the Nova Holanda, Baixa do Sapateiro and Vila do Pinheiro 
neighbourhoods. One 33-year-old woman – Cristina Ramos da Silva – is shot in 
the mouth on her way to collect her son from school. She is sent to the 
intensive care unit. I hear no news of her after that.

12 September 

Maré is home to many great photographers, who record and reveal the reality of 
life here through the sensitive eyes and lenses of local residents. Today, they 
are holding an exhibition as part of a contemporary art project supported by 
the government, City Hall and other institutions. One of them is a friend – 
Henrique Gomes – who has exhibited a series of portraits of the daily life of a 
family. There are some beautiful shots in the exhibition. In the small details, 
I think, they show the strength of our local identity.

17 September 

Today marks the beginning of the favela food festival in the Maré complex and 
other favelas. It showcases the unique gastronomy of each community and puts 
the restaurants in competition with one another. But it is not cheap. For 20 
reais (£3.50), you can buy a tasty, well-cooked meal, but one of those dishes 
usually costs just six reais (£1.10). The food reflects our cultural roots in 
the north-east ofBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, which is 
where most of the residents are from.

20 September 

At night, I see about 15 young Christians near Avenida Brasil walking in the 
street with signs saying, “We can pray for you.” I am not sure why. Perhaps 
this is part of an evangelising campaign. The other day, a friend and I were 
discussing this. We concluded that every street in Maré has at least one 
church, though some are no bigger than a garage. Residents, especially the 
older generation, are very attached to religion. This is also an element of the 
culture of the north-east of Brazil, where belief is the basis of family life 
and hope for a better future.

23 September 

My bus home is stopped by a protest today. I see police aiming their guns at 
the demonstrators in Avenida Brasil. Then I hear the sound of an explosion, 
perhaps percussion grenades or teargas or fireworks. I don’t find out the cause 
until I arrive home. Hours earlier, 11-year-oldHerinaldo Vinicius de Santana  
<http://latino.foxnews.com/latino/news/2015/09/24/brazilians-protest-death-boy-from-police-gunfire/>
was killed by police from the Caju UPP. He was shot in the head on the way to 
buy a ping-pong ball. He was the second young victim this month in Maré. Two 
weeks ago, 12-year-oldCristian Soares da Silva from Mangueira 
<http://esquerdadiario.com.br/Jovem-de-12-anos-e-morto-pela-policia-denuncia-Forum-Social-de-Manguinhos>
, a nearby favela, was also killed by police. The state executes people here 
because they live in a favela and they are black [as were these two boys]. 
According to data released byAmnesty International 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/amr19/2068/2015/en/>, more than half of 
registered cases of killings by on-duty police in Rio de Janeiro between 2010 
and 2013 were of young people between the ages of 15 and 29. Of those killed, 
79% were black. This is our struggle.

3 October 

A new family planning and maternal health support group has opened in Maré. 
Ishtar <http://ishtar-rio.blogspot.co.uk/> is an organisation with branches in 
several cities that provide free advice to women. With the support of theMaré 
museum <http://www.museudamare.org.br/joomla/>, it will hold meetings on the 
first Saturday morning of each month. This is important because the community 
has many women who get pregnant at a young age, then drop out of school or end 
up having to raise their child without the support of the father. It is good 
for them to exchange experiences and receive support.

30 October

Today marks the third month since the end of the military occupation of our 
favela. In the past year, the government has spent1.7m reais (£297,693) a day 
on security in Maré 
<http://oglobo.globo.com/rio/presenca-de-militares-na-mare-custa-17-milhao-por-dia-12601748>
, but I see no change. The violence has not diminished, neither have the 
conflicts. The state was supposed to get closer to the residents, but this 
hasn’t happened. There seems to be no purpose to everything that has happened. 
All we see is the repression and militarisation of our streets. We already knew 
what it was like to live with a strong force in our favela. But in the past, 
the worry was there only on certain days – over the past year, it has been 
there every day.

12 November

With little advance notice, the Rio de Janeiro state governor, Luiz Fernando 
Pezão, inaugurates a “sports academy”. It is the second sports academy in the 
favela. This will be especially important for older people living in the 
neighbourhood because the equipment is mostly simple exercise machines. It is 
nice that it is free.

Pezão does not say anything about the UPP, although residents of the Parque 
União neighbourhood report on the internet that the police are once again 
shooting in the streets without respect or pity for local residents. The police 
patrols have been going on for more than a day and in more than one favela.

14 November

There is a big funk party tonight to mark the end of a cultural festival. The 
streets are full of people dancing and drinking beer. This is how our favela 
should be, but during the military occupation, almost all cultural events were 
forbidden. We should have the freedom to be ourselves without the authorities 
repressing and monitoring our movements.
 