
2 March

Teachers and other education professionals go on strike today with massive 
support from high school students. Classes have also been shut down at the 
State University of Rio de Janeiro. The watchword in the city is “I’ll give up 
the Olympics, I want more funds for health and education.” Rocinha is one of 
the few places that doesn’t have an occupation by students. There is only one 
high school in Rocinha, so many young people have to study in neighbouring 
districts. The André Maurois school, in the Leblon neighbourhood, is one of the 
occupied schools. Many young people in Rocinha study there and are taking part 
in the occupation.


9 March

Progress of sorts. The city government inaugurates a municipal centre for 
community mediation in Rocinha. This initiative seeks to resolve problems 
without the need for residents to turn to the justice system. It aims to 
promote citizenship and reduce the burden on the courts.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – ‘Violence here has become trivialised’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-violence-here-has-become-trivialised>
10 March

National politics sparks a neighbourhood debate. A week after police take 
former president Lula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/05/brazil-senior-judges-voice-concern-over-detention-of-former-president>
 in for questioning, resident Adelson Guedes drapes a banner reading “Rocinha 
supports President Lula” above one of the busiest entrances of Rocinha. This 
action divides opinion. Guedes says he wants to show support for the man who 
changed the history of the country. But a few hours later, somebody removes the 
banner. This is widely praised on social networks. Although Lula and President 
Dilma Rousseff have directed funding to Rio’s favelas, residents are very 
critical of corruption.

12 March

Heavy rain turns the community into a river. That’s not news. It is always 
like this in a storm. One resident – 58-year-old Carlos M da Silva – dies after 
being dragged into a ditch. When it rains, the volume of water and garbage that 
comes down the hillside is huge. Residents say Carlos was trying to unclog a 
manhole and was carried by the force of the current and debris. He was a street 
cleaner and worked clearing ditches. He died trying to help the community, as 
he had always done. His body was buried in the São João Batista cemetery in 
Botafogo in the south zone of Rio. His family didn’t comment and asked for 
privacy in their moment of grief.

25 March

Our community feels slighted after a comparison is made with the corrupt 
businessmen and politicians who have been exposed by theLava Jato investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/lava-jato-brazilian-anti-corruption-minister-quits-over-secret-recording>
. Federal police release spreadsheets detailing how much cash the contractor 
Odebrecht paid to lawmakers and government officials. The list includes the 
mayor of Rio, Eduardo Paes, and the [now former 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/brazil-lower-house-speaker-eduardo-cunha-resigns>
] speaker of the Chamber of Deputies, Eduardo Cunha. When this scandal is 
revealed, a journalist called Nelson Motta sneeringly jokes in the O Globo 
newspaper: “This is not a gang of bandits in Rocinha; these are the men who run 
Brazilian politics.”

29 March

Financial problems hit one of our community’s most important cultural events. 
Organisers of the stations of the cross of Rocinha, now in its 24th year, are 
putting on a show highlighting the murder of black and mixed-race residents in 
Rio’s marginalised communities. But this year the event has to be scaled down 
because the sponsor – the private electricity firm Light – says it is unable to 
renew sponsorship due to the poor economic climate. The company was given a tax 
exemption worth 85m reais (£17m) to provide power to the Olympic Games.

12 April

Rocinha residents are promoting a dance funk-party protest against the 
impeachment of Rousseff. It is organised by the famous DJ sound production team 
Furacão 2000 on Copacabana beach. The organiser, Romulo Costa, says it is 
important to mobilise against the “coup” taking place inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>. Other favelas on the slopes of the 
south zone, such as Vidigal and Cantagalo, also came out in force. Organisers 
estimate the crowd at about 100,000 people. As the samba musician Wilson das 
Neves warned: “The day the favela comes down [from the hill] and it’s not for 
carnival …”

21 April

A newly built bicycle lane collapses after being hit by a strong wave. Among 
the fatalities is a 60-year-old Rocinha resident, Ronaldo Severino da Silva, 
who used to go for walks along that cycle path on his days off. The 
construction, which was inaugurated in January, cost 44m reais but failed to 
account for the impact of waves. This is absurd because it is built on the 
coast. But it is not an isolated accident. Rio de Janeiro is full of botched 
work.

22 April 

An anti-Zika operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/07/brazil-rich-zika-virus-poor> 
gets under way near a Rocinha nursery called Lacyra Frazão. Staff and officers 
from the police pacification unit collect rubbish and clear potential breeding 
grounds of theAedes aegypti mosquito, which is thought to transmit the disease. 
The nursery’s director, Cláudia Regina, said several staff have contracted 
Zika. There are not enough awareness-raising campaigns in the community, even 
though many residents are contracting the virus. The city government does not 
disclose data on viral diseases, but just walk around and you can see that the 
problem is critical.

30 April

Once again, national politics prompts debate and action in Rocinha. There was 
a demonstration in Rocinha against the [now former 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/brazil-lower-house-speaker-eduardo-cunha-resigns>
] speaker of the chamber of deputies, Eduardo Cunha. There was an open 
microphone where anyone could share their opinions. Cunha orchestrated the 
impeachment of the president, but much of the protest focused onhis homophobic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/brazil-far-right-dilma-rousseff-impeachment>
, sexist or racist statements. This demonstration was very unusual because the 
residents normally stage protests about local issues, such as lack of basic 
sanitation.

3 May

Government officials and NGOs begin a campaign to remove rubbish from the 
favela’s streets, streams and alleys. About 32 environment agents take part in 
the “Eye on the Trash” operation, which involves collecting, separating and 
removing plastics, cardboard, tin cans, glass, wood and other recyclable 
products. The project is run byViva Rio Socioambiental 
<http://vivario.org.br/meio-ambiente/socioambiental/>, with the backing of the 
state environmental institute <http://www.inea.rj.gov.br/Portal/index.htm>. 
Some community leaders criticise the campaign because they say there is little 
point picking up rubbish when Rocinha does not even have the basic sanitation 
needed to improve the quality of life of the residents.

4 May

Residents commemorate the fourth anniversary of the death of Hugo Silva, a 
father of two who was killed by military police in a Rocinha alleyway. He was 
carrying construction material, but the police chief at the time claimed he was 
a drug dealer. Police operations are criticised by residents because they 
always take place when the streets are crowded. Recently there hasn’t been much 
armed conflict. According to thepublic security institute  
<http://www.isp.rj.gov.br/>in Rio, the number of criminal incidents is high. 
Over the past five years, 22 residents have died and 129 have been targets of 
homicide attempts. It’s hard to say how many of these were by the police, 
because this information isn’t made public.

7 May

The Rio 2016 Olympic committee sponsors a festival in the Rocinha sports 
complex, from 8am to 1pm. People can try out popular and unusual Olympic sports 
and children can pose next to the Olympic and Paralympic mascots. It was a 
one-day event. There wasn’t much information about the event, and not many 
people came. It was the first time the mascots visited Rocinha. Unlike during 
other sports mega-events, there aren’t many Olympics-related products being 
sold in shops. Until now, there hasn’t been any legacy for the community. Just 
marketing.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – ‘In Alemão, deaths aren’t investigated'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-alemao-deaths-not-investigated>
12 May

A historic day for Brazil, especially for the poorer classes, as Dilma is 
suspended while the Senate begins impeachment proceedings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/dilma-rousseff-brazil-president-impeached-senate-vote>
 against her. This a blow not just to democracy, but to the social programmes 
that Lula and Dilma put in place. Dilma tried to educate the country and 
respond to the requests of the poor, but she was attacked by an elite that felt 
uncomfortable with the rise of the C-class (newly emerged from poverty).

People were watching the process live on TV or the internet. There are 
different opinions in the favela. Some people defend Dilma, and others support 
the impeachment because ofcorruption in the Workers’ party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/18/brazil-corruption-petrobras-jose-dirceu-sentenced-23-years>
. There are also those who would prefer to have a new presidential election.

17 May

The extension of Metro Line 4, which will finally give Rocinha residents a 
subway station, has been delayed – and when it does open, we will not initially 
be allowed to use it because priority will be given to Olympic pass holders, 
including athletes, organisers and tourists. Only after the Olympic and 
Paralympic Games have ended will locals get to travel on the line.

There has also been some controversy about the name of the station. Although 
it is located at the entrance to our favela, it was initially named São Conrado 
after the more upmarket neighbouring community. But this generated a wave of 
criticism because it ignored the existence of the favela and so there is now a 
move to call the station Rocinha.

This anti-favela prejudice is visible in many aspects. On official and virtual 
maps, favelas are often ignored and something else is inserted instead. The 
segregation of Rio is notorious when it comes to favelas and the city. A 
divided city exists, which many people ignore, despite the fact that social 
movements have been fighting for years to show that the favela is also the city.






















































 