
21 August

A teenager called David is killed today during a firefight between drug 
traffickers and police. It barely makes the news. This month, Rio de Janeiro is 
more focused on the Olympic test events, which are taking place in the richer 
areas of the city. Shootouts and killings in favelas are all too common and are 
rarely reported in the newspapers. However, thanks to smartphones and internet 
access, residents are filming the shootings and publishing the images on social 
networks. It is an attempt to draw the attention of society to violence in 
Rio’s favelas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-it-is-not-police-role-to-do-social-work%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55e8e255a506f92d7db2be7fd590fdc94a677647%2F1434_0_2560_3840%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'It%20is%20not%20the%20police's%20role%20to%20do%20social%20work'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-it-is-not-police-role-to-do-social-work%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27It%20is%20not%20the%20police%27s%20role%20to%20do%20social%20work%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-it-is-not-police-role-to-do-social-work%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55e8e255a506f92d7db2be7fd590fdc94a677647%2F1434_0_2560_3840%2F2560.jpg>
 Michel Silva: ‘What’s the point of promoting sport for a short while and then 
leaving?’ Photograph: Jonathan Watts for the Guardian 
The first Police Pacifying Unit – known as UPP – arrived in Rocinha in 
September 2012, following a military occupation the previous year. Initially, 
the UPP brought hope to residents like me, who were born and raised on the 
slopes of this community. We looked forward to a new era. Until then, the 
government had ignored us for 70 years, leaving many basic services such as 
sanitation, health, water and light in a precarious situation. But now it is 
difficult for the residents to trust the police. There have been numerous 
episodes of police violence, most notably the torture and killing ofAmarildo de 
Souza in July 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/03/brazil-rio-police-charged-death-missing-man>
. There are also many clashes between police and gangs. When two armed powers 
operate in the same territory, confrontation is inevitable.

29 September

A golf demonstration has been scheduled at the Rocinha Sports Complex 
<http://www.suderj.rj.gov.br/complexo_Rocinha.asp> sponsored by HSBC bank, with 
support from the ministry of sport and the Professional Golf Association. I 
think this is just propaganda ahead of the Olympics. I don’t think there is any 
interest. We have a huge golf course next to our community, but it is not for 
us, it is for the bourgeoisie. There is a little more enthusiasm for tennis 
because the initiative for that came from a local resident, who has opened a 
tennis school that now has 200 students. People like football most, of course. 
Before the World Cup, sponsors and NGOs refurbished pitches in Rocinha. That 
was good but it hasn’t been kept up and they now look pretty shabby. What’s the 
point of promoting a sport for just a short time and then leaving?

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'We need the freedom to be ourselves'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-we-need-the-freedom-to-be-ourselves>
17 October

Rocinha is very tense after the shooting of two young men in the favela in 
less than 24 hours. One of the injured, Adson da Conceição Figueiredo, 24, was 
shot by police during a raid. The other, whose identity was never revealed, was 
shot while hiking from Rocinha to Chacara do Céu in Leblon. Angry residents 
block a highway in protest and the UPP commander requests reinforcement to 
control the situation. Police use teargas, pepper spray and rifle fire to 
suppress the demonstration. Fortunately, neither victim dies.

25 October

The Rocinha UPP has begun offering music lessons to residents in addition to 
martial arts classes, and training for soccer and other sports. It might seem 
like a good idea, but this is problematic. The role of the police shouldn’t be 
social work, it should be police work. If there is a lack of music, then why 
don’t they open a proper music school or give more funds to those that exist? 
Amigos da Rocinha, for example, has been around for 20 years and offers 
percussion lessons, and other classes related to samba, especially before the 
Carnival. The state should support organisations like this instead of opening 
new courses provided by the police. Many people no longer believe in the UPP 
programme.

8 November

Rocinha has elected a new residents’ association. This is a hot topic because 
for many years the associations did not achieve much and had ties with the 
gangs. This time, however, the elections were more transparent than ever 
before. Almost 2,000 people voted and chose as president – by a huge majority – 
Carlos Eduardo Barbosa, a well-respected guy whom everybody calls “Duda”. I’ve 
spoken to him a few times and I believe he he has what it takes to be a 
representative of the residents. He is determined to make Rocinha a better 
place. I’m not sure if he’ll manage that difficult task, but I’m cheering for 
him and I will help if I can.

The biggest challenge is to regain the trust of the residents. The association 
is always blamed when things go wrong, even though it is often the fault of the 
government. I’m pleased that Duda is concerned about sanitation; there is no 
point in installing expensive police units here if there is no sewage treatment 
or pipes.

16 November

The Itaú bank has closed its Rocinha branch with no explanation. This is bad 
for our community. Tens of thousands of people live here and many used this 
bank even though they had only one small branch with space for just five people 
at a time, so the queue often stretched out into the street. Residents would 
like to know why this has happened. Itaú has said nothing. Perhaps they were 
concerned about the violence. There was a robbery at Banco do Brasil in August. 
Rocinha has other banks – Bradesco, Caixa Econômica and Banco do Brasil, but 
Itaú was the most popular because it was one of the first to open here. Now, 
people will have to walk 30 minutes to get to a branch of Itaú, which will be a 
big problem for the elderly.
 