
2 June

Favelas are being ignored by the government of the interim president, Michel 
Temer. There was a great article about this today by the Rocinha journalist 
Davison Coutinho, who noted how public works such as the growth acceleration 
programme have been halted, education and social programmes have been cut, 
unemployment is rising and the risk of violence is increasing. “The favelas are 
being forgotten,” he says. This is a complex subject. There is no doubt a 
shortage of funds to maintain the pacification police units (UPP), but there 
are many causes:the bankruptcy of the Rio state government 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2016/06/18/hosting-olympics-bankrupts-another-place-rio-de-janeiro-declares-financial-disaster/#3a30376f9361>
 as a result of the policies of the past two governors: Sergio Cabral and Luiz 
Fernando Pezão, the collapse of oil prices andthe corruption investigation 
known as Lava Jato <http://www.coha.org/understanding-the-petrobras-scandal/> 
(Car Wash). The problem is aggravated by the interim president, who threatens 
the labour benefits, social programmes and quota systems introduced under the 
Workers party presidents Lula and Dilma [Rousseff].
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-rocinha-overpriced-public-works-leave-a-bitter-taste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525bb639c8d5e07eb4a961d396caceb4ac2534cf%2F0_0_640_640%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'Overpriced%20public%20works%20leave%20a%20bitter%20taste'%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-rocinha-overpriced-public-works-leave-a-bitter-taste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27Overpriced%20public%20works%20leave%20a%20bitter%20taste%27%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-rocinha-overpriced-public-works-leave-a-bitter-taste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525bb639c8d5e07eb4a961d396caceb4ac2534cf%2F0_0_640_640%2F640.jpg>
 Michel Silva 
4 June

Rocinha Park library – known as C4 by residents – completed four years of 
co-operation and partnership with the community. Inspired by the Colombian 
model whose goal is to bring culture to communities, the library is a public 
space that offers a diverse programme. Inaugurated in June 2012, C4 has five 
floors, divided into DVD library, theatre, coffee shop, cooking school, 
children’s library and multipurpose room. The collection includes more than 
14,000 books and 915 DVDs. Although it is a big structure, many residents do 
not know there is a public library in the community. Part of the problem is 
that it was inaugurated before it was finished. The amphitheatre lacked a basic 
sound system, lighting and seats. This is not the fault of the library, it is 
the fault of the government.

9 June

Opened just 10 days ago, the new elevated highway of Joá 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2k4PZC2TLRQ&feature=youtu.be>, which connects 
the south zone to Barra da Tijuca, is already potholed. The project was 
budgeted at nearly half a billion reais [about £117m] by the construction 
company Odebrecht –one of the contractors involved in the Lava Jato corruption 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/brazil-corruption-scandal-marcelo-odebrecht-jailed>
 – and aims to minimise congestion in the region. It has made it easier for 
residents who want to travel to Barra da Tijuca. But there is a bitter taste in 
the mouth when overpriced public works have evident structural flaws. This is 
not the first time.

Jogos Olímpicos do Rio: A vista das favelas – 'A violência é empurrada às 
áreas mais pobres'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/jogos-olimpicos-do-rio-a-vista-das-favelas-rocinha-a-violencia-e-empurrada-as-areas-mais-pobres>
10 June

A court has awarded damages to the family of Amarildo de Souza, a Rocinha 
resident who wastortured and killed by military police in July 2013 
<http://www.southernpulse.info/sp-pulses/a-dozen-police-officers-convicted-in-the-amarildo-case-in-rio-de-janeiro>
. A dozen officers were convicted, which was a turning point in relations 
between the UPP and the community. The widow and six children of Amarildo will 
receive $500,000 each. The judge ruled the children should receive a pension 
until they reach 25 years of age. The government is also obliged to pay the 
widow a minimum wage each month. Since the death of Amarildo, the UPP has lost 
credibility with the locals. The number of police officers has been reduced and 
the level of violence has increased.

In the beginning, I thought the UPP programme was a good thing, but over the 
years I have come to feel cheated. There is no point investing in security 
without offering other basic public services such as health, leisure and 
education.

There are other problems too: police enter and search homes without 
permission, the government lacks the budget to install UPPs in every favela and 
those that it prioritises tend to be where there is real estate speculation 
close to rich areas or big sports events. Violence is pushed into the poorest 
areas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-rocinha-overpriced-public-works-leave-a-bitter-taste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1232110201e6ae9154d5b4cad98c5f73389dffa9%2F0_0_3500_2335%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'Overpriced%20public%20works%20leave%20a%20bitter%20taste'%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-rocinha-overpriced-public-works-leave-a-bitter-taste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27Overpriced%20public%20works%20leave%20a%20bitter%20taste%27%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-rocinha-overpriced-public-works-leave-a-bitter-taste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1232110201e6ae9154d5b4cad98c5f73389dffa9%2F0_0_3500_2335%2F3500.jpg>
 The moon shines over the Rocinha favela in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 26 July 
2016. Photograph: Bruno Kelly/Reuters 
16 June

Rocinha residents took justice into their own hands after a member of the 
community stabbed and seriously injured his wife. The woman had to be 
hospitalised after the attack. When locals found out, they seized the husband, 
tied him up and burned him with cigarettes and candle wax. He was then handed 
over to the UPP. According to police, the offender confessed to attempted 
murder, but gave no reason for the fight. He could face up to 20 years in 
prison. It is common for residents to mete out punishment. There is a culture 
of intolerance of these cases. This is a legacy of the long absence of police. 
As with drug trafficking, residents mediate conflicts by themselves. Recently, 
the city inaugurated a community mediation centre in the favela to resolve 
problems in partnership with the court of Rio. But cases like rape and domestic 
violence still tend to be “judged” by residents.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'The only Olympic legacy I see is 
repression' | Daiene Mendes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-alemao-the-only-olympic-legacy-i-see-is-repression>
30 June

Google aims to have mapped 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-07-29/google-wants-to-invite-you-on-a-walking-tour-of-rio-s-slums>
 30 favelas of Rio de Janeiro by the end of this year. Since 2014, when it 
teamed up with the local NGO AfroReggae, the company has already identified 
streets, alleys and 3,000 businesses in 25 favelas. This year, it aims to 
increase that by 25% with the help of community residents trained in digital 
cartography. Until 2014, favelas were almost invisible on the internet, though 
we have our streets, squares, banks, post offices, churches and businesses. 
Google is not the only one interested in changing this. Another digital mapping 
initiative has been launched by the community newspaper Foreign Roca in 
partnership with the Memory and History Museum of Sankofa-Rocinha. According to 
the organisers, mapping is a way for the favela to assert its place in the 
city. The long absence of favelas on city maps used to feed the stigma of our 
communities and widen the divisions in society.

4 July

Residents are mobilising to persuade the government that Rocinha should be 
included in the name of the metro station that will soon open outside the 
favela. The site is in the final stage of work, and is set to be called São 
Conrado station, according to the state transport department. Our community 
believes the nomenclature is a matter of social inclusion and visibility. The 
petition reads: “We are working for a more integrated city. To achieve this 
goal, it is important that local names are recognised. For this reason, we 
request the name “Rocinha / São Conrado station.” [Since this diary entry was 
written, one of the entrances to the station now bears the name São 
Conrado-Rocinha.]

14 July

Residents have begun reporting rapes on a Facebook page that includes 
descriptions of the attackers. There have been six reports in just one area of 
Rocinha this year. In 2013,nine-year-old Rebeca Miranda Carvalho dos Santos 
<http://odia.ig.com.br/noticia/rio-de-janeiro/2013-09-30/crianca-morta-na-rocinha-foi-estuprada-e-levou-mordidas-aponta-laudo.html>
 was raped and killed 100 metres from the UPP. Despite having a UPP in the 
community, policing is poor. Because of the Olympic Games, the police have been 
strengthened. But after the mega event, violence is likely to worsen because 
the government is out of money and society suffers from poor public 
administration.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'Going out to buy bread can cost a life' 
| Thaís Cavalcante
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life>
16 July

Residents gathered for the monthly meeting of the Rocinha Without Borders 
social group. The theme was the campaign to rename the station. Local officials 
were invited but they failed to show up or provide any information about the 
metro. That was disrespectful. The government continues to ignore invitations 
to enter into dialogue with favela communities.

18 July

A grenade was found near a police station and school in Rocinha. It was not 
detonated, but the population is tense. Many fear a terrorist attack during the 
Olympic Games.
 