
The neighbourhood of Rocinha is widely considered the largest favela community 
in Rio de Janeiro and is often referred to as a “city within a city”. In 2011, 
a police pacifying unit was set up in Rocinha to wrest control from drug gangs 
operating there.

I am a 21-year-old student of social communication at the Pontifical 
University of Rio de Janeiro and a journalist forViva Rocinha 
<http://vivarocinha.org/portal/>, a web portal and community newspaper covering 
Rocinha, the community where I live.


I started working as a journalist because of the biased view of favelas in the 
Brazilian mainstream media. Rocinha has always been portrayed by newspapers as 
a dangerous and dirty place where residents lack an understanding of how the 
world works. But I know that favela residents have powerful stories and face 
social problems that needed solving. So I decided to write about the situation 
as I saw it, starting in 2011 when the military entered the community with the 
police to establish Rio’s 28th police pacification unit (UPP).

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55e8e255a506f92d7db2be7fd590fdc94a677647%2F142_305_5329_3200%2F5329.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'We're%20not%20ready%20for%20another%20mega%20event'%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27We%27re%20not%20ready%20for%20another%20mega%20event%27%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55e8e255a506f92d7db2be7fd590fdc94a677647%2F142_305_5329_3200%2F5329.jpg>
 ‘Poverty shouldn’t be treated as a tourist attraction’ … Michel Silva from 
Rocinha in Rio de Janeiro. Photograph: Jonathan Watts for the Guardian 
Rocinha is located between two wealthy districts – Gávea and São Conrado – 
which have the highest property tax and land value in in Rio de Janeiro. The 
community grew out of the occupation of a former coffee plantation. The owners 
had been neglecting the area so people moved in, divided up the land and built 
houses.

The exodus from the rural north-east has contributed to Rocinha’s rapid growth 
since then, with about 80% of residents coming from that region. Today, the 
population is 62,000, according to the government, but residents say more than 
150,000 people live here. Either way, Rocinha has grown to become a city within 
a city. Since 1993, it has been recognised by the municipal authorities.

People are proud to live here. Commerce within the community is 
well-established so residents can get almost everything they need without 
leaving the favela. The geographical location of Rocinha is also excellent. But 
there are social challenges, such as water shortages, electricity cuts, 
transport difficulties, security issues, potholed streets and weak education at 
schools and on professional courses. These problems all boil down to the 
absence of effective government.

I have high hopes for the opening of a new metro line, which is scheduled for 
July 2016. One station will be located at the entrance of Rocinha and this 
should improve residents’ access to other areas of Rio. More worrying is the 
plan for a Rocinha cable car, which is included in the public works package of 
the federal government’sgrowth acceleration programme 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programa_de_Acelera%C3%A7%C3%A3o_do_Crescimento> 
(PAC). Many residents are opposed to the cable car because it will result in 
homes being relocated and is likely to be expensive.

The big issue, however, is public security. Peace feels like a distant utopia. 
Since the creation of the first UPP in Rocinha, daily life has never been the 
same. We are now living in the worst times in the history of the community. 
Since the occupation by armed forces in 2011, there have been more cases of 
rape, theft and domestic violence. Violence is everywhere. There is not enough 
discussion of public security policies with local people. I do not expect the 
situation to change any time soon.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'The Games have made things worse' | 
Thaís Cavalcante
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-games-have-made-things-worse>
In 2016, the Olympics are coming to Rio and I hope this will be positive for 
the city in general, but there won’t be many benefits for Rocinha. Extra 
tourism might generate more income for retailersand tour guides, but this is 
temporary. Since 1992, tourists have been coming to look at our community. But 
many residents don’t like being photographed without being asked for permission.

They also dislike the tourists driving through Rocinha in jeeps, which makes 
it seem as though they are on a safari. Although favela tours are a lucrative 
source of income for some, the way things are done at the moment is 
disrespectful. Poverty shouldn’t be treated as a tourist attraction.

We don’t know yet what the legacy of the Olympics will be for our community. A 
huge amount of public money was spent on the 2014 World Cup inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, and although sport can be a tool 
for social inclusion, what we really need is investment in education, health, 
security and many other things. Rio de Janeiro is not ready for another “mega 
event”. Now is the time for us to get our own house in order.

I look forward to contributing to this project. In the year ahead, I plan to 
reveal some good stories about where I was born and still live. Hopefully, my 
articles will help bring improvements to the community.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6470b4496a61ee723a78d2a3c44724ffd749fc1%2F194_183_3584_2153%2F3584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'We're%20not%20ready%20for%20another%20mega%20event'%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27We%27re%20not%20ready%20for%20another%20mega%20event%27%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6470b4496a61ee723a78d2a3c44724ffd749fc1%2F194_183_3584_2153%2F3584.jpg>
 An aerial view of Rocinha. Tourists who drive through in jeeps and take 
photographs of residents without asking permission are not universally popular 
with residents. Photograph: Felipe Dana/AP 
Leia este artigo na lingua original

Sou um estudante de 21 anos, cursando Comunicação Social na PUC-Rio e um 
jornalista do portalViva Rocinha <http://vivarocinha.org/>, atuando no meu 
bairro Rocinha. Eu me tornei um jornalista comunitário por causa do olhar 
preconceituoso da mídia tradicional brasileira sobre as favelas do Rio. O lugar 
onde eu moro sempre foi retratado nos jornais como um lugar perigoso e sujo com 
pessoas que não têm uma compreensão de como o mundo funciona. Mas eu sei que os 
moradores da favela têm histórias poderosas e enfrentam problemas sociais que 
precisávamos resolver.


Por isso, decidi escrever sobre situações sob meu ponto de vista, começando em 
2011 a partir da operação conduzida pelas forças armadas brasileiras e polícias 
do estado para a implantação da vigésima oitava Unidade de Polícia Pacificadora 
(UPP) da cidade.

A Rocinha está localizada entre dois bairros ricos – Gávea e São Conrado – 
dois dos bairros com o imposto sobre a propriedade predial e territorial urbana 
mais alta do Rio de Janeiro. A Rocinha surgiu no começo dos anos 30, através da 
divisão em chácaras de uma antiga fazenda que produzia café. Os herdeiros da 
fazenda não tinham interesses pelas terras e as pessoas acreditavam que as 
terras não tinham donos. Por conta disso, começaram a invadir o terreno para 
construir moradias. O êxodo rural no nordeste do Brasil contribuiu para o 
crescimento da população – cerca de 80% da população é oriunda do nordeste 
brasileiro - que veio para o Rio de Janeiro em busca de uma nova vida.

Apesar das características do espaço geográfico, a Rocinha é considerada um 
bairro desde 1993 pela prefeitura da cidade. A população é de 62 mil, segundo o 
governo, mas os moradores afirmam que a população ultrapassa 150 mil pessoas 
vivem aqui. A Rocinha já foi considerada a maior favela da América Latina. De 
qualquer maneira, a Rocinha cresceu tanto que virou uma “cidade dentro da 
cidade”.

Os moradores têm orgulho de morar aqui. O comércio dentro da comunidade é tão 
forte que os moradores podem conseguir quase tudo sem sair da favela. A sua 
localização geográfica na cidade é excelente. Porém, existem problemas sociais 
que afetam os moradores como falta de água, a interrupção de energia elétrica, 
dificuldades com mobilidade urbana, questões de segurança, ruas esburacadas e 
educação fraca em escolas e cursos profissionalizantes. Estes problemas todos 
se resumem a ausência de um governo eficaz.

Tenho expectativas boas para a inauguração da nova linha do metrô, prevista 
para julho de 2016. Uma estação será na entrada da Rocinha e isso deve melhorar 
o acesso para os moradores a outras partes da cidade. Mais preocupante é o 
plano para um teleférico na Rocinha, que estáincluído no pacote de obras do 
Programa de Aceleração do Crescimento(PAC) do Governo Federal. Muitos moradores 
estão preocupados que isso trará remoções. Além disso, vai ser muito caro.

A paz é uma utopia distante. Desde a criação de uma Unidade de Polícia 
Pacificadora (UPP) na Rocinha, o dia a dia nunca mais foi o mesmo. Vivemos o 
pior momento na história da comunidade. A violência aumentou em relação aos 
últimos anos. Casos de estupros, furtos e violência doméstica assombram os 
moradores desde a ocupação das forças armadas no final de 2011. A violência está
 em toda parte.O que falta é discussão de políticas de segurança pública com os 
moradores. Eu não espero que a situação mude em breve.

As Olimpíadas vão vir para o Rio em 2016 e espero que seja muito positivo para 
a cidade em geral, mas não tem muitos benefícios para a Rocinha. O aumento em 
turismo pode gerar mais renda para comerciantes e guias, porém é momentâneo. O 
turismo é um setor muito lucrativo na Rocinha. O turismo nas favelas do Rio de 
Janeiro surgiu na Rocinha, através da Eco-92. Muitos artesões e comerciantes 
obtêm lucro com os passeios dos turistas, entretanto, os moradores não gostam 
que os turistas fotografem eles sem autorização ou visitem o morro em um jipe, 
pois parece um passeio em um safári. Na verdade, os turistas acham que estão em 
um safári. Muitos guias não são moradores da Rocinha.

Milhares de turistas visitam a Rocinha e caminham pelo mesmo trajeto, sem 
conhecer as outras regiões da favela ou até mesmo, a história da Rocinha. 
Apesar de ser uma fonte de renda para os moradores, penso que o modelo de 
turismo que existe hoje nas favelas do Rio é um desrespeito aos moradores. Não 
se pode fazer turismo com a pobreza.

Não sabemos qual o legado que os Jogos Olímpicos deixarão para a comunidade. 
Vimos a quantidade de dinheiro público gasto com a Copa do Mundo de 2014 no 
Brasil, mas apesar do esporte ser uma ferramenta de inclusão social, no momento 
precisamos de investimentos na educação, saúde, segurança e tantas outras 
coisas. O Rio de Janeiro não está preparado para outro megaevento. Agora é hora 
de arrumar a casa.

Nesse próximo ano, espero revelar boas histórias sobre o lugar onde eu nasci e 
moro até hoje. Espero que as minhas reportagens ajudem a trazer melhorias para 
a minha comunidade
 