
As Rio gears up to host the Olympic Games in August, the Swiss NGO Terre des 
Hommes (Land of People) has aChildren Win campaign <http://www.childrenwin.org/>
 calling on authorities to respect the rights of children before and after the 
Olympics.

In their own words, four young people involved in the campaign discuss life in 
the city’s favelas and how they think the Olympics will affect them.

‘There haven’t been improvements because of the Olympics’

I was born here. I like being near my friends and family, but it is not cool 
living here. Sometimes, we go without energy in our houses. I live with my 
parents and two sisters. I prefer to stay in a lot of the time and play on my 
phone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d9a304646cce29f4708236c6e5ba22f23c9e018%2F0_0_3000_4000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20views%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'I%20think%20policing%20is%20a%20beautiful%20profession'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20views%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27I%20think%20policing%20is%20a%20beautiful%20profession%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d9a304646cce29f4708236c6e5ba22f23c9e018%2F0_0_3000_4000%2F3000.jpg>
 Yasmin: ‘It would be good if they built more sports facilities like football 
fields here.’ Photograph: Children Win 
The police sometimes approach young people in the favela, but it is usually 
young men. Relations between the police and the community have got worse. It is 
bad when there is conflict here.

After school, I want to go to university, but it is a bit more difficult for 
us [who live in the favela]. I would like to go to Disney one day, but I am 
scared of flying. I understand a bit of English from listening to American 
artists like Selena Gomez and Justin Bieber. I like physical education and I 
play football, but some people still say it’s for boys and not for girls to 
play.

There haven’t been any improvements here because of the Olympics. It would be 
good if they built more sports facilities like football fields here. I plan to 
stay here when I’m older, as all my friends and family are here.

Yasmin da Cruz, 14, Cantagalo

‘People said David Beckham bought a house here’

I’ve lived in Vidigal for five years. Before that, I lived in Paraíba, in the 
north-east ofBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>. At first, it 
was hard to get used to being here, as people in the north-east are very 
friendly and I missed it, but I have got used to life here now. I study at 
night, and during the day I work in a food kiosk here in the favela with my dad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69b9891dc7c06751c8a9ae496e8d3a4015cdec72%2F0_246_3000_3754%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20views%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'I%20think%20policing%20is%20a%20beautiful%20profession'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20views%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27I%20think%20policing%20is%20a%20beautiful%20profession%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69b9891dc7c06751c8a9ae496e8d3a4015cdec72%2F0_246_3000_3754%2F3000.jpg>
 Marcelinho: ‘People keep opening new businesses here, and there are lots of 
hostels now.’ Photograph: Children Win 
The favela has changed a lot since we arrived. Vidigal is highly valued 
because it has a great view [of Ipanema and Copacabana beaches]. You get a lot 
of foreigners coming here now. It’s a favela which is in fashion. Everything 
has got a lot more expensive, and some people have moved out because they can’t 
afford it any more.

The UPP [police pacifying unit] has been here since 2012 and things started to 
change then. They moved thebaile [funk party] 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-17657122> to another part of the 
favela. But work has got easier, more people come. Visitors didn’t used to come 
here because they were afraid, but that’s not true any more, especially since 
the [2014 football] World Cup. People keep opening new businesses here, and 
there are lots of hostels now. People said David Beckham bought a house here. I 
don’t know if it’s true. He definitely visited though.

This is the most peaceful of all the favelas in my view, but people are saying 
it could go back to the way it was before, after the Olympics. It’s safer than 
other favelas. They sell marijuana here but crack is not allowed. People who 
work don’t have too many problems with the police either. If you stop to ask 
someone for directions, they will always help you.

Marcelinho Isac, 17, Vidigal

‘I’d like to join the military police’

I was born in Barreira do Vasco and I like living here because my friends and 
family are here. We’ve had works going on to improve the community for some 
time. It will make it better eventually, but a lot of people are still 
complaining. They are sorting out better energy and water access, and now there 
is less litter on the streets.

When it rained before, sewage used to flow out of the drains, but that doesn’t 
happen now. I don’t have any friends who have had dengue fever or Zika, but I 
know that lots of people here have had them because you do get mosquitoes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19efa75bfa38b17bb814e01e909bdb0b1b035a9a%2F0_0_3000_3888%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20views%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'I%20think%20policing%20is%20a%20beautiful%20profession'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20views%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27I%20think%20policing%20is%20a%20beautiful%20profession%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19efa75bfa38b17bb814e01e909bdb0b1b035a9a%2F0_0_3000_3888%2F3000.jpg>
 Fabiana: ‘There are people who hate the police, but I don’t feel that way.’ 
Photograph: Children Win 
I live next to the Vasco team’s football stadium. I haven’t been to the ground 
for a long time, but a lot of people here support Vasco. There was a rumour the 
stadium was going to be used as a rugby venue during the Olympics. The 
president of the football team at the time wanted it to happen, but it didn’t 
get approved. At that time, the mayor came here and promised lots of government 
housing for people, but they are still waiting.

There are a lot of roadworks going on in the city because of the Olympics. 
They have changed the bus routes, and there is a lot of traffic, but in the end 
it will be better. I will watch the Olympics when it’s on. Everyone says they 
won’t, but when the time comes they will get into it. Just like the World Cup.

When I finish studying I’d like to join the military police. There are people 
who hate the police, but I don’t feel that way. I think it is a beautiful 
profession, doing something good for people. Some of my relatives are in the 
force. The UPP came here three years ago. Relations between the community and 
the police have got better. The police joke around with us in the street, they 
play football with us. We went on a day out with them to visit a museum in Rio, 
but some of the children’s mothers didn’t let them go. There are two female 
officers who I really like. I know I might be scared sometimes [if I was a 
police officer] but everything passes in life.

Fabiana Davino de Araujo, 12, Barreira do Vasco

‘My mum makes me stay in as it is dangerous at night’

I’ve lived here all my life. There are six families in my building, and five 
people in my house.

I don’t like living on the edge of the river, it smells bad. We get rats, 
mosquitoes and sometimes people fall into the river. People’s bathrooms drain 
straight into the river and water gets into the houses. The water we get in our 
homes is yellow, so we can’t drink it and we have to buy mineral water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69be71099b45a0f908becbf0d15980104ed3731%2F1205_0_2400_3000%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20views%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'I%20think%20policing%20is%20a%20beautiful%20profession'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20views%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27I%20think%20policing%20is%20a%20beautiful%20profession%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frio-olympics-views-from-the-favelas-i-think-policing-is-a-beautiful-profession%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69be71099b45a0f908becbf0d15980104ed3731%2F1205_0_2400_3000%2F2400.jpg>
 Talia: ‘I am ashamed to bring my school friends here.’ Photograph: Children Win
You couldn’t even see the river before. There were walls and it was covered 
where the residents had built their own bridges over it. Then in 2012, the city 
hall came and broke everything, opening up the river [as part of the works for 
theTransolimpica expressway 
<http://www.olympic.org/news/final-tunnel-cleared-in-rio-2016-transolimpica-project/246992>
]. It was much better before. Then, I would have wanted to stay. They offered 
us new apartments in Colonia [a government housing scheme], but we are still 
waiting to hear when we can go. The house has been condemned. My mum makes me 
stay in as it is dangerous at night. The streets are very dark and there are 
drug users nearby. There is no leisure area or park for children.

I can’t see any good coming from the Olympics for us. I liked the project for 
the new homes when they showed it to us, but the new apartments will be smaller 
than the ones we saw. I want to go, even though it will be small. I am ashamed 
to bring my school friends here. I go to school nearby, you can walk there from 
here. I know I need to study to be someone in life. I like geography and 
English, and in the future I’d like to be a lawyer, to defend people.

Talia Marques de Queiroz, 12, Vila Uniao
 