
4 June

Some Maré streets are closed because of rehearsals for the typical Junina 
party. People of all ages come together to celebrate. Children and young people 
participate in the tradition of dancing to music from the north-east at 
weekends. Stalls sell food such as corn, cake andpé de moleque 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=p%C3%A9+de+moleque&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi_1832jKDOAhVlBcAKHVU4CDMQ_AUICCgB&biw=2560&bih=1280>
at cheap prices. Songs byGonzaguinha <http://www.gonzaguinha.com.br/> play all 
through the night.


20 June

Today is the second day of police operations in several of Maré’s favelas. I 
hear many shots and see troops roaming the streets. Generally, we leave the 
door open so we can talk to neighbours, keep an eye on the street and enjoy a 
passing breeze. But there are days when even going out to buy bread is a 
decision that can cost a life. The police claim they are trying to track down a 
fugitive. But what do we know? This is also happening in other favelas in the 
north zone: Manguinhos, Jacaré and Complexo do Alemão. But why?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0691f3f11e8a9d7000c40b28b65edc6e503b3b49%2F0_0_1417_2126%2F1417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'Going%20out%20to%20buy%20bread%20can%20cost%20a%20life'%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27Going%20out%20to%20buy%20bread%20can%20cost%20a%20life%27%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0691f3f11e8a9d7000c40b28b65edc6e503b3b49%2F0_0_1417_2126%2F1417.jpg>
 Thaís Cavalcante. Photograph: Marcia Alves for the Guardian 
24 June

Today is my older sister’s birthday. We have spent the past week organising a 
surprise party, but it proves difficult. We wake at 5am to the sound of shots. 
It is very loud. Live television coverage shows three armoured vehicles of the 
Bope special operations unit patrolling the neighbourhood. The report claims 
they are there “for security”, but they strike us with horror. Amid all this 
uncertainty, my family decides to celebrate life. Only a few people come to the 
party. This is a dark day for our community.

24 June marks the anniversary of the 2013 massacre 
<http://www.rioonwatch.org/?p=10000>, when nine people were killed by armed 
police. [One police officer was also killed.] On that day, my sister could not 
come home from work so she had to sleep at a friend’s house. Just as on that 
day, residents were killed tonight. This time three men lost their lives. They 
were shot a short distance away from the house where we had the party. It’s 
really sad to celebrate life amid so much death. But this is our way to resist. 
Tomorrow may be better.


Jogos Olímpicos do Rio: A vista das favelas – 'O silêncio, às vezes, não 
significa paz'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/jogos-olimpicos-do-rio-a-vista-das-favelas-o-silencio-as-vezes-nao-significa-paz-mare>
25 June

Even in this uncertain climate, residents of Baixa do Sapateiro dress up in 
costumes and celebrate the Junina festival. Children lead the dancing in a 
street decorated with brightly coloured flags and balloons. In the coming days, 
many other neighbourhoods in Maré will have similar parties. It is a tradition 
from the north-east ofBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, where 
most residents originate from. What we want is the freedom to be happy.


28 June

The closer the Olympics, the more favelas suffer. It seems we are the target. 
The morning starts with tension due to another police operation. Once again, 
residents are awakened by the crackle of gunfire, the burst of grenades and 
running up and down the alleys. Schools are closed again. The main streets are 
deserted. Silence does not always mean peace. We try to adapt, we try to learn 
what is happening from the news, but fears come nonetheless. There is talk of 
people who are shot and injured, but I know little.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ffear-in-rios-favelas-my-ears-are-used-to-the-gunshots-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fear%20in%20Rio's%20favelas%3A%20'My%20ears%20are%20used%20to%20the%20gunshots'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ffear-in-rios-favelas-my-ears-are-used-to-the-gunshots-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fear%20in%20Rio%27s%20favelas%3A%20%27My%20ears%20are%20used%20to%20the%20gunshots%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Ffear-in-rios-favelas-my-ears-are-used-to-the-gunshots-video&media=>
Fear in Rio’s favelas: ‘My ears are used to the gunshots’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/aug/03/fear-in-rios-favelas-my-ears-are-used-to-the-gunshots-video>
29 June

I went to sleep last night hearing gunshots and woke with them. This is 
becoming routine. There is a period of quiet until 3pm and then another police 
invasion. Some mothers leave home crying with desperation as they bring their 
children to and from schools and day care centres. Many businesses close. Bope 
forces have entered three Maré favelas.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'Overpriced public works leave a bitter 
taste' | Michel Silva
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-rocinha-overpriced-public-works-leave-a-bitter-taste>
I go to work. I have some good news today. I have passed the semester at 
college. But any joy quickly fades when I receive a call from my mother telling 
me to be careful on the way back home. “There are many police in balaclavas 
here,” she says in a worried voice. I spend the rest of the day fearing that 
something might happen to my family and friends. I want to cry.

One of our emergency hospitals is closed to reduce the risk of violence. But 
it was to no avail: Carmen dos Santos, 29, is shot in the arm as he walks home 
from the hospital where he works. Even in the daylight hours, the streets are 
deserted.

The police operation lasts more than six hours. When I come home from work I – 
and many other residents – cannot enter the favela. We wait on a street by the 
entrance, close to the police.

I arrive at home still very nervous. It seems a police officer has been shot. 
So has a bricklayer’s assistant, José da Silva, who is killed by a stray 
bullet. He left slave-like conditions on a farm in the north of Brazil to 
search for a better life. But he did not have enough time here to follow his 
dreams through.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F846ee653961925e5f3662829743dfdcaf2e2d760%2F6_0_3083_1850%2F3083.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'Going%20out%20to%20buy%20bread%20can%20cost%20a%20life'%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27Going%20out%20to%20buy%20bread%20can%20cost%20a%20life%27%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F846ee653961925e5f3662829743dfdcaf2e2d760%2F6_0_3083_1850%2F3083.jpg>
 Soldiers patrol near the Maré favela on 24 July 2016, as a massive security 
operation that is expected to last through the Olympics begins. Photograph: 
Ricardo Moraes/Reuters 
30 June

I wake up anxious and my heart is racing. But finally we receive good news. 
Local institutions and neighbourhood associations in Maré have called for an 
inquiry and an injunction on recent police operations. For the first time, the 
judge has accepted the request. Representatives of the police battalions will 
have to explain themselves. I think this is the least they should do. Police 
were also forbidden from raiding our homes in the middle of the night.


7 July

A young crowd gathers at a bar known as the Tobacco Shop to listen to music 
and enjoy a beer on the street. Sometimes there are rock concerts at the nearby 
Morro do Timbau neighbourhood too. Next week, we will have the Rock in 
Movement, a monthly gathering of rockers. This time will be special because 
local band Algoz will release their second CD. The rock scene has always been 
strong in Maré. I like to tell people that we are not just into funk.


8 July

The State University of Rio de Janeiro (UERJ) is so broke that it has stopped 
paying students’ scholarships and teachers’ salaries. It won’t even have 
entrance tests this year. That is terrible news for the many residents of Maré 
who have studied for years to try to get into this public college. There is a 
strike and the campus has been occupied. I have friends whose graduation will 
be delayed for years because of the strike. The fight is for knowledge. 
Education is one of the most important things we have in life. We young people 
like to learn. And now, more than ever, we want that right back.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c38107b812aa6b00f17a6f7a6151e42f9a6bb3b%2F0_0_3000_1977%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'Going%20out%20to%20buy%20bread%20can%20cost%20a%20life'%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27Going%20out%20to%20buy%20bread%20can%20cost%20a%20life%27%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c38107b812aa6b00f17a6f7a6151e42f9a6bb3b%2F0_0_3000_1977%2F3000.jpg>
 A student wears a sticker that reads ‘Boycott Rio 2016’ during a protest 
demanding better education on 6 July 2016. Photograph: Silvia Izquierdo/AP 
9 July

More than 100 residents join a march for peace against state violence. Two 
incidents that marked the community during the military occupation of 2014-15 
were remembered. First,Vitor Santiago was hit by soldiers in a car 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/04/rios-true-colours-police-shootings-in-favelas-olympics/>
 and lost a leg. He has yet to receive government assistance. Second, Claudia 
Silva was shot as she looked out of her window. [She died after falling out of 
the police car that was taking her to hospital. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-26638995>] The walk marks our 
right to life. We carried placards, raised our voices and handed out leaflets 
telling people what happened and providing contact details for human rights 
organisations.


Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'The only Olympic legacy I see is 
repression' | Daiene Mendes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/02/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-alemao-the-only-olympic-legacy-i-see-is-repression>
12 July

When foreign visitors come to Rio de Janeiro for the Olympics, they will have 
to drive through the expressway know as the Red Line. On both sides, they will 
see colourful murals on barriers that hide our favela. Maré residents have 
nicknamed this the Wall of Shame. It was erected a few years before the 2014 
World Cup. For the authorities, the problem was that the Maré favela was 
visible to the world. Our community has more than 140,000 residents. Our homes 
line the most important routes into the city, including the main roads from 
Galeão international airport. Officials say the barrier is acoustic and reduces 
the noise of cars for the locals. I believe that is a lie. I think they are 
attempting to deny our existence, which is revolting.


It makes no sense to cut spending in health and education to pay for this. The 
favela exists. Covering it up must not undermine our strength, power and 
culture.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffee4501719496126271966b349dc41e45815169f%2F0_0_5122_3074%2F5122.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'Going%20out%20to%20buy%20bread%20can%20cost%20a%20life'%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27Going%20out%20to%20buy%20bread%20can%20cost%20a%20life%27%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-mare-going-out-to-buy-bread-can-cost-a-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffee4501719496126271966b349dc41e45815169f%2F0_0_5122_3074%2F5122.jpg>
 A man walks beneath a barrier on the main highway – the same barrier as in the 
top photograph, seen from the other side – which links Rio’s international 
airport to the city centre running above the Maré favelas. Photograph: Mario 
Tama/Getty Images 
20 July

The Maré Museum has opened a new exhibition – Science and Art in Maré, which 
has surprised many visitors, most of whom are public school kids. The idea is 
to show in the favela what our culture generally does not know. Few public 
schools have room to explore science in this way, so it is so important. Our 
children need stimulation.
 