
As Brazil prepares to host the 2016 Olympic Games, the country’s most famous 
city is changing rapidly. Despite the hype, many people in Rio de Janeiro’s 
favelas fear benefits from the Games may fail to reach their doorsteps. In the 
second part of ourRio’s voices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/rio-voices-our-olympic-odyssey>
 series, three bloggers share their diary entries of daily life in their 
communities. Daiene Mendes writes aboutpervasive gun violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-many-deaths-go-unexplained-here>
 in Alemão, Michel Silva argues for anew kind of policing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-it-is-not-police-role-to-do-social-work>
 in Rocinha, and Thaís Cavalcante explains thestrong community bonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-we-need-the-freedom-to-be-ourselves>
 that exist in Maré. If you live in Rio’s favelas, or have ties with them, we’d 
love you toshare your stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/olympics-rio-favela-affected-by-olympics-share-stories-photos-videos-guardianwitness>
 on life in these communities.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'Many deaths go unexplained here' | 
Daiene Mendes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-many-deaths-go-unexplained-here>
In El Salvador, women who suffer a miscarriage can face imprisonment for murder
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/17/el-salvador-anti-abortion-law-premature-birth-miscarriage-attempted-murder>
. Watchthis powerful video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/dec/17/el-salvador-miscarriage-judge-accused-me-murder-anti-abortion-law-video>
 featuring women for whom the physical and emotional trauma of losing a child 
has been the start of a life-changing ordeal of poor medical treatment, arrest 
without recourse to legal advice and imprisonment for up to 40 years.

And, the world has a new climate deal – but will it be enough to save the 
planet? For both a glass-half-full and a glass-half-empty summary of the 
agreement, read John Vidal’sfive reasons to be glad, and five to be gloomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/15/climate-change-deal-five-reasons-glad-five-reasons-gloomy>
.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Bangladeshi lawyer takes aim at sexual violence by religious edict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/18/bangladesh-violence-women-fatwa-barrister-sara-hosssain>
 * Syrian refugees: World Bank and UN urge major change in handling of crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/16/syrian-refugee-crisis-world-bank-unhcr-sea-change>
 * UN accused of ‘shocking’ lack of action over murder and rape in South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/15/un-accused-of-shocking-lack-of-action-over-murder-rape-south-sudan>
 * Make it work: jobs hold key to achieving development goals, says UN report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/un-human-development-index-report-2015-employment-selim-jahan>
 * Love Matters: teaching young Kenyans about a safe and healthy sex life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/11/love-matters-teaching-young-people-kenya-safe-healthy-sex-life>
Opinion

The global community must do more to shine a light on corrupt leaders, says 
Transparency International’s José Ugaz. As his group launches a new campaign 
against grand corruption, Ugazargues that the practice threatens security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/18/corrupt-leaders-citizens-poverty-grand-corruption-transparency-international>
 and locks citizens in poverty. “The corrupt behave differently when they know 
they are being watched,” he writes.

In Kenya, there is growing concern over the safety of the sex industry after 
the killings of seven female sex workers in 10 days in October. Phelister 
Wamboi Abdalla, national coordinator of Kenya Sex Workers Alliance, says it is 
time todecriminalise the country’s sex industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/17/kenya-sex-workers-legalise-human-rights-public-health>
 for the sake of human rights and public health.

Multimedia

Gallery: Helping the women made widows by Boko Haram  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/dec/20/nigeria-helping-the-women-made-widows-by-boko-haram-in-pictures>

Gallery: Nepal fuel crisis bites as winter brings fear to quake-hit areas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/dec/19/nepal-fuel-crisis-winter-earthquake-hit-areas-in-pictures>

Podcast: Paris climate talks turn up the heat on world leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/dec/10/paris-climate-talks-world-leaders-poor-countries-podcast>

What you said

On the video El Salvador: ‘I had a miscarriage. The judge accused me of murder’
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/dec/17/el-salvador-miscarriage-judge-accused-me-murder-anti-abortion-law-video>
,Aesaphyr wrote:

This is shameful and as a doctor I feel personally disgusted by what is done 
to these women. One in four pregnancies will result in a miscarriage. A 
miscarriage is a traumatic event and can be life-threatening for the woman. On 
top of the pain of losing their child, they are torn away from their families 
and thrown into a cell for years... I can’t comprehend how such an inhuman 
thing can be done.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Triple crises: India’s time to lead the WTO 
<http://triplecrisis.com/indias-time-to-lead-at-the-wto/>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 