
2 December

A pregnant woman has to be rescued from a landslide in the Trampolim 
neighbourhood of Rocinha, after a thunderstorm hits our community. Fortunately, 
there are no casualties, though heavy rains have caused many deaths in the 
past. Storms are always a concern because people build houses on slopes where 
the ground is not stable. Construction in the forest is supposed to be 
prohibited but everyone knows the authorities won’t do anything. People build 
in risky areas for many reasons. Sometimes, they want to be close to their 
families, sometimes because they want to live close to their place of work.


In the eye of El Niño: landslides and flooding in coastal Peru – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/jan/30/in-the-eye-of-el-nino-landslides-and-flooding-in-coastal-peru-podcast>
6 December 

Tour operators treat favelas like zoos, but that might end soon. A motion to 
reform the “safari trips” through favelas was tabled in the municipal 
government today by councillor Célio Lupparelli, who says the visits are 
arranged by companies from outside the favela who pay little heed to the 
cultural, historical and artistic aspects of our community. Instead, tourists 
just focus on degradation, poverty, violence and misery and leave without any 
interaction with local culture. Lupparelli wants the City Hall to develop 
training courses that embrace the community point of view. The bill is expected 
to go to a vote in the first half of 2016.

8 December 

Rocinha Park Library hosts a series of events for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and 
Transexual week in the community, including discussions and a screening of the 
film Favela Gay. This event is important because there is a great deal of 
stereotyping of gay people in the favela. There have been cases of beating, 
torture and humiliation. I think a gay person who doesn’t live in a favela has 
more opportunities than a gay person in a favela. For example, in the favelas 
gay people can’t kiss or hold hands. They face a daily fight for survival. I 
think this has got better thanks to discussions on the internet, but we need 
more dialogue and to show greater respect for this part of our community.

12 December

The ever-contentious issue of land regularisation was discussed today by the 
residents associations of Laboriaux and Vila Cruzado, two Rocinha 
neighbourhoods that are threatened with eviction because of real-estate 
speculation. Both communities are close to the upmarket district of Gávea, 
where property values are among the highest in the city. I am in favour of 
regularisation because it legitimises ownership by these residents, many of 
whom have lived in the slums for decades. With this document, residents have a 
guarantee that they cannot be removed by force. If the government wants to do 
some work on their land, then they have to negotiate and pay a decent value. 
Basically, what favela residents want are the same rights as the people on the 
asphalt [who do not live in the favela].

13 December

Rocinha social networks were buzzing today with a community appeal to raise 
money for a family who lost everything in a fire. The victims – a mother, 
father and two very young children – live in a flimsy hillside shack made of 
wooden walls and a tin roof in Macega, one of the poorest neighbourhoods in the 
favela. The cause of the fire is unknown, but it is suspected to be a short 
circuit. Many homes lack basic safety standards. It is one consequence of the 
extraordinary social inequality that is evident in Rocinha. It is often the 
case that the community fills the gap left by social services. If we waited for 
the authorities, it would take too long because of the bureaucracy involved. It 
is easier to ask for a donation here and a donation there until life gradually 
goes back to normal. Catholic and evangelical churches also make donations of 
clothing.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'It is not the police's role to do 
social work'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-it-is-not-police-role-to-do-social-work>
22 December

There is a lot of talent in Rocinha that goes unrecognised and unpolished. 
Today, the community tried to rectify that with a meeting with senior officials 
from the ministry of culture. The government side said they would create 
projects that will help local performers, but I think it will be hopeless. 
Politicians are always launching initiatives because it looks good on their 
resumé, but as soon as they leave office, the projects die. There is no 
continuity. Despite this, talent from our favela still emerges from time to 
time. We are proud of Fabiano de Paula, a tennis player and resident who has 
risen to the 239 position in the ranking of the Association of Tennis 
Professionals, and Claudinho, a footballer who won the state championship at 
Ituano.

Then there is black actress Jéssica Ellen 
<http://gshow.globo.com/artistas/jessica-ellen/>, who has appeared in TV dramas 
on the Globo channel. In a recent magazine article, she noted, “I’m a punk who 
grew up in the favela. I am proof that the medium does not make the man.”

 25 December

Instead of Christmas cheer, there was fear in Rocinha today after a shootout 
between police and locals that left one dead and six injured. Jorge Arui, a 
49-year-old merchant, was killed on his way to the shops to buy bread. Locals 
said the gunfight started after the police demanded that the music from a 
neighbourhood party be turned off. Rocinha is not the only favela to suffer 
violence on Christmas Day. In the City of God favela, another shooting left a 
child and a teenager dead. Cases like this show thepacification policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/oct/07/brazil-favela-pacification-operation-in-pictures>
 is exhausted. We need to demilitarise the paramilitary police and to have the 
state government take more social responsibility.

26 December

Officers from the special police unit (better known as BOPE) are accused of a 
rape in Rocinha. A 28-year-old woman who was afraid to be publicly identified 
says she was assaulted on Christmas morning in the same alley where Arui was 
killed. Allegations like this help to explain why the police in Rio de Janeiro 
have lost credibility with the population.

2 January

The Mayor of Rio, Eduardo Paes, authorised an 11.7% rise in public transport 
fares from R$3.40 (65p) to R$3.80 (72p) 
<http://www.insidethegames.biz/articles/1033116/fears-grow-ahead-of-rio-2016-after-protests-against-rising-transport-prices-turn-violent>
. Bus operators say this is the minimum they need to break even. People don’t 
approve, but there isn’t much social mobilisation to try to stop it. As well as 
the increase, there was a redrawing of bus lines which means many residents now 
have to take two buses to get to work. Many people complain on the internet a 
lot, but urban revolutions do not happen with Facebook comments. Services 
remain sub-standard. In 2012, Paes promised that all buses in Rio would have 
air conditioning by 2016 but this is still not the case.

4 January

The new police commander, Col Edison Duarte dos Santos Júnior, has promised an 
overhaul in favela pacification units after diagnosing problems. There is a 
colour classification of the risk level in each community. Green is minimum, 
yellow is moderate and red is out of control. Rocinha is one of 38 places where 
the police pacification units have lost control. In most of them, there has 
been violence in recent months. The increasing conflict is a result of 
inadequate public policies for social development. The government invests 
heavily in public security, but not in education.

17 January

The state governor, Luiz Fernando Pezão, announced today that water and sewage 
service in Rio’s favelas will be privatised. The government is preparing a 
public-private partnership programme for sanitation in 25 communities that have 
Pacifying Police Units (UPPs), including Rocinha, Vidigal, City of God and the 
Complexo do Alemão. In all, they will invest R$600m (£114m) so that about 
140,000 households will receive better services. Some residents may also be 
relocated from areas with poor sanitation to other areas of the favela, but 
people are afraid that they might be moved to another part of the city. Most of 
the population reject the governor’s proposal. The residents of Rio’s favelas 
have fought for basic sanitation for more than 50 years. Privatisation of these 
services is not the solution because the costs go up. The government didn’t 
invest in public works for basic sanitation, and now the people who live on a 
minimum wage can’t cover the costs of something that should be the 
responsibility of the government.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-tour-operators-treat-favelas-like-zoos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd75c6f7df001efe4adbf73910afccdf670504d21%2F0_0_3456_2304%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'Tour%20operators%20treat%20favelas%20like%20zoos'%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-tour-operators-treat-favelas-like-zoos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27Tour%20operators%20treat%20favelas%20like%20zoos%27%20%7C%20Michel%20Silva&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-tour-operators-treat-favelas-like-zoos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd75c6f7df001efe4adbf73910afccdf670504d21%2F0_0_3456_2304%2F3456.jpg>
 Life in Rocinha. Photograph: Sanja Sparica/Alamy 
21 January

The corruption investigation known as Lava Jato (Car Wash) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/brazil-anti-corruption-prosecutor-deltan-dallagnol-lava-jato-investigation>
 has reached Rio’s favelas. Federal police are trying to gather information 
about possible fraud in the bidding for public works in the favelas of Rocinha, 
Manguinhos and Complexo do Alemão that were funded by the government’s growth 
acceleration programme after 2008. Investigators are looking at possible 
collusion between the companies that won contracts.

29 January

My sister Monique Silva witnessed a startling shooting and robbery inside the 
Rebouças tunnel, which links the north and south zones of Rio. According to the 
military police, a motorbike was stolen and the victim was shot twice in the 
arm. The incident caused panic. Drivers feared it was a mass robbery and 
abandoned their cars to run outside the tunnel. There is a frightening climate 
of fear in this city. People head off to work each morning, not knowing if they 
will return home in the evening.

 13 February 

Amid growing fears about the Zika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/27/global-defence-against-virus-zika-ebola-needed>
, the federal government declared a nationwide mobilisation today against the
Aedes aegypti mosquito. The armed forces reportedly dispatched 220,000 
personnel on to the streets for this mission 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/27/world/americas/zika-virus-brazil-will-deploy-troops-to-spread-awareness.html?_r=0>
, but areas of armed conflict in Rio were excluded to avoid possible clashes 
with trafficking gangs.
 