
16 March

State repression can arrive at any time. Before 6am the helicopter is already 
hovering over our houses. Those who leave early for work feel afraid. There are 
reports of the police breaking into houses. I hear shots, and I know that there 
is a police operation looking for drugs, but it seems nothing is found. All the 
municipal schools and nurseries close when this happens. Normally, the 
operations happen more in the favelas that have territories divided between 
factions, such as Nova Holanda and Baixa do Sapateiro.

18 March

This week the focus of the military police is Maré. The residents of Parque 
União wake up early today with helicopters, armoured vehicles and military 
troops coming up the favela, shooting. This war isn’t against drugs, as they 
insist on saying. It’s against the poor. They don’t release the name of the man 
who is killed this morning. He is just another suspect to them. And to us, one 
more life lost.

21 March 

After many promises, the security secretary of Rio de Janeiro finally admits 
thata police pacification unit will not be deployed in Maré 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/rios-favela-pacification-plan-stumbles-months-from-olympics-1462786200>
 as a result of spending cuts. Deep down, we already know that the security 
policy is not working. It has never worked. People are killed every time the 
police enter the favela.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'I've seen six people infected with 
Zika. I am one of them' | Thaís Cavalcante
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/30/rio-olympics-view-favelas-six-people-with-zika-virus>
23 March 

The country’s economic crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/rio-de-janeiro-financial-emergency-olympic-games-2016>
 is affecting many sectors of society. Teachers are on strike because of their 
low salaries. This has gone on for so many months that students have occupied 
more than 30 public schools to stake a claim to a better education. They sleep 
in the classrooms. My old high school where many Maré residents have studied – 
the Viscount of Cairo College – is one of the occupied schools.

2 April 

Our favela newspaper, the Citizen <http://www.jornalocidadao.net>, is running 
a community communications course with financial support from the ministry of 
culture, which is celebrating the 450th anniversary of Rio de Janeiro with 
projects in marginalised areas.

With the help of teachers and residents, we aim to learn about web journalism, 
human rights, news writing and the history of Maré.

I have personal experience of the transformative effect of such classes. I was 
once ashamed to be a favela resident because of the enormous discrimination we 
face in society and the commercial media. For the past four years, however, I 
have been proud to be a part of this newspaper, which has taught me to know and 
love the place where I was born.

6 April 

On the way home from work, I see a crowd of people at a tent on the sidewalk. 
They are Christian volunteers from the Cathedral of Faith, one of the largest 
evangelical churches in Rio’s north zone.

They offer to cure disease, solve family problems and help people kick drug 
habits. The tent was near the sidewalk where addicts live and use crack.

Volunteers bless visitors with “anointed” oil. One of them hands me a magazine 
called Change of Time, which has stories of people overcoming problems.

It’s been getting easier and easier in the favela to go to an evangelical 
church. The pastor speaks the language of the people. Going to these places can 
be the salvation of those who aren’t very religious and need help. Even though 
there are Catholic churches with years of history, people are more dedicated to 
the evangelical churches. There is no space for Afro-Brazilian religions here. 
Some say this is due to repression, others say it’s prejudice.

17 April 

A very important day for the country – the lower house votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/dilma-rousseff-congress-impeach-brazilian-president>
 on the impeachment of President Dilma Rousseff. I voted for her in 2014, 
mainly because of the lack of better options. Sincethe 2013 protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/21/brazil-police-crowds-rio-protest>
, we young people are seeing politics as it really is: run by thieves, liars 
and selfish people. Today, the deputies ignore the 54m democratic votes that 
re-elected Dilma and put the Workers’ party in power again. We are experiencing 
a coup.

Residents are asking what will happen next. There are protests across the 
country, but Maré does not raise its voice. We have not forgotten that the 
president approved the idea ofa military occupation of all the favelas of Maré 
in 2014 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2014/04/the-military-occupation-of-mare-ahead-of-brazils-world-cup/>
.

7 May 

I meet some well-known commentators and other journalists to talk about the 
2016 Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>. We are linking 
up in preparation for the Games. The idea is to show how these places really 
are, so that the world can lose the stereotyped and prejudiced image of people 
and life in favelas.

I also hear a statement from a former resident of the Vila Autódromo community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/26/rio-de-janeiro-favela-change-vila-autodromo-favela-olympics>
 who resisted the city government’s efforts to relocate her for three years but 
ultimately was forced from her home. She is clearly suffering as she speaks of 
how she lost not just her home but her identity. Favela dwellers always have 
this difficulty in belonging to a place. Sometimes we are treated as being 
unworthy of the little that we have achieved.

10 May 

There is still a long way to go in the democratisation of Brazil’s media. 
About 10 wealthy families control the commercial mass media. Some of them are 
politicians. But the people have a voice and, thanks to community journalism, 
they are now telling the other side of the story.

Today I go to the launch of a book by two friends of mine from Maré – 
Experiments in Popular Communication in Rio de Janeiro Yesterday and Today, 
which details some of those changes.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'We need the freedom to be ourselves'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-we-need-the-freedom-to-be-ourselves>
12 May 

On the way home from my sister’s house, I hear shots ahead of me. I call my 
mother to check whether it is safe to return. “You can come, but be careful,” 
she says. I feel nervous but I get back OK. I learn later that a Special 
Resources Police Unit (Core) has killed a local resident –24-year-old Oswaldo 
Rocha 
<http://odia.ig.com.br/rio-de-janeiro/2016-05-12/suspeito-e-morto-durante-operacao-no-complexo-da-mare.html>
 from the Morro do Timbau neighbourhood. The crack of gunfire that I hear means 
casualties. Every sound is a loss. And with every loss, less hope.

Exactly two years ago the army killed a victim here. These operations are a 
justification to kill with impunity.

This time, the lethal shooting does not even make the newspapers. Violence in 
the favela has become trivialised. People have a new topic of discussion when 
they chat at bus stops and in checkout queues and elevators: Dilmahas been 
removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/suspended-brazil-president-dilma-rousseff-proposes-early-elections>
 from the presidency. And who will lose most from this? As always, it will be 
us. The vice-president,Michel Temer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/michel-temer-brazil-president-rebuild-impeachment>
, who took power, has promised to reduce workers’ rights. I’m worried about 
what will come next.

18 May

All the political news we hear is disappointing. The new minister of health, 
Ricardo Barros, says that at some pointthe country will not be able to sustain 
<http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/internacional/en/brazil/2016/05/1772048-universal-access-to-healthcare-should-be-reconsidered-says-brazils-new-health-minister.shtml>
 universal access to health. He is talking about the unified health system 
(SUS), which provides care to people like me who cannot afford to pay a private 
doctor. It’s free, but this is what we pay taxes for – for public services to 
work. But it’s not what happens.

This is our right, but it does not happen. Today, it is already very difficult 
to get an appointment or a prescription. Imagine how much worse it will get. 
After I tell my mother, she can’t sleep. She tells me that if healthcare is 
cut, the poor will die.

Leia este artigo na lingua original

16 de março

A opressão do Estado não tem mais hora pra chegar. Antes das 6h da manhã, o 
helicóptero já rondava nossas casas. Quem sai cedo de casa para trabalhar, tem 
medo. Há denúncias de arrombamento de casas Ouvi tiros, e soube que estava 
tendo uma operação policial a procura de drogas, mas parece que nada foi 
encontrado. Todas as escolas municipais e creches fecham quando acontece isso. 
Geralmente as operações acontecem mais nas favelas que tem dividem os 
territórios entre facções, como Nova Holanda e Baixa do Sapateiro.

18 de março

Nessa semana, o foco da Polícia Militar foi a Maré. Moradores do Parque União, 
acordaram de manhã cedo helicóptero, caveirões e tropas militares para subir na 
favela dando tiros. Essa guerra não é de combate as drogas, como eles insistem 
em dizer. É de combate ao pobre. Não divulgaram o nome do homem que foi morto 
nessa manhã. Era só um suspeito pra eles. E para nós, mais uma vida perdida, 
independente do seu envolvimento.


21 de março

Depois de muitas promessas, finalmente a Secretaria de Segurança admitiu que a 
UPP na Maré não será instalada por causa do corte de gastos. No fundo a gente 
sabe que essa política de segurança não está funcionando. Nunca funcionou. As 
pessoas estão morrendo cada vez que a polícia entra na favela.


23 de março

Vejo que a crise econômica no país tem afetado setores diferentes. Os 
professores estão em greve por causa do baixo salário. Após meses sem aulas, 
estudantes ocuparam mais de 30 escolas públicas para reivindicar uma educação 
de qualidade. Eles dormem nas salas de aula. A minha antiga escola de ensino 
médio e a de muitos moradores da Maré, o Colégio Visconde de Cairu, é uma das 
escolas ocupadas.


2 de abril 

O nosso jornal O Cidadão (www.jornalocidadao.net 
<http://www.jornalocidadao.net/>) está oferecendo um curso de comunicação 
comunitário com apoio financeiro do Ministério da Cultura, que está comemorando 
os 450 anos do Rio de Janeiro com projetos em áreas menos favorecidas.


Com ajuda de moradores e professores, a ideia é trocar conhecimento sobre web 
jornalismo, direitos humanos, produção de reportagem e história da Maré.


Só eu sei como essas aulas me transformaram. Eu tinha vergonha de ser da 
favela porque a descriminação na sociedade e na mídia comercial é grande. Mas a 
quatro anos sinto orgulho em fazer parte desse jornal, que me ensinou a 
conhecer e amar o lugar em que nasci.


Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'The closer the gunshots, the stronger 
my heart beats' | Daiene Mendes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/30/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-closer-the-gunshots-the-stronger-my-heart-beats>
6 de abril

Quando voltava do trabalho a noite, vi uma barraca bem movimentada na calçada. 
Eram voluntários cristãos, que vieram da Catedral da Fé, uma das maiores 
igrejas evangélicas da Zona Norte do Rio de Janeiro.


Eles oferecem ajuda para pessoas que buscam a cura de uma doença ou parar de 
usar drogas. Essa barraca, foi colocada perto da calçada onde pessoas viciadas 
em drogas moram e usam crack.


Os voluntários estavam abençoando quem passava ali com o óleo “ungido”. Um 
deles me entregou uma revista chamada “Hora da Mudança” que mostra histórias de 
superação.


Sempre foi mais fácil aqui na favela visitar uma igreja evangélica. O pastor 
fala para o povo, de uma forma fácil de entender. Visitar esses espaços é a 
salvação de quem não é muito religioso e precisa de ajuda. Apesar de termos 
muitas igrejas católicas com anos de história, a relação das pessoas é de mais 
fidelidade. Já as religiões afrodescendentes, não tem esse espaço aqui. Uns 
dizem que é repressão, outros preconceito.


17 de abril

Um dia muito importante para o país - o dia da votação para aprovar ou não o 
processo de impeachment contra a presidente Dilma Rousseff. Eu votei nela para 
presidente, não por vontade, mas por falta de opção. Desde os protestos de 2013 
nós jovens, estamos enxergando a política como ela realmente é: egoísta, 
mentirosa e ladra. Hoje, os deputados ignoraram os 53 milhões de votos 
democráticos que colocaram o PT no poder pela segunda vez. Estamos vivendo um 
golpe.


Os moradores se perguntavam o que ia acontecer. Como será daqui pra frente. 
Protestos rolaram por todo o país, mas a Maré não levantou a voz. Nós também 
não esquecemos que a presidente aprovou a ideia de ocupação militar em 2014 em 
todas as Favelas da Maré.


7 de maio

Eu me reuni com alguns comunicadores populares da Maré e de outros lugares 
para falar sobre as Olimpíadas 2016. Estamos nos articulando em preparação para 
os Jogos. A ideia é mostrar como os territórios populares realmente são, e que 
o mundo perca essa visão preconceituosa e estereotipada que tem sobre as 
pessoas e sobre a vida na favela.


Ouvi também um depoimento de uma ex-moradora da Vila Autódromo, que resistiu à 
retirada da Prefeitura por 3 anos. Ela passava muita dor enquanto falava e 
relembrava do sofrimento de perder não só a casa, mas identidade. Morador 
sempre teve essa dificuldade de pertencer a algum lugar. Às vezes somos 
tratados como não merecedores do pouco que conquistamos.


10 de maio

Ainda temos muito para fazer na democratização da comunicação no Brasil. Temos 
cerca de 10 famílias ricas que controlam toda a mídia comercial de massa. 
Alguns são políticos. Mas o povo tem voz e agora, graças ao jornalismo 
comunitário, está contando o outro lado da história.


Hoje vi o lançamento do livro de duas amigas minhas da Maré - “Experiências em 
Comunicação Popular no Rio de Janeiro Ontem e Hoje”, que registrou algumas 
formas dessa mudança.


12 de maio

Depois de voltar da casa da minha irmã, em um bairro próximo de casa, ouço 
tiros. Ligo para minha mãe e pergunto da situação. “Pode vir, mas toma 
cuidado”, ela diz. Sigo com medo mas chego bem em casa. Fico sabendo depois que 
a Coordenadoria de Recursos Especiais (CORE) matou um morador, o Oswaldo Rocha 
de 24 anos do Morro do Timbau. O barulho de tiros que escuto muitas vezes fazem 
vítima. A cada som uma perda. E a cada perda, menos esperança.


Exatamente há dois anos atrás o exército matava um homem. As operações feitas 
são justificativas para matar e ficar impune.


Mas nenhuma notícia da Maré estampou os jornais de hoje. A violência na favela 
foi banalizada. A cidade tem um novo assunto para discutir no ponto de ônibus, 
na fila do mercado e no elevador: Dilma foi afastada da presidência. E quem 
perde como sempre, somos nós. O vice-presidente já mostrou para que veio, se 
for eleito, vai diminuir direitos do trabalhador formal. Tenho medo até do que 
virá depois.


18 de maio 

A cada notícia sobre mudança na política que a gente fica sabendo, é uma 
decepção. O novo Ministro da Saúde, Ricardo Barros, disse que em algum momento 
o país não vai conseguir sustentar o acesso universal a Saúde. Ele fala do 
Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS), o programa que cuida da saúde das pessoas como 
eu, que não tem condições de pagar médico particular. Ele parece ser gratuito, 
mas é para isso que pagamos impostos, para que os serviços públicos funcionem. 
Mas não acontece.


Esse é um direito nosso e isso não pode acontecer. Se hoje já é muito difícil 
conseguir uma consulta ou um remédio, imagina depois? Quando contei isso para 
minha mãe a noite, ela nem conseguiu dormir direito. Me disse que se realmente 
acontecer isso, os pobres vão morrer.
 