
5 December

There is growing concern about the Zika virus in the news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/25/zika-virus-mosquitoes-countries-affected-pregnant-women-children-microcephaly>
. It seems to hit favelas harder than other communities. In Maré, I’ve seen at 
least six people who have been infected. I am one of them. My personal 
experience highlighted how budget cuts are hurting medical care. When we get 
sick, doctors at public hospitals often will not see us because they are not 
being paid their salaries. And when they prescribe medicines, we are left to 
pay for them.

This was the case when I had Zika. I had to buy my own medicine because it was 
not available at the public pharmacy. There was no hospital treatment. I just 
had to go home and wait until I got better. It’s worrying. The reports say it 
can cause problems in foetuses, but we don’t have enough information about it. 
I don’t plan to get pregnant any time soon but if I do one day then I will 
worry whether my baby will be born healthy.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'We need the freedom to be ourselves'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-we-need-the-freedom-to-be-ourselves>
25 December

I am spending Christmas and the new year in my family’s old home in Rio Grande 
do Norte. It’s a state in the north-east ofBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, the region where most Maré 
residents migrated from. Being here reminds me of the drastic change my parents 
had to adjust to when they made the move from the farm to the favela. Life is 
very tranquil – conversations on the porch, no computer or mobile phone. 
Everything is much simpler. But it can be tough. My grandmother has struggled 
without money to raise 16 children alongside my grandfather, and is now 
fighting cancer. Somehow, she manages to smile.

7 January

After a quiet and peaceful new year in the north-east, I return to Maré and am 
woken up at dawn by the sound of shooting.

8 January

The first killing of the year in our community. Fifty-one-year-old José Carlos 
Santos was killed during a robbery on bus 483, as it passed the Vila do João 
favela, which is part of the Maré complex. Armed robberies are common at bus 
stops and overpasses near the entrance of favelas. That is exactly where the 
patrol cars of the military police are usually parked, but they do nothing. It 
seems their only role is to look reassuring on television ahead of the 
Olympics. Our community has little confidence in uniforms.

19 January

The construction of the Factory of Tomorrow School – a municipal educational 
project – had muddied the surrounding streets, making it difficult to cross on 
foot. It’s been a long time since we’ve seen such a large structure being 
built, and authorities investing both time and money in our children. The 
promises came only after they announced the World Cup and Olympic mega events. 
Before that, it wasn’t important that we had so few schools. It will be good to 
have more schools here in Maré – but it’s frustrating that our demands are not 
met without political motivations.

23 January

The community is full of energy today as we celebrated summer in Maré with a 
pre-carnival street party. Our goal is to have this event recognised as one of 
the city’s “blocos” or neighbourhood parades. Everyone met at the Lona 
Cultural, a hub for music and other events, in the heat of the afternoon and 
then we sweatily partied our way towards the Pontilhão at night. This is an 
area that was taken over by the military but today we occupied it with dancing 
and festivity. The drummers kept up a strong rhythm, people painted their 
faces, mothers in brightly coloured clothes brought their young children along. 
We will have other blocos at the Pontilhão. The police put their armoured cars 
there, but we bringbaile funk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/nov/23/worldmusic> and go to play at 
the nearby amusement parks and skating rinks. I think it’s important to occupy 
these areas as a form of resistance.

28 January

The Centre for Studies and Solidarity Actions of Maré (CEASM) has launched an 
online campaign <https://beta.benfeitoria.com/ceasm> to gather funding for 
social projects. CEASM has already created great opportunities for local 
people. My sister studied for her college entrance exam there and it is where I 
got my first taste of community journalism. This latest initiative is 
impressive. Online financial support is new for those working in favelas and 
one of the few ways to sustain social projects in a difficult economic climate. 
The campaign is called “We are all CEASM” (borrowing its name from theCharlie 
Hebdo solidarity movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/charlie-hebdo-attack>).

1 February

Education authorities announced today which children will get places in the 
new system of early learning centres. Families in Maré and other favela 
communities are clearly at a disadvantage because those who applied via the 
municipal website before the end of January were guaranteed a place, but those 
without a computer – which includes many favela residents – are not so lucky. 
The system itself is good. It is well structured, the facilities are decent and 
there is even space for babies. Best of all it is full-time so that working 
parents can focus on their careers. But getting in is tricky without a computer.

3 February 

I was hoping for a warm and peaceful start to carnival, but it began with a 
noisy 6am police operation. For several days in a row now, we have woken to the 
sound of police helicopters buzzing overhead.


Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'The Games have made things worse' | 
Thaís Cavalcante
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-games-have-made-things-worse>
13 February 

It has been a year since a Maré resident called Vitor Santiago 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/americas/brazil/report-brazil/> was shot 
by the military as he was travelling with friends in a minibus. His leg had to 
be amputated but so far he has received no government assistance. He used to 
play a lot of football. Now he is an example of police failure. There is little 
hope of protection for those who want to get on with their lives, their work, 
their family and to be happy in the place where they were born.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Frio-olympics-view-favelas-six-people-with-zika-virus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bb90cb97bba47c158bafa669b675c15816319a1%2F0_96_5100_3061%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'I've%20seen%20six%20people%20infected%20with%20Zika.%20I%20am%20one%20of%20them'%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Frio-olympics-view-favelas-six-people-with-zika-virus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27I%27ve%20seen%20six%20people%20infected%20with%20Zika.%20I%20am%20one%20of%20them%27%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Frio-olympics-view-favelas-six-people-with-zika-virus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bb90cb97bba47c158bafa669b675c15816319a1%2F0_96_5100_3061%2F5100.jpg>
 The canine operations unit of Rio de Janeiro police perform stop and search 
operations in Maré in 2014. Photograph: Anthony Burns/Alamy 
22 February 

Today, I had one of the worst experiences I can remember. After hearing that a 
police action was taking place, I posted my concerns on twitter (@tcavalcantes 
<https://twitter.com/tcavalcantes>) before going to college in the morning. But 
on the way, I almost became caught up in the fighting. I took shelter behind a 
car and covered my ears with my hands. The gunfire was very loud. So was my 
crying. I dropped my food on the ground and went to college in a state of 
shock. When I returned home, the car windows were broken. There were empty 
rounds of ammunition on the floor. The TV news reported that a 19-year-old 
resident, Igor Silva, 19, was fatally shot in the chest by an officer from the 
Core special police unit. He worked at a local pharmacy, but the police 
insisted he was a criminal. A resident filmed what happened from the window of 
her home. This was a day that made me rethink my life.

29 February 

The Rio Metro begins an exhibition called Favela Memories 
<http://favelatemmemoria.com.br/> at its stations today. I took part by 
interviewing the residents of several favelas, including Morro do Borel, 
Mangueira and Salgueiro. It’s amazing how every testimony saves a local memory. 
This brings me hope. I help to promote the event at the stations and try to 
show a little of what I saw of each reality.
 