
I was born and raised in the Nova Holanda community of the Maré favela 
complex. I am 21 years old and I have been a community journalist for four 
years.

I see community communication as a way to fight for the rights and livelihoods 
of the residents. I love my favela and I have come to realise that every one of 
us has a role to play in protecting our shared home. If we don’t do it, no one 
will. I believe that talking and writing about our experiences can contribute 
to social change. Communication needs to be more democratic so people’s voices 
are heard.
 ‘We struggle every day with oppression by the state’ … Thaís Cavalcante from 
Maré in Rio de Janeiro. 
The Maré complex of 16 favelas has about 134,000 residents. They are mostly 
families of migrants from the north-east with little education who came to Rio 
de Janeiro in the expectation of work. The name “Maré” means tide, a reference 
to the situation here in the 1960s when wooden shacks on stilts started 
springing up close to Guanabara Bay.

The military occupation (which the authorities euphemistically call 
“pacification”) of Maré began on 30 April 2014, which happened to be the 50th 
anniversary of the military coup inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>. In the first month, 15 people were 
killed. Tanks roll through the streets and soldiers stand in the place of 
police. As the tensions have risen, so has the danger. Every day, the 
government spends 1.7m reais (£314,486) to maintain this false security in Maré.

Today, civil society is very active here in getting people on to the street 
for both cultural and political mobilisations. The state’s presence is hugely 
apparent in terms of raids and police repression. But when it comes to 
investments in health, education and sanitation, it is lacking.

Given the changes now underway, I think there will be more protests to demand 
political reform. The price of food and other goods is increasing and the 
minimum wage is too low. Corruption is increasingly apparent. As in Brazil’s 
dictatorship era, the military continue to control daily life in the favelas. 
This is creating a growing dissatisfaction that could gradually lead to a 
popular uprising.

The Olympics have made things worse. The preparations for the event have been 
disastrous for Maré, which is located in the north of the city along the main 
road between the airport and the centre. As a result, our community has become 
part of the “safety belt” for visitors. In July last year, families were 
removed from their homes in the Salsa and Merengue communities, and police 
pacification units (UPP) were installed. Their purpose is to show the world how 
the country will ensure the safety of visitors, but not the safety of those who 
actually live here.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – 'We're not ready for another mega event' 
| Michel Silva
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/05/rio-olympic-games-2016-favela-not-ready-for-another-mega-event>
We struggle every day with oppression by the state, limitations on movement, 
arbitrary invasion of homes, prohibition of baile funk, pagoda and samba at 
parties – essentially, the criminalisation of black youth. But life goes on. My 
sister will soon get married. I am planning to travel with my boyfriend to my 
grandmother’s house in the north-eastern state of Paraíba. Half of my mother’s 
family lives there, so it should be fun.

In the year ahead, I want to show the reality of life in a favela. In addition 
to seeking solutions to problems, I hope that writing can educate people and 
deconstruct some of the stereotypes of poor, black people living on the 
periphery.

Residents have had their voice silenced by the state within their own 
community as you can see from recent protests in Maré, when security forces 
fired teargas, pepper spray, rubber bullets and live ammunition against 
residents calling for peace. Photographers and local journalists are often 
unable to show what is happening and the mainstream media focuses on the 
government’s version of the story. The other side needs to be told.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-games-have-made-things-worse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafa88f09f82badefe41180a1fa075848e1445c2b%2F127_156_5228_3144%2F5228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0'The%20Games%20have%20made%20things%20worse'%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-games-have-made-things-worse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0%27The%20Games%20have%20made%20things%20worse%27%20%7C%20Tha%C3%ADs%20Cavalcante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Frio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-games-have-made-things-worse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafa88f09f82badefe41180a1fa075848e1445c2b%2F127_156_5228_3144%2F5228.jpg>
 Rio’s Maré favela complex has been occupied by federal forces since before the 
start of the 2014 World Cup. A police pacification unit will arrive to improve 
security ahead of the 2016 Olympic Games. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty Images 
Leia este artigo na lingua original

Eu nasci e fui criada na comunidade Nova Holanda do Complexo Conjunto de 
Favelas da Maré. Tenho 21 anos e sou jornalista comunitária há quatro anos.Eu 
vejo comunicação comunitária como formar de lutar por direitos e pela vida dos 
moradores.

Amo a minha favela e vim a perceber que cada um de nós tem um papel na 
proteção da nossa comunidade. Se não fizermos isso, mais ninguém vai. Acredito 
que falar e escrever sobre as nossas experiências pode contribuir para a 
mudança social. A comunicação tem de ser mais democrático para que a voz do 
povo seja ouvido.

O complexo conjunto de 16 favelas da Maré tem cerca de 134 mil habitantes. São 
em sua maioria famílias de migrantes do Nordeste que vieram para o Rio de 
Janeiro com pouco estudo na expectativa de encontrar trabalho. O nome “Maré” 
significa maré, uma referencia à situação aqui na década de 60 quando barracos 
de madeira sobre palafitas começaram a surgir perto da Baía de Guanabara

A ocupação militar começou dia 30 de abril de 2014 - dia em que completou-se 
50 anos de golpe militar no Brasil. Só no primeiro mês de ocupação, 15 pessoas 
foram mortas. Tanques de guerra circulam pelas ruas e soldados fazem papel de 
policiais. A tensão aumentou e o perigo também. Pois temos mais forças armadas 
em nossa rotina. Diariamente, a secretaria de segurança gasta 1,7 milhões para 
manter essa falsa segurança nas favelas da Maré

Hoje, a sociedade civil local é muito ativa, levando as pessoas para a rua 
para obilizações culturais e politicas. A presença do Estado é extremamente 
aparente nas invasões e repressões policiais. Mas quando se trata de 
investimentos em saúde, educação e saneamento básico, são insuficientes.

Com todas as mudanças que vem acontecendo, acredito que haverá mais 
manifestações exigindo reforma política. Os preços dos alimentos e outros bens 
estão aumentando e o salário mínimo é muito baixo. A corrupção está cada vez 
mais evidente. Como na ditadura no Brasil, os militares continuam a controlar a 
vida cotidiano nas favelas. Isto está criando uma insatisfação crescente que 
pode levar está acontecendo aos poucos uma revolta popular.

Os jogos olímpicos piorou a situação. Os preparativos para o evento tem sido 
desastrosa para a Maré, que está localizada no norte da cidade no entorno da 
principal via de acesso do aeroportos para o centro. Como resultado, a nossa 
comunidade tornou-se parte do cinturão de segurança para os visitantes. 
Famílias já foram removidas de suas casas em Julho do ano passado na Comunidade 
Salsa e Merengue, que compõe a Maré e UPPs foram instaladas. Sua finalidade é 
mostrar mundialmente como o país está pronto para garantir segurança de quem 
chega, mas não de quem permanece.

Lutamos contra a opressão diária do Estado, limitação de ir e vir, invasão 
arbitrária nas casas, proibição de festas como baile funk, rodas de pagode e 
samba, principalmente a criminalização de jovens negros. Mas a batalha por uma 
vida melhor continua. Minha irmã vai se casar em breve. Estou planejando viajar 
com meu namorado para a casa de minha avó na Paraíba. Metade da família da 
minha mãe mora lá, gosto muito de visitá-los.

No próximo ano, quero mostrar aos leitores a realidade da vida em uma favela. 
Além de buscar soluções para os problemas, espero que a escrita possa educar as 
pessoas e desconstruir alguns dos estereótipos de pessoas pobres e negras que 
vivem na periferia. Os moradores tem tido sua voz silenciada pelo Estado dentro 
de sua própria favela. Nos últimos protestos ocorridos na Maré, as forças de 
segurança atiraram bombas de efeito moral, gás de pimenta, balas de borracha e 
balas de verdade contra os moradores que pediam paz. Fotógrafos e jornalistas 
locais, muitas vezes são impedidos de retratar sua realidade. E a mídia 
comercial contribui com isso focando no lado do governo na história. O outro 
lado precisa ser contado.
 