
I am a 25-year-old woman who lives in Nova Brasilia – one of the 15 
communities that make up the Complexo do Alemão favela conglomeration. I 
dedicate most of my time to Projeto FaveLê, a community project that aims to 
encourage reading among residents of Rio’s favela communities.

I believe that through reading we can become more responsible citizens and 
critical observers of our circumstances. I became a journalist after I 
participated in an event run byVoz das Comunidades 
<http://www.vozdascomunidades.com.br/complexo-do-alemao/> (Community Voice), a 
monthly newspaper for local residents.
 Daiene Mendes, 25, lives in Nova Brasilia, in the Alemão favela complex. 
Photograph: Jonathan Watts for the Guardian 
Alemão, which means “the German”, is a misnomer. The complex was named after 
Polish farmer Leonard Kaczmarkiewicz, who sold lots of his property to the 
first wave of people who moved into the area in the 1920s. They thought he 
looked German so they gave him that nickname.

Today, the favela complex is huge. The government claims the community has 
only 60,000 residents, but the truth is that 120,000 people probably live here. 
You can see how vast the community is by taking a short cable car ride.

The cable car opened in 2011 and was a major public investment of about 210m 
reais (£35m). It carries up to eight people at a time on steel cables elevated 
above thousands of brick homes. This impressive service is already one of the 
major tourist sights in the city, although it should also be mentioned that 
sewage flows along the steps and streets nearby.

If you really want to experience the life and energy of our people, you have 
to walk through the community, not just stare down from above.

For more than 40 years, the Complexo do Alemão existed without the presence of 
police, although there were occasional raids, gunfire and violence as a result 
of the “war on drugs”. The law of the state did not apply here. Instead, people 
learned to get by with unwritten rules – we just got along with one another. 
But in 2010 the government launched the pacification programme and the police 
moved in. This was propaganda: the authorities were selling us a dream of being 
able to live together in peace and have access to public services such as 
water, electricity and sewerage. It stirred up the hopes of thousands of people 
who just wanted to live with dignity and pride.

The initial operation was news around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/28/rio-police-drug-gang-slum>. 
There were headlines proclaiming that police had taken over the headquarters of 
the trafficking gangs. It was almost unbelievable how few shots were fired on 
the day the gangs lost their territory. But those hopes have been shattered. 
Earlier this year, we suffered 100 consecutive days of shootings. Earlier this 
week, I was woken up at 4am by the sound of gunfire outside my house.

In my account of life in my favela in the runup to the Olympics, it is easy to 
predict what the main themes will be: police, gangs, drugs and violence. I 
dream of the day when we can talk about other topics with the same weight and 
relevance.

I’m excited about taking part in this project. I really want to share the 
energy that exists here. I hope I can write about more peace than violence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-hopes-of-pacification-are-shattered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fcd7434331c4594e01f8076b93e04b350994383%2F0_15_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20'Hopes%20of%20pacification%20are%20shattered'%20%7C%20Daiene%20Mendes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-hopes-of-pacification-are-shattered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%3A%20view%20from%20the%20favelas%20%E2%80%93%20%27Hopes%20of%20pacification%20are%20shattered%27%20%7C%20Daiene%20Mendes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Frio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-hopes-of-pacification-are-shattered%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fcd7434331c4594e01f8076b93e04b350994383%2F0_15_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A boy shows off his soccer skills in the Alemão favela complex. Photograph: 
Mario Tama/Getty Images 
Leia este artigo na lingua original


Eu sou uma mulher jovem de 25 anos que mora na Nova Brasília – uma das 15 
comunidades que compõe o Complexo do Alemão. Dedico a maioria do meu tempo ao 
projeto FaveLê, um projeto comunitário que tem o objetivo principal de 
estimular o hábito de ler nos moradores das comunidades cariocas. Acredito de 
através da leitura podemos nos tornar cidadãos mais responsáveis e críticos na 
vida. Eu me tornei uma jornalista comunitária quando comecei a contribuir aVoz 
das Comunidades <http://www.vozdascomunidades.com.br/complexo-do-alemao/>, um 
jornal mensal para os moradores locais.

Alemão, que significa “the German”, é um equívoco. O complexo foi nomeado após 
o agricultor polonês Leonard Kaczmarkiewicz, que vendeu lotes de sua 
propriedade às primeiras pessoas que se mudaram para a área na década de 1920. 
Eles pensavam que ele parecia alemão e foi assim apelidado.

Agora é enorme. O governo divulga que tem 60,000 residentes, mas a verdade 
está mais perto de 120,000. É possivel comprovar o tamanho da comunidade com um 
breve passeio de teleférico.

O teleférico foi inaugurado em 2011. Foi um grande investimento público de 
cerca de 210 milhões de reais transportando até 8 pessoas por vez, através de 
cabos de aço, sobre milhares de casas de tijolo. Esse serviço impressionante já 
é um dos principais pontos turísticos da cidade, mas é importante comentar de 
bem perto dali, o esgosto escorre à céu aberto pelas escadarias e ruas que 
ligam os morros. Se realmente quiser sentir a energia e vida que vem do nosso 
povo, tem que andar pela comunidade, não só olhar de cima.

Por mais de 40 anos o Complexo do Alemão conviveu sem a presença da polícia, 
embora houvesse incursões pontuais, tiros e violência como resultado da “guerra 
às drogas”. A lei do estado não se aplicava aqui. Em vez disso, as pessoas 
aprenderam aconviver com regras não escritas. Nos dávamos uns com os outros. 
Mas em 2010 o governo lançou o programa de pacificação e a policia entrou. Isso 
era propaganda. As autoridades estavam vendendo a imagem do sonho de conviver 
em paz e principalmente de ter acesso à serviços públicos como agua, luz e 
saneamento básico. Movimentou a esperança de milhares de pessoas que só queriam 
viver com dignidade e orgulho.

A operação inicial foi notícia no mundo inteiro. Tiveram manchetes proclamando 
que a policia ocupou o “quartel general do tráfico”. Foi quase inacreditável 
ter se ouvido pouquíssimos tiros no dia em que o tráfico de drogas perderia 
todo o seu território para a polícia. Mas aquelas esperanças foram destruídas. 
No início deste ano chegamos a viver 100 dias consecutivos com tiroteios. Ainda 
essa semana acordei às 4 da manhã com uma rajada de tiros.

Em minha narrativa da minha favela até as Olimpíadas, é fácil prever os 
principais temas: policia, traficantes, drogas e violência. Eu sonho com o dia 
que poderemos falar sobre outros temas com o mesmo peso e relevância.

Eu estou muito animada por participar desse projeto. Eu quero muito conseguir 
traduzir toda a energia que existe por aqui. Espero poder falar mais de paz do 
que de violência, mas estou pronta para compartilhar com vocês os principais 
fatos e eventos que envolvem a minha comunidade.
 