
8 March

Last night, there was such a fierce gun battle that I could not go home. My 
WhatsApp groups warned of the tension in the favela so a friend offered to let 
me stay at her house. This meant I took a different route from usual the next 
morning when I headed to an appointment in the south zone, the most upmarket 
part of the city. When I go from the Complexo do Alemão, which is in the north 
zone, it generally takes two hours. But it feels much longer, because the buses 
are crammed and there is no air-conditioning while you are snarled in the 
traffic jams that always clog the main thoroughfare of Avenida Brasil. Look out 
the window and you can see that one of the reasons for the chaos is 
construction. Workers are building alternative transport systems for the 
Olympics.

In the south zone, it’s very different. Here, the bus is brand new and has 
good, cold air-conditioning. From the window, I see people exercising on the 
reclaimed land of the Aterro do Flamengo. I realise how beautiful this city is 
and a smile crosses my face. Then I take a deep breath and think about the 
contradictions of a city model that was not made for me, my family or my 
friends. Time to get off the bus.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – ‘The segregation of Rio is notorious’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-the-segregation-of-rio-de-janeiro-is-notorious>
17 March

“Avoid leaving the house! Heavy shooting in the Complexo do Alemão” read the 
headline on the Facebook page of a local newspaper. With clashes between police 
and drug traffickersincreasingly frequent these days 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/04/brazil-surge-in-killings-by-police-sparks-fear-in-favelas-ahead-of-rio-olympics/>
, the TV news announced that during the Olympics the Brazilian army will occupy 
some slums. Of course, the Complexo do Alemão is on the list!

The dynamics of the relationship between gangs and police here are hard to 
understand. For a while, there may be peace. This does not mean that there 
aren’t dealers, drugs or police. On the contrary, the two sides live together 
in a strange kind of “harmony”. Sometimes, they are just a few metres from one 
another.

I think the “war on drugs” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/02/un-war-on-drugs-failure-prohibition-united-nations>
 legitimises the violence in the favelas. Drugs are consumed throughout the 
whole city, but the violence is concentrated in Alemão, Maré, Rocinha and so 
many other favelas. As a result, they have a reputation for violence, and that 
is what the outside world hears about, rather than the wonderful stories about 
talented people who are transforming their existence out of sheer necessity and 
in the absence of the state. In the favelas, the presence of the state means 
the police. We deserve more than this.

2 April 

Eduardo de Jesus Ferreira was 10 years old when he was killed by a bullet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/19/brazilian-police-officer-charged-with-homicide-over-death-of-10-year-old-boy>
 to the head while playing outside his front door. The investigation concluded 
the shot was fired by a military policeman.

A year later, hundreds of people gather in the alley where Eduardo was 
murdered to press the authorities to punish those responsible. Many mothers who 
have lost their children participate, sharing in the pain of the loss and the 
anger at the reluctance of the government to bring the culprits to justice. One 
of the mothers said to the crowd: “In addition to sharing suffering, note that 
we all share the same colour – we are all black. All of us.”

17 April 

At the home of my grandmother I watch the impeachment vote against [President] 
Dilma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/dilma-rousseff-congress-impeach-brazilian-president>
 [Rousseff] that is taking place in the House of Representatives. Every five 
minutes, my grandmother complains that she cannot bear to hear the politicians 
talking. My uncle and cousin are playing video games. It seems like an ordinary 
day.

At my computer, I transcribe the speeches of all the deputies who claim they 
are voting “to end corruption”, even though they are accused [of] or charged 
[with] crimes themselves.

The city of Rio was strangely silent. It was almost impossible to believe 
that, despite beingelected with 54m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/27/dilma-rouseff-brazil-election-president-battle>
 votes and not committing any crime, the president is being removed from 
office. A coup was launched on this day by a congress that does not represent 
the Brazilian people.

Rio Olympics: view from the favelas – ‘Violence here has become trivialised’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/12/rio-olympics-view-from-the-favelas-violence-here-has-become-trivialised>
21-23 April 

In the wealthy south zone of Rio, a bike path collapses, killing three people. 
In the north zone favela of Alemão, police kill a moto-taxi driver. The 
responses could hardly be more different.

The day after the disaster in the south zone, there is a major operation to 
locate the missing bodies with helicopters and fire department officials. In 
Alemão, police put the body of the moto-taxi driver in a car in the middle of 
the night and leave the scene. Since the moto-taxi driver was dead, the area 
should have been cordoned off, preserving the crime scene for an investigation. 
Then, those responsible should be punished. Here in Alemão, deaths aren’t 
investigated.

Newspaper reports of the south zone accident have big headlines, detailed 
analysis by experts and smart infographics. When it comes to coverage of the 
death in Alemão, there is only a terse summary: “Firefight leaves 
motorcycle-taxi driver dead.”

But locals say there was no gunfire at the time the police were supposed to 
have shot the boy. In the south zone, taskforces are mobilised to find the 
bodies. In Alemão, it seems the police makes an effort to hide them.

15 May 

It was a quiet night, but the police stopped one of my friends at one of the 
exits of the community. He was released soon after, but the memory of what we 
experienced that day will be forever in our memories.

I was with two friends: Enderson, a journalist from Bahia who exposed a 
massacre on the outskirts of Salvador, and Raull Santiago, a supporter of the 
most influentialhuman rights group <https://100ko.wordpress.com/> in Alemão. 

We were at the home of a friend who lived in one of the highest parts of the 
favela. She was preparing a welcome dinner for Enderson. We always have a party 
when we meet, since most of our interactions take place online. Shortly before 
midnight, we headed out to the birthday party of another friend, Helcimar.

We split up to take separate moto-taxis. I was on the first motorbike, 
followed closely by Enderson and Raull. Along the way, we passed people on the 
street, children, police and gang members. All of them were separated only by a 
few metres, but they seemed to be getting along well, each in their own space, 
knowing their limits.

I arrived at the bar and waited for the two guys. I was finding the delay 
strange when I received a message on my phone from Raull asking: “Dai, has 
Enderson arrived yet?”

I answered no, and immediately became very worried – it was night-time and 
Enderson, being from Bahia, wasn’t familiar with the alleys of the favela. 
Raull replied: “Something’s off”, which confirmed my suspicions that something 
was wrong.

Enderson had been approached by police officers. He was wearing a shirt with 
the words“Jovem Negro Vivo” <https://anistia.org.br/campanhas/jovemnegrovivo/> 
(Young, Black, Alive), a campaign launched by Amnesty International to alert 
people to thehigh number of deaths caused by Rio’s military police 
<https://anistia.org.br/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Voce-matou-meu-filho_Anistia-Internacional-2015.pdf>
 among young black favela residents.



Since Rio won the right to host the Olympics in 2009, Amnesty says 2,500 
people have been killed by police in Rio 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/07/rio-2016-has-brazil-lost-even-before-the-olympics-have-begun/>
. The overwhelming majority of the victims are young black men. Very few cases 
are investigated, let alone punished.

Enderson had at least three rifles pointed at his head. The police asked if he 
worked with Raull Santiago. The question is why do the police persecute those 
who fight for a better future in the favela? Why are they trying to impose a 
culture of fear that prevents us from pointing out errors and suggesting 
changes?

We are “traffickers” of culture and information, so maybe this persecution is 
a kind of “revenge” by a group of police officers who point us out, know our 
names and show off their guns. Our weapon is our narrative, and our struggle is 
for the right to live in Alemão and the chance to live together without daily 
shootings, without the terror of the police, without fear of drug traffickers.




















































 