
Two years ago, we met Ayman Hirh, a Syrian refugee who had fled to Scotland 
with his family.Hirh spoke about the heartache 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2014/aug/05/syrian-refugee-scotland-video>
 of leaving Damascus, and his hopes for his two young sons. Now, the family are 
settled in Edinburgh, where Hirh volunteers for the British Red Cross and his 
wife, Iman, works in a hotel.Read how their lives have changed. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/20/syrian-refugee-edinburgh-scotland-children-dont-want-to-know-syrian-world-refugee-day>

One in every 113 people in the world is a refugee, according to the UN. A 
record 65 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/20/one-in-every-113-people-uprooted-war-persecution-says-un-refugee-agency>
 men, women and children were forced from their homes by war and persecution 
last year, the annualglobal trends study <http://www.unhcr.org/5748413a2d9> 
found.


Elsewhere on the site

The opium bulbs of Myanmar: drug crop or lifeline for poor farmers?  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/22/opium-bulbs-poppies-myanmar-drug-crop-or-lifeline-for-poor-farmers>

Head of UN Women vows to tackle laws blocking women’s economic progress  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/21/head-un-women-tackle-laws-blocking-womens-economic-progress-phumzile-mlambo-ngcuka>

Sterilised at 20: the Indian women seeking permanent contraceptive solutions  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/21/sterilised-at-20-indian-women-permanent-contraceptive-solutions>

Madagascar’s vanilla farmers face volatile times after poor harvest  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/21/madagascar-vanilla-farmers-face-volatile-times-after-poor-harvest>

Somalia’s limited polls overshadowed by clan rivalries and al-Shabaab  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/22/somalia-limited-polls-overshadowed-clans-al-shabaab-michael-keating-head-un-mission>

Opinion

People caught in the midst of humanitarian crises need cash, not commodities, 
write Erik Johnson and Paula Gil Baizan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/27/humanitarian-crises-cash-not-commodities-un-economic-and-social-council>
. They argue that survivors of conflict and disaster prefer to use cash to 
access what they need more efficiently. The next step, they say, is to work out 
how best to coordinate cash transfers at scale.

Following news that the Colombian government and Farc guerrillas have agreed a 
bilateral ceasefire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/22/colombian-government-farc-rebels-ceasefire-deal>
, activists say the country’s future hinges on an inclusive peace deal. “After 
more than three years of peace negotiations, we welcome the ceasefire as a 
major step forward. But we need to be realistic,”writes Héctor Fabio Henao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/23/colombia-future-inclusive-peace-deal-human-rights>
, director of Cáritas Colombia.

Multimedia

Why is comprehensive sex education so important? Listen to the latest Global 
development podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/jun/15/lets-talk-about-sex-why-do-we-need-good-sex-education-podcast>
, featuring young people and experts on combating misconceptions and taboos 
around sex.

Severe water shortages are affecting about 330 million people in India, as 
farmers suffer devastating water losses. Photographer Sean Gallaghercaptured 
the impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/jun/17/india-drought-land-parched-cattle-emaciated-in-pictures>
 of the drought.

And if you missed it, take a look at our film on the harsh abortion laws in El 
Salvador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/dec/17/el-salvador-miscarriage-judge-accused-me-murder-anti-abortion-law-video>
, where women can be jailed for suffering miscarriages. The piece recently took 
the top prize in the short film category at theOne World Media awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/the-guardian-picks-up-three-prizes-at-london-awards-ceremony>
.

What you said

We asked readers to share their experiences of sex education in the classroom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/24/slutty-apple-your-experiences-sex-education#comments>
.bzz77 wrote:

Mine was way too technical. We had classes every year, starting when I was 
about 13 and ending when I was 16. But the teachers used anatomically/medically 
correct terms for everything and no one could understand what on earth was 
going on. I have a PhD in engineering and deal with menstruation, but I am 
still quite confused about the details. One of these days, I need to get on 
Wikipedia and rectify that.


Highlight from the blogosphere

While the global impact of the UK’s vote to leave the European Union remains 
unclear, the International Institute for Environment and Development hasshared 
its initial thoughts 
<http://www.iied.org/navigating-uncharted-waters-eu-referendum-spirit-paris-sdgs>
 on navigating uncharted waters.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 