
Cinema workers are counting on the magic of Harry Potter to raise awareness of 
pay and conditions with a series of strikes around the launch of Fantastic 
Beasts and Where to Find Them this week.

Workers at the Ritzy in Brixton and the Hackney Picturehouse, both in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, are planning strikes to coincide with 
screenings of the Potter spinoff film between Thursday this week and Monday 
next week as the latest move in a campaign for the independently verified 
living wage.

Kiv Legate, from the Ritzy cinema, said: “This year’s strike has now been 
going on for over six weeks with five strike days to date. Picturehouse 
strikers from the Ritzy cinema and Hackney Picturehouse, along with our union 
Bectu are being ignored by Cineworld and Picturehouse management, leaving 
workers with no alternative option but to intensify our action. We welcome a 
meaningful return to the negotiation table byCineworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cineworld> CEO Mooky Greidinger, and urge 
the company to accept Acas’s invite to settle the dispute once and for all.”

The workers say Picturehouse reneged on a promise, made after protests two 
years ago, to progress towards payment of the independently calculated London 
living wage, which now stands at £9.75 an hour. The pay rate, based on the 
amount needed to meet basic living costs, is considerably more than the 
government-backed legal minimum of £7.20 an hour for over 25s known as the 
“national living wage”.


In 2014 Ritzy workers campaigned to secure the London living wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/30/brixton-ritzy-climbs-down-over-redundancies>
 but instead won a stepped 26% pay rise, which was less than they demanded.

Cinema staff, most of whom are on zero-hours contracts, are paid £9.10 an hour 
which they say is not enough to live on in the capital. At the Ritzy, workers 
get regular shifts although these are not guaranteed by their contracts.

Staff who have worked less than a year do not get company sick pay. Longer 
term employees only get sick pay if they have been off work for eight days. 
Workers want sick pay for all staff from the first day they are off ill.

The pressure for a pay rise comes as Cineworld, the owner of the Picturehouse 
group, revealed an 8.4% rise in UK and Irish revenues in the 45 weeks to 10 
November.

The company described Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, which opens in 
the UK on 18 November, as one of two remaining major releases of the year 
alongside Star Wars: Rogue One, which opens in the UK on 15 December.

The appeal of the boutique cinema chains has been tarnished by rows over the 
use of zero-hours contracts and low pay. Film fans have criticised poor pay and 
conditions when they are paying £13 or more to watch a film.

After protests in 2014, the Curzon chain agreed to pay the living wage  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/29/curzon-cinema-chain-london-living-wage>
to some staff and earlier this month became fully accredited to the Living Wage 
Foundation as it said all staff, including agency workers, would get the 
independently agreed rate. The Everyman chainrecently pledged to move hundreds 
of staff off zero-hours contracts by the end of next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/14/everyman-cinema-chain-is-next-to-drop-zero-hours-contracts>
, although it does not pay the living wage.
 