
Not many futuristic technological advances involve lamb cutlets served with a 
choice of chips or salad. But this week, takeaway history was made when a 
Turkish restaurant in south London became the world’s first to use a robot 
delivery driver.

It’s part of a trial by takeaway app Just Eat <https://www.just-eat.co.uk/>. 
They have signed up seven mechanoids from Starship Technologies – a tech 
company run by two of Skype’s co-founders – and will be using them across 
Greenwich in the coming weeks. Now, when customers in the area order from a 
nearby restaurant, there’s a chance that their chicken chow mein will be 
brought to them by a robot.

Or, more accurately, a box on wheels. It’s a six-wheeled cube with a 
combination-locked lid that has enough space to fit a large food-delivery bag – 
essentially, a mobile locker to be opened by the customer, via a link they are 
sent when the robot arrives. Its design doesn’t exactly scream: “The future is 
here and it’s bearing a pizza!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Frobochops-on-the-road-with-a-food-delivery-droid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fdb1e54e532760bf2560a27a7ba38683ba7f1e0%2F0_610_4912_6140%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robochops%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20road%20with%20a%20food-delivery%20droid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Frobochops-on-the-road-with-a-food-delivery-droid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robochops%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20road%20with%20a%20food-delivery%20droid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Frobochops-on-the-road-with-a-food-delivery-droid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fdb1e54e532760bf2560a27a7ba38683ba7f1e0%2F0_610_4912_6140%2F4912.jpg>
 The robot collects its first delivery from Taksim Meze restaurant. Photograph: 
Christian Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
“It looks like a kid’s toy!” says a bearded pensioner as he watches it roll 
off to make the world’s first delivery – a portion of lamb cutlets and falafel 
from Taksim Meze restaurant on Blackheath Hill. It trundles along the pavements 
at four miles an hour, emitting the whine of an air-conditioning unit. When it 
comes within two metres of a human, it jerks to a stop, in case it knocks them 
down at its awesome top speed of 10 miles an hour.

Despite the fact that it looks like a radio-controlled car, it is actually 
self-operating. As it moves along, it creates a 3D map of the area and builds 
up a comprehensive memory of all the roads, pavements and bollards. When it’s 
required to make a delivery, it uses a GPS system to pinpoint itself on that 
map and thus avoid obstacles or driving off the edge of a kerb into oncoming 
traffic. But what happens when its attempting to pilot its way past a Friday 
night pub full of drunks?

“People will try to ride on them, steal them or tip them over,” says Henry 
Harris-Burland from Starship Technologies. “But we’ve fitted them with alarms, 
plus we’ve got robot operators in Estonia, and when there are any problems, a 
robot will ping camera footage to their screen so that they can either take 
control of it – or talk to people through the microphone.”

Judging by most peoples’ reactions to the cutlet bot rolling across the 
pavements, though, it doesn’t seem that likely to cause alarm. With the 
exception of one man who glares at it, everyone is totally blase. A builder 
says: “I’m used to them – I’ve seen them driving around here for weeks 
already.” A binman chips in: “Yeah, I saw it on the telly a few weeks ago.”

Within 10 minutes of leaving the restaurant, the robot has arrived at the 
customer’s address. Notified by her app, she opens the door to find herself 
face to face with a mechanoid delivery man – and seems totally, utterly 
nonplussed. “I’ve got a Roomba robot [vacuum cleaner] in my flat, so it’s not 
that out of the ordinary,” she says. “I guess it was less personal than a 
human, but to be honest, I’m not really looking to make friends with my 
delivery guy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Frobochops-on-the-road-with-a-food-delivery-droid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36ebaa78b1e5d6abdc1e3e053369f2a2c3d3a86b%2F0_366_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robochops%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20road%20with%20a%20food-delivery%20droid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Frobochops-on-the-road-with-a-food-delivery-droid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robochops%20%E2%80%93%20on%20the%20road%20with%20a%20food-delivery%20droid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Frobochops-on-the-road-with-a-food-delivery-droid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36ebaa78b1e5d6abdc1e3e053369f2a2c3d3a86b%2F0_366_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 The delivery has landed, 10 mins trundle away. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi 
for the Guardian 
But what about it stealing drivers’ jobs? “There actually aren’t enough 
drivers to cope with demand at peak times,” says Harris-Burland. “Plus, we’re 
hoping that with all the robot handlers we’ll need, it will create jobs 
overall.”

A beautiful co-existence of human and robot co-workers – might it come true? 
This remains to be seen. Judging by the comments from an onlooking roadsweeper, 
there may be an initial bit of suspicion. “If that turned up with my takeaway, 
I’d try to avoid paying it! Although, I suppose they’ve probably got a gun 
fitted somewhere.”
 