
If you want to know what’s going on in the collective consciousness of the 
global games industry, just hang out atE3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/e3> for a day. This gigantic three-day 
celebration of mainstream gaming has just closed up in Los Angeles, and it made 
a heck of an impression.

So here are the key trends that we picked out among the many hundreds of 
announcements.

Nature overcomes civilisation

Humankind may destroy itself, but will we take the world down with us? Not so 
in Guerrilla’s Horizon, Microsoft’s ReCore and The Chinese Room’s Everybody’s 
Gone to the Rapture. Each of these games present a post-apocalyptic world in 
which nature survives the collapse of human civilisation, and has begun its 
slow but inexorable work of reclaiming our towns and cities. It’s a different, 
more pastoral approach to the catastrophe narratives with which we are so 
familiar, one perhaps driven by the fact that games are now able to render moss 
and trees just as well as bricks and rubble.

The dawn and diversity of consumer virtual reality

The rush of excitement that accompanied the first wave of VR announcements 
appears to have cooled a little. VR demos at E3 were, in the main, situated at 
the periphery of the show floor. What’s clear is that there is no one headset 
that has everything. Sony’s Morpheus has the best product design and is the 
most comfortable to wear. Vive offers the most immersive experience, as it 
allows you to walk around. Oculus has the best physical input device, and 
newcomer Fove a gimmick that may prove fundamental: the ability to interact 
with objects and in-game characters using nothing but your eyes. It’s a mess, 
then, but an exciting one – and some people are going to make (and others lose) 
a lot of money in the process.

The rise of the user-designer

Companies have been encouraging user-generated content in their games for 
years – it allows players to express their creativity, while keeping a game 
fresh and stocked with new content for others to sample. Nintendo’s Mario 
Maker, which allows players to create 2D Mario levels in the style of various 
titles from across the series’ history is going to indulge fan fantasies on an 
industrial scale. Sony’s Dreams (made by LittleBigPlanet creator, Media 
Molecule) will allow users to build and paint a huge variety of hazy, yet 
beguiling stages. Meanwhile, Microsoft’s decision to allow PC mods to run on the
Xbox One <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> version of Fallout 4 
will allow the semi-professionals to get involved. And Doom’s new user-friendly 
snapmap level editor should open up the devilish joy of first-person shooter 
design to a much wider audience.

The battle of the living room PCs

Xbox One’s forthcoming support for PC mods is just one of a slew of features 
that are moving Microsoft’s console closer to the territory of PC tinkering. 
There’s a new controller for the system that has modifiable components (you can 
switch the analogue sticks out, for example) and an early access programme, 
whereby a developer can sell an unfinished game at a cut price both to generate 
income to further fund its work, and also to gain valuable live data for use in 
tweaking and developing the game further. These three elements are firsts for a 
video game console, and, in all likelihood, a move fromMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> to head off Valve’s incoming 
Steam machines.

The search for new ways to tell stories

The Chinese Room pioneered the (sometimes sneeringly) so-called “walking 
simulator” with its first release, Dear Esther, a game in which you wander a 
Scottish Isle, listening to snippets of voiceover that piece together a 
melancholy narrative. The company’s follow-up Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture 
takes the theme further: you follow the story of six disappeared people as you 
roam an abandoned village in Shropshire during the apocalypse. Another
PlayStation 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> title, 
What Remains of Edith Finch offers another example of the weird power of the 
walking simulator, where the journey and excitement comes not from overcoming 
challenges or tests of reaction, so much as lingering exploration and vigilance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fseven-game-design-trends-e3-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434715708947%2F8958e12f-deee-4a6c-960e-b3f7c5ceedef-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robots%2C%20dogs%20and%20the%20apocalypse%3A%20seven%20game%20design%20trends%20from%20E3%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fseven-game-design-trends-e3-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robots%2C%20dogs%20and%20the%20apocalypse%3A%20seven%20game%20design%20trends%20from%20E3%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fseven-game-design-trends-e3-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434715708947%2F8958e12f-deee-4a6c-960e-b3f7c5ceedef-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture: you won’t know whether to play it or book a 
weekend break in it. 
Women on screen – if not always on stage

After years of being told that female characters don’t sell games or are too 
time-consuming to draw,E3 2015 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/e3-2015> 
provided a heartening influx of women in leading roles. There was Lara Croft, 
of course, and Faith in Mirror’s Edge Catalyst. And with these established 
heroes came Horizon’s post-apocalyptic hunter, Aloy, Dishonored 2’s Emily 
Kaldwin, the scavenger in ReCore and Evie Frye in Assassin’s Creed: Syndicate. 
More important was the fact that these characters were presented in such a 
matter-of-fact way. It was as though the industry was saying “yeahof course 
there are female lead characters, why wouldn’t there be?” There were even jokes 
about Ubisoft holding the first E3 press conference to pass the Bechdel Test, 
with the chat between presenter Aisha Tyler and Rainbow Six: Siege star Angela 
Bassett. Sadly, though, Sony failed to invite a single woman presenter on stage 
during its entire 90 minute press briefing.

Dogs, robots and other pets

Human companions are so 2014: the future of co-operation in games is between 
humans and animals. Or robots. Or robot animals. Of course, we’ve had canine 
chums in games sinceShinobi <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shinobi_(series)>, 
and helpful droids are always useful backstory-spewing device. But this year, 
they all arrived at once. Fallout 4 has a dog (and a family robot), ReCore has 
a robot dog, Metal Gear Solid: Phantom Pain has wolves and Last Guardian has a 
giant griffin creature. The only question now is: why no cats? Is it too late 
to have Nathan Drake scoop up an abandoned kitten in Uncharted 4, only to 
become hopelessly besotted with it, much to Sully’s jealousy? Hmm, that’s 
probably best left to the fanfic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fseven-game-design-trends-e3-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434715616076%2Fb83d5438-9293-48f0-ba01-bf34a778daed-1020x612.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robots%2C%20dogs%20and%20the%20apocalypse%3A%20seven%20game%20design%20trends%20from%20E3%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fseven-game-design-trends-e3-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robots%2C%20dogs%20and%20the%20apocalypse%3A%20seven%20game%20design%20trends%20from%20E3%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fseven-game-design-trends-e3-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434715616076%2Fb83d5438-9293-48f0-ba01-bf34a778daed-1020x612.png>
 Fallout 4: ‘Go get that mutant, boy! Good dog’.  