
Just 20 minutes from Jerez airport, El Puerto de Santa María is an often 
overlooked, whitewashed town on the Bay of Cádiz, with empty beaches that bring 
to mind Charlton Heston falling to his knees and crying “God damn you all to 
hell” in Planet of the Apes.

It’s in the “sherry triangle” and has bodegas to visit – Osborne 
<http://www.osborne.es/en/> and Gutiérrez-Colosía  
<http://www.gutierrezcolosia.com/index_ingles.html>are the most well-known – 
and excellent restaurants. Two-Michelin-starredAponiente 
<http://www.aponiente.com/>, in an 18th-century mill and specialising in 
seafood, was rated “worth a plane ride” by the New York Times;El Arriate 
<http://restauranteelarriate.com/>, in the centre of town, serves gourmet 
contemporary Spanish fare without the gourmet prices. But, it’s not for the 
charming town, restaurants or beaches that I make an annual pilgrimage here: I 
go for Monkey Week, a music festival held every October.

The brainchild of local residents Paco (Martínez) Loco, owner and producer at 
Paco Loco Studio, and singer-songwriter Enrique Bunbury, it has more than 200 
bands playing on 13 stages – in every bar and available outside space. It’s 
open to up-and-coming Spanish bands, and to a few international guests too, as 
a giant showcase event. Bands put a mind-blowing amount of effort into to their 
slot on stage. The Ships, The Loud Residents and Mikel Erentxun are among those 
who’ll turn up to play to supportive and appreciative crowds. Drinks are cheap, 
venues are all within walking distance, and all music tastes and genres are 
covered. There are no music curfews here: the bands in El Puerto rock night and 
day. No holidaying music lover should miss it.
• This year Monkey Week <http://monkeyweek.org/en/> takes place in Seville, 
from 13-15 October 2016

The Mining Co’s debut album, Burning Sun & the Atomic Powers Within, is out now
 