
Rodney Culleton is maintaining he is still a senator despite the fact the 
president of the Senate hasdeclared his seat vacant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/rod-culletons-senate-career-to-end-as-bankruptcy-stay-closes>
 because of his bankruptcy.

On Thursday Culleton won a one-week extension of a stay against proceedings to 
seize his assets, and claimed this meant he was not an undischarged bankrupt 
and his removal from the Senate was not valid.

But a spokesman for Senate president, Stephen Parry, told Guardian Australia 
the stay has no impact on the decision to declare his seat vacant and his 
constitutional ineligibility.

Rod Culleton claims legal actions will save already vacant Senate seat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/12/rod-culleton-claims-legal-actions-will-save-already-vacant-senate-seat>
Culleton has launched an appeal in the federal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/12/rod-culleton-claims-legal-actions-will-save-already-vacant-senate-seat>
 againstits finding on 23 December that he is bankrupt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/former-one-nation-senator-rodey-culleton-declared-bankrupt>
. He has foreshadowed a high-court challenge to force Parry to withdraw the 
notice he sent to the Western Australian governor that Culleton’s seat is 
vacant.

A spokeswoman for Culleton told Guardian Australia the stay had been extended 
to expire next Friday and repeatedly referred to him as “Senator Culleton”. 
“Our legal representatives and constitutional lawyers have told us he’s still a 
senator, so that’s what we’re going by.”

Emerging from the federal court in Perth, Culleton said the one-week stay was 
“a stay on all proceedings, including the government”.

“I would think that Senator Parry would need to have a look at why he jumped 
the gun, and why he acted in that 21-day stay period. I’m taking one day at a 
time and I don’t feel threatened, I’ve still got the senator’s badge on and I’m 
going to my senator’s office.”

Former One Nation senator Rod Culleton declared bankrupt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/former-one-nation-senator-rodey-culleton-declared-bankrupt>
Asked about the government stating he is not a senator, Culleton replied: 
“That’s their view, who’s the government? [The Senate president] is not the 
government.”

A spokesman for Parry told Guardian Australia the president’s decision to 
notify Culleton’s seat had been declared vacant still stood. “The federal court 
has confirmed he’s an undischarged bankrupt,” the spokesman said. “The stay has 
nothing do with the decision of the president and the issues around Culleton’s 
constitutional eligibility.”

Parry’s spokesman described the circumstances of Culleton exiting the Senate 
as “unusual” as most senators are not forced out by constitutional 
ineligibility that they deny, but added that Culleton was reacting “not 
unexpectedly”.

Culleton’s entry on the parliament website has already been updated to refer 
to him as a former senator.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Frodney-culleton-insists-hes-a-senator-ive-still-got-the-badge-and-the-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69573b4ab5d887b8875b03c2baadc9e295e9156c%2F0_0_860_516%2F860.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rodney%20Culleton%20insists%20he's%20a%20senator%3A%20I've%20still%20got%20the%20badge%20and%20the%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Frodney-culleton-insists-hes-a-senator-ive-still-got-the-badge-and-the-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rodney%20Culleton%20insists%20he%27s%20a%20senator%3A%20I%27ve%20still%20got%20the%20badge%20and%20the%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Frodney-culleton-insists-hes-a-senator-ive-still-got-the-badge-and-the-office%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69573b4ab5d887b8875b03c2baadc9e295e9156c%2F0_0_860_516%2F860.jpg>
 Parliament House’s website entry for Rodney Culleton Photograph: Australian 
Parliament website 
Parry’s spokesman said further arrangements would follow, including the Usher 
of the Black Rod advising Culleton to pack up his parliament office, the 
Department of Parliamentary Services asking him to return his phone and laptop, 
and the Department of Finance notifying his employees.

Culleton’s notice of appeal against the bankruptcy lists a litany of alleged 
flaws in the case including the failure to give him legal representation, to 
consider whether the claim was an abuse of process and to exercise discretion 
not to find him bankrupt.

The basis for Culleton’s mooted high court action is still unclear.
 