
“We want to scan you, all of you, your body, your face, your emotions, your 
laughter, your tears. We want to sample you, preserve you. We want to own this 
thing called Robin Wright.” These are the unnerving words from Danny Huston’s 
Jeff Green in sci-fi filmThe Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/may/17/the-congress-video-review>, 
as he discusses the idea of digitally capturing the actor for generations to 
come. Once her image is handed over, she will lose all creative control of how 
it is used – the studio owns her for all time.

It’s hard not to think of these words when watching Rogue One: A Star Wars 
Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
, in which the late Hammer legend Peter Cushing returns to the screen for the 
latest instalment of the franchise.


CGI Friday: a brief history of computer-generated actors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/27/paul-walker-furious-seven-brief-history-of-computer-generated-actors>
With the aid of advanced CGI, a walking, talking Cushing once again reprises 
his role as the sneering Imperial Officer Grand Moff Tarkin from the 1977 
original Star Wars: A New Hope, even though the actor has been dead for more 
than 20 years.

The news that Cushing would feature in Rogue One broke last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/24/star-wars-rogue-one-to-resurrect-peter-cushing-via-cgi-despite-slipper-issues>
, with sources reporting that it would be “one of the most complex and costly 
CGI re-creations ever.” Since the release of the film, critics have noted how 
remarkable yet slightly creepythe digital resurrection of Cushing is.

The effect is remarkable, if uncanny, and the technology is breathtaking. How 
the trick was pulled off remains a mystery as the wizards at Lucas Film and 
Disney remaining tight-lipped about their achievement. Since the start of 
cinema, its technical magic has always made us gasp, and seeing Cushing 
interacting, near seamlessly, with new characters brings a smile to the face.


Then come the questions about this necromantic cinematic feat and what it 
means for the industry. When the effects can be so spookily lifelike, you start 
to wonder … can you copyright and package an actor after death? It would seem 
so.


This isn’t the first time that the dead have graced the silver screen. Brandon 
Lee was tragically shot while filming Alex Proyas’s goth classic The Crow. The 
film was completed by digitally lifting Lee from previously captured footage 
and superimposing it on later scenes. After Oliver Reed died in the middle of 
shooting Gladiator, Ridley Scott similarly used digital renderings of the 
actor’s face to complete the missing scenes. Both were remarkably effective, 
with audiences barely aware of the digital trickery.


More recently, there’s been a trend of actors being given digital facelifts to 
restore them to their younger selves, as was the case for Robert Downey Jr in 
Captain America: Civil War and Anthony Hopkins in Westworld.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frogue-one-star-wars-cgi-resurrection-peter-cushing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50b483973fb079677a0b86cc819590be033edd48%2F0_0_2243_1345%2F2243.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%3A%20the%20CGI%20resurrection%20of%20Peter%20Cushing%20is%20thrilling%20%E2%80%93%20but%20is%20it%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frogue-one-star-wars-cgi-resurrection-peter-cushing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%3A%20the%20CGI%20resurrection%20of%20Peter%20Cushing%20is%20thrilling%20%E2%80%93%20but%20is%20it%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frogue-one-star-wars-cgi-resurrection-peter-cushing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50b483973fb079677a0b86cc819590be033edd48%2F0_0_2243_1345%2F2243.jpg>
 Superimposed star … Brandon Lee in The Crow. Photograph: Cine 
Text/Allstar/Sportsphoto 
Musicians have been raised from the grave, too. At California’s Coachella 
festival in 2012, Dr Dre and Snoop Dogg were joined on stage byTupac Shakur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/18/tupac-hologram-tour>, 16 years 
after the actor was shot dead in Las Vegas, thanks to holographic technology. 
The same techniques have been deployed for Frank Sinatra and Elvis Presley 
concerts, where audiences enjoy the macabre spectacle of the dead performing 
again.


Framestore, the VFX company that has provided visual effects for Arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/arrival-review-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-science-fiction>
,Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/13/fantastic-beasts-review-jk-rowling-eddie-redmayne-harry-potter>
, and the upcoming live-actionBeauty and the Beast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/14/beauty-and-the-beast-trailer-emma-watson-in-disneys-live-action-remake>
 were also behind the Galaxy chocolate TV advert set on the Amalfi coast that
brought a 19-year-old Audrey Hepburn back to the screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/oct/08/how-we-made-audrey-hepburn-galaxy-ad>
 They used FACS (facial action coding system) and body doubles. Mike McGee, CCO 
and co-founder of Framestore, says: “Many young and old actors today are having 
their heads and bodies digitally scanned to future-proof their image, to allow 
future technologies to recreate them.”

But such technological marvels can feel unnerving, as if they’ve been plucked 
from a dystopian novel. Where science and alchemy have failed, Hollywood is 
creating its own philosopher’s stone.

Final act: what happens when a film turns out to be a star's last
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/08/paul-walker-phillip-seymour-hoffman-dead-stars-who-live-again>
So where do we draw the line? It was reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/31/robin-williams-restricted-use-of-his-image-for-25-years-after-his-death>
 last year that the late actor Robin Williams had passed on rights to his name, 
signature, photograph and likeness to a trust protecting the use of his image 
until 2039. Williams, as with Ari Folman’s The Congress, clearly saw 
Hollywood’s direction.


Returning to Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story>, it’s 
interesting that Peter Cushing isn’t credited on the Internet Movie Database, 
nor the presumed body double used to stand in for the shots. This is more 
likely about not creating a spoiler for diehard Star Wars fans, rather than a 
creative snub, despite the character’s return being well-publicised.


Questions remained unanswered, though. Who gets paid for a digital 
resuscitee’s role? Does an estate have to give permission if the likenesses are 
taken from pre-existing footage under licence to movie studios? It is 
difficult, at least in English law, to protect your own likeness, and unless an 
actor, as Williams did, has taken steps to protect their image, it is unlikely 
that permission would be needed.


There are also positives. It is wonderful to see Cushing, replete with 
snarling lip and piercing stare, back in the franchise that relaunched his 
career. It appears to be an act of affection by director Gareth Edwards who, 
rather than recasting the Grand Moff, has opted to honour Cushing’s memory.


Legal points aside, what does this means for actors in moral terms? Are 
studios right to use an actor’s likeness? Pandora’s box has been opened,. 
Stories and plots are remade and rebooted all the time in Hollywood, but what 
if this becomes the case with actors? Could a director resurrect an actor 
digitally if they believe there are perfect for the role? Are we going to see 
Marlon Brando, James Dean, Grace Kelly and other Hollywood icons brought back 
to star alongside Dwayne Johnson and Melissa McCarthy? Perhaps.

 