
Two months ago the Maxxi museum in Rome was emptied entirely of its contents 
and its cavernous curved gallery spaces filled not with physical, permanent art 
but with intangible sound installations evoking the ancient city around it.

It was done purely for the purposes of a brief and quite radical exhibition, 
but it also proved a symbolic move for a modern art institution that has 
suffered considerable growing pains since it opened four years ago.

Just over a year and a half ago the Maxxi seemed doomed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/24/maxxi-museum-closure-italy>. The 
contemporary art gallery, designed by London-Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/nov/16/zaha-hadid-maxxi-rome>, 
took 10 years to build and was saddled with a huge funding deficit almost from 
the moment it opened. , with The culture ministry reduced its initial funding 
for the building from €7m (£5.5m) in 2010 to €4m in 2011 – a 43% drop. In 2012 
it was accused by the government of having a €800,000 gap in its budget.

In a city where the echoes of past architectural and cultural splendour are 
still dominant, the Maxxi has also struggled to establish a voice and presence 
of its own in Rome. Yet, for the first time, its fortunes are – contrary to the 
expectations of its many vocal critics – beginning to shift. This week, four 
new and ambitious exhibitions opened at the Maxxi, each unlike anything that 
has been staged there before and signalling a new beginning for this formerly 
precarious institution.

The driving force behind Maxxi’s rebirth is Chinese curator Hou Hanru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/aug/08/rome-maxxi-museum-new-director>
, who last year took over as artistic director when the gallery was in the 
direst of straits. As a non-Italian director of a partially state funded art 
gallery, to many he seemed an unusual choice. Hou defines it himself as an 
“unexpected encounter”.

But, in Italy’s insular world of cultural politics, it appears an outsider may 
have been exactly what was needed. He was under no illusions about the Maxxi’s 
parlous position, yet was drawn to the project by an interest in “taking charge 
of a new institution still in the process of becoming, still in the process of 
looking for an identity – and in the meantime going through a certain kind of 
crisis. I saw it as an opportunity to gain certain freedoms out of this 
urgency, to view this crisis as an opportunity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Frome-maxxi-art-museum-gallery-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1419016219786%2F249918b4-dc74-4adb-8890-1d346c57099d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rome%E2%80%99s%20Maxxi%20art%20museum%20aims%20to%20build%20creativity%20out%20of%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Frome-maxxi-art-museum-gallery-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rome%E2%80%99s%20Maxxi%20art%20museum%20aims%20to%20build%20creativity%20out%20of%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Frome-maxxi-art-museum-gallery-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1419016219786%2F249918b4-dc74-4adb-8890-1d346c57099d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Maxxi was designed by Zaha Hadid, took 10 years to build and was saddled 
with a funding deficit almost from the moment it opened 
Hou’s vision has not been simply as a showcase for Italian contemporary art 
but rather a space with a global perspective. That vision has become fully 
realised in the four exhibitions that have just opened, including a showcase of 
Korean video and new media art since the 1970s and an exhibition of the 
monumental sculptures of Chinese avant-garde artist Huang Yong Ping – both of 
which opened on Friday – as well as another major show of Iranian art from the 
1960s, which opened last week.

“Yes, it’s true it was a big challenge to take on,” said Hou. “The general 
belief when I got here was that there was no money and nobody was going to the 
museum. So I just said, well maybe one has to look at that in a more dynamic 
manner and to see that there were a lot of reasons this had happened and 
therefore a possibility to change things. There are so many wonderful artworks 
created in history in the most difficult situations, when artists did not even 
have anything to eat, so I thought, why can’t it be the same thing for the 
Maxxi – to be given a new life born out of difficulty. This difficulty has 
pushed us to think outside the box, to create a museum unlike anywhere else and 
that can contribute a very different kind of intellectual and cultural content 
to life and to society.”

He added: “It is a global vision I had for the Maxxi. This country actually is 
a very young nation and it is a very decentralised community, with a huge 
multiplicity of cultural identities. And also this is traditionally a country 
of emigration- you have Italian diasporas around the world- but is also a 
country that is at the frontier ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, facing an influx of people 
from African, Asian and Mediterranean nations, so it has always been a 
transitional place. So the challenge for me was how to somehow create a 
relevant, cultural, artistic platform for this transition?”

One of the most outward looking exhibitions on Hou’s newly opened programme is 
The Future is Now, the first comprehensive show of pioneering Korean video and 
digital art ever held in Europe. Divided into four parts, it examines 
everything from the relationship between art, technology and the spiritual, to 
the impact of technology on modern psychology and even as a political platform 
for messages about social change and gentrification.

Particularly powerful pieces on show include a 2004 work by Jeong Jeong-ju, 
titled Seodaemun Prison, which combines black and white footage behind the bars 
of a prison with a scaled-down physical model of the place which has become a 
symbol of Japanese cruelty and oppression during their colonial rule of Korea 
from 1910 until 1945.

Another piece of video art, titled New Ghost Town, by artist Minouk Lim, shows 
young people driving through a Korean town rapping on the back of a truck, in a 
comment on gentrification, while the exhibition’s most eye-catching piece is an 
installation by artists Bang and Lee, titled Transparente Studio, which 
confronts the viewer with a clash of analogue and digital, and east and west 
art and politics, through various screens, televisions and neon signs of both 
biblical and consumerist slogans.

Next year the gallery will host a show examining the relationship between the 
urban and visual arts in Istanbul and the year after, an exhibition focused on 
Beirut and the Lebanese art scene. A show on food security around the world is 
scheduled.
 Hou Hanru took over as artistic director of the Maxxi when the gallery was in 
the direst of straits 
However, it has been far from an easy transition for the Maxxi’s new artistic 
director and Hou admits it has been a struggle to win round the Italian public, 
particularly when the country is facing a severe economic crisis and art has 
been pushed to the bottom of the national agenda. Yet, as the public opinion of 
Maxxi has over the past year become more positive, the culture ministry and 
other funders have followed suit with their support. The government gives Maxxi 
a grant of €6m, enough to “keep the lights on”, and it operates on a 58:42 
ratio of public to private and sponsorship funding – an improvement on the 
72:28 ratio two years ago. Each of the four newly opened exhibitions had 
private sponsors, patrons or co-productions in the forms of other international 
galleries. It aims to have an equal split of public-private finance in three 
years.

Another fundamental problem was the gallery space itself. The curvaceous 
geometry and snaking galleries of Hadid’s design, while praised as impressive 
architecture, were criticised for being an impractical and even reductive space 
for hanging and displaying art. Yet Hou has wholeheartedly embraced its 
eccentricities. “This building is based on a very clear vision of neo-liberal 
capitalism – it’s all steel and concrete and glass; it could easily be an 
airport building, or a shopping mall,” said Hou. “Of course this is a very 
strange building but if there’s no challenge then it’s not interesting. I’m not 
interested in making a comfortable gallery, something that is just the 
consumption of art.” I don’t think it is a competition between the building and 
the art, I think it just forces an engagement. If you want to create a new 
society based upon a given society, you think about the vision of the 
revolution but you also have to go through a long process of engaging with the 
given reality and come up with different manners of occupation. So that’s how I 
approach it with the gallery space and the art I want to put in that space.”

Indeed, it is undeniably a space that lends itself almost perfectly to the 
sculptures of Yong Ping, in particular the namesake piece of his exhibition, 
Baton Serpent, a monumental 30-metre long aluminium skeleton of the serpent, 
inspired by Chinese and pagan mythology as well as the serpent that emerges 
from Moses’ staff in the Bible. The giant silver snake hangs, elevated high 
within the curved gallery, as if it was designed especially for the twisting 
fluid space. With other works in Yong Ping’s exhibition grappling with highly 
current themes of religion and cultural conflict in his characteristically 
provocative sculptures, it once again illustrates Hou’s determination to make 
sure the Maxxi’s programme is relevant not just in the Italian contemporary art 
scene but on the global stage.

“Slowly we are saying who we are, an open platform for creativity and an open 
platform for research,” said Melandri.

“Hanru brought a very global perspective and a very open perspective … his 
vision is a very participatory and radical vision and I think that’s what’s 
working. We’ve overcome our challenges, this is not to be doubted or discussed 
any more.”

• This article was amended on 22 December 2014 to correct references to Hanru 
Hou’s name.
 