
With its incomparable examples of classical, baroque and renaissance 
architecture, ornate city squares and landscaped gardens, you might think Rome 
could not be a more perfect location for the suave and sophisticated British 
secret agentJames Bond <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> in his new 
adventure Spectre.

But with just three weeks to go until Sam Mendes and his crew arrive to shoot 
the 24th official 007 movie, campaigners are pointing out that the picture 
postcard image of the Eternal City differs wildly from the rubbish-strewn, 
graffiti-plagued reality of the Italian capital.

A number of key scenes for Spectre are due to be filmed in Rome. According to 
reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/25/new-james-bond-rome-italy-car-chases-action>
 these include night-time car chases through the city’s historic centre and on 
the famous Corso Vittorio Emanuele II thoroughfare – though one section around 
the Quattro Fontane crossroadswas vetoed 
<http://time.com/3661182/james-bond-spectre-rome/> thanks to the fragility of 
the architecture. There is also a much-hyped segue in which 007 parachutes from 
a helicopter on to the 15th-century Ponte Sisto pedestrian bridge.

But writing on the Basta Cartelloni blog 
<http://www.bastacartelloni.it/2015/01/ciak-si-gira-nel-degrado-dal-22.html>, 
campaigners suggest that a number of landmarks need vital attention if Bond is 
not to find himself racing past evidence of dilapidation and decay. Photographs 
show the Ponte Sisto appearing dirty and adorned with graffiti and garbage, 
while the nearby Tiber Farnesina street (where a car chase is due to take 
place) appears to be in a similar state.
“With Rome having presumably known the filming dates for months, why have they 
not yet resolved the issues with the shoot locations?” asks the blog post 
author. “Were the relevant authorities not alerted in time to allow them to get 
these walls cleaned? Do Rome’s mayor Ignazio Marino, the president of the 
region Nicola Zingaretti and culture minister Dario Franceschini really want 
this to be the backdrop for Spectre’s filming?”

A spokesperson for Marino, Lucia Ritrovato, told the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/james-bond-spectre-film-challenged-to-show-true-state-of-rome-by-campaigners-10019164.html>
 the mayor was confident the city would be cleaned up before the film-makers 
arrive. “It has to be done and we’ll absolutely do it in time, working with the 
film production people, the council and the government,” she said.

Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre> is due to feature Daniel 
Craig returning for his fourth outing as 007, with double Oscar-winner 
Christoph Waltz, French actor Léa Seydoux and Italy’s Monica Bellucci among the 
supporting cast. Mendes’ second turn as director, following the $1bn box office 
success of 2012’s Skyfall, is expected to hit UK cinemas on 23 October. It 
arrives in the US on 6 November.
 