
Russian MPs have asked the state communications oversight agency to take 
action against the Fifa 17 video game for violating the country’s law against 
gay propaganda.


Communist MPs sent a letter to the communications oversight and state consumer 
protection agencies complaining that the popular EA Sports football game, which 
is rated all ages, “invites users to support the English football premier 
league’s Rainbow Laces action, a massive campaign in support of LGBT”, Izvestia 
newspaper reported.

Premier League backs LGBT rainbow laces campaign for weekend’s matches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/premier-league-lgbt-rainbow-laces-campaign-richard-scudamore>
According to the 2013 law, such propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations 
can cause “harm to children’s health and development”, the letter said.

The UK-based LGBT rights group Stonewall began the Rainbow Laces campaign 
<http://www.stonewall.org.uk/our-work/campaigns/rainbow-laces> last month to 
combat homophobia, biphobia and transphobia in football, noting that 72% of 
fans had heard anti-LGBT remarks at games over the past five years. Premier 
League matches and social media platforms havefeatured 
<https://www.premierleague.com/news/144134?sf51060856=1> materials from the 
campaign.

EA Sports also backed the campaign by allowing Fifa 17 players to obtain free 
rainbow-coloured uniforms 
<https://twitter.com/EASPORTSFIFA/status/802474506346516480?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 for their virtual footballers in the game’s ultimate team mode. This action 
expired on 28 November.

Nonetheless, parliamentarians suggested Fifa 17 could be banned in Russia. 
UnitedRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> MP Irina Rodnina, a 
former figure skater who won three Olympic gold medals for the Soviet Union, 
told Izvestia that the authorities needed to “verify the possibility of 
distributing this game on the territory of the Russian Federation”.

“Every state has its internal laws and order; they need to be obeyed,” she 
said.

Communist MP Valery Rashkin told Izvestia that, following the investigation, 
the authorities should order the game’s developer, EA Canada, to “introduce 
changes to the programming code or the age classification of this information 
product, and if it refuses, adopt corresponding restrictive measures”.

In October, the communications oversight agency blacklisted 
<https://themoscowtimes.com/news/russian-lgbt-support-site-deti-404-blacklisted-55686>
 the website of Deti 404, a group that posts messages of support by and for 
LGBT teenagers. Communist MPsintroduced <http://www.ntv.ru/novosti/1554542/> 
legislation in 2015 to fine or jail anyone who comes out or speaks of their 
homosexuality in public.
 