
In 2013, Russia’s parliament unanimously passed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/11/russia-law-banning-gay-propaganda>
 a law forbidding “propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations”, essentially 
making it illegal to distribute any material on gay relationships or gay rights 
via the internet or any other kind of media, or to hold gay pride marches or 
rallies.

The move led to an immediate rise in homophobic hate crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/15/russia-failing-prevent-homophobic-gay-violence>
. So far, targets have included Ikea (for the crime of including gay couples in 
its catalogue), sports events run by LGBT-friendly organisations, and perhaps 
most famously, theSochi Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/30/olympic-athletes-russia-repeal-anti-gay-laws>
.

This week, Russian MPs took aim at what might seem like an unlikely target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/russian-mps-accuse-fifa-17-video-game-of-gay-propaganda>
: EA Sports’ Fifa 17, the latest entry in an annual series of football games 
that routinely sells over 20m copies year.

What’s so gay about Fifa, you might ask? There’s no mention of anything 
remotely approaching an LGBT issue in Fifa 17’s narrative mode. The issue is 
developer EA Sports’ support forRainbow Laces 
<http://www.stonewall.org.uk/our-work/campaigns/rainbow-laces>, a Stonewall 
campaign tackling homophobia in football through challenging homophobic 
language and supporting LGBT fans and players in the sport.

For a limited time a few weeks ago, players could download rainbow uniforms 
<https://twitter.com/EASPORTSFIFA/status/802474506346516480?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 for use in the game’s Ultimate Team mode, in which players build their fantasy 
teams. (I wouldn’t read the replies to EA’s tweet announcing this, unless you 
need to depress yourself.)
EA SPORTS FIFA (@EASPORTSFIFA) 
Show your support, get your FREE Rainbow kit in FUT now! More on the 
#RainbowLaces <https://twitter.com/hashtag/RainbowLaces?src=hash> campaign: 
https://t.co/2NohXaloXe <https://t.co/2NohXaloXe> pic.twitter.com/xSbY9G8wAp 
<https://t.co/xSbY9G8wAp>
 <https://twitter.com/EASPORTSFIFA/status/802474506346516480> November 26, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/EASPORTSFIFA/status/802474506346516480> 
The demand perhaps reflects wider attitudes to sport in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Sport in the country has very 
strong traditional gender roles: women’s football or ice hockey are relatively 
rare, for example. A couple of years ago, one of the country’s biggest football 
fan groups at Zenit St Petersburg published a manifesto pledging, among other 
racist and objectionable things, that they would never support a gay player at 
the club, although it never gained much actual traction in society.

Specifically, the Russian MPs in question want EA to either remove this 
“offensive” gay code, or face consequences involving either a higher age rating 
or restrictions on the game’s distribution in Russia. This could theoretically 
have financial consequences for EA, as the video games market has been booming 
in Russia in recent years and is now valued at more than $1bn, although it 
doesn’t represent one of Fifa’s biggest audiences.

This is the first time that the 2013 law has been invoked against a video 
game, but not the first time that games have fallen foul of Russian 
parliamentarians.

Previous calls to ban video games include Pokémon Go (over fears it was being 
used by the CIA to gather video footage of the inside of Russian government 
facilities), Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 (over the infamous “No Russian” 
mission [in which Russian terrorists indiscriminately murder civilians in a 
Moscow airport]), Company of Heroes 2 (for its less-than-heroic representation 
of Russian forces), and assorted shooter games, which have provoked panic over 
players shooting people in real life. So far none of these games has actually 
been banned, but publisher Activision voluntarily removed the “No Russian” 
level from copies of Modern Warfare 2 that went on sale in the country, as well 
as in Japan and Germany.

Russian MPs accuse Fifa 17 video game of 'gay propaganda'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/russian-mps-accuse-fifa-17-video-game-of-gay-propaganda>
EA Sports has not responded yet to this demand. However, the publisher has a 
long and admirable history of visible support of LGBT employees and players – 
it has been named one of thebest places to work for LGBT equality 
<http://www2.ea.com/news/ea-named-one-of-the-best-places-to-work-for-lgbt-equality>
 several years in a row – so although video game publishers regularly comply 
with special regional regulations in, say, Germany or Australia, where violence 
in games is more strictly regulated, it is highly unlikely that the company 
will comply. This is hardly the first time that someone has suggested that the 
presence of LGBT people be censored out of a video game: the only difference 
this time around is that it’s a government making the demand.

LGBT themes and characters have been appearing in video games since the 1980s, 
but until recently, both developers and publishers were rather shy about it. 
Nervousness about the potential reception of gay or non-gender-conforming 
characters in Japanese games led to fairly widespread censorship in America in 
the 1980s and 90s, affecting games as varied as Super Mario Bros 2, Streets of 
Rage 3 and Dragon Warrior II. As recently as 2008, when the Japanese RPG 
Persona 4 was released, localisation of Japanese games often downplayed the 
sexuality of queer characters, or made it deliberately ambiguous.

Recently, though, developers have been less tentative about including LGBT 
characters and themes, and they feature in games ranging from teensy indie 
projects to blockbusters. A great many role-playing games let you form romantic 
relationships with pretty much anyone you have the hots for, regardless of 
gender. The Sims has always included gay relationships, and actually included 
gay marriage before most real-world societies decided it was acceptable. Ellie, 
a main character in 2013’s the Last of Us, is gay. In 2014, Nintendocame under 
fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/10/nintendo-apologises-gay-relationships-video-game>
 for not including the possibility of gay relationships in its cartoonish 
life-sim Tomodachi Life. We’re still some way off from the kind of diversity 
that players are increasingly demanding, but progress is happening quickly.

This has sparked a bit of a backlash, largely from the same people who 
bafflingly believe that the dreaded social justice warriors are ruining 
everything about pop culture by suggesting that perhaps women, LGBT people or 
people of colour should be included in it. They whine about “forced” LGBT 
representation in, say,Tom Clancy’s The Division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/14/tom-clancy-the-division-ubisoft-online-shooter-review>
, in which a character mentions her wife exactly once, or the fact that 
characters of the same gender sometimes hit on them inDragon Age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/10/dragon-age-inquisition-sex-enjoyable>
. It is odd that these people should demand ever more realistic video game 
graphics and technology, but that their representation of the actual people who 
make up society should remain stubbornly stuck in a mythical past where nobody 
was gay and women were only ever in the background.

Truth is, though, that neither disgruntled “consumers” nor Russian MPs are 
going to be able to turn the clock back on this. LGBT people are present in the 
real world, and in the real sport of football, so it is only natural that they 
feature in Fifa 17’s reflection of it. Calls for censorship – whether from 
socially conservative governments or reactionaries who seem inexplicably 
threatened by the presence of anyone who isn’t straight in pop culture – are 
not going to change that now.
 