
The Catholic church in Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> 
apologised on Sunday for the church’s role in the 1994 genocide, saying it 
regretted the actions of those who participated in the massacres.

“We apologize for all the wrongs the church committed. We apologize on behalf 
of all Christians for all forms of wrongs we committed. We regret that church 
members violated [their] oath of allegiance to God’s commandments,” said the 
statement by the Conference of Catholic Bishops, which was read out in parishes 
across the country.

The statement acknowledged that church members planned, aided and carried out 
the genocide, in which more than 800,000 ethnic Tutsis and moderate Hutus were 
killed by Hutu extremists.

My journey back to Rwanda: confronting the ghosts of the genocide 21 years 
later
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/15/my-journey-back-to-rwanda-confronting-the-ghosts-of-the-genocide-21-years-later>
In the years since the genocide – which was sparked by a contentious plane 
crash that killed the president, Juvénal Habyarimana, a Hutu – the local church 
had resisted efforts by the government and groups of survivors to acknowledge 
the church’s complicity in mass murder, saying those church officials who 
committed crimes acted individually.

Many of the victims died at the hands of priests, clergymen and nuns, 
according to some accounts by survivors, and the Rwandan government said many 
died in the churches where they sought refuge.

The bishops’ statement is seen as a positive development in Rwanda’s efforts 
at reconciliation.

“Forgive us for the crime of hate in the country to the extent of also hating 
our colleagues because of their ethnicity. We didn’t show that we are one 
family but instead killed each other,” the statement said.

Bishop Phillipe Rukamba, spokesman for the Catholic church in Rwanda, said the 
statement was timed to coincide with the formal end on Sunday of theholy year 
of mercy 
<https://cruxnow.com/church/2015/12/07/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-holy-year-of-mercy/>
 declared by Pope Francis to encourage greater reconciliation and forgiveness 
in his church and the world.

Tom Ndahiro, a Rwandan genocide researcher, said he hoped the church’s 
statement would encourage unity among Rwandans.

“I am also happy to learn that in their statement, bishops apologise for not 
having been able to avert the genocide,” he said.
 