
For decades, women seeking health services at the Fertility Control Clinic in 
East Melbourne were subject to shouting and physical threats from 
self-described “counsellors” who opposed pregnancy termination and 
contraception.

While recent law reforms have brought this type of harassment to an end in 
Victoria, it still occurs elsewhere in Australia. Women, often young, and their 
friends and family, as well as health clinic staff, continue to be singled out, 
threatened and abused as they enter fertility clinics in other Australian 
states and territories.

Right to life protestors who participate in this kind of behaviour are not 
just protesting. They are harassing, shaming, intimidating and physically 
jostling the patients and staff of these clinics, says Emily Howie, Director of 
Advocacy at the Human Rights Law Centre.

Law reform

Termination of pregnancy was decriminalised in Victoria in 2008, but it wasn’t 
until November 2015 that a Bill was formally passed by the Legislative Council 
stating that “Victorian women would be able to access lawful medical services 
free from harassment and intimidation with the establishment of safe access 
zones around abortion providers”.

Liberty Sanger, a partner at Maurice Blackburn who worked on the Fertility 
Control Clinic case, the landmark case responsible for making access to these 
legal services safe for women in Victoria, says: “The Bill supports women’s 
reproductive health choices by ensuring that all women can access health 
services that provide terminations without fear, intimidation, harassment or 
obstruction.”

Sanger says the Fertility Control Clinic case demonstrates the importance of 
legal firms prosecuting these public interest cases in the court.

“Doing this raises awareness and puts the issue front of mind for 
decision-makers, and provides a reason for everyone to have a look at it,” she 
says.

“The whole process [of the Fertility Control Clinic case] was a necessary part 
of the journey towards safe access for women to fertility services. Someone 
else’s views about the morality of a certain healthcare service ought not 
interfere with another person’s right to safely access that health service.”




Historic fight 

The hard-fought Fertility Control Clinic battle began back in 2001 when the 
clinic’s clinical psychologist, Dr Susie Allanson, took up the fight after a 
security guard was murdered in the clinic’s foyer.

Dr Allanson wrote a book about the murder (Murder on his Mind, Wilkinson 
Publishing, 2006) and began lobbying Melbourne City Council and the state 
government, requesting that something be done to protect patients and staff 
from the constant harassment.

“This harassment is a form of violence against women,” Dr Allanson says. “It’s 
absolutely disrespectful to women. These people were not protesting, they were 
harassing and shaming.

“At times I would lose hope that we were going to get anywhere, but then we 
would have a day where every single woman coming into the clinic would be in 
tears, their partners angry, and the staff upset…”

In 2010, Emily Howie and Maurice Blackburn became involved.

“It was not until I contacted Emily that we knew where to go with it,” Dr 
Allanson says. “And then Maurice Blackburn came on board. We couldn’t have got 
this far without them.”

In 2014, Maurice Blackburn and the Human Rights Law Centre commenced Supreme 
Court proceedings on behalf of the Fertility Control Clinic, seeking to compel 
Melbourne City Council to enforce existing laws that would protect the clinic’s 
patients and staff from harassment.

While the case was unsuccessful, it highlighted the harassment and fear that 
women trying to access the clinic were subject to, Sanger says. “The case 
focused the minds of decision-makers on what solutions they could come up with 
to ensure women’s safety.”

The fight is far from over

While terminations have been decriminalised, and safe access zones introduced, 
in Victoria, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory, other Australian 
states and territories are still governed by laws that are, in some cases, more 
than 100 years old.

Termination of pregnancy has been partly decriminalised in South Australia, 
Western Australia, and the Northern Territory, but is still a crime in New 
South Wales and Queensland, Howie says.

The fight for equal rights for Australia's workers with disabilities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/maurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all/ng-interactive/2016/sep/30/the-fight-for-equal-rights-for-australias-disabled>
“I think it surprises a lot of people to hear that abortion is still a crime, 
because it is possible to access it safely and legally, because the court has 
intervened to allow abortion in certain circumstances, usually to preserve the 
life or health of the mother,” she says.

“But the fact remains that doctors who provide abortion, and in some cases 
women who have an abortion, run the risk of prosecution.”

In Queensland, for example, abortion law in the criminal code has not changed 
since 1899.

“The abortion laws in Queensland are out of step with community values, 
clinical practice and common sense, and urgent reform is required there,” Howie 
says. Bills seeking to amend this are now before a parliamentary committee in 
Queensland.

Howie, who recently moved north from Melbourne to Sydney, has now set her 
sights on fighting for abortion law reform in NSW.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsafe-healthcare-for-every-woman-the-fight-continues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498c5671557c76f0e5db3aaaf5dd111d35037c6f%2F0_2799_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Safe%20healthcare%20for%20every%20woman%3A%20the%20fight%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsafe-healthcare-for-every-woman-the-fight-continues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Safe%20healthcare%20for%20every%20woman%3A%20the%20fight%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmaurice-blackburn-fair-is-for-all%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsafe-healthcare-for-every-woman-the-fight-continues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498c5671557c76f0e5db3aaaf5dd111d35037c6f%2F0_2799_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
 Photograph: XiXinXing/Getty Images/Xixinxing 
Beyond reproductive health 

Access to safe healthcare extends beyond reproductive issues. 

Medical negligence claims brought by Maurice Blackburn’s medical negligence 
department not only bring accountability and compensation for injured patients, 
but also expose systemic failures and poor practices, bringing about 
improvements in health care standards for the safety of all, says Maurice 
Blackburn principal Rebecca Gilsenan.

Similarly, class actions brought by Maurice Blackburn provide compensation to 
thousands of Australians injured by faulty medical devices and ensure that 
device manufacturers are held accountable for the injuries caused by these 
devices.

Since 2010 Gilsenan was involved in a landmark test case in which the High 
Court of Australia unanimously upheld an appeal in the case of Yvonne D’Arcy v 
Myriad Genetics Inc. The High Court ruled that company’s patent over the 
isolated BRCA1 gene – which indicates a familial predisposition to breast and 
ovarian cancer – was invalid.

Whether it’s in a test tube or in your body, a person’s genetic material is a 
discovery."
Rebecca Gilsenan 
“The patent meant that Myriad owned the gene when it was isolated from the 
human body,” Gilsenan says. “That meant Myriad owned my BRCA1 gene and your 
BRC1 gene as soon as it was in a test tube. Myriad could then control who could 
have access to the gene to study it, test it, and the like.

“We didn’t think it was right that a corporation could own our genes and we 
took the view that the greatest public interest lay in unfettered access to the 
gene for research purposes and unfettered access to testing for people who have 
a familial predisposition to breast or ovarian cancer.

“Whether it’s in a test tube or in your body, a person’s genetic material is a 
discovery. It is not an invention that warrants patent protection.”

A case was brought against Myriad Genetics Inc. on behalf of breast cancer 
survivor Yvonne D’Arcy, who was outraged at the thought that a corporation 
could stand in the way of people being able to have their BRCA1 gene tested to 
see if they had a higher chance of developing breast or ovarian cancer. The 
decisions that people make based on the results of the tests, such as to 
undergo a preventative mastectomy, for example, can save lives. D’Arcy believed 
it was important that the tests were accessible and affordable.

“We lost in the Federal Court, appealed, lost again, and then we got 
permission to appeal to the High Court. The result confirms that a company 
can’t own our BRCA1 genes,” Gilsenan says. “More broadly, it has implications 
for patents over other genes too.”

A continuing commitment to taking on cases such as these and a determination 
to see them succeed is vital if safe and affordable access to healthcare is 
going to be a reality for all women in Australia. After all, isn’t that every 
woman’s right?
 