
The competition regulator has approved the Sainsbury’s £1.4bn takeover of Home 
Retail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/homeretailgroup> Group, which owns 
Argos, clearing the way for the supermarket chain to become Britain’s biggest 
seller of general goods.

The Competition and Markets Authority said that after an initial review,  it 
had decided not to refer the deal 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/competition-and-mkts/rns/merger-update/201607220700058731E/>
 to an advanced, phase-two inquiry. The decision spares Sainsbury’s months of 
delays and potential costs of millions of pounds.

The CMA said in late May  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/27/competition-regulator-could-investigate-sainsburys-home-retail-takeover>
it was considering an investigation into the takeover, which was agreed between 
the two companies in April. The regulator set a deadline of 13 June for 
comments about the deal’s likely effect on consumers and had until 25 July to 
decide whether to hold an inquiry.

Sainsbury's to hire 900 staff for online delivery centre in east London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/21/sainsburys-hiring-staff-online-delivery-centre-east-london>
Sainsbury’s is buying Argos to broaden its product range, reduce its reliance 
on the highly competitive grocery market and acquire Argos’s online delivery 
business. Sainsbury’s will put Argos stores into its supermarkets, adding to 
its own range of homeware and other non-food goods.

The CMA said in May it would judge “whether the creation of that situation may 
be expected to result in a substantial lessening of competition within any 
market or markets in the United Kingdom for goods or services”.

Sainsbury’s said at the time it had expected the CMA to look at the deal but 
that it believed the takeover would be passed. The CMA surprised the retail 
industry last yearby subjecting Poundland’s takeover of 99p Stores to a full 
inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/18/poundland-gets-final-clearance-for-99p-stores-takeover>
, before withdrawing early objections and clearing the deal.

Home Retail and Sainsbury’s said they were pleased with the CMA’s decision. 
The deal will go to Home Retail shareholders for approval at a meeting on 27 
July.

The CMA said it would publish more information on its decision next month.
 