
The launch of Cefinn, a new fashion brand by Samantha Cameron, confirms that 
first lady chic is the defining look of our era. They say that the mood of a 
decade crystallises halfway through and, as this one comes into focus, the 
preeminent style icons are variations on the theme of soft power. From the
Duchess of Cambridge <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/duchess-of-cambridge>’s 
globally documented royal wardrobe toMichelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama>’s three Vogue covers, the 
consort in the corridors of power is the supermodel of our time.

That our focus has drifted away from policy and toward the more glamorous, 
ephemeral elements of public life is so 2016. That Samantha Cameron is the 
first first lady to embark on the spousal equivalent of the after-dinner speech 
circuit bymonetising the modern obsession with her wardrobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2016/nov/30/out-of-power-dressing-sam-cam-launches-new-fashion-label>
 is a mark of Cameron’s instinctive grasp of fashion, business and the modern 
world. (Those who quibble that Samantha Cameron was never, technically, a first 
lady might want to consider whether they are guilty of the kind of pedantic 
establishment mindset that the global electorate has summarily rejected this 
year.)

In her pre-Downing-Street life, Cameron was creative director of Smythson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/07/samantha-cameron-smythson-handbag-taxation-debate>
, where she was credited with being instrumental in turning a highly 
traditional stationery brand into a fashion force to be reckoned with. 
Smythson’s most successful luxury piece was the 2007 Nancy bag, which Cameron 
named after her daughter; after she reduced her involvement following the 2010 
election, the brand struggled to remain in the limelight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6439fc23113074080c8f22a030876a54e3cb12%2F0_0_4312_6468%2F4312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Cam%20the%20brand%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20expect%20from%20the%20Cefinn%20fashion%20label&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Cam%20the%20brand%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20expect%20from%20the%20Cefinn%20fashion%20label&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6439fc23113074080c8f22a030876a54e3cb12%2F0_0_4312_6468%2F4312.jpg>
 Samantha Cameron in a top and skirt from her label, Cefinn. Photograph: Darren 
Gerrish 
During her tenure in Downing Street, Cameron strengthened her links to the 
fashion industry as a dedicated ambassador for British designers, working 
closely with the British Fashion Council. She has made no secret of her 
intention to remain in the industry, attendingTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>’s first London Fashion Week 
reception earlier this autumn. Her fashionable connections – her sister Emily 
Sheffield is deputy editor of Vogue – made her a natural fit for the front row. 
Cameron also proved herself adept at using fashion as a messaging tool. When 
she wore Zara’s bright orange trousers and £29.99 grey suede heels to the 
Conservative Party conference in 2011, the image of a Prime Minister’s wife who 
– despite being the daugher of a baronet – was both modern and “normal” was 
highly impactful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb3e8dce8353c3a7d7db4ae2ac9feb4d31dd7c32%2F0_0_1984_3000%2F1984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Cam%20the%20brand%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20expect%20from%20the%20Cefinn%20fashion%20label&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Cam%20the%20brand%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20expect%20from%20the%20Cefinn%20fashion%20label&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb3e8dce8353c3a7d7db4ae2ac9feb4d31dd7c32%2F0_0_1984_3000%2F1984.jpg>
 The Camerons at the 2011 Conservative Party conference. Photograph: AFP/Getty 
Images/Peter Macdiarmid 
Cefinn <http://www.cefinn.com/> will go on sale on Net-a-Porter and Selfridges 
early in 2017, around the same time thatJackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
 – a biopic of the most iconic of first ladies, starringNatalie Portman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman> – arrives in cinemas. Few 
details have as yet been released, but prices are likely to sit in the 
low-three-figure middle ground between high street and luxury. It is thought 
that the name is drawn from the first and last letters of the Cameron name, 
bookending the initials of couple’s four children Elwen, Florence, Ivan and 
Nancy.

The images so far released by the Cefinn brand feature the same outfit, in two 
colourways. A mid-calf length skirt is worn with a matching sleeveless shell 
top; the “coord”, in fashion parlance, comes in grey with a windowpane cream 
check, or fashion’s favourite, solid black. Both versions have an orange stripe 
at the shoulder. The hemline is key here, because a long skirt is on trend, 
demure enough for professional life and wearable by an older demographic – but 
the sleeveless top is equally important, representing a generation of women 
over-40 who remain fitness-conscious and youthful in outlook, and who are not 
ready to be fobbed off with dresses designed to hide bingo wings. The pop of 
orange, and the subtle dip of the skirt’s asymmetric hemline are the kind of 
details that make clothes special and give the modern consumer that 
all-important reason to buy. Influences from some of the many London fashion 
week shows that Cameron has attended – from Roksanda to Whistles – can be felt 
here.

 