
Sam Dastyari has rejected the prime minister’s characterisation of his 
donation as “cash for comment”, saying he had always supported Labor’s stance 
on the SouthChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea.

“I support the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> position on the South 
China Sea dispute,” Dastyari said in a message to Guardian Australia.

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> has 
stepped up its attack on Bill Shorten over the Labor senator’s decision to take 
a political donation from a company with links to the Chinese government as the 
opposition leader defended his senator.

 In China for the G20 summit, Malcolm Turnbull attacked the opposition leader 
for standing up for Dastyari’s “right to take cash” while undermining 
Australia’s foreign policy.

“I’m here in China standing up for Australia,” Turnbull said.


“Back home, Bill Shorten is standing up for Sam Dastyari’s right to take cash 
from a company associated with a foreign government and then express a view on 
foreign policy that undermines the Australian government’s foreign policy which 
had been supported by Mr Shorten himself.”

Turnbull was referring to reports <http://www.qldtoday.com/content/1231098> in 
the Chinese media that Dastyari had taken a different position on the South 
China Sea which was more favourable to China.

But Dastyari reaffirmed his support for Labor policy and also told the ABC: 
“I’m not responsible for how the Chinese media reports my comments.”

On political donations, Canberra is sleepwalking into its own integrity crisis 
| Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/on-political-donations-canberra-is-sleepwalking-into-its-own-integrity-crisis>
Shorten said he had expressed his “unhappiness” to Dastyari, who is Labor’s 
manager for opposition business in the Senate, and who led the Labor charge 
against banks for corporate malfeasance.


“I’ve just said to him that he shouldn’t have done it and he said he won’t do 
it again,” Shorten said.

Labor has demanded the Coalition act to ban foreign donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/05/bill-shorten-tells-malcolm-turnbull-to-use-g20-trip-to-address-foreign-donations>
 after it was revealed Dastyari received $1670.82 to pay travel expenses – 
which he declared in accordance with the rules.

Two Coalition cabinet ministers – trade minister Steve Ciobo and transport 
minister Darren Chester – have openly considered allowing political donations 
from individuals on the electoral roll only. It is a positionMalcolm Turnbull 
has consistently held 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/03/turnbull-restates-belief-in-donations-cap-but-does-not-commit-to-act>
 since he was Coalition opposition leader. This would ban donations from 
corporations – Australian or foreign – as well as unions.

The attorney general, George Brandis, has described Dastyari as “compromised 
by a foreign government”.

Brandis described the payments to Dastyari as “intrinsically suspicious” and 
said if Shorten attempted to “ride out” the Dastyari affair that would 
demonstrate he was unfit to be leader of the Labor party.


“These payments are intrinsically suspicious,” Brandis said. “They are not 
donations, they are the payment of cash to senator Sam Dastyari for unspecified 
personal matters.”


Brandis said there was inevitably a suspicion created that the payments were 
linked to Dastyari’s statements on China that were at odds with Labor and the 
Coalition’s policy on the South China Sea.


“What [Shorten] will be saying is he is prepared to have as a member of his 
alternative government a person who has been compromised by a person who has 
been compromised by a foreign government,” Brandis said.

Dastyari has been under pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/on-political-donations-canberra-is-sleepwalking-into-its-own-integrity-crisis>
 since the donation was exposed last week. He also declared he was given two 
bottles of wine as they were worth more than the $300 limit. He subsequently 
gave them to charity.

Christopher Pyne opposes donations ban but says Sam Dastyari broke 'ethical 
rule'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/05/christopher-pyne-opposes-donations-ban-but-says-sam-dastyari-broke-ethical-rule>
But the gifts came from Yuhu, the same company that reportedly paid a $40,000 
legal 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/inquirer/how-labors-sam-dastyari-slipped-behind-the-clouds-of-china/news-story/f83da153f58140b7523aceeb75588449>
 bill for Dastyari before he was a senator. At the weekend, it was revealed the 
wine wasPenfolds Grange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/16/penfolds-grange-1959-barry-o-farrell>
, worth more than $600 a bottle. All his actions revealed so far are within the 
rules of the parliamentary entitlements.

Before the election, Labor called for a ban on donations by foreign entities 
and a boost in public funding. Labor also supportscontinuous disclosure laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/labor-calls-for-big-changes-in-donation-rules-to-restore-public-confidence>
, which would allow the public to see donations soon after they were made. 
Under current laws donations are revealed at least six months after they were 
made.

Many comparable countries, including Canada and New Zealand, are among the 114 
nations that ban donations 
<https://theconversation.com/australia-trails-way-behind-other-nations-in-regulating-political-donations-59597>
 to political parties from foreign interests.

But Labor does not support a ban on donations from corporations and unions – 
the prime minister’s favoured option – given unions are a large source of 
Labor’s funding.

The transport minister, Darren Chester, told Sky News he was “more 
comfortable” with individuals making donations than corporations or individuals.

“What’s good for the goose has to be good for the gander, so if you have more 
rules coming in place in terms of restrictions on business donations then you 
equally should apply those to union donations,” Chester said.


“I particularly am more comfortable with individuals making donations because 
it’s a matter of them choosing a political side they support – they support the 
philosophy or ideology of that party – and we have a participatory democracy 
where we expect people to join the parties and get involved.”

Chester said the joint standing committee on electoral matters, which reviews 
election funding and operations, would make recommendations in line with 
parliamentary practice.

“The alternative of full public funding of election campaigns is one that’s 
been looked at in the past and quite frankly the Australian people didn’t like 
it.”

 The trade minister, Steve Ciobo, told Fairfax 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/trade-minister-steve-ciobo-says-merit-in-reassessing-whether-foreign-donations-should-be-banned-20160904-gr8lim.html>
 there was some merit in allowing donations only from individuals.

“There might be some merit in only allowing donations from individuals, and 
not from unions, organisations, corporations and sometimes foreign entities,” 
Ciobo said.

Liberal backbencher Craig Kelly said he liked the idea that only individuals 
on the electoral roll should have the right to make political donations.

“I like the idea that if you don’t have a vote ... at the election, that you 
don’t actually get a chance to donate,” Kelly said.

“As time goes on and we see the potential, as we have seen with Sam Dastyari 
where it apparently appears that he has taken a position that is against our 
national interest, that’s actually against the international interests of all 
western democracies and gone and sided with the Chinese communists, it just 
seems to be bizarre that at the same time he is taking donations from entities 
associated with them.”
 