
UK’s most advanced drone lab to be built at Imperial College London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/06/uk-drone-lab-imperial-college>
Samsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> has set up a new 
research lab concentrating on drones, robotics, 3D printing and virtual reality.

The research group will be part of Samsung’s mobile division but will operate 
independently, building on the work done by the company in robotic vacuum 
cleaners and, most recently, its Gear VR headset built in partnership with 
Facebook’s Oculus Rift.

A Samsung spokesperson told the Korea Times 
<http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/tech/2015/02/133_173274.html>: “Given the 
significance of the team, members will have more authority and independence 
because the main purpose of the team isn’t to develop single devices for any 
imminent results, but to develop solutions to go with Samsung’s manufacturing 
capabilities. The team will explore how technologies could help people’s daily 
life for a better future.”

Google’s massive humanoid robot can now walk and move without wires
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/21/googles-massive-humanoid-robot-can-now-walk-and-move-without-wires>
The move forms part of Samsung chief executive BK Yoon’s plan to finally make 
theInternet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> of Things (IoT) – 
an environment where everything is connected to the internet, creating “swarm 
intelligence” from individually dumb devices – a reality after being simply a 
meaningless buzzword for years.

Yoon pledged $100m (£66m) in funding for IoT developers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/06/samsung-pledges-over-100bn-to-make-an-open-internet-of-things-finally-happen>
 and said 100% of Samsung’s products would be internet-connected and IoT 
capable within five years.

“Samsung’s previous success was mostly due to releasing products that are 
competitive in pricing,” Samsung said. “This is an old business formula. We 
need to constantly explore new ways to meet the needs of people through 
innovation and updated technologies.”

What is Boston Dynamics and why does Google want robots?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/17/google-boston-dynamics-robots-atlas-bigdog-cheetah>
Samsung’s revenues in its mobile business have declined as growing sales of 
the company’s smartphones, including the flagship Galaxy S and Galaxy Note 
series, have faltered with competition from Apple at the top end and Chinese 
manufacturers such as Xiaomi and Lenovo at the bottom.

The company is likely to look to the innovation centre to revitalise its 
technology sales leveraging Samsung’s extensive expertise in semi-conductors 
and component manufacturing.
 