
Sara Pascoe never set out to be a standup. Comedy started as a hobby, she 
admitted in a 2013 interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/07/sara-pascoe-nietzsche>, third in 
line to her acting career and plans to write a novel. Yet catch her at 
Edinburgh this summer and she'll be in the comedy – not books or theatre – 
programme with her latest show, Sara Pascoe vs History.


There may be no going back. Pascoe's past two Edinburgh appearances each 
earned four stars from Brian Logan, and she is the Guide'scurrent pick of the 
week <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/23/this-weeks-new-live-comedy> 
as her 2013 outing, Sara Pascoe vs the Truth, heads to London’s Soho theatre.


These show titles suggest an adversary spirit at odds with her laidback stage 
persona. “Pascoe's a comic who delights more in playing with ideas than in 
forcing them down her audience's throat,” writes James Kettle.


Case in point: after scientists suggested that most successful comics display 
symptoms of psychosis,Pascoe was first to respond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/16/successful-comedians-display-symptoms-psychosis-study-says>
, saying: "Everyone I know who is really, really good atcomedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> works really, really hard … it's 
unhelpful for anyone to believe there is magic involved in being an artist."

Fresh off the plane from Auckland and New Zealand's international comedy 
festival, Pascoe joined us for a live webchat. Was W1A as good as Twenty Twelve 
(she starred in both <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mJiPDTEctoo>), who aside 
from Maid Marian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jul/29/sara-pascoe-favourite-tv> 
is her top feminist icon, what's the bestvegan 
<http://www.sarapascoe.com/veganism.html> meal she's ever eaten – read the best 
of her answers to your questions below.

 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:02pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36200171> 
HELLO GUYS! this is Sara, thank you for not making your questions too mean, i 
am going to start answering them now, SORRY IN ADVANCE FOR ANY SPELLING 
MISTAKES!!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4219509> TempleCloud  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4219509> 23 May 2014 7:20pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36055369> 
Hi Sarah,

How was New Zealand?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:03pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36200266> 
It's too far away. It's really too far way - it took 36 hours to come back and 
I still resent New Zealand for that. It was obviously very beautiful but the 
comedy scene is parochial. It's a great place to be if you like being a big 
fish in a small pond. The comedy festival's got nothing on Edinburgh.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2813213> theunknowing  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2813213> 24 May 2014 4:41am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36067474> 
Which authors have you laughing out loud?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:07pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36200460> 
My very favourite is Kurt Vonnegut - I also really love Tom Robbins. They both 
have fantastic ideas as well as jokes. I also love Woody Allen's prose work and 
his books and would love to steal everything he's ever written if I wouldn't 
get caught. I also adore Dorothy Parker and Jane Austen and I can't wait to 
read Francesca Martinez's book because the extract the other day made me roar.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:08pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36200493> 
Here it is: 
http://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/may/17/francesca-martinez-having-the-last-laugh-interview
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4667969> MisterBrahms  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4667969> 24 May 2014 8:57am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36071675> 
Did you go to that Oxbridge university? It's just that you've got that classic 
Radio 4 'comedy' delivery, where you tonally start low at the beginning of a 
sentence and rise up at the end.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:10pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36200601> 
No, I went to Sussex University and grew up in Essex. It's probably a sign of 
social insecurity if I imitate the cadence of Radio 4 comedy. I don't think I 
do that live but I'm definitely aware of it. When I do the Now Show, I write it 
in my own vernacular and then find myself delivering it in a completely Radio 4 
way. That's probably why they have me back so often.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3794687> UnrealFire  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3794687> 24 May 2014 9:00am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36071728> 
The Fringe is undoubtedly one of the best festivals in the world. Does working 
every night ruin it for you, or is it still fun?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:14pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36200860> 
The performing element is not fun at all. Not one bit. But I enjoy my job 11 
months a year so one month of misery is okay. I love seeing other people's 
shows and living in that beautiful city one month a year. This is my eight 
festival. So in four more I will have lived in Scotland for a full year. But, 
in terms of how big and competitive and tiring that festival is to work at, no, 
as I said, not fun. I get progressively more paranoid and emotional as the four 
weeks go on.

I do try to do fun things while I'm there like go to the cinema or swimming or 
walking up Arthur's Seat. But I spend the entire time worrying about my show so 
those are a waste of time.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:15pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36200894> 
And also I drink too much.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12240398> HAL2013  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12240398> 24 May 2014 9:32am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36072678> 
Thanks Sara. U amazing. Haven't got a question except what's ur usual 
tipple?....
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:17pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36201035> 
Thank U Hal. U amazing more like. My favourite drink is white wine but I drink 
red wine because I think it's healthier. And then when I'm feeling really 
healthy, I drink a whole bottle of red wine and my mouth is stained red. I have 
to drink a glass of white wine as that's the only way of getting red wines 
stains out.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1577236> vastariner  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1577236> 24 May 2014 9:33am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36072705> 
I loved Maid Marian & Her Merry Men as well. Will you marry me?

(don't ask, don't get)
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:20pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36201204> 
Okay but there are some conditions. Sure, some people will say that a shared 
love of a TV show is not much to base a marriage on. I say: lifetime loves have 
been based on less. So here goes: I don't like the word wife. We both have to 
be husbands. I think heart husbands is how we'll refer to each other. The 
ceremony will have no men giving away women and we'll both have to give 
speeches. Mine has to be funnier. I will get a whole writing team. You will pay 
for this as my dowry.

If agreed, sign here ______________________
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2656538> GCday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2656538> 24 May 2014 9:56am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36073397> 
I've never heard of you - how would you describe your style?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:23pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36201341> 
No worries on that score. I am avoiding publicity wherever possible in order 
to stay cultish and underground. The Guardian are doing their best to raise 
awareness. Thank god for people like you reminding me of my place. Having said 
that, my style is excellent. And you should really get involved.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12900489> kingalfred1  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12900489> 24 May 2014 9:57am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36073417> 
What else would you do if you couldn't tell jokes for money?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:27pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36201604> 
That's a good question. I would still tell jokes for free. But I think a lot 
about being a psychologist. This is going to sound really pretentious and is 
probably true of all of us but I find other people's reasons for doing things 
and their approach to the world fascinating. Also, being a psychologist is 
really just getting some free saucy gossip. Except you're not allowed to tell 
anyone. But I would keep a very racy journal.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:28pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36201644> 
Also, my younger sister is a GCSE English teacher and I am so proud of her and 
think that is what I should have probably done with my life. But I was too 
selfish.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3794687> UnrealFire  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3794687> 24 May 2014 9:05am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36071866> 
You've said comedians work really really hard. With so many people wanting to 
get into stand up, is it a job worth fighting for?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:45pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36202487> 
Standup is a compulsion. The first gig will be an experiment. A leap into the 
dark. But like falling in love, it becomes something (for those who enjoy / 
hate themselves), an all-encompassing endeavour. So when I say work really 
really hard, that is not out of choice. People don't get up, sigh, and then 
think I should probably think about one joke for nine hours. They get up, try 
and do admin, but all they can think about is that bloody joke.

And in terms of being worth fighting for, the comedy scene is made up of 
whoever wants to be in it. It is big enough for everyone. Not everyone will be 
able to pay their mortgage form it. But as it exists in rooms above and below 
pubs, anyone and everyone who wants to should try it and see how it feels. It's 
like being a town crier. And what is so exciting about how huge the live 
standup comedy scene is now is that the diversity of voices, because more 
people feel welcome, has improved the quality of standup greatly.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3198289> ariel3  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3198289> 24 May 2014 10:50am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36075123> 
what is the meaning of life.
well, cmon. no pussyfooting about.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:36pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36202032> 
Well, in a nutshell, of course there is no meaning at all. We are merely meat 
robots programmed to replicate ourselves in order that the bacteria that 
pre-dates us by millennia can continue existing.

BUT being that we are here (probably), the meaning of life is to give life 
meaning•• Sara bows ••
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13263439> Simon Daly  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13263439> 24 May 2014 1:21pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36079635> 
Did you live in a share house in Abbotsford, Melbourne in 1999?

 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:32pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36201819> 
No I didn't. Who's been talking? What do you think you know? I've also never 
been to Colombia, my name didn't used to be Colin Stabsford, and I'm not really 
42.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1349776> KittenKong  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1349776> 27 May 2014 9:06am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36188694> 
Sorry, I should probably ask a question relating to your stuff. 
So......erm.......'Sara Pascoe vs History;. I'm a history teacher. If I bring a 
classful of screaming adolescents to your show may I be able to tick off a 
module on the national curriculum?

Finally, in a partial response to the egregious numpties further upthread, I 
saw you doing a thing with Andrew Lawrence a little while ago. You were 
marvellous. Thank you for a lovely evening.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:40pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36202221> 
Dear Kitten Kong,
As wonderful as screaming adolescents sound, I'm not sure I will be able to 
handle them as well as teacher. Perhaps I could write a pamphlet for you to 
read out in class and I will stick to performing to middle-class sleepy people. 
There is a bit of history in my show, I am researching the great love stories: 
Hitler and Eva Braun; Napoleon and Josephine; Adam and Eve. Are any of these on 
your syllabus? You may notice that I am treating religion as historical. Some 
people say you can't please the rational and the faithful all at once. To them, 
I say: meet my new character: GeneSus. He lives inside you and tells you what 
to do and you will never see any evidence of him. They just have to trust what 
they tell you.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12770837> ilGatto  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12770837> 27 May 2014 12:44pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36199206> 
What's your favourite place in Edinburgh?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:52pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36202819> 
David Bann's restaurant. Or the sauna at Warrender Pool.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12115292> alizee_alice  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12115292> 27 May 2014 12:49pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36199498> 
How do you approach writing material that both challenges and delights an 
audience? Is there a play-off between making acute political/feminist 
statements and making something that people can let themselves laugh at? How do 
you define this in your work? Also is this too many questions? How many 
questions am I allowed?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 2:01pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36203306> 
I write a lot of stuff that isn't funny so it doesn't get further than me 
lecturing my boyfriend in the kitchen while he's trying to cook pasta. I love 
it when an analogy enables me to tackle a subject I am earnest about in an 
humorous way and I always regret it if I feel like I've tipped over into being 
preachy on stage. I wouldn't want a comedian to tell me what to do or how to 
live my life. The joke comes first, or should come first. And so I try to ask 
questions (just like you) rather than lecturing from a definite standpoint.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12770837> ilGatto  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12770837> 27 May 2014 12:54pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36199756> 
Have you ever had a paranormal experience?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 2:02pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36203339> 
I've often died on stage. Boom boom.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1779981> katmandubaggie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1779981> 23 May 2014 9:13pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36058779> 
If you're a vegan comedian, please tell us a vegan joke
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:48pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36202625> 
I can't. They are all too quorny ••high fives herself••

Also Quorn's got egg in it so it's not even a Vegan joke.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3530323> HexagonSon  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3530323> 27 May 2014 12:58pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36199972> 
Would you describe yourself as a feminist?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 2:07pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36203566> 
HEY GUYS! thank you for all your interesting questions, i am so sorry if i 
didn't get to your question, in summary i LOVE being a vegan but that doesn't 
mean i am critical of any of you and what you like to eat, just cruel farming 
practices. And if any of you are interested in stand up PLEASE have a bash, 
just book 5 mins somewhere and see how it feels, big love to you all xxx
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:57pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36203098> 
Oh yes. But not as a definition of myself - people are far too complex to be 
reduced down to a description based on one thing they believe. But I love 
reading feminist literature and analysing our culture via it. I studies 
feminism briefly at university and what struck me was how very lucky I am to 
have been born in this country at the time I was born. I think feminism is 
really exciting now because what we have to challenge is the insidious way that 
concern with body image can undermine the freedoms women now have. We also have 
the huge but fascinating challenge of how to spread human rights without 
disrespecting cultures. Anyone who thinks that women don't need feminism 
anymore should have a quick search engine of FGM.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12486442> peskydor  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12486442> 23 May 2014 6:41pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36053983> 
How easy do you find defending Veganism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/veganism> in a quite hostile 
carnivorous culture?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:50pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36202732> 
I don't feel that I have to as it's just a personal decision. I am not an 
activist or judging anybody else on their own dietary needs or decisions. I 
feel passionate about it and it has made my life happier but I have absolutely 
no antagonism to people who find happiness in meaty diets.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1050163> littledutchboy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1050163> 23 May 2014 8:16pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36057151> 
Can you ask your dad if there will ever be a Flintlock reunion?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 1:47pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36202553> 
Haha. My dad hates that that's on my wikipedia page. They have done a couple 
of very small scale reunions, just gigs in pubs. I believe there is footage on 
youtube. Brace yourself: they are pretty old and tubby now with not much hair. 
My mum met my dad because she was a fan of that band, and used to stalk him. 
So, I have Flintlock to thank for my existence.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> Guardian contributor
SaraPascoe1  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13273454> 27 May 
2014 2:07pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36203566> 
HEY GUYS! thank you for all your interesting questions, i am so sorry if i 
didn't get to your question, in summary i LOVE being a vegan but that doesn't 
mean i am critical of any of you and what you like to eat, just cruel farming 
practices. And if any of you are interested in stand up PLEASE have a bash, 
just book 5 mins somewhere and see how it feels, big love to you all xxx
 