
On my business card, I am a corporate president. In my mind, I am a game 
developer. But in my heart, I am a gamer.

– Satoru Iwata, speaking at the Game Developers Conference in 2005

Here is a story about Satoru Iwata. It’s just one moment from his career, but 
it tells us much about how he thought and why, on the news of his death, an 
industry is in mourning.

On 2 December 2004, Nintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> 
launched its DS dual-screen handheld console in Japan. Designed to appeal to 
what the company called “the Touch Generation”, the DS was the first big 
product launch for Iwata as president of the veteran video game manufacturer. 
This was the vanguard moment for his plan to grow the gaming population. But as 
the stores opened early in Tokyo and the first DS units were sold, Iwata was 
nowhere to be seen.

Instead, he was in the city of Sendai, visiting Prof Ryuta Kawashima. He knew 
his absence in Tokyo would raise eyebrows, but this outranked it. At the time 
Kawashima was author of a pair of popular exercise books, containing simple 
maths and language puzzles, that were marketed as ways to “train the brain”. 
Iwata thought these could be the basis for a game that would be popular with 
non-gamers and, after securing Kawashima’s agreement to the project in the 
summer of 2004, had now brought the prototype software. The two men discussed 
the project for hours.

Just over five months later, Brain Age: Train Your Brain In Minutes a Day! was 
released for the NintendoDS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ds>. Rather 
than being an instant smash, Brain Age (renamed Dr Kawashima’s Brain Training 
in other territories) was a slow-burner, spreading by word of mouth and 
gradually attracting a whole new audience. The simple but personable style was 
charming, the daily structure of tasks was compulsive, and finding out your 
“brain age” at the end of exercises was fun. Over the coming years, Brain Age 
would sell just under 20m copies, with its sequel close behind. Iwata turned a 
maths game into an industry phenomenon, and he knew and cared enough about the 
project to see it through personally.

Nintendo CEO Satoru Iwata dies of cancer aged 55
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/13/nintendo-ceo-satoru-iwata-dies-of-cancer-aged-55>
It was this perspective on the games business that saw Nintendo regain its 
dominant market position under his leadership. After the arrival of the 
PlayStation in 1994, the company had been playing catch up, blindsided by 
Sony’s technical acumen. The N64 and GameCube were decent, successful consoles, 
but they fell far behind the PlayStation and its sequels in sales. When Iwata 
arrived, he brought with him a “blue ocean” philosophy: instead of competing 
with rivals like the PlayStation and Xbox on technical specs, Nintendo would 
explore entirely new areas of design. He thought differently from other 
corporate leaders in the industry, for one very important reason: Iwata learned 
his trade in the trenches of game development.

Born in 1959 in Hokkaido Prefecture, Japan, the young Iwata was always 
fascinated with technology, and as a teenager at high school would create 
simple games on his programmable calculator. Many years later, Iwata would 
reflect on how a friend’s enthusiasm for these productions had affected him. “I 
think it was like when members of a comedy duo find each other. When I made 
something, he responded. That’s how I found my first customer and awakened to 
the joy of making something. I often think how I would have never made video 
games if it weren’t for that experience.”

Iwata received his first computer, a Commodore PET, in the late 1970s – and in 
his thirst to understand the machine, took it apart. This would turn out to be 
a stroke of luck: the PET used a CPU similar to the one that would later power 
Nintendo’s Famicom console. By this time, Iwata had left high school and was 
studying computer science at the Tokyo Institute of Technology, which he 
juggled with a part-time gig at newly established developer HAL Laboratory. 
While still at college, Iwata coded his first commercial game, Super Billiards, 
which was published by HAL for the MSX home computer in 1983.

But by this time, the potentially industry-changing Famicom was imminent. HAL 
Laboratory exploited its Nintendo links, badgering the company for a chance to 
develop on the machine. Iwata himself visited Nintendo to find out more, 
believing even before he saw the console that he could program games for it.

And of course he could. Though Iwata was a HAL employee, throughout the 1980s 
and 1990s he also began to work for Nintendo. He was solely responsible for 
coding firstparty Nintendo games like Balloon Fight and NES Tournament Golf, 
and was credited as producer on many others.

As he gained experience of the industry, Iwata began to think of ways to make 
new kinds of game, however modest. One idea was to create a game that anyone 
could play from beginning to end, regardless of skill. Fellow HAL employee 
Masuhiro Sakurai designed a giant smiling puffball that inhaled his enemies, 
and the studio released Kirby’s Dreamland for the Game Boy – a delightful, 
gently challenging platformer and the debut of a beloved character.

At around the same time, HAL was in some financial trouble, and 1993 saw Iwata 
appointed president. Over the next seven years he brought HAL’s finances back 
into the black and further strengthened the company’s links with Nintendo: when 
Masuhiro Sakurai had the idea for an arena-battling game starring Nintendo 
characters, it was Iwata himself who coded the Pepsiman proof-of-concept 
prototype, that would go on to become the legendary Smash Bros series. All this 
was done under the watchful eye of the formidable Hiroshi Yamauchi, then 
president of Nintendo Japan.

Being close to Nintendo was good for HAL, but it would be even better for 
Iwata. Finally hired as a Nintendo employee in 2000 at the age of 41, he was 
initially made head of the corporate planning division and thrown into managing 
multiple large-scale projects that required global co-ordination. Nintendo was 
preparing to transition from N64 to Gamecube, entering another round of 
bruising competition with Microsoft and Sony.

In May 2002 Iwata was summoned to Hiroshi Yamauchi’s office. The older man 
spoke for hours about his half-century in charge of the company and, at the 
end, offered Iwata the job of president. The change happened soon thereafter. 
“Iwata has the instincts you need to succeed in this business” said Yamuachi on 
his departure. But perhaps the greater compliment was that Iwata was the fourth 
president of Nintendo in 136 years, and the first from outwith the Yamauchi 
family.

Within two years, Iwata repaid that faith. Despite industry doubts over the 
appeal of a dual-screen handheld console, the Nintendo DS was a phenomenon, 
going on to sell over 150m units and thriving on beautiful, accessible games 
like Brain Training, Advance Wars, Animal Crossing and Mario Kart DS. Nintendo 
had discovered that providing new ways to interact with hardware could be just 
as important as improving visuals. Speaking at the Game Developers Conference 
in 2005, Iwata said: “Making games look more photorealistic is not the only 
means of improving the game experience. I know, on this point I risk being 
misunderstood, so remember, I am a man who once programmed a baseball game with 
no baseball players. If anyone appreciates graphics, it’s me! But my point is 
that this is just one path to improved game. We need to find others. 
Improvement has more than one definition.”

It was a lesson he built on with the launch of the Nintendo Wii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii> console in 2006 – and the results 
were equally spectacular. Straight after the DS launch the company’s research 
and development division began to work on a home console that could make 
similar use of a non-traditional control interface to reach beyond the 
traditional market. The team began to experiment with motion controls, 
developing a controller that could react to player movement, allowing easy 
interaction with onscreen characters. Speaking to Business Week in 2006, 
Nintendo’s game design legend Shigeru Miyamato said that Iwata and he wanted to 
attract those members of a family who tended to stand back and watch. But they 
also wanted a machine that would fit in with the space and budgetary demands of 
the family, a cheap machine that would also play old games.

“Our goal was to come up with a machine that mums would want: easy to use, 
quick to start up, not a huge energy drain, and quiet while it was running,” 
said Miyamoto. “Rather than just picking new technology, we thought seriously 
about what a game console should be. Iwata wanted a console that would play 
every Nintendo game ever made. Mums would hate it if they had to have several 
consoles lying around.”

When the Wii was first revealed, the industry scoffed once again. The graphics 
processors were inferior to those in the latest PlayStation and Xbox machines 
and the Wii remote controller seemed like a gimmick. But then people started 
playing early titles like Wii Sports and Wii Play – they were intuitive, fun 
and social. Anyone could get involved. Word of mouth spread and by mid-2007, 
Wii had sold more units than the PS3 and Xbox 360 put together. People were 
holding Wii parties, and everyone who attended was going out and buying their 
own machine the next day. It sold over 100m units.

From here, the industry became more of a challenge. The rise of smartphones 
and then tablets ate into the traditional handheld console market, and the 
online gaming explosion drew more and more gamers to Sony and Microsoft 
platforms. Iwata was cautious about both sectors. In 2011, the new3DS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3ds> console featuring an offbeat 
stereoscopic 3D display, had a difficult launch period, with too little 
software and a swift price cut, so Iwata took personal responsibility. He cut 
his own salary by 50%, apologised to fans and investors, and gave every early 
purchaser of the system 10 Nintendo games for free. Last year, after 
disappointing financials, he again took a 50% cut in salary.

In 2013, following the sluggish performance of the Wii U, Iwata was pressed by 
investors 
<http://www.polygon.com/2013/7/5/4496512/why-nintendos-satoru-iwata-refuses-to-lay-off-staff>
 to cut Nintendo’s staff to save money. “If we reduce the number of employees 
for better short-term financial results, employee morale will decrease,” Iwata 
replied. “I sincerely doubt employees who fear that they may be laid off will 
be able to develop software titles that could impress people around the world.” 
Nintendo cut no staff.

Most recently, Iwata finally ditched his instinctive mistrust of the 
smartphone games industry. His concerns had been about separating Nintendo 
software and hardware. But througha business relationship with sector 
specialist DeNA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/17/nintendo-mobile-games-dena-partnership>
, he saw a way of capitalising on the boom in phone and tablet gaming, while 
still protecting Nintendo’s IP and values. There will be no conversions of 
current Nintendo console games on to smartphones, everything will be built 
especially for these platforms.

And in an industry where company CEOs often become pantomime villains to a 
demanding fanbase, Iwata was almost alone as a universally respected and liked 
executive. The gaming community has an insatiable appetite for in-jokes and 
memes – any figure of prominence becomes known best for one or two things. It 
says everything about Iwata that the most frequent joke is to add “[Iwata 
laughs]” to forum comments – a reference to his online series,Iwata Asks 
<http://iwataasks.nintendo.com/>, where the president very frequently finds 
things amusing.

Iwata was a man inclined to take the road less travelled – whether that was in 
his innovative game code, or in revolutionising the console industry. While he 
was determined to bolster the Wii and DS machines with hardcore fan favourites 
like Super Metroid and Zelda, he never shied away from Nintendo’s child 
friendly reputation, believing that entertaining families was not only sensible 
business but a worthwhile end in itself. “Video games are meant to be just one 
thing,” he said. “Fun! Fun for everyone.”

He cemented this belief while talking at the 2011 game developer conference. 
After reflecting on his early days of games programming he said that observing 
the sales of Miyamoto’s games had convinced him of one thing: “engineering is 
not quite as important as imagination.”

Goodbye Satoru Iwata, you were right about that, and you were right about so 
much more.

 * This article was amended on 13 July 2015 to correct the spelling of 
Hokkaido Prefecture.
 