
Proposals to reopen cinemas in Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> have been strongly dismissed by 
the current head of the country’s religious authority.

“Motion pictures may broadcast shameless, immoral, atheistic or rotten films,” 
said the grand mufti, Sheikh Abdulaziz al-Sheikh, on his weekly television 
programme.

“There is nothing good in song parties, for entertainment day and night, and 
opening of movie houses at all times is an invitation to mixing of sexes.”

Public cinemas in the country have been illegal since the 1980s, but a plan to 
reintroduce them has been mooted by the head of theGeneral Authority for 
Entertainment, Amr al-Madani 
<http://saudigazette.com.sa/saudi-arabia/2017-year-of-entertainment-in-saudi-arabia/>
, as part of the government’sVision 2030 <http://vision2030.gov.sa/en> slate of 
cultural and economic reforms.

The grand mufti added: “I hope those in charge of the entertainment authority 
are guided to turn it from bad to good and not to open doors to evil.”

Vision 2030 was launched last year by the deputy crown prince, Mohammad bin 
Salman bin Abdulaziz. Chief proposals include a reduction in unemployment from 
11.6% to 7% and upping the private sector’s contribution to the economy from 
40% to 65%.

The grand mufti attracted criticism in the west in 2012 when he issued a fatwa 
approving the marriage of girls as young as 10,saying 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/24/sheikh-abdul-aziz-al-al-sheikh_n_1450449.html>
 “good upbringing makes a girl ready to perform all marital duties at that age”.

Next month should see the fourth annual Dammam film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/19/second-saudi-arabia-film-festival-opens>
, a five-day celebration of cinema which manages to contravene the rules by 
holding private screenings in an arts centre on the Gulf coast city.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Wadjda: Haifaa al Mansour on becoming Saudi Arabia’s first female feature film 
director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/jul/16/wadjda-saudi-arabia-female-director-video>
Artistic director Ahmed al-Mulla has said 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/afp/article-2960360/Curtain-rises-Saudi-film-fest-despite-cinema-ban.html>
 he hopes the festival would help encourage the authorities to relax 
legislation as film is “part of culture, part of loving life” and that its 
rejection is motivated by fear and ignorance.

Only around a dozen Saudi movies have been made in the past decade. The most 
critically acclaimed of these was 2012’s Wadjda, shot by the country’s first 
female director,Haifaa al-Mansour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/jul/16/wadjda-saudi-arabia-female-director-video>
. The film, about an 11-year-old girl’s desire for a bicycle, was longlisted 
for a foreign language Oscar and shortlisted for the equivalent Bafta.
 