
More than 1,000 Russian athletes benefitted from state-sponsored doping

More than 1,000 Russian athletes across more than 30 sports were involved in 
or benefited from state-sponsored doping between 2011 and 2015, according to a 
second report on the subject by the respected Canadian law professor Richard 
McLaren. Speaking in London, McLaren said he had found “an institutional 
conspiracy across summer, winter and Paralympic sports” in Russia between 2011 
and 2015 and “a cover-up that operated on an unprecedented scale”. This story 
is still developing, so check back throughout the day for more updates.

More than 1,000 Russian athletes benefitted from state-sponsored doping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/more-than-1000-russian-athletes-benefitted-from-state-sponsored-doping>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Frussian-state-sponsored-doping-unprecedented-scale-mclaren-second-report-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia-backed%20doping%20corrupted%20London%202012%2C%20says%20second%20McLaren%20report%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Frussian-state-sponsored-doping-unprecedented-scale-mclaren-second-report-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia-backed%20doping%20corrupted%20London%202012%2C%20says%20second%20McLaren%20report%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Frussian-state-sponsored-doping-unprecedented-scale-mclaren-second-report-video&media=>
Russia-backed doping corrupted London 2012, says second McLaren report – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/dec/09/russian-state-sponsored-doping-unprecedented-scale-mclaren-second-report-video>
Who’s who in Trump’s cabinet

Tom McCarthy has your rundown of who has been nominated for positions in 
Donald Trump’s cabinet so far, as well as the non-cabinet roles that won’t 
require confirmation by the Senate – from retired general James Mattis as 
secretary of defense to Elaine Chao as secretary of transportation. Trump’s 
recent nominations offast-food executive Andy Puzder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/andrew-puzder-labor-secretary-trump-unions-wages>
 to head the US Department of Labor andScott Pruitt as administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/scott-pruitt-trump-administration-epa-oil-gas-environment>
 have faced criticism. Pruitt has supported fossil fuel companies, sued the EPA 
and questioned that climate change is spurred by human activity. Within the 
agency, one scientist said that Pruitt risks being an “unprecedented disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
” for the natural world and public health.

Trump’s cabinet picks: here are all of the appointments so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-administration-cabinet-picks-so-far>

Hillary Clinton warns against fake news

In a speech at the Capitol yesterday, Hillary Clinton warned of the 
“real-world consequences” of fake news, alluding to an incident over the 
weekend in which a gunman opened fire at a Washington DC pizzeria over a false 
story. “It is a danger that must be addressed and addressed quickly,” Clinton 
said at a tribute to departing Senate minority leader Harry Reid. She also 
joked about all of those selfies in the woods. Clinton was joined by 
Vice-president Joe Biden and congressional leaders from both parties to bid 
farewell to Reid, who leaves the chamber after 30 years in the Senate.

Hillary Clinton warns fake news can have ‘real world consequences’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/hillary-clinton-fake-news-consequences-pizzagate>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-fake-news-puts-lives-at-risk-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20fake%20news%20puts%20'lives%20at%20risk'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-fake-news-puts-lives-at-risk-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20fake%20news%20puts%20%27lives%20at%20risk%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-fake-news-puts-lives-at-risk-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton: fake news puts ‘lives at risk’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/09/hillary-clinton-fake-news-puts-lives-at-risk-video>
US scrambles to respond to surge of migrants at the border

A spike in crossings at a previously quiet sector of the US-Mexico border 
“stems perhaps in part from the fear that Donald Trump will build a mighty 
wall. But it is mainly a consequence of continuing violence and economic 
distress in Central America, that migrants say make staying at home a riskier 
bet than trying to cross into the US, whatever the president-elect may say or 
do”, Tom Dart writes from the Rio Grande Valley.

US government scrambles to respond to surge of migrants at Mexico border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/us-government-migrant-influx-texas-mexico-border>

Ohio ‘heartbeat’ abortion bill could be test case for overturning Roe v Wade

The Ohio state legislature passed a new anti-abortion “heartbeat” bill 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2016/dec/07/ohio-abortion-ban-bill-heartbeat-passes-state-house>
 that would ban terminations from as early as six weeks, the most severe 
restrictions in the country. Politicians say they were motivated to push 
through the bill by Trump’s win, believing they might find a more friendly US 
supreme court that would uphold the law. If passed by Governor John Kasich, the 
bill could serve as a test case for the limits of constitutional protections of 
abortion – though activists on both sides of the issue doubt that strategy is 
likely to succeed.

Ohio ‘heartbeat’ abortion bill could be test case for overturning Roe v Wade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/ohio-heartbeat-abortion-bill-test-case-roe-v-wade>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, understand the forces behind this divisive election – 
and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Images of Charleston shooting aftermath shown at trial

On Thursday, the second day of the federal trial of Dylann Roof, the 
22-year-old white supremacist accused of murdering nine black parishioners 
during a brutal hate crime, horrific images depicting the bloody aftermath of 
the Charleston church massacre were shown to the jury. They revealed that seven 
of the victims had been shot dead at one end of the room, as they attempted to 
hide underneath a cluster of large round tables. Earlier on Thursday, attorneys 
for Roof unsuccessfully attempted to force a mistrial.

Charleston shooting trial: jury shown graphic images of aftermath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/dylann-roof-attorneys-motion-mistrial-denied-charleston-shooting>

South Korean MPs vote to impeach president

South Korean MPs voted to impeach President Park Geun-hye, over a corruption 
and cronyism scandal that has made her the country’s most unpopular leader 
since it became a democracy in the late 1980s. Allegations that Park abused her 
position to help her friend Choi Soon-sil secure tens of millions of dollars of 
funding for her foundations from major South Korean companies, and even allowed 
her to influence policy, provoked a wave of anger across the country. Park’s 
duties will be temporarily transferred to the prime minister while the 
country’s constitutional court decides whether the impeachment vote is valid. 
If six of the court’s nine justices support impeachment, Park will be removed 
from office and a new presidential election held within 60 days.



South Korea impeachment vote: the key facts behind a presidential crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-korea-impeachment-vote-the-key-facts-behind-a-presidential-crisis>

Last survivors in Yemen’s ground zero

Ghaith Abdul-Ahad visited Sa’ada, “ground zero of the 20-month Saudi campaign 
in Yemen, a largely forgotten conflict that has killed more than 10,000, 
uprooted three million and left perhaps 14 million – more than half the country 
– short of food, manyon the brink of starvation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/yemen-famine-feared-as-starving-children-fight-for-lives-in-hospital>
”. In the decimated city, he spoke to the survivors whose homes have been 
destroyed and families lost, their children are starving.

‘Everything is over now’: the last survivors in Yemen’s ground zero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/everything-is-over-now-the-last-survivors-in-yemens-ground-zero>

In case you missed it ...

Erin Martucci is believed to be the first woman to use a virtual reality 
headset to manage her pain during labor, wearing a headset that showed her a 
relaxing beachside scene before she began to push. Her gynecologist, Ralph 
Anderson, has been using virtual reality in his medical practice to help calm 
patients before minor procedures and during early-stage, passive labor. The 
company that created the virtual environment and supplied the headset Anderson 
uses, AppliedVR, has partnered with Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles 
for clinical studies.

Can virtual reality help women cope with childbirth? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/09/virtual-reality-childbirth-pain-relief>
 