
With the approach of autumn our interest is renewed in scarves, which have a 
fascination for most of us, whether our choice of them is happy or not. Each 
season sees some change in scarf fashion but certain general rules hold good 
for all of them.

There are women who declare that a scarf of any kind is not for them, but this 
usually means that they have chosen the wrong shape, colouring, or texture. Few 
but the very young can wear successfully the “halter” shape. Older women 
usually need something with more precision in outline.

The conventional scarf cut on the cross and secured by a single fold at the 
base of the throat is usually found more suitable, but both the short, plump 
neck and that which is very thin may find this severe style somewhat trying. 
Tied loosely in front, however, the conventional scarf will soften the neckline 
in either case.


Many women find a scarf unbecoming simply because any kind of pattern close to 
the face does not suit them. For the older woman especially perfectly plain 
scarves are usually best, and the wearer may “let herself go” in brilliant 
colouring if she pleases.


Whether the material shall be dull or glossy is another consideration to which 
women often pay far too little attention. Again, some scarves of good quality 
look wispy and “tired” because they are too thin. A crepe or rayon scarf will 
usually be found to set better if it is lined and reversible.


For the strictly tailored woman narrow double scarves, cut on the straight 
instead of on the cross, will usually be found an ideal accessory to the autumn 
or winter costume. Only women of the frilly type can successfully wear chiffon 
scarves. Women with broad shoulders; tall women, and plump ones will find the 
stiffer materials which set in “sculptured” folds more becoming. The neat 
needlewoman can make satisfactory little scarves cut on the straight from 
remnants bought at sales.

 