
A baby desert tortoise is no match for a raven. The tiny reptile’s soft shell 
is easily pierced, offering the bird a tantalizing fix of delicious entrails.

World on track to lose two-thirds of wild animals by 2020, major report warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
Soaring raven populations, along with drought and disease, are having a huge 
impact on tortoises. With numbers dropping 90% since the 1980s it’s not an 
understatement to say that the raven now poses an existential threat to the 
tortoise.

But not if tortoise biologist Tim Shields has anything to do with it. Shields 
has dedicated the last four decades to studying desert tortoises in the Mojave 
desert, and is fighting to save the species with a hi-tech armory comprising 
robots, lasers, 3D-printed lures and an intimate understanding of his feathered 
enemy’s modus operandi.

“Historically ravens were rare, but humans have made it very easy for them to 
survive,” said Shields, who says that the raven population in the Mojave desert 
has increased700% over the last 25 years 
<http://www.defenders.org/sites/default/files/publications/invasion_of_the_tortoise_snatchers.pdf>
. Humans provide food in the form of agriculture, trash dumps and roadkill as 
well as cell towers, telegraph poles and billboards that provide safe nesting 
sites. That means there are a lot more hungry, cawing beaks to feed, 
particularly during breeding season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb323691db0a211d51eded766bccdd43f6fa1009c%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb323691db0a211d51eded766bccdd43f6fa1009c%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Biologist Tim Shields is fighting to save the desert tortoise. ‘If they were 
completely wiped out, I would be crushed.’ Photograph: Dane Smith 
“We have completely overloaded the desert with these highly intelligent 
predators with a high metabolic rate. They go into predatory overdrive when 
their eggs hatch,” he said.

The feeding frenzy is indiscriminate. In addition to devastating the desert 
tortoise, ravens target birds including the sage grouse, snowy plover and the 
least tern, as well as horned lizards and snakes.

Shields is left to deal with the aftermath, finding dozens of mangled baby 
tortoise shells as he scours the desert for living specimens. Baby tortoises 
take up to five years to develop the tough outer shell they need to withstand 
raven attack. “In the early part of my career, there were hundreds of tortoises 
per square mile. I’d find and catalogue maybe 15 tortoises per day. Now I’m 
lucky if I find one,” he said.

Baby tortoise is a ‘luxury item’ for ravens

Shields, through a company called Hardshell Labs 
<http://www.hardshelllabs.com/>, is taking matters into his own hands with a 
range of technological solutions.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97f291aac4d7c1857d803ba35f0afe36c5b20619%2F238_525_3899_2339%2F3899.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97f291aac4d7c1857d803ba35f0afe36c5b20619%2F238_525_3899_2339%2F3899.jpg>
 A raven eating a baby tortoise. The tortoise needs up to five years to develop 
the tough outer shell that can withstand an attack. Photograph: Tim Shields 
First up: camera-equipped remote controlled rovers that can patrol the desert 
to keep track of the remaining tortoises while scaring away ravens. Shield’s 
vision is to have a fleet of these unmanned vehicles that members of the public 
can control via the internet in order to better understand the species.


“There’s potential to have thousands of eyes in the desert to increase the 
amount of information we can collect about the tortoises, while engaging more 
of the public in caring about the species,” Shields said.

He’s collaborating with others including Roy Haggard <http://t3b-inc.com/>, a 
hardware consultant who has worked on a real Mars lander, andelectronics 
engineer Chris Smith <http://www.hardshelllabs.com/our-team-contact-us/>, to 
build a rugged wheeled robot that can navigate the desert and livestream video 
footage of its travels.

It’s critical the rover doesn’t harm tortoises – something the team has had to 
demonstrate by running over a baby tortoise without causing any damage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtZQTmetUr0w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtZQTmetUr0w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtZQTmetUr0w&media=>
 Hardshell Labs’ Guardian Angel navigates the Mojave desert. 
Through hanging out with these creatures I learned a much more balanced way of 
approaching life, just by osmosis
Tortoise biologist Tim Shields 
Shields doesn’t want to hurt ravens either. Instead, he wants to train them by 
appealing to their cautious and communicative – they learn from each other – 
tendencies. “You need to hack into their communication system and get them to 
propagate the message,” he said.

This is where a combination of lasers and 3D printers come in handy.

Ravens can’t stand lasers, so Shields has been using laser rifle scopes to 
sweep areas of the desert to ward the birds off. “I spent three weeks firing 
the laser at ravens and they didn’t come back to the area for several weeks 
after,” he said. The conditioning seemed to work.

The second way to train ravens involves creating highly accurate 3D-printed 
baby tortoises – which Shields calls “techno-tortoises” – that blast a noxious 
chemical and sound an alarm when disturbed. A laser could be added as well to 
create a triple assault on the senses. Other 3D-printed babies could be packed 
with a tasty lure treated with a substance that induces nausea and diarrhea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8471051436aa1ab72bc4b4e74fcc250c8684c8b0%2F0_16_2245_1348%2F2245.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8471051436aa1ab72bc4b4e74fcc250c8684c8b0%2F0_16_2245_1348%2F2245.jpg>
 A laser gun used to scare ravens away from tortoises. Photograph: Tim Shields 
The trials are in their early days, but Shields is convinced he can alter the 
ravens’ behavior. “Baby tortoise is not an essential food item for ravens. It’s 
a luxury item. My bet is that the motivation to eat baby tortoises is 
relatively low in the face of a negative experience. They are very cautious 
animals, by and large.”

‘It’s a conservation emergency’

Throughout our conversation, Shields talks fondly of individual animals he’s 
followed over the years, each identified by number rather than name. Tortoise 
29, for example, is a powerhouse alpha male who was unexpectedly courteous 
towards lesser tortoises. “He was killed by coyotes during a drought in the 
mid-2000s. That was very sad.”

During that same drought, Shields experienced one of his lowest moments when 
he revisited a plot of land once teeming with tortoises. “We found 398 
carcasses and 30 live tortoises. That was very depressing,” he said.

Shields described how he scoured the area in the hope that Tortoise 125 was 
still alive – sadly he wasn’t.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d651d64f37a767c4b94c3ab65e49655fa42b08%2F0_0_4486_1809%2F4486.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d651d64f37a767c4b94c3ab65e49655fa42b08%2F0_0_4486_1809%2F4486.jpg>
 Hardshell Labs’ rover and a desert tortoise. Photograph: Tim Shields 
“He was 325mm, one of the biggest tortoise I’d ever seen. He was like a 
boulder. I was dreading the day I found his shell. “I almost hung it up at that 
point.”

The fact that the tortoise grows so slowly, taking about a decade to reach 
maturity, and has a very low reproductive rate make it harder for the species 
to recover from the onslaught. To make matters worse, adult populations have 
been hit by a fatal respiratory disease. “The adults are being hammered by 
disease and the babies are hammered by ravens,” said Shields. “It’s a 
conservation emergency.”

The story of the Mojave desert tortoise is a microcosm of a much larger 
natural crisis, according to a new report by theWWF and Zoological Society of 
London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
, which predicts that the number of animals living in the wild will decrease by 
two-thirds in the next four years due to the impact of humans.

The plight of the tortoises is particularly tragic since the creature has 
survived in roughly the same form for 220m years, “sailing through” the mass 
extinction that wiped out most of the dinosaurs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd809d7c01d547bfc849dead8ba118dd3b7c16496%2F0_0_2695_2062%2F2695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scientists%20fight%20for%20an%20endangered%20tortoise%20with%20a%20secret%20weapon%3A%20lasers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmojave-desert-tortoise-california-endangered-lasers-ravens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd809d7c01d547bfc849dead8ba118dd3b7c16496%2F0_0_2695_2062%2F2695.jpg>
 Ravens can easily peck through the soft shells of baby tortoises. Photograph: 
Tim Shields 
Their efficient design means they can live in an “incredibly stingy” 
environment. “I look at my own species and we’re the polar opposite. We’re 
sloppy with resources, careless and reckless.”

Spending so much time with these creatures has clearly had a profound impact 
on Shields.

“When I went out to start my career as a tortoise biologist, I was a fairly 
tightly wound, competitive American male,” he told the Guardian. “Through 
hanging out with these creatures I learned a much more balanced way of 
approaching life, just by osmosis.”

“If they were completely wiped out, I would be crushed. It would be hard to 
take. It’s already been very hard to take.”
 