
Scott Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> has 
said he would have difficulty looking his children in the eye if he ceded to a 
backbench push to water down superannuation reforms designed to limit use of 
super as a tax minimisation strategy.

In an interview on 2GB radio on Monday, the treasurer confirmed he is having 
“open conversations behind closed doors” about the reforms but strongly 
criticised doubling the life-time cap on non-concessional super contributions.

The comment came after reports on Friday he is considering increasing the 
$500,000 cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/19/labor-accuses-morrison-of-planning-humiliating-u-turn-on-super-reform>
 proposed in the May budget and taken to the July election.

The outspoken conservative critic of the superannuation reforms MP George 
Christensen tweeted on Sunday that he wanted the cap doubled from $500,000 to 
$1m.
George Christensen (@GChristensenMP) 
A doubling of the proposed lifetime cap would satisfy most concerns over the 
Coalition superannuation policy.#auspol 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/auspol?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/GChristensenMP/status/767002432706535425> August 20, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/GChristensenMP/status/767002432706535425> 
Asked about increasing the non-concessional super cap to $750,000, Morrison 
said: “We’re still working through that process with my colleagues.”

He said if amendments were made alternative savings would need to be found “to 
make up the other $250 to $550m”, for the first time putting a price tag on a 
mooted back-down.

“This is the process we’re working through. I’m doing that with my colleagues, 
around the country, we’re sitting down in open conversations, behind closed 
doors and working this through. I’m not negotiating this through the media – 
I’m doing this directly with my colleagues.”

Labor accuses Morrison of planning 'humiliating' u-turn on super reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/19/labor-accuses-morrison-of-planning-humiliating-u-turn-on-super-reform>
Morrison said the proposed backdown would affect people who “want to put $1m 
after tax into their superannuation so they can pay 15% on it rather than their 
marginal tax rate” and had already transferred $1.6m to a tax-free account.

“I find it pretty hard to look my kids in the eye and tell them they’ve got to 
saddle a higher debt because someone who had a very big income wanted to pay 
less tax.”

On Friday the Australian Financial Review reported Morrison was considering 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/govt-considers-more-super-concessions-to-appease-mps-20160817-gqv6yi>
 increasing the $500,000 cap on non-concessional super contributions proposed 
in the May budget to $750,000 or changing the start date of the cap.

When asked to rule out the changes, a spokeswoman for the treasurer said the 
government was consulting on the “implementation” of the superannuation reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/19/labor-accuses-morrison-of-planning-humiliating-u-turn-on-super-reform>
 taken to the election. “The government will consider technical changes to 
assist in the implementation of these necessary reforms,” she said.

The stoush around the equity of the superannuation system comes as welfare 
groups wrote to the prime minister and opposition leader on Friday calling on 
them not to do away with the $1.34bn energy supplement.

Malcolm Turnbull demands support from opposition for savings measures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/malcolm-turnbull-demands-support-from-opposition-for-savings-measures>
The supplement was introduced in 2013 to compensate welfare recipients for the 
carbon tax. The government proposes to remove the payment through its omnibus 
savings bill, which it saysdraws together $6.5bn in savings Labor had said it 
would enact if elected in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/malcolm-turnbull-demands-support-from-opposition-for-savings-measures>
.

The letter said cutting the supplement would cut payments to 2.2 million 
people on the lowest incomes including pensioners, sole parents, single-income 
families, carers and Newstart recipients.

It would result in a $4 a week reduction to Newstart, which is already “well 
below the poverty line”.

The letter was signed by the Australian Council of Social Service, the 
Australian Youth AffairsCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>, the Australian 
Unemployed Workers’ Union, Carers Australia, Jobs Australia, the National 
Welfare Rights Network, the National Council of Single Mothers and Their 
Children, People with Disability Australia and the Welfare Rights Centre.

On Friday the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, said it was “humiliating” for 
the treasurer to make changes to the government’s super policy in an effort to 
calm the Liberal backbench.

“[Morrison] should be on the front foot and tell people, the superannuants of 
Australia, those who have invested in good faith under existing rules, just 
what his policy is,” he said.
 