
The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> has made 
clear it is willing to compromise on its $6bn omnibus savings bill, saying it 
must pass parliament to reduce the deficit substantially.

Scott Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> 
said on Monday the government had been talking with Labor, Greens and 
crossbenchers “in good faith” about the bill and voters expected the government 
to get a result.

But the treasurer also kept up pressure on Labor, warning that global ratings 
agencies were watching and had made it clear “it is a matter of getting things 
passed and actioned”.

Malcolm Turnbull cites 'clear economic plan' as biggest win in first year in 
office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/malcolm-turnbull-cites-clear-economic-plan-as-biggest-win-in-first-year-in-office>
“I met them with them last time in Canberra, and I will be meeting with them 
again in the next months overseas, and it will be a good story to tell to say 
we have our budget and we are getting support for savings measures in this 
parliament,” Morrison said.

“That is a test for the parliament, but we are engaging those discussions 
practically, in good faith, as I think the Australian people expect us to, to 
get a result.”

Debate will begin on the $6bn savings package this week, and the Coalition has 
been keeping pressure on Labor to fulfil its pledge to support the savings 
measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/malcolm-turnbull-demands-support-from-opposition-for-savings-measures>
 it made during the election campaign.

Labor has been pushing back, saying the omnibus bill introduced to parliament 
was not the same as the suite of savings measures it said it would support. 
Late last month,after the government was forced to correct a $100m error in the 
bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/31/turnbulls-bid-to-seize-economic-agenda-undermined-by-budget-repair-bill-error>
, Labor said its go-slow approach was justified.

The shadow cabinet will consider the matter before taking it to caucus for 
debate on Tuesday morning. Labor is concerned about a number of measures in the 
bill, including the Coalition’s desire to cut the $1.3bn clean energy 
supplement, which was introduced to cushion the household impact of the carbon 
tax.

If the $4.40-a-week energy supplement is abolished it will make the incomes of 
Newstart recipients go backwards in real terms. Homeless and social welfare 
groups have warnedit could push thousands of people who are already on the 
brink of homelessness into poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/31/living-on-24day-mps-warned-loss-of-welfare-supplement-will-hit-hard>
.

Labor should not support Newstart cuts. It would be a moral and electoral 
mistake | Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/labor-shouldnt-support-newstart-cuts-it-would-be-a-moral-and-electoral-mistake>
A draft Senate committee report on the omnibus bill 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Economics/OmnibusBill2016>
 was circulated on Monday morning, with dissenting reports or additional 
comments required by 11am on Tuesday, although it is understood the reporting 
date may be extended.

Chris Bowen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, the shadow 
treasurer, told Guardian Australia that Labor would have more to say about its 
negotiations with the Coalition once it had gone through its “normal internal 
processes”.


“Labor advocated a fair approach to budget repair prior to the last election 
and is doing so after the election,” he said. “Labor has outlined $80bn in 
savings after the election.

“When it comes to the omnibus legislation, we said our approach will reflect 
the bottom line we took to the election.”
 