
After years of consultations and campaigning, the world has a new plan for 
tackling poverty, inequality and climate change. The sustainable development 
goals wereformally adopted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/25/global-goals-summit-2015-new-york-un-pope-shakira-malala-yousafzai>
 by 193 member states at the UN general assembly, green lighting them to 
replace the millennium development goals, which expire this year. You can 
follow the actionas it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/live/2015/sep/25/un-sustainable-development-summit-2015-goals-sdgs-united-nations-general-assembly-70th-session-new-york-live>
, read how the new pledgeaffects women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/29/leaders-pledge-25bn-to-improve-health-of-women-children-and-adolescents>
 and children, and see howcampaigners turned out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/sep/25/light-the-way-rallies-your-guardianwitness-contributions>
 to mark the new agreement. And if you think you know a few things about the 
new goals, test your knowledge with ourSDGs quiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/25/sustainable-development-summit-2015-quiz-global-goals>
.

World leaders agree sustainable development goals – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/live/2015/sep/25/un-sustainable-development-summit-2015-goals-sdgs-united-nations-general-assembly-70th-session-new-york-live>
In 2005, photographer Nick Danziger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/27/nick-danziger-development-agenda-10-years-lives-in-flux>
 began to create anarchive of photographs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/sep/27/nick-danziger-portraits-lives-flux-revisited-journey-10-years-four-continents>
 documenting the lives of women and children in eight countries around the 
world. He returned five years later, and again in 2015. Had the millennium 
development goals made a difference to their lives? Over the next few weeks, 
we’ll be featuring the families from the countries he photographed, beginning 
withNiger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/27/nick-danziger-window-on-the-world-niger-journey-10-years-four-continents>
.

Elsewhere on the site

 * UN hails impressive gains on education and reducing child mortality in 
Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/28/united-nations-hails-impressive-mdg-gains-on-education-reducing-child-mortality-africa>

 * Cambodian women turn to tech in hope apps can turn tide of gender violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/21/cambodia-womens-rights-gender-violence-apps-safe-agent-008-7-plus-krousar-koumrou>
 * Gambian community project helps women turn waste to worth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/18/the-gambia-recycling-innovation-centre-womens-initiative>
 * China pledges $2bn for development goals and says it will write off debts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/27/china-pledges-2bn-for-development-goals-and-says-it-will-write-off-debts>
 * Bangladesh’s PM rejects claims of repression: ‘I do politics for the people’
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/21/bangladesh-prime-minister-rejects-accusations-of-authoritarian-rule>
Opinion

While many campaigners welcomed the adoption of the sustainable development 
goals, there were also warnings that this new agenda could not be fulfilled if 
countries failed to monitor progress. Speaking on the gender equality targets,
Keiko Nowacka called for greater pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/28/measuring-discrimination-will-bring-the-gender-equality-global-goal-a-step-closer>
 on leaders to build on the statistical advances of the past 15 years, saying 
that “what gets measured, gets done”.

After a global nutrition report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/16/malnutrition-children-under-five-2015-global-nutrition-report-sustainable-development-goals>
 showed improvements in tackling stunting in under-fives, the three co-chairs 
of the group leading the reportcalled for countries to go a step further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/22/malnutrition-has-no-place-in-the-21st-century-global-nutrition-report>
 and tackle malnutrition in all its forms.

And on education, Pauline Rose and Benjamin Alcott laid out their five-point 
plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/22/five-steps-achieving-sustainable-development-goal-of-educating-every-child-in-the-world>
 for achieving the goal of educating every child in the world.

Multimedia

Gallery: A journey across 10 years and four continents – Nick Danziger’s tales 
from Niger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/27/nick-danziger-window-on-the-world-niger-journey-10-years-four-continents>

Podcast: Africa’s children 10 years on – what happened next? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/aug/31/africa-children-10-years-on-podcast>

What you said: top reader comment

On the piece Global goals on women’s rights are a pale imitation of promises 
made in Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/23/global-goals-womens-rights-pale-imitation-beijing-declaration-and-platform-for-action>
,Alina Hangma Limbu wrote:


I agree with the writers. The absence of accountability is the biggest 
weakness that exists. Having policies which are merely implemented further 
worsens the fight of gender equality. In many cases, it is used as solution to 
every demand of gender inequality, as an indicator of government’s achievement, 
although nothing is done to put it into action. Accountability is the only way 
to hold governments responsible to put it into action, else whatever further 
promises are made it will be just a piece of paper! Alina – Nepal

Highlight from the blogosphere

From Poverty to Power: Hello SDGs, what’s your theory of change?  
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/hello-sdgs-whats-your-theory-of-change/> 

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal Development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @MarkC_Anderson 
<https://twitter.com/MarkC_Anderson> and @CarlaOkai 
<https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
Development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 