
The UK aid sector is on the brink of a massive step backwards into the days of 
“projectitis”, as a popular and crucial government funding stream begins to dry 
up.

If you work for any of the 40-odd agencies currently receiving strategic 
funding from the Department for International Development (DfID) the words
Programme Partnership Arrangements 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/programme-partnership-arrangements-ppas> (PPA) 
will make you feel nothing but despair. Launched over15 years ago 
<http://www.mande.co.uk/docs/IDSPPAMainReportFinal.doc>, it was a source of 
unrestricted income that paid forM&E advisers, better financial management, 
innovations in programme delivery and for leveraging further restricted income 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/ICAI-REPORT-DFIDs-Support-for-CSOs-through-PPAs.pdf>
.


Secret Aid Worker: After years in the field, I've lost my compassion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/28/secret-aid-worker-after-years-in-the-field-i-worry-ive-lost-my-compassion>
The strategic nature of the funding meant that it was different from other 
types of funding, where a donor decides which projects to fund and what 
activities must be undertaken in exchange for the grant. It allowed civil 
society to spend wherever the need was greatest and where it would provide the 
most impact in achieving strategic goals.


As well as lowering transaction costs for DfID, PPA freed NGOs from spending 
money on continuously chasing project financing. Instead they were able to 
focus on delivering sustainable development outcomes through activities that 
are hard to fundraise for, such as advocacy.

PPAs were never meant to make up more than 40% of an organisation’s income (
VSO was the only exception <http://iati.dfid.gov.uk/iati_documents/3717202.doc>
), but in reality they make up more than 50% of unrestricted income for many 
organisations. In short, it is over£120m 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwi6xZiisKLOAhXJD8AKHTRhDGoQFggtMAI&url=http%3A%2F%2Ficai.independent.gov.uk%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2FICAI-REPORT-DFIDs-Support-for-CSOs-through-PPAs.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGj1xVVVHNngFYeDZmGG9QS7O-oYw&sig2=Y5DnS72T16ICR6OdXxWuag>
 a year that made development and humanitarian response better, without which 
many organisations will either cease to exist or become faint shadows of their 
former selves.

With this funding such a vital lifeline for the sector, it’s not surprising 
that NGOs are growing increasingly nervous about what will happen in December 
when PPAs are due to end, particularly as there have been constant delays in 
announcing what comes next. This means across the sector projects are being 
stopped, organisations restructured and staff are leaving.

Secret aid worker: fixing the humanitarian and development divide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/05/secret-aid-worker-fixing-the-humanitarian-and-development-divide>
And this is combined with the Brexit headwinds, which will potentially cut off 
EU funding for UK NGOs. Oxfam hasdeclared 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/loss-eu-funding-could-cost-oxfam-40m-year/fundraising/article/1401451http:/www.thirdsector.co.uk/loss-eu-funding-could-cost-oxfam-40m-year/fundraising/article/1401451>
 it stands to lose millions in EU funding, Christian Aid is undertaking a 
cost-saving restructure and Progressiofaces closure 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/progressio-faces-closure-unless-secure-2m-funding/management/article/1401731>
 after 75 years of existence if it does not find £2m funding.

Some are calling the combined result a slow-onset funding disaster 
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/uk-ngos-face-a-slow-onset-funding-disaster-what-can-be-done-to-avoid-it/>
.

Even if your organisation did not have access to PPA funding, you may have 
benefitted from it when partnering with an agency that does receive it.
Evaluations 
<http://icai.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/ICAI-REPORT-DFIDs-Support-for-CSOs-through-PPAs.pdf>
 showed that the PPAs helped millions and they have helped turn the UK into a 
global development superpower, adevelopment Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/18/uk-aid-development-bill-guilt-imperial>
.

Evidence also shows that PPA helped organisations leverage funding from other 
donors by providing co-financing for projects. For example, PPAs enabled
Conciliation Resources <http://www.c-r.org/> to do groundbreaking work building 
peace between India and Pakistan in Kashmir through trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/19/kashmir-trade-india-pakistan-peace>
, work that would have been deemed too risky or too political to fund another 
way.

Civil society organisations are not the only cheerleaders for PPAs. They were 
commended 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=7VCMSWD1xzkC&lpg=PP1&dq=editions:&hl=en> 
by OECD because they allowed recipients to “focus on strategic and substantive 
issues instead of constantly chasing funds”. They were intended to be a 
mechanism that encouraged freedom and innovation, freeing its recipients from 
the tyranny of “projectitis”– the infectious disease whose first symptoms 
include an un-editablelogframe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/17/how-to-write-a-logframe-a-beginners-guide>
 and causes the sufferer to become a sub-contractor for northern governments.

The UK’s National Audit Office (NAO) said of the PPAs in its 2006 report 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2006/07/05061311.pdf> that they 
“offer the prospect of a more strategic approach to long-term development 
challenges, better coordination and reduced transaction costs – where they can 
be based on well-specified and monitorable strategic objectives”. Greater 
predictability, flexibility and reduced administration costs for both DfID and 
the recipient were singled out by the NAO as benefits of the funding.

Secret aid worker: we need to listen to humans, not follow programmes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/15/secret-aid-worker-we-need-to-listen-to-humans-not-follow-programmes>
If you ask a member of the general public who they think delivers UK aid, the 
answer is likely to be charities. However, funding for civil society only makes 
up a small percentage of the £12bn UK aid budget. The PPAs provided a strategic 
nature to this funding and meant the money went further. With the end of the 
PPAs the strategic partnership between civil society and DfID is now under 
threat.

We now face a future of UK aid only funding projects seen to be politically 
safe in western capitals regardless of the development outcomes for the 
poorest. This “projectitis” is exactly what donors agreed to do away with just 
a few months ago at the World Humanitarian Summit. Theysaid they 
<http://www.irinnews.org/analysis/2016/05/24/grand-bargain-big-deal> “aspire to 
achieve a global target of 30% of humanitarian contributions that is 
non-earmarked or softly earmarked by 2020”.

The end of the PPAs is a step in the wrong direction for the millions of the 
poorest people in the world.


Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here areinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 