
New York fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/new-york-fashion-week> has a new 
catchphrase: “Ready to wear – ready to go.” The see-now-buy-now mantra that is 
revolutionising the industry started in London, withBurberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/11/burberry-nods-bowie-menswear-show-reclaims-camel-checked-past>
’s unilateral abolition of the traditional six-month wait between a catwalk 
show and clothes arriving in store. But it was inevitable that New York, a city 
where instant gratification and 24-hour delivery are a way of life, would step 
up and own it.

The designer Michael Kors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/may/20/michael-kors-bags-afforable-luxury>
 has a talent for pithy enunciations of where fashion is at. (“Ultimately, rich 
and pretty is what women want,” he pronounced at the height of last decade’s 
pre-financial crash mania for status dresses and It bags.)

This season, he’s into instaglam. Seven key garments from the collection shown 
atNew York fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/new-york-fashion-week> on Wednesday, as 
well as two bag styles and two shoe styles, will be available to buy instantly. 
“Our customer doesn’t think in terms of seasons, anyway,” said Kors at a press 
conference before his catwalk show. “She just thinks about what works for her 
life.”

But Kors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/19/michael-kors-new-york-fashion-week-aspirational-handbags>
 will as yet stop short of a full see-now-buy-now upending of the calendar, 
with the rest of these catwalk pieces still not arriving in store for five 
months. The designer said he wanted the immediately available pieces to be 
“like a trailer for a film. It can’t give away the whole plot, or you don’t go 
see the film.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnew-york-fashion-week-michael-kors-ready-to-wear-fall-2016-collection-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb780f32c05ed863e6f24416297c144afade672%2F0_0_2825_1883%2F2825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=See%20it%2C%20buy%20it%3A%20pr%C3%AAt-%C3%A0-porter%20comes%20to%20New%20York%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnew-york-fashion-week-michael-kors-ready-to-wear-fall-2016-collection-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=See%20it%2C%20buy%20it%3A%20pr%C3%AAt-%C3%A0-porter%20comes%20to%20New%20York%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnew-york-fashion-week-michael-kors-ready-to-wear-fall-2016-collection-designer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb780f32c05ed863e6f24416297c144afade672%2F0_0_2825_1883%2F2825.jpg>
 Key items from Michael Kors’s latest collection will be immediately available 
to buy in shops. Photograph: Eduardo Munoz/Reuters 
The Hollywood spin is classic Kors, but the reality is more prosaic. However 
keen Kors is to fulfil customer demand for immediate gratification, he cannot 
fully commit to the new business model until questions about how the system 
works for department store buyers and glossy magazines, whose schedules rely on 
a time delay between catwalk and retail, have been ironed out.

This catwalk show, staged in a glossy white studio high above Tribeca, hinted 
at an interesting possible side-effect of fashion’s changing timeframe. 
Designing clothes that would be hanging on rails in his boutique on the 
afternoon of the same day they were shown on the catwalk seemed to shift 
something in Kors’s mindset, so that the clothes, while never lacking the swish 
and polish that his customer loves, were noticeably more wearable. Shoes were 
walkable, with lower heels and wider toes than usual. Almost everything had 
sleeves.

Michael Kors dresses America’s wealthiest women in arctic fox and ostrich 
feathers, while steering a global fashion empire whose ubiquitous handbags for 
around the £250 mark have made him a billionaire. His formula is to take the 
on-trend look of the moment and give it a private-jet upgrade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnew-york-fashion-week-michael-kors-ready-to-wear-fall-2016-collection-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5401775f51edaa725166a3fe40ce57dfc44ac042%2F0_234_3498_2099%2F3498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=See%20it%2C%20buy%20it%3A%20pr%C3%AAt-%C3%A0-porter%20comes%20to%20New%20York%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnew-york-fashion-week-michael-kors-ready-to-wear-fall-2016-collection-designer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=See%20it%2C%20buy%20it%3A%20pr%C3%AAt-%C3%A0-porter%20comes%20to%20New%20York%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnew-york-fashion-week-michael-kors-ready-to-wear-fall-2016-collection-designer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5401775f51edaa725166a3fe40ce57dfc44ac042%2F0_234_3498_2099%2F3498.jpg>
 Catwalk presentation from the Michael Kors Fall/Winter 2016 collection. 
Photograph: Eduardo Munoz/Reuters 
This season, that means trousers cropped to just above the ankle bone, worn 
with chunky-heeled loafers. The pussybow blouse, star piece of myriad recent 
nerd-chic catwalk collections, appeared here as an elegant silk shirt dress, 
which could have been taken fromJackie Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/03/polo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice>
’s wardrobe. The pleated skirt, a staple item of 2016, is scissored into 
vertical ribbons from hem to upper thigh, a style usually called a “carwash” 
skirt – but rebranded here, with classic Kors panache, as the more elegant 
“streamer skirt.”


 