
Every year at about this time, newspapers love to identify the biggest-selling 
Christmas presents – those sudden surprise hits that have desperate shoppers 
combing internet stores for hours or simply fighting each other in Toys R Us.

This year, among other candidates, is a £40 wireless version of the Sega Mega 
Drive, the classic 1988 games console, famous for Sonic the Hedgehog. According 
to Argos, sales of the retro gadget, which includes 80 built-in games (although 
only 40 are Mega Drive classics, the rest are generic mini-games like 
solitaire) and a cartridge port so you can use any original game carts you have 
lying around, have risen by 400% this month. While we’re all supposed to be 
saving up for cutting-edge machines like the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, some 
families will be gathered around a very different audio-visual experience come 
25 December.

Of course, cheap retro consoles have been around for several years. You can 
buy a version of the legendary Atari 2600 that fits into a single joystick and 
lets you play games like Pong and Breakout until ... well, until you realise 
why people don’t play those games anymore. There is now even a retro console 
called theSpectrum Vega <http://retro-computers.co.uk/>, based on the old ZX 
Spectrum computer.

In a lot of ways, this is all about simple, honest nostalgia. We’re now in an 
era where the first generation of gamers have grown up, had kids and maybe 
fallen a bit behind on where gaming technology is going. An old games console, 
like a favourite band or movie, is a pleasurable way to revisit and capture 
some of the fun and spirit of youth. For many people my age, Sonic is their New 
Kids on the Block; Star Fox is their Star Wars.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbun8tA_ksZw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbun8tA_ksZw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbun8tA_ksZw&media=>
But now that retro hardware is simulating the 16bit age – the era of the Mega 
Drive, SuperNintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> 
Entertainment System and Neo Geo – something different is happening. It’s not 
just about reliving memories anymore, it’s about getting a specific and very 
valid gaming experience. Indeed, the renewed interest in these machines very 
much reflects the return of the vinyl record: sure, there’s a nostalgic 
component, but you’re also getting a very distinct and singular experience that 
holds its own in the digital age.

The Mega Drive, for example, was expertly designed to recreate the arcade 
games of the era. With its Motorola 68000 CPU and dedicated video display 
processor, it could handle big animating characters (or sprites) and detailed 
scrolling backgrounds with ease. At the time, beat’em-up titles such as Golden 
Axe and Altered Beast looked amazing – gamers had never seen anything like this 
in the home. Meanwhile, the technically superior SNES brought rich, deep colour 
palettes and music of great emotional resonance to its wonderful platformers 
and role-playing adventures. We were staggered.

And the thing is – they all still look beautiful. 

In the modern era, the rise of the independent games scene (facilitated by 
digital distribution and cheap development kits) has seen a revival of 2D pixel 
art. Games such as Fez, Towerfall, Super Time Force and Shovel Knight have 
discovered that this remains a gorgeous, meaningful aesthetic, that chunky 
sprites and hand-drawn backgrounds are not nostalgic, they’re poetic. They’re 
just a different way of doing and seeing things. “Pixel art doesn’t always 
spell everything out,” said indie developer Adam Saltsman to tech site Verge 
when it wrote aboutthe pixel game phenomenon 
<http://www.theverge.com/2014/7/3/5865849/pixel-art-is-here-to-stay>. “It can 
be pretty minimalist and evocative that way. Often when you are looking at 
pixel art you are seeing more than is actually there.”

But we don’t need to play contemporary indie titles to understand the beauty 
of pixel art – we can see it in the original 16bit titles. Mega Drive games 
such as Gunstar Heroes, Comix Zone and Dynamite Headdy, and SNES greats such as 
Donkey Kong Country, Chrono Trigger and Yoshi’s Island show an incredible 
artistry, an intricacy of detail, colour and animation that still have immense 
power. While the console games of the 1970s and early 80s do have a minimalist 
appeal, it is the 16bit titles that brought us into the age of naturalistic 
worlds and human characters. It was the Mega Drive and SNES that formed the 
foundations of modern console game visuals (even in terms of 3D polygonal 
content – see Virtua Racing on the Mega Drive and Star Fox on the SNES).

However, part of the appeal is that these machines are resolutely not modern. 
The 16bit consoles were the last generation that was just about games. After 
this came the PlayStation, the Saturn, the 3DO – multimedia devices intended as 
CD and movie players as well as gaming hardware. Then we entered the connected 
era, with its endless system updates and patches. When you put a cartridge into 
the SNES or Mega Drive, the game boots up in seconds and you’re in – no 
waiting, no updates. Bam. You’re playing a video game. And once you’re in, you 
get the whole experience, a complete product. There were rarely any bugs, there 
was no downloadable content. Everything the game had was on that chunk of 
plastic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D41g6YrbRfYo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D41g6YrbRfYo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D41g6YrbRfYo&media=>
These were also machines designed to be seen and admired. Modern consoles want 
to disappear into your living room entertainment setup, providing just another 
box to spew content onto your LCD display. Designed by Mitsushige Shiraiwa, the 
Mega Drive drew inspiration from mid-80s high-end audio equipment and muscle 
cars, while Masayuki Uemura, who lead the SNES team, pictured a sort of 
family-friendly computer, welcoming and unintimidating to non-tech heads. Both 
systems have character and presence, and the act of inserting a cartridge – 
like putting on a vinyl record – is pleasingly tactile. Even user habits such 
as blowing on the cart to clean it (not recommended) are analogous to the 
rituals around playing and enjoying records.

Every gamer should try to experience the Mega Drive, SNES, Neo Geo or PC 
Engine – pure systems, built in an era dominated by arcade game design, by 
levels and bosses and fixed save points and wonderful 2D graphics. But I would 
always recommend the original systems. Modern versions don’t contain the same 
hardware; instead they emulate it, which leads to differences in speed and 
quality of the visuals and means you won’t be able to play any special carts 
that added their own hardware features. You can get a Mega Drive or SNES for 
about £30 on eBay; but you’ll also need a CRT television or monitor (Sony 
Trinitron is a good bet), because this is an analogue experience.

It is analogue, but it is not ancient or nostalgic or dead. It is just 
different. You can still sit with friends and play Street Fighter II, Sonic the 
Hedgehog 2 or Micro Machines and have a fun, exciting and demanding experience; 
and the stories that drive adventures like Mother, Ys and Phantasy Star are 
just as compelling as those behind contemporary RPGs.

In fact, you will find in the 16bit machines a direct throughline of design 
sensibilities that leads straight into the most modern and forward-thinking of 
games. This is where the future as we know it began.
 