
Uber has launched an aggressive battle with California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> over its controversial 
self-driving cars, with regulators and consumer advocates accusing the 
corporation of flagrantly violating the law, endangering public safety and 
mistreating drivers.

The intense fight with the state – which ignited hours after numerous 
self-driving carswere caught 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/dec/15/uber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
 runningred lights <https://twitter.com/AnnieGaus/status/809092789388472320> in 
Uber’s home town – has exposed what critics say are the unethical and illegal 
tactics that the company has repeatedly used to grow its business.

Uber blames humans for self-driving car traffic offenses as California orders 
halt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-self-driving-cars-run-red-lights-san-francisco>
The ride-sharing company, which launched semi-autonomous vehicles in San 
Francisco without permits this week, was ordered by the California department 
of motor vehicles (DMV)to immediately remove the cars from the road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-self-driving-cars-run-red-lights-san-francisco>
 or face legal action.

But Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, which has not publicly 
responded to the state’s demands, blamed the traffic light violations on “human 
error” and suspended the drivers who were monitoring the cars. This bold 
deflection of blame further highlights the corporation’s refusal to take 
responsibility for potential faults in its technology and raises questions 
about the dangers of prematurely rolling out self-driving vehicles.


“How many people are they going to kill before they understand they’re not 
doing the right thing?” said John M Simpson, privacy project director with 
Consumer Watchdog, a non-profit that has called for Uber to face consequences 
for side-stepping regulations. “If you’re going to use public highways as your 
own private laboratory, you’ve got an obligation to follow the rules.”

Uber’s open defiance of California regulators marks the latest case of a 
“sharing economy” corporationignoring government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/apr/18/uber-airbnb-sharing-economy-tougher-rules-australia>
 under the guise of “disruption” and “innovation”. Uber has long claimed that 
it is a technology “platform” and not a transportation company and thus does 
not have toclassify its drivers as employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/21/uber-driver-settlement-labor-dispute-california-massachusetts>
 orfollow traditional taxicab regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/04/uber-challenged-taxi-too-late-to-regulate-it>
.

That strategy has resulted in more than 70 lawsuits 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/2016/07/04/uber-battling-more-than-70-lawsuits-in-federal-courts/>
 in federal courts andhefty settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/13/uber-lawsuits-619-million-ride-hailing-app>
, along with claims from opponents that the company isabusing workers’ rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/23/uber-drivers-union-settlement-contractors>
 and failing to ensure thesafety of riders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/10/uber-pledges-improve-vetting-drivers-dallas-assault>
.

The San Francisco self-driving car scandal centers on Uber’s Volvo XC90s, 
which cannavigate on their own 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/technology/2016/sep/26/uber-self-driving-passengers-pittsburgh-injury-death-waiver>
 while licensed drivers sit at the wheel and take control when necessary. The 
company firstpiloted semi-autonomous vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/18/uber-riders-self-driving-cars?utm_term=Autofeed&CMP=twt_a-technology_b-gdntech#link_time=1471549082>
 in Pittsburgh in August.


In Pennsylvania, some drivers responded to the program with shock and concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/19/uber-self-driving-pittsburgh-what-drivers-think>
 and wondered how quickly they could lose their jobs to full automation.

The abrupt rollout in San Francisco and subsequent suspensions has led some 
California drivers to question whether Uber will toss them aside when the 
technology malfunctions or drivers aren’t properly trained and make a mistake.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20self-driving%20car%20drives%20through%20red%20light%20in%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20self-driving%20car%20drives%20through%20red%20light%20in%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video&media=>
Uber self-driving car drives through red light in San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/dec/15/uber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
“Uber itself is a very unethical company,” said Travis Taborek, a 26-year-old 
Bay Area resident, who drives full time for Uber and its competitor, Lyft. “If 
you launch technology like this on the scale of a city, then you need to go 
through proper channels. That’s how people are protected.”

In the long term, he added, “I am concerned self-driving cars are going to put 
a lot of people out of work.”

One San Francisco Uber driver, who requested anonymity for fear of 
retaliation, followed a self-driving car for about 15 minutes on Wednesday and 
filmed its movements. The footage shows multiple minor violations or 
potentially dangerous moves, such as failing to fully brake at a stop sign or 
cutting off a bus.

“I’d expect better behavior from a company with such clout in the 
transportation industry,” he said.

Uber has argued 
<https://newsroom.uber.com/san-francisco-your-self-driving-uber-is-arriving-now/>
 that it does not need permits since its cars aren’t fully autonomous, though 
the DMV noted that 20 companies have followed proper procedures and were 
approved to test self-driving vehicles in California.

Uber did not respond to repeated inquiries about the state’s order and lawsuit 
threat. In a statement to the Guardian, a spokesperson claimed that two cars 
running red lights were not part of the pilot and weren’t carrying customers.

“These incidents were due to human error. This is why we believe so much in 
making the roads safer by building self-driving Ubers.” A spokesperson also 
claimed the cars require “human monitoring and intervention in many conditions, 
including bad weather”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fuber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8106da18bc1c0434aae27852b093f877bd41e6a%2F0_78_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Self-driving%20cars%3A%20Uber's%20open%20defiance%20of%20California%20shines%20light%20on%20brazen%20tactics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fuber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Self-driving%20cars%3A%20Uber%27s%20open%20defiance%20of%20California%20shines%20light%20on%20brazen%20tactics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fuber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8106da18bc1c0434aae27852b093f877bd41e6a%2F0_78_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 An Uber driverless car is displayed in a garage in San Francisco. Photograph: 
Eric Risberg/AP 
Experts note that Uber has an obvious financial interest in a system with 
minimal regulations. By ignoring California regulators, the corporation is 
attempting to preemptively create a framework in which self-driving cars are 
treated similarly to traditional vehicles, said Arun Sundararajan, a New York 
University business professor and expert on the sharing economy.


“The act of asking for permission is sort of a tacit admission that this needs 
to be regulated,” he said. “They are playing a long game here … They’re trying 
to define what the regulatory space is going to look like.”

Michael Gumora, a longtime San Francisco Uber driver who runs a website called 
RideshareReport.com <http://www.ridesharereport.com/>, said it was a public 
relations ploy to announce suspensions and say the drivers erred when the 
automation system clearly didn’t work properly.

“It’s a human error, but the vehicle and the technology didn’t compensate,” he 
said. “The technology itself wasn’t able to avoid running the red light.”

Taborek said publicly admonishing the operators was another example of Uber 
mistreating drivers. “I would take anything Uber says with massive grains of 
salt ... I’d be willing to bet good money that the technology is at fault.”

Uber’s response is reminiscent of statements from Tesla earlier this year 
after a driverusing its “autopilot” technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk>
 died in a crash. The corporation denied responsibility anddefended its 
technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/01/tesla-driver-killed-autopilot-self-driving-car-harry-potter>
 even though the car’s systemfailed to detect a truck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/02/elon-musk-self-driving-tesla-autopilot-joshua-brown-risks>
 in front of it.

“You put unsafe vehicles on the road and then you blame a human,” said 
Simpson, who argued that San Francisco police should respond to Uber’s rogue 
operations by impounding the vehicles operating without a permit.

Consumer Watchdog also called for criminal charges against Uber’s CEO Travis 
Kalanick for violating DMV requirements.

“This is essentially driving without a license,” Simpson said. “It’s really 
unconscionable.”

Contact the author: sam.levin@theguardian.com
 