
HMRC’s focus on workers’ employment status could shift the spotlight on to 
other firms with large self-employed workforces. Several firms are already 
facing action from workers taking their cases to employment tribunals.

According to one employment expert, the timing of the HMRC intervention 
against Hermes is important because it follows the government announcement this 
month of areview of workers’ rights and practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-hires-former-tony-blair-policy-boss-to-review-workers-rights>
 by Matthew Taylor, a former adviser to Tony Blair. An employment tribunal is 
also considering whetherdrivers for taxi-hailing tech firm Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/19/uber-drivers-court-tribunal-self-employed-uk-employment-law>
 should be recognised as company staff.

Delivery giant Hermes faces HMRC inquiry into low pay allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/delivery-giant-hermes-faces-hmrc-inquiry-into-low-pay-allegations>
Matt Gingell, an employment specialist at the Gannons, said: “This comes at a 
time when the government has asked Matthew Taylor to do a review of the law and 
we are waiting for theUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> 
judgment, so companies must be a bit concerned about the grey area of status, 
and whether people they say are self-employed really are.”

Uber

The firm uses about 30,000 drivers in London, all of whom are designated as 
self-employed. In July,two drivers took a case to an employment tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/19/uber-drivers-court-tribunal-self-employed-uk-employment-law>
 arguing that they should be classed as workers, meaning they were entitled to 
holiday pay and the national living wage. They said that their work was 
controlled by the firm as they are only told the destination of a job when they 
pick someone up, and they were not allowed to send another driver in their 
place – two features of employment. If the ruling goes in their favour, 17 
other drivers will also be deemed to be workers and entitled to compensation, 
and HMRC may decide to take a closer look at the firm. The tribunal’s ruling is 
due imminently.


Uber said the case only involves a very small number of its 30,000 drivers and 
that it is a technology company rather than a transport provider, working with 
“driver partners” and offering them flexibility to control how much and often 
they work.

CitySprint, Excel, Addison Lee and eCourier

The four firms are facing tribunal cases brought by cycle couriers working in 
London who argue they are not really self-employed. Currently, they are classed 
as “independent contractors”, but say they should be recognised as workers 
because: they tend to work for one company at a time only; are subject to the 
control of their managers; and have no say over their rates of pay. One 
courier, Andrew Boxer,said that he carried a company ID for Excel at all times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/30/job-pay-workers-gig-economy>. “I 
don’t have any independence as such,” he said. The first case, against City 
Sprint, will start on 22 November and the other three will follow in the new 
year.

The courier companies say the tribunal claims are unfounded. Excel has 
previously said its London couriers “operate as independent subcontractors”.

Deliveroo

The takeaway food delivery service has more than 3,000 riders around the UK on 
contracts that say they are self-employed and cannot contest their status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/25/deliveroo-workers-contracts-ban-access-to-employment-tribunals>
. Employment lawyers have dismissed this clause as unenforceable. A strike in 
the summer over changes to the way riders were paid to deliver food prompted 
the government to state that workers’ status was determined“by the reality of 
the working relationship and not the type of contract they have signed” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/14/deliveroo-told-it-must-pay-workers-minimum-wage>
. It also led drivers to join forces to call for better rights. Next week, the 
Independent Workers of Great Britain union is holding a meeting for Deliveroo 
riders to discuss how to win better rights and be paid the London living wage 
of £9.40 per hour if they are based in the capital.

Deliveroo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deliveroo> has defended its 
employment terms, saying: “We provide a platform for people to work with us on 
a freelance basis. This allows riders to work flexibly around another 
commitment, like studying or other work. We’ve worked with legal experts to 
design our contracts to reflect that.”

Gig economy

Michael Newman, an employment lawyer at Leigh Day, said there were other “gig 
economy” businesses that depend heavily on self-employed workers. “There are 
other smaller businesses in different sectors, such as cleaning, that tend to 
go under the radar,” he said. “People who are working for these are likely to 
face the same issues of no holiday or sick pay, or not earning the living wage.”

Newman said that these companies were unlikely to be too concerned about the 
latest development atHMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc>. “Until 
they see some kind of enforcement in place it will be business as usual,” he 
said.
 