
Who doesn’t want to be their own boss? Since the dawn of industrial 
capitalism, gaining independence over our livelihoods has been the hope for 
many workers. Instead of being told what to do by employers, afraid of what 
will happen if we say no, it could be us calling the shots, deciding when and 
how to get things done. Making a living would be so much easier and more 
pleasant…

If that was the dream, welcome to the nightmare.

Self-employed earn less than in 2001 – and will be hit by welfare cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/self-employed-earn-less-than-2001-hit-welfare-cuts>
Self-employment is rising in many economies. In the UK it has grown by a 
staggering 45% since 2002. But here’s the catch. The chances of becoming the 
next uber-wealthy Richard Branson are fairly slim. Arecent study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/self-employed-earn-less-than-2001-hit-welfare-cuts>
 has found that the average self-employed contractor is nowpaid less than in 
1995 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37678065>.

So how did the dream of becoming our own boss turn into such a bad deal for 
all the construction workers, IT consultants, nurses and courier drivers who 
believed that being self-employed would be a path to economic freedom? In short,
neoliberalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
.

Economists who worked in this tradition, including Milton Friedman and Gary 
Becker, believed that everyone ought to behave like mini-corporations, 
individually competing on the open market. Employees were simply capitalists in 
disguise. Friedman was spellbound by the notion. Perhaps he’d found the 
ultimate retort to the old Marxist battle cry to seize the means of production. 
If it turned out that workers were already their own means of production, the 
tension between labour and capital magically disappears. Just like that.

Of course he was wrong, which didn’t stop the idea catching on in a big way 
from the 2000s onwards. All of sudden, we were living in “Free Agent Nation 
<http://www.danpink.com/books/free-agent-nation/>”, where footloose super-temps 
and creative freelancers were transforming old industries into vibrant 
knowledge economies. And making a fortune in the process. Everyone was 
potentially an entrepreneur, mothers at home or “mumpreneurs”, andeven kids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/09/aspirational-parents-children-elite>
.

Unfortunately, the move to reclassify people as self-employed follows a very 
simple formula: it helps reduce labour costs and maximise profits for 
businesses that would rather use contractors than a permanent workforce. This 
includes Uber,Hermes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/hermes-couriers-paying-staff-less-than-living-wage>
, universities and many other organisations.

The business logic is rather brutal. If you’re self-employed then all the 
costs that a normal employer would cover must now be paid by you – including 
training, uniforms and vehicles, not to mention basic provisions for pensions 
and sick pay. This is the case even when a contractor works for the firm on a 
de facto permanent basis.

A Hermes courier in Yorkshire recently described the predicament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/18/life-as-a-hermes-driver-they-offload-all-the-risk-on-to-the-courier>
. He spent two days training with another contractor, which he wasn’t paid for. 
Once on the payroll, he calculated his income to be about £4 per hour before 
expenses. And after figuring these expenses into the equation the bleak reality 
became clear:

The Hermes model offloads all the risk on to the “independent” courier, but 
the potential reward is absolutely limited. You are responsible for the 
packages, any problems with the system, your car, paying for your holiday time, 
covering any sickness. He learned that a local postman had recently had an 
operation on his hand as a result of an injury at work. He had five weeks off 
on sick pay. Hermes couriers don’t get any sick pay. The postal workers often 
help out the couriers because they feel sorry for them. They know the Hermes 
couriers get a raw deal.

Most self-employed workers find themselves perilously dependent on an 
employer, and with few rights or protections

The problem is that successive governments have completely swallowed the 
“entrepreneurial society” propaganda that is spouted by neoliberal economists. 
As a result, the laws and regulations that protect the permanent workforce 
don’t apply here. Not even the minimum wage. Clearly this has been exploited by 
employers.

When a major budget airline 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/you-thought-ryanairs-attendants-had-it-bad-wait-til-you-hear-about-their-pilots-8621681.html>
 hit the headlines over its hiring of pilots as self-employed contractors, many 
were surprised that highly trained professionals were being subjected to 
zero-hours contracts. The trend wasn’t only affecting university students 
working part-time at a pub, but people who fly jetliners.

Most worrying about the case was the amount of pressure the pilots experienced 
to work regardless of whether they were ill or fatigued. They wouldn’t be paid 
otherwise. The pilots protested by circulating a “safety petition” to other 
workers. Then senior management issued a warning: “any pilot who participates 
in this so-called safety petition will be guilty of gross misconduct and will 
be liable for dismissal”.

Perhaps the message cuts to the heart of the self-employment movement. It’s 
all about power. While some may end up on top, most workers find themselves 
perilously dependent on an employer, and with few rights or protections, not to 
mention less pay.

What can be done? Well, the airline pilots had the right idea. The only way to 
rebalance what is now a very unequal power relationship is to collectivise. 
Workers atDeliveroo <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37076706> and Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/21/uber-driver-settlement-labor-dispute-california-massachusetts>
 have arrived at similar conclusions.

The so-called “gig economy” sounds glamorous and fun, like trendy graphic 
designers working from a laptop in a Shoreditch cafe. Sadly it’s turned out to 
be something of a bad gig for many struggling to make ends meet. The conflict 
between workers and capitalism hasn’t disappeared. It might have got even wor

 * You can catch up on the discussion we had on this article and others on our 
Your Opinions thread, which 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/your-opinions-the-perils-of-globalisation-and-the-future-of-the-tory-left>
is now closed.  