
Chris Bowen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen> this week set out 
his plans for winning the fight against the rise of protectionism. It’s a fight 
in which those in favour of free trade have been shown over the past year – 
whether in the Brexit vote or the inability to counter Donald Trump – to have 
been completely inept. Among the best aspect of Bowen’s plan of attack is that 
he has realised one of the reasons for this ineptness has been an over reliance 
on data and facts.

The government’s position on trade essentially operates from the belief that 
the benefits of free trade are obvious, and thus it is also obvious that more 
free trade – in whatever form – is better. Such a position has led to the 
government pursuing free trade agreements with eagerness and delight.

Australia eager to start free trade talks with Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/australia-eager-to-start-free-trade-talks-with-britain>
The problem however is that the data that demonstrates the benefits of free 
trade is actually pretty complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/11/there-are-economic-benefits-to-free-trade-but-not-for-everyone>
, and the data that demonstrates the benefits of free trade agreements is 
actuallypretty skint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2014/nov/20/why-isnt-the-government-being-held-to-account-on-the-china-free-trade-deal>
.

Little wonder that people might think it’s all a load of hogwash.

Two weeks ago, the treasurer, Scott Morrison, noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/aug/29/scott-morrisons-car-crash-logic-and-the-real-story-behind-the-taxed-nots>
 the resistance to free trade and suggested that the government “must face up 
to their concerns and address them”.

And he addressed them by saying that “there is more than three trillion worth 
of foreign investment in Australia today” and that exports “delivered around 
$363bn to our economy and accounted for around 19% of our GDP and around 1.3% 
of annual growth”.

I wrote an honours thesis on foreign direct investment, and even I was rolling 
my eyes.

And now, the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, has set out his argument for free 
trade ina speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/07/chris-bowen-warns-against-populist-stances-on-immigration-and-trade>
 titled, “The Case for Openness 
<http://www.chrisbowen.net/media-centre/speeches.do?newsId=7209>”. He too 
quoted some of the data that pointed to the benefits of free trade, but 
crucially he argued that they alone were not enough.

He suggested that those in favour of free trade needed to win “the evidence 
war, the passion war and the fairness and inclusivity war”. It was a crucial 
acknowledgment that the voice from above, reminding us of the glory days of the 
reform of the 1980s, is not going to cut it.

I love facts as much as anyone, but the problem with the benefits of free 
trade is that you mostly are talking about cheaper imports.

As Bowen noted in his speech, the price of computers, TVs and stereos has 
declined by 90% over the last 25 years. That sounds great, but when you get to 
other facts, like for example that we pay less for cars than we did in the 
early 1990s, it doesn’t take too much thinking to realise the impact of this on 
the local car industry and its workers.

That doesn’t mean free trade is bad but it does highlight how there are 
winners and losers – and the data focuses mostly on the winners.

Bowen also noted that trade is not the only reason for declining work in such 
industries as large-scale manufacturing, but that automation is also playing a 
large and increasing role – something which greater trade protectionism will do 
nothing to halt.

But this mix of trade, automation, declining employment, and a rise in the 
lower-paid service sectors, also causes people to believe that free trade only 
benefits the few, and also leads to inequality.

This is not necessarily the case.

A study this week out of the USA 
<http://voxeu.org/article/drivers-inequality-trade-versus-tax-rates#.V9Ijxwjz9qQ.twitter>
 argues that trade is not what causes inequality, but rather, tax and welfare 
policies are to blame.

The impact of such a finding is implicit in Bowen’s argument that “the more 
people feel they benefit from our economy, the more they will embrace the 
system which allows it to grow.”

It means you can’t unlink welfare and tax policy from trade policy.

Free trade is viewed as economic catnip, but the benefits are not for everyone 
| Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/11/there-are-economic-benefits-to-free-trade-but-not-for-everyone>
Arguing for more free trade while also pledging a crackdown on welfare and 
bemoaning the “taxed-nots”,as Morrison did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/aug/29/scott-morrisons-car-crash-logic-and-the-real-story-behind-the-taxed-nots>
, is just self-defeating.

But the path Bowen has chosen, while admirable, remains a rocky one. The 
difficulty is evident in his speech. He spent much more time talking of the 
“evidence war” than he did the “passion, fairness and inclusivity wars”.

Similarly he offered little concrete solutions other than the anodyne 
suggestions of “more investment in relevant education, training and industry 
plans”.

It’s why the ALP should reverse its election commitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/coalitions-plan-to-abolish-welfare-supplement-attacked-by-australia-institute>
 to cut the $4.40/week energy supplement for those on Newstart.

Since the global financial crisis, the drive towards protectionism has 
gathered pace, but it is wrong to believe it is just a fight about trade. As 
Bowen argues, it is also about inequality and inclusiveness.

Quoting data and graphs alone will not further the cause, but neither will 
pursuing welfare and tax policies that foster inequality, all the while 
suggesting that yet another free trade agreement will somehow make everything 
better for all.
 