
The Turnbull government has persuaded the Liberal Democratic party Senator 
David Leyonjhelm to support the backpackers tax at 15% after suffering an 
embarrassing Senate defeat on the proposal just minutes after the passage of 
legislation restoring the construction industry watchdog.

The government is attempting to claw back numbers for a 15% tax after Labor, 
the Greens and crossbenchers amended the rate of the backpacker tax to 10.5% on 
Wednesday morning.

The ambush prompted the finance minister, Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, to declare that 
the government would not accept the result, so the rate would revert to the 
original 32.5% on 1 January if the issue continued without resolution.

Senate votes down 15% backpacker tax after passing ABCC bill – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/30/malcolm-tunbull-george-brandis-bill-shorten-nick-xenophon-building-watchdog-politics-live>
Cormann also declared after the vote that Labor had perpetrated a “cunning 
ploy” and would wear the backpacker tax issue like a “rose of crowns”.

The Senate had earlier passed legislation restoring the Australian Building 
and Construction Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/coalition-agrees-to-new-procurement-rules-and-jobs-test-to-help-pass-abcc-bill>
 – one of the government’s triggers for the July double-dissolution election – 
after accepting a raft of amendments from various crossbenchers in late-night 
debate on Tuesday.

The government had been working round the clock to secure the positive ABCC 
vote, which was intended to close out the political year for Malcolm Turnbull 
on a high. The chamber then moved on to what the government anticipated would 
be a routine consideration of the backpacker tax legislation.

Last week opposition parties including One Nation combined in the Senate to 
lower the backpacker tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/senate-votes-for-jacqui-lambies-suggestion-of-105-backpacker-tax>
 from the government’s preferred 19% rate to the Tasmanian independent Jacqui 
Lambie’s suggestion of 10.5%.

The government rejected 10.5% in the House of Representatives and later 
compromised again to set a 15% rate, which went through the lower house earlier 
this week.

During the Senate vote on the 15% rate on Wednesday, Labor secured support 
from the One Nation senator Rod Culleton, who broke with his party bloc to 
lower the rate to 10.5%. Lambie held firm to vote for 10.5%, as did the Justice 
party senator,Derryn Hinch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/derryn-hinch>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Flabor-overturns-backpacker-tax-compromise-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labor%20overturns%20backpacker%20tax%20compromise%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Flabor-overturns-backpacker-tax-compromise-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labor%20overturns%20backpacker%20tax%20compromise%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Flabor-overturns-backpacker-tax-compromise-video&media=>
Labor overturns backpacker tax compromise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/nov/30/labor-overturns-backpacker-tax-compromise-video>
After the vote Labor declared the Senate had spoken and the government needed 
to accept the verdict of the chamber. “The Senate has spoken not once, but 
twice,” the shadow treasurer,Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, told reporters.

“This has been back to the House of Representatives and the Senate, the Senate 
has made it clear – the Senate has voted twice for a 10.5% tax rate, theLabor 
party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> and others, the 
fact of the matter is the government can’t get 19 or 15 through the parliament, 
so they should accept 10.5%.”

The shadow agriculture minister, Joel Fitzgibbon, predicted a Mexican standoff 
in the House of Representatives on Wednesday afternoon, where the government 
would attempt to blame Labor “for this chaos”. Fitzgibbon said if the tax 
reverted to the 32.5% it was “this government’s rate”.

Senate passes building watchdog bill after changes to boost Australian jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/coalition-agrees-to-new-procurement-rules-and-jobs-test-to-help-pass-abcc-bill>
“It’s obvious we can’t compete with other countries at 32.5%,” he said. “It’s 
clear now by the government’s own admission that we can’t compete at 19, and it 
was also clear to us that 15 is also too high. That’s what many, many growers 
were telling us.”

Hinch told Sky News he was intent on sticking to a 10.5% rate. “Right now I’m 
on 10.5%,” he said. “Right now I’m sticking to my guns.”

The senator said the government had tried to convince him to vote for 15% in 
the chamber but he had been intent on expressing his independence. “I’m not on 
the government’s side, I’m an independent senator,” Hinch said.

Culleton acknowledged after the vote that One Nation’s position was a tax rate 
of 15% but his own view was the tax should have been set at 10.5%.
 