
“Which contraceptive protects you against pregnancy and sexually transmitted 
diseases?” In a flurry, the group of young people crowded into a room in the 
Marie Stopes centre in Kathmandu grab cards on which “condom” is written, and 
shout out their answers. There’ll be a prize for the quickest and the loudest.

It’s a warm Saturday morning in the Putalisadak district of Nepal’s capital, 
and the young men and women are attending a sex education class – part of a 
three-year programme, funded by Australian aid, to get young people talking 
about sex.

'I just got trapped': Nepal tries to expand girls' horizons beyond marriage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/18/trapped-child-marriage-nepal-attempts-to-expand-girls-horizons>
The programme is called Rockets and Space – rocket representing the penis, 
space the vagina – and its message, carved out in bright orange and yellow 
letters on notebooks, keyrings and T-shirts, is being promoted by a band of 
youth volunteers through sessions at youth space stations, based in four of 
Marie Stopes’s 36 centres inNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal>, 
and visits to schools and communities. The volunteers also set up stalls along 
streets and in busy centres, handing out leaflets and condoms that are wrapped 
in card with illustrations of different sexual positions.

Cartoon characters, including a scientist and myth-busting “astronuts”, are 
used to communicate facts about safe sex and discuss topics such as 
masturbation, menstruation and wet dreams.


The programme has a Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/rocketsandspace/timeline?ref=page_internal>, which 
has attracted more than 100,000 likes, and a website is due to be launched this 
month.

Deepa Pradhan, one of the volunteers, says using games to engage young people 
reduces the embarrassment of talking about what are still taboo subjects in 
Nepal, and helps keep the interest of those listening.


“Games make them see [sex education] is really important and helps them keep 
these things in mind,” says Pradhan, a social work graduate who has been 
working with Marie Stopes for two years. “Lecturing makes young people bored. 
They are not interested in lectures or presentations.

“I really enjoy my job. I give young people information that they might not 
want to talk about, but [which] they really need. It’s very important for the 
youth, as our society doesn’t allow us to talk about sexual health openly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsex-education-nepal-launches-mission-to-get-message-to-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F387a147357374c3279c8e6796c7edc67ce3200a2%2F0_30_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%20education%20lifts%20off%20as%20Nepal%20launches%20mission%20to%20get%20message%20to%20young%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsex-education-nepal-launches-mission-to-get-message-to-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%20education%20lifts%20off%20as%20Nepal%20launches%20mission%20to%20get%20message%20to%20young%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsex-education-nepal-launches-mission-to-get-message-to-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F387a147357374c3279c8e6796c7edc67ce3200a2%2F0_30_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Materials from the Marie Stopes Nepal Rockets and Space sex education 
programme. Photograph: Liz Ford for the Guardian 
Rahul Thapamagar, another volunteer at the centre, adds: “We want to help them 
sort out their problems so that they won’t be harmful to their futures.”

The 22-year-old business studies graduate admits that at first he felt 
embarrassed talking about sex but, after some training, he now “feels more 
comfortable to talk with them about these topics”.

Thapamagar says that while sex education is taught at Nepalese schools, what 
is covered, and the quality of the information, varies widely – a trend found 
across the world.

In May, the International Planned Parenthood Federation said sex education 
globally was “too little, too late and too biological”, andcalled for more 
funding <http://www.ippf.org/resource/CSE-for-all> for services to give the 
world’s 1.8 billion 10- to 24-year-olds better information.

'When I have my period I'm not allowed to … ': girls in Nepal share their 
photo diaries – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/may/28/menstrual-hygiene-day-girls-nepal-when-i-have-my-period-im-not-allowed-to-photo-diaries-in-pictures>
Nepal had the third-highest teenage pregnancy rate in south Asia in 2014, 
according toWorld Bank figures <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.ADO.TFRT>
, with 73 births per 1,000 women aged 15 to 19. Of the 15- to 19-year-old girls 
who arealready married 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/18/trapped-child-marriage-nepal-attempts-to-expand-girls-horizons>
 (almost 30%), an estimated 17% have at least one child and86% are thought not 
to use any modern contraception 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&ved=0ahUKEwiY2-nE4qfNAhWMK8AKHSB9DrwQFgg8MAU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fnepal.unfpa.org%2Fsites%2Fasiapacific%2Ffiles%2Fpub-pdf%2FICRW.pdf&usg=AFQjCNH7wwz93wZmxIGWqz31x9B-f6yKVg&sig2=wIdON5o-qJFucpHjEEwUMQ&cad=rja>
.

Last month, the ministry of health held the country’s first national conference
 <http://www.myhealthrightsfuture.com/index.html> on adolescent health and 
development, which brought together government officials, NGOs, academics, UN 
agencies and representatives from the private sector to share ideas to reduce 
the numbers and hit internationally agreed targets on universal access to 
sexual and reproductive healthcare services, including information and 
education.

The government has already proposed scaling up its family planning services 
over the next five years.Government figures 
<http://nepal.unfpa.org/sites/asiapacific/files/pub-pdf/FP%20Costed%20Implementation%20Plan.pdf>
 (pdf) show that 25% of people who want to use contraceptives are unable to 
access services. Only about 52% of married or cohabiting women between the ages 
of 15 and 49 use family planning in Nepal,according to the UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/mar/08/contraception-and-family-planning-around-the-world-interactive>
.

“In Nepal, if you approach young people about family planning, they hesitate 
to talk about it. They think they don’t need to think about it,” says Shreejana 
Bajracharya, senior communications consultant at Marie Stopes Nepal.

She says the Rockets and Space programme was designed with the input of young 
people and complements afree helpline 
<http://www.mariestopes.org.np/en/projects/meri-saathi>, set up in 2011, and a 
weekly radio show that both offer sex and relationship advice. “We asked young 
people what they wanted and designed it for them,” she says.

Bajracharya hopes that as well as promoting safe sex, the programme will help 
Marie Stopes shed the image that it only offers abortion services, which is a 
barrier to people coming to its centres. “People think Marie Stopes is just for 
safe abortion. They don’t know we provide family planning services.”
 