
Casey Affleck seems poised for grade-A movie stardom. After decades toiling in 
the shadows of his big brother Ben and childhood friend Matt Damon, he is 
tipped to sweep this season’s best actor awards for his role in the drama
Manchester by the Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/film/manchester-by-the-sea>.

Critics have acclaimed his depiction of a heartbroken divorcee as a tour de 
force. “Casey Affleck joins the ranks of giants,” gushed Time Out.

If Hollywood likes one thing more than a comeback it’s a breakthrough, and for 
a celebrity-driven industry, Affleck’s is especially gratifying: The Boston 
scrapper with under-appreciated talent and an artist’s soul, too long 
languishing on the fringe, finally taking his place in the spotlight.

Affleck, normally press shy, has worked the awards circuit with aplomb. In his 
acceptance speech 
<http://deadline.com/2017/01/new-york-film-critics-circle-awards-casey-affleck-1201878350/>
 to the New York Film Critics Circle this week – a possible prelude to aGolden 
Globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations>
 this weekend and then an Oscar – he read out stinging reviews the event’s 
host, David Edelstein, had made about his previous performances. (Sample: 
“Affleck, though likeable, doesn’t have a lot of variety and resorts to chewing 
gum to give his character through-lines.”)

How, Affleck asked, does one survive such scathing and often accurate 
criticism? “Truth is, there’s never really been anything so horrible said about 
me that I haven’t either thought of or said to myself.” It was funny, poignant 
and self-deprecating and the critics lapped it up. Batman’s kid brother was 
finally getting his due.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmanchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%20trailer%3A%20Casey%20Affleck%20stars%20in%20acclaimed%20drama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmanchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20by%20the%20Sea%20trailer%3A%20Casey%20Affleck%20stars%20in%20acclaimed%20drama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmanchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video&media=>
Manchester by the Sea trailer: Casey Affleck stars in acclaimed drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/29/manchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video>
There is, however, a snag in the humble artist’s narrative. Two female 
colleagues who worked with Affleck on I’m Still Here, a 2010 mockumentary which 
he directed, sued him for sexual misconduct. Cinematographer Magdalena Gorka 
and producer Amanda White alleged that behind the scenes Affleck verbally and 
sexually harassed them: bragging about sexual exploits, propositioning and 
grabbing White, sliding into Gorka’s bed uninvited and creating a hostile 
climate by, among other things, instructing a crew member to display his penis. 
Each woman sought $2m.

Affleck denied wrongdoing and settled both claims in 2010. Details of the deal 
remain secret, butGorka’s 
<http://abcnews.go.com/images/Entertainment/Gorka_complaint.pdf> and White’s 
<http://abcnews.go.com/images/Entertainment/White%20Complaint.pdf> complaints 
remain online, on the public record, for all to see.

Here was a potential monkey wrench in the PR campaign for Manchester by the Sea
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/manchester-by-the-sea>, sabotaging not just 
Affleck but Amazon Studios, which hopes for awards glory to crown its emergence 
as a Hollywood player.

Nate Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nate-parker>, after all, had 
been poised for his own breakthrough with Birth of a Nation only to be shunned, 
and the film’s award buzz silenced, after revelations that he had been accused 
(and later acquitted) of rape in 1999. He has denied it was rape, claiming it 
was consensual sex.

[Ben Affleck and Matt Damon] joked that Casey finally needs a Golden Globe. 
Maybe that protects Casey from real scrutiny
Member of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association 
Hollywood liberals also shuddered at Donald Trump’s “grab them by the pussy” 
leaked tape and did not protestNBC’s sacking of Billy Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/17/billy-bush-fired-nbc-donald-trump-tape-groping-women-leaked>
, who was implicated in Trump’s comments. They cheered Roger Ailes’s tumble 
from Fox News amidsexual harassment complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/29/roger-ailes-sexual-harassment-fox-news-laurie-luhn>
.

Old injustices have surfaced: Tippi Hedren revealed in a memoir fresh details  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/31/tippi-hedren-alfred-hitchcock-sexually-assaulted-me>
about Alfred Hitchcock’s predatory behaviour while filming The Birds. Bernardo 
Bertolucciadmitted he conspired with Marlon Brando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/actors-disgust-last-tango-paris-rape-scene-confession-bertolucci>
 to film a rape scene in Last Tango in Paris without revealing all details in 
advance to the then 19-year-old actor Maria Schneider. More accusations, some 
decades old, have piled up aroundBill Cosby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bill-cosby>; he has denied assaulting any of 
the women accusing him. The drip-drip of revelations has prompted indignation 
and calls for Hollywood to do better.

In this climate Affleck could have shared the fate of the ancient mariner, 
metaphorically weighed down by the albatross. Instead, he soared. In magazine 
interviews, TV chat shows, round-table media talks and film festivals he basked 
in acclaim and affection – a striking contrast with the interrogations Parker 
faced.

Some media outlets such as Buzzfeed 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/annehelenpetersen/what-separates-casey-affleck-from-nate-parker?utm_term=.cbp7DRpE0#.saK8bRXvW>
,Mashable 
<http://mashable.com/2016/09/07/casey-affleck-harassment-allegations/#cH72E3KoFSqU>
, theDaily Beast  
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/11/22/casey-affleck-s-dark-secret-the-disturbing-allegations-against-the-oscar-hopeful.html>
andNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/04/movies/casey-affleck-nate-parker-awards-season.html?emc=edit_ca_20170105&nl=california-today&nlid=69927574&te=1&_r=0>
 did stories on the allegations but without any apparent effect on the awards 
buzz.

“People love him in Manchester and he might win some stuff,” said a member of 
the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA), which runs the Golden Globes. 
“People really do like him, no one wants him to be an abuser or anything like 
it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcasey-affleck-sexual-harassment-nate-parker-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e05a0bd2113ad94a07613b330fe155f96538d9b%2F182_7_2012_1208%2F2012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sexual%20harassment%20claims%20could%20have%20sunk%20Casey%20Affleck.%20Instead%2C%20he%20soared&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcasey-affleck-sexual-harassment-nate-parker-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sexual%20harassment%20claims%20could%20have%20sunk%20Casey%20Affleck.%20Instead%2C%20he%20soared&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcasey-affleck-sexual-harassment-nate-parker-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e05a0bd2113ad94a07613b330fe155f96538d9b%2F182_7_2012_1208%2F2012.jpg>
 Nate Parker’s film The Birth of a Nation was overshadowed by negative press 
surrounding a 1999 rape accusation, of which he was acquitted. Photograph: Fred 
Prouser/Reuters 
Affleck, after all, is a gifted actor who carved a circuitous path through 
indies (Gerry, To Die For) and bit parts in big films (Ocean’s Eleven) and won 
a best supporting actor nomination in 2007 for The Assassination of Jesse James 
by the Coward Robert Ford before derailing his career with the bold but 
misconceived I’m Still Here.

The member, who requested anonymity, said the sexual harassment allegations 
did not surface during HFPA interviews with Affleck, possibly to avoid offending
Ben Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck> and Matt Damon, who 
championed the younger Affleck in their own meetings with the group. “They both 
joked that Casey finally needs a Golden Globe. Very much the united front ... 
and maybe that really protects Casey from real scrutiny. Reminds me a bit of 
Woody Allen – the liberal press loves him too much to want to really look for 
the truth.”

Woody Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>. Two of Hollywood’s 
most problematic words, after Roman Polanski. The formeraccused of child abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/11/ronan-farrow-condemns-media-woody-allen-allegations>
, the latterconvicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/31/roman-polanski-polish-government-seeks-to-revive-extradition-proceedings>
, and both still revered for cinematic achievements. Allen has repeatedly 
denied the allegations for years.

It is perhaps harsh to include Affleck in such company. His alleged offences 
during filming ofI’m Still Here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/16/im-still-there-review>, which 
chronicled Joaquin Phoenix’s faux meltdown, were not criminal. The gravest 
accusation is that while hosting the crew in his apartment he crept into the 
bed where Gorka slept.

“He had his arm around her, was caressing her back, his face was within inches 
of hers and his breath reeked of alcohol,” said the cinematographer’s 
complaint. She said he responded angrily when ordered out, then left. Gorka and 
White also alleged Affleck violated their contracts.

Since the cases were settled privately there is no way to weigh the evidence. 
Neither Affleck nor the alleged victims responded to interview requests for 
this article. Nor did Affleck’s estranged actor wife, Summer Phoenix (sister of 
Joaquin), nor half a dozen other crew members who worked on the mockumentary, 
save one, a woman, who said she witnessed no harassment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcasey-affleck-sexual-harassment-nate-parker-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8231ce24e3f7c6983ac6db0c7b4578e0581b3ff%2F208_27_2081_2080%2F2081.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sexual%20harassment%20claims%20could%20have%20sunk%20Casey%20Affleck.%20Instead%2C%20he%20soared&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcasey-affleck-sexual-harassment-nate-parker-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sexual%20harassment%20claims%20could%20have%20sunk%20Casey%20Affleck.%20Instead%2C%20he%20soared&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcasey-affleck-sexual-harassment-nate-parker-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8231ce24e3f7c6983ac6db0c7b4578e0581b3ff%2F208_27_2081_2080%2F2081.jpg>
 Casey Affleck and Manchester by the Sea co-star Michelle Williams at the New 
York Film Critics Circle Awards. Photograph: StarPix/REX/Shutterstock 
In the few times he has been asked, Affleck has denied wrongdoing. “It was 
settled to the satisfaction of all. I was hurt and upset – I am sure we all 
were – but I am over it,” he told theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/06/movies/casey-affleck-interview-manchester-by-the-sea.html?_r=1>
. He hinted toVariety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/casey-affleck-manchester-by-the-sea-1201891603/>
 that he was the victim. “I guess people think if you’re well-known, it’s 
perfectly fine to say anything you want. I don’t know why that is. But it 
shouldn’t be, because everybody has families and lives.”

If Affleck does indeed spend the next few weeks clutching trophies on podiums, 
observers can choose from two narratives. Here is a gifted actor unspoiled by 
proximity to fame who kept plugging away and stamped his authority in Kenneth 
Lonergan’s brooding masterpiece. Or here is a man who abused his power to 
humiliate female colleagues and then hid behind heavy hitting PR bruisers and 
the industry clout of big brother Ben and mate Matt.

This being Oscar season there is a race angle too. Did Parker, who is black, 
sink because he lacked Affleck’s protective bubble? Or was it because he was 
accused of a graver offence, and the revelation that his alleged victim took 
her own life?

Jeffrey Wells, a veteran Hollywood columnist and blogger 
<http://www.hollywood-elsewhere.com/>, thinks there should be a separation of 
church (cinema) and state (film-makers’ private lives). The media had no 
business dredging up the Affleck allegations, he said. “It’s not decent to try 
make a thing about this given the two women involved took the money and went 
away, so to speak. I mean, its over.”

If the older Affleck and Damon helped dampen the story, well, kudos, said 
Wells. “Maybe that’s a factor. If it is, that’s good, because [the allegations] 
are not even close to approaching the Woody Allen allegations, or Polanski. It 
seems to boil down to asshole, boorish behaviour. So what?”
 