
About 125 million people are affected by crises. A quarter of those people are 
female and of reproductive age – andwomen are 14 times more likely than men to 
die in a crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/life-saving-services-midwife-gender-rights-reproductive-health-isabella-lovin-sweden>
.


On Monday global thinkers, activists and politicians will come together for the
world humanitarian summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/19/world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul-everything-you-need-to-know>
 in Istanbul to tackle some of these issues. It’s time for them and us to act 
as the world faces thelargest refugee crisis since the second world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/20/global-refugee-figure-passes-50-million-unhcr-report>
.

One thing often overlooked when a conflict, natural disaster, or crisis 
strikes is a comprehensive and responsive approach to health. Sexual and 
reproductive health often gets little attention, with devastating consequences. 
That’s why we will be pushing these issues during a special session at the 
summit.

Access to the life-saving services of a midwife is a gender rights issue | 
Isabella Lövin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/life-saving-services-midwife-gender-rights-reproductive-health-isabella-lovin-sweden>
Reproductive health issues are compounded during a crisis. About 60% of 
preventable maternal deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/may/16/why-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video>
 take place in crises and fragile settings.

We know that, when a woman in need of care and protection has travelled for 
days to reach a shelter or camp, she will often arrive to find no doctor or 
sterile equipment. We also know that in times of crisis, girls are more likely 
to be married off at a young age, and women and girls are at increased risk of 
trafficking and rape.

The International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) focuses on these 
issues. We make sure that the“dignity kits” 
<http://www.unfpa.org/news/dignity-kits-meet-hygiene-needs-displaced-women-and-girls-iraq>
 we give women and girls in our care contain not only the essentials, such as 
underwear and sanitary towels, but also items like a sarong, so they can cover 
themselves while changing in the camp – crucial if they have no tent. Small 
things like this can protect women and girls from violence.

Longer-term, we work with women and girls to build their resilience and help 
them take part in decision-making processes in refugee settings. We see 
tackling gender norms as a vital part of the services we offer.

From experience, we know that the demand for sexual and reproductive healthcare
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/06/reproductive-health-in-crises-women-family-planning-abortion-inter-agency-working-group>
 is much higher than normal in crisis situations. These are essential services 
and must form part of any humanitarian response.

There is already a life-saving package for delivering sexual and reproductive 
health 
<http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/emergencies/field_manual/en/>
, recognised by the UN and other agencies.

We need to ensure that there is a coordinated response to provide sexual and 
reproductive healthcare on the ground, one which has the same status as other 
humanitarian responses such as those surrounding food, shelter, water and 
sanitation.

We urge governments to include reproductive health in their own humanitarian 
response delivery. Donor governments need to ensure that services are more 
equitably distributed between conflict zones and natural disasters.

We will continue to hold the banner for sexual and reproductive rights to be 
given the status they deserve to ensure that the rights of women and girls, 
boys and men are protected.

A comprehensive response that includes sexual and reproductive health will 
help people to rebuild their lives after their worlds are turned upside down.

• Tewodros Melesse is director general of the International Planned Parenthood 
Federation <http://www.ippf.org/>
 