
Shane Sutton, the former British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> technical director, is 
confident that Team Sky and the national governing body have nothing to hide 
amid an ongoing investigation by UK Anti-Doping.

A furore has erupted over the decision to seek permission for Sir Bradley 
Wiggins to use triamcinolone and Ukad is investigating allegations of 
wrongdoing in cycling relating toa package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/package-bradley-wiggins-doctor-2011-criterium-du-dauphine>
delivered to Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/dave-brailsford-team-sky-bag-bradley-wiggins>
 at the end of the Critérium du Dauphiné stage race won by Wiggins in June 
2011. Team Skydenies wrongdoing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/dave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-tue>
 and is cooperating with Ukad.

Sutton, who left his role 100 days before this summer’s Olympics amid 
allegations of discrimination which he denies, has complete faith in both 
Wiggins and theTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> principal, 
Sir Dave Brailsford.

The Australian, Wiggins’s long-time mentor, said: “Our record at British 
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> speaks for itself. Our 
record at [Team] Sky is brilliant. They’ve endorsed clean cycling from day one.

“Knowing Sir Dave Brailsford and the way he works, his work ethic, he’s been 
the big pioneer for clean cycling and we built our success off evidence-based 
programmes. The evidence will come out and I’m sure that they’ll be exonerated.”

Brailsford has declined to reveal the package’s contents, preferring to let 
Ukad complete its investigation.

Sutton, who was at the Dauphiné race in the Alps, told BBC Radio 5 Live: “It’s 
not something uncommon for a coach or a logistics person to bring out a parcel. 
I don’t know too much about the whole story but I’ve had a chat with UK 
Anti-Doping. Let the truth come out and move on.”

In 2012 Wiggins became the first British rider to win the Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/jul/22/tour-de-france-bradley-wiggins>
. He alsowon time-trial gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/01/bradley-wiggins-gold-medal-olympian>
 on the road at that summer’s Olympic Games in London and histeam pursuit gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/team-gb-bradley-wiggins-olympic-gold-mens-team-pursuit-australia>
 on the track in Rio in August was his fifth Olympic title and eighth medal, a 
British record.

Data stolen by computer hackers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-and-bradley-wiggins-targeted-in-wada-hacking-scandal>
 after the Rio Games revealed that hereceived three therapeutic use exemptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-former-doctor-questions-use-banned-steroid>
 (TUEs)for triamcinolone – a substance that has a history of abuse in cycling 
and is otherwise banned – on the eve of the 2011 and 2012 Tours and 2013 Giro 
d’Italia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fshane-sutton-british-cycling-team-sky-bradley-wiggins-cleared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5943eda16647e9dd77c5344352b51eed82cc379f%2F0_192_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shane%20Sutton%20says%20British%20Cycling%20and%20Team%20Sky%20will%20be%20cleared&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fshane-sutton-british-cycling-team-sky-bradley-wiggins-cleared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shane%20Sutton%20says%20British%20Cycling%20and%20Team%20Sky%20will%20be%20cleared&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fshane-sutton-british-cycling-team-sky-bradley-wiggins-cleared%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5943eda16647e9dd77c5344352b51eed82cc379f%2F0_192_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Britain’s Bradley Wiggins, right, heads the British team in the men’s team 
pursuit final at the Rio Olympics. Photograph: Odd Andersen/AFP/Getty Images 
Wiggins and Brailsford have strenuously denied any wrongdoing, insisting each 
time that the TUEs were medically necessary to deal with apollen allergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues>
 that aggravates Wiggins’slong-standing asthma condition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues>.

The TUEs also had the approval of the UCI, cycling’s world governing body, and 
there is no suggestion that Wiggins – who left Team Sky in April 2015 – or the 
team have broken any rules.

Wiggins plans to retire at the end of this year and races for the final time 
on British soil at theLondon Six Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2015/oct/24/london-six-day-race-cycling-inside-track>
, which begins on Tuesday.

Sutton said: “I think we all need to get behind him again and support him 
because, in my belief, this guy has done no wrong. Once all this comes out, we 
can get back and cherish one of the greatest moments in British sport, when we 
produced the first British Tour de France winner in 2012.

“Brad will be bearing up because he knows what the truth is, knows it’s all 
going to come out. The couple of texts I’ve had with him, he seems in a good 
place. We’re talking about one of the greatest athletes ever.”

British Cycling this week announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/british-cycling-ian-drake-ceo-leave-post>
 that the chief executive, Ian Drake, will leave his post next April. Drake has 
insisted his departure after a 21-year association is not linked to the recent 
controversies.

British Cycling’s CEO Ian Drake confirms he will leave post in April
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/british-cycling-ian-drake-ceo-leave-post>
Sutton said: “The timing’s not great as far as the announcement’s concerned 
but I wish him well. He was a big supporter of mine. It’s a sad day for British 
Cycling to see the end of Ian Drake’s tenure.”

British Cycling is now recruiting for a chief executive and a first 
performance director since Brailsford quit in April 2014 to concentrate on Team 
Sky.

There has been a clamour in some quarters for the return of Sutton, who was 
Brailsford’s right-hand man before being promoted on his departure, if he is 
cleared of discrimination allegations. An internal investigation is to conclude 
imminently and a separate independent review into the culture at British 
Cycling is ongoing.

Sutton, who denies the claims, said in the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/cycling/2016/10/22/shane-sutton-hopeful-of-british-cycling-return-and-expects-to-be/>
: “As I’ve said all along, I am confident that I will be cleared of any 
wrongdoing.

“And if I am, I’d like to think they would ask me to reconsider my 
resignation. I resigned when I did to take the heat off the team 100 days out 
from the Olympic Games. But I totally refute the claims.”

Wiggins: ‘I was paranoid about making excuses. It wasn’t something I was going 
to shout from the rooftops’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues>  