
Shane Sutton is considering whether to apply to coach the national side in his 
native Australiaafter being found guilty of sexist behaviour, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
 but he has not yet given up hope of returning to British Cycling.

The 59-year-old resigned as British Cycling’s technical director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/shane-sutton-resigns-british-cycling-paralympians>
 100 days before the Rio Olympics after the track sprinter Jess Varnish claimed 
he told her she was fat andshould “go and have a baby”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/23/jess-varnish-british-cyling-shane-sutton-go-and-have-a-baby>
and following allegations he referred to theParalympic squad as “gimps and 
wobblies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/british-cycling-crisis-shane-sutton-alleged-paralympians-remarks>
”.

Sutton, a coach at the organisation for 16 years during its most golden 
period, was last week found to have used “inappropriate and discriminatory 
language” towards Varnish, in effect ending his hopes of a return to the 
NationalCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> Centre in 
Manchester.

He said on Thursday night he would appeal against the decision of the internal 
investigation and that he could not rule out a comeback within British Cycling. 
At an event in London organised by Rouleur magazine, Sutton said: “Steve 
McClarenjust went back to Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/steve-mcclaren-set-for-shock-derby-county-return-manager>
 [17 months after being sacked as manager]. Never say never. It’s sport. And 
who’s to say you won’t see Big Sam back at Sunderland if David Moyes decides to 
retire?”

Shane Sutton denies sexism but admits telling Varnish to ‘lose some timber’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/shane-sutton-denies-sexism-jess-varnish>
He added that he had been discussing his future with Dave Brailsford, the 
formerBritish Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> 
performance director and current boss of Team Sky, but he stressed he had not 
been asked back to British Cycling: “I’m looking at other avenues. I’ve gone 
away, recharged the batteries and I just feel like the palate is starting to 
get wet again and I’m ready to come back.”

He said he had spoken to other nations and then made a joke about hopping, 
kangaroo-like, off the stage. His brother, Gary, is a coach for Cycling 
Australia, which is currently advertising for a high-performance director to 
lead its elite teams, who returned from Rio with two medals out of a possible 
54.

“Course I would like to talk to Australia,” he said, “but it’s going to take 
time. I know they’ve advertised the job, whether I apply, I’m not 100% 
convinced on that; that’s something I’ve got to talk to my family about, it’s a 
big ask.”

Sutton has six children as well as grandchildren and said his eldest daughter 
did not want him to move to the other side of the world away from the family. 
Vowing to clear his name, Sutton said of Varnish’s allegations: “I can look 
everybody in the eye and state for the record, I did not say she had a fat arse 
or ‘go away and have a baby’ and I will maintain that until my dying day. And 
there is no supporting evidence to back that up from her point.”

Great Britain enter Track Cycling World Cup with politics on backburner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/great-britain-track-cycling-world-cup-katie-archibald>
It had come as a shock that Varnish’s claims were upheld, he said: “It hit me 
a little bit [from] left field, that one. I suppose being around all them 
athletes and being used to winning so often it was a bit of a kick in the guts 
to lose because I pretty much based everything in my defence on evidence, so it 
was a bit of a surprise. But at the end of the day I’m going to live to fight 
another day. I’m going to appeal, I’m just waiting for the supporting evidence 
to come back from my lawyer and we’re going to take it from there.”

He said he had developed into a good coach and had learned to control his 
temper with the help of British Cycling’s former psychiatrist, Steve Peters.

Asked which were his most memorable moments working for British Cycling, 
Sutton singled outChris Hoy’s final keirin title at the London Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/07/chris-hoy-wins-olympic-gold> and 
Victoria Pendleton’s first gold medal in Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/19/olympics.cycling> – perhaps 
surprisingly, given Pendleton supported Varnish’s sexism claim,saying Sutton 
contributed to a corrosive culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/26/victoria-pendleton-olympics-shane-sutton>
at British Cycling that forced her out of the sport.
 