
Almost four years ago, still basking in the afterglow of Bradley Wiggins’s 
Tour de France victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-cavendish>
 and a torrent ofOlympic cycling medals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/07/london-2012-gb-cycling>, and a 
couple of months away from learning of his impending knighthood, Dave 
Brailsford welcomed Roberto Mancini to the Manchester Velodrome. The Italian, 
about to start his fourth and last season at the nearby Etihad Stadium, was in 
the habit of cycling to work in East Manchester from his home in Alderley Edge, 
riding a carbon-fibre racing bike, wearing full Lycra kit, and with an 
assistant following discreetly in a car in case of rain.

Mancini inspected the facilities at the headquarters of British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> and Team Sky before 
watching members of the men’s team pursuit squad circling the track. He seemed 
to enjoy his visit, in a slightly detached kind of way. Brailsford, consumed 
with the task of establishing his professional team as a major force in world 
cycling, was keen to gather information on how City’s manager handled a group 
of highly paid athletes of different nationalities. Of the two, the Welshman 
seemed the readier to profit from the encounter.

Shane Sutton saga: Winning culture in sport is laudable – but not at any cost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/shane-sutton-winning-culture-sport-cycling-rio-2016-olympics>
This week, asked for his reaction to Leicester City’s success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri>
, Brailsford told BBC Radio 4 that Team Sky recently sent its sports scientists 
to see what Claudio Ranieri’s backroom staff were up to. “That’s sport – we’re 
all trying to learn from each other,” he said.

The secrets of Leicester’s medical department, in charge of a group of players 
who never seemed to get injured in the course of a stressful campaign, are 
likely to have been of more than casual interest.

What many want to know, of course, is the secret of Ranieri’s own method 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/claudio-ranieri-leicester-city-good-wine-jamie-vardy-house>
. Plenty of coaches at all levels in all sports will be wondering how a 
64-year- old Italian, sacked a decade ago from his previous job in the Premier 
League and with only a bunch of runner-up medals to show for his 30-year 
career, suddenly found the magic touch to defeat rivals with far greater 
reputations and resources.

Conversely, how could it happen that British Cycling, whose management and 
coaching structure provided a model for all sports only a single Olympic cycle 
ago,suddenly fell apart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/british-olympic-cycling-team-controversy-shane-sutton>
 last month, revealing itself as a house divided and lacking the sort of 
assured leadership it had once taken for granted?

The resignation of Shane Sutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/shane-sutton-resigns-british-cycling-paralympians>
 from the job of technical director, following claims that he used 
inappropriate language to certain female and Paralympic riders, exposed a 
simple truth: an approach that is perfect for one athlete will be exactly what 
another does not need.

Those figures who rallied to support Sutton against the accusations of Jess 
Varnish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/26/jess-varnish-complaint-british-cycling-shane-sutton>
 formed an impressive bunch: Chris Hoy, Laura Trott, David Millar, Dani King, 
Geraint Thomas, Jo Rowsell. But the chorus backing Varnish’s criticisms also 
contained some powerful voices from the same generation. AfterNicole Cooke had 
said her piece in these pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/25/nicole-cooke-cycling-sexism-jess-varnish-shane-sutton>
, she was followed by Victoria Pendleton, Emma Pooley, Wendy Houvenhagel and 
the Paralympian Darren Kenny.

Some athletes don’t mind the kind of encouragement that borders on bullying. 
They might even welcome it, if the treatment pushes them closer to their goal. 
And if, of course, it comes from a source whose harsh manner is balanced by a 
sensitivity to the nuances of their sport. Many of those in Sutton’s charge 
respected his profound knowledge as well as his commitment to their success. 
“He’s a mad dude, but I love him,” Millar said of Sutton this week. “I know he 
would run through a brick wall for me.”

Ten years ago some of Britain’s top swimmers may have felt the same about Bill 
Sweetenham <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jan/11/swimming>, Sutton’s 
fellow Aussie, a similarly blunt and forceful figure who served as British 
Swimming’s performance director from 2000 to 2007. Others did not.

Sweetenham’s athletes won 18 world championship medals, but in 2006, after a 
handful of them had changed nationality, he faced an inquiry into his methods. 
He survived that one, but resigned the following year, in the run-up to the 
Beijing Games.

British cycling’s Medal Factory-built tensions sure to hit breaking point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/british-olympic-cycling-team-controversy-shane-sutton>
“I hear that he’s good with kids,” the former 50m world champion Mark Foster 
said, “but that’s because they don’t talk back. You can talk at kids but you 
have to talk to adults.” This week, perhaps unsurprisingly, Sweetenham 
expressed the view that his compatriot should have been given a talking-to and 
kept in his post.

We seem to envy the brusque style of leadership patented by Australians across 
many sports, identifiable in the culture of sledging in cricket – symbolised by 
Steve Waugh’s aim of subjecting opponents to “mental disintegration” – and now 
in Eddie Jones’s no-nonsense approach to coaching the England rugby union 
squad. Is this a reversal of the old “cultural cringe”, the phenomenon which 
led Australians of a certain generation to defer automatically to supposed 
British superiority? And if so, is it just as misconceived?

Back in 2002, Sutton was a brilliant acquisition. His nous and drive were just 
what the emerging generation of British cyclists needed – but only in 
combination with Brailsford’s visionary management and the ability of Dr Steve 
Peters to soothe away an athlete’s self-doubt. When Brailsford and Peters left 
BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> in 2014, the former 
to devote all his attention to Team Sky, the decision to give Sutton the top 
job must have seemed as logical to those in authority as promoting Steve 
McClaren, Sven-Goran Eriksson’s assistant, seemed to the Football Association 
in 2006.

In any army, good regimental sergeant majors are worth their weight in gold, 
and for a dozen years Sutton was worth his weight in gold medals. But the 
qualities of a good RSM are not those of a commanding officer, who needs a gift 
for diplomacy and strategic thinking. The CO will ensure that the RSM’s methods 
of discipline and motivation are kept within the proper bounds. Those who 
elevated Sutton to a position that exposed his weaknesses must take 
responsibility for the events of the past fortnight, and for the possible 
consequences in Rio. So must Brailsford, whose unwillingness to create a 
women’s squad at Team Sky lies behind much of the support for Varnish’s act of 
revenge.

Ranieri’s success showed that when the ingredients are right, anything is 
possible. Leicester’s title-winning formula came together quickly and 
unexpectedly at a time when the manager was old and wise enough to know what to 
change, what to leave alone, and how to speak to his players. The British 
cycling phenomenon, by contrast, was the result of long and detailed planning, 
which makes its sudden disarray, and the flaws it reveals, all the more 
shocking.

• This article was amended on 10 May 2016. An earlier version described 
Brailsford as English. He moved to Wales as a child and sees himself as Welsh.
 