
British Cycling’s former technical director Shane Sutton insists he is not a 
sexist and has denied ever tellingJess Varnish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jess-varnish> to “go and have a baby” after 
she was dropped from the team, although he did admit telling the 25-year-old 
that she should “lose some timber”.

Sutton resigned in April following Varnish’s claims that he had made 
inappropriate remarks about her weight. On FridayBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> said an internal 
investigation had upheld Varnish’s allegations, in effect ending any chance 
that Sutton would return to the organisation.

British Cycling upholds complaint against Shane Sutton by Jess Varnish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
However, Sutton has claimed he has been the victim of “untruths”. “It would be 
just nice to understand how they came to this decision,” said the Australian in 
an interview with Sky Sports.

“I will continue to repeat what I’ve said from day one, that conversation 
[with Varnish] has never taken place. If Jess can produce where the 
conversation took place, who was there at the time – and I believe that it was 
only me – so I’m trying to understand how they’ve arrived at that decision 
given it’s her word against mine. It never happened in the way it was described.

“I can visualise the conversation quite vividly. The coaches and dietitians 
had sat Jess down and said you really need to lose some weight. Jess was 
confused because she thought the coaches had told her to get bigger, get more 
power.

“She asked me for my personal opinion and I said, ‘Do you want the director’s 
opinion or the personal opinion?’ My exact words were: ‘We are trying to 
qualify for the Games in team sprint and you need to lose some timber.’”

An independent review into British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> is being carried out after other 
riders, including the Olympic champions Victoria Pendleton and Nicole Cooke, 
claimed there was a culture of sexism and bullying in the organisation while 
Sutton was in charge. He has also been accused of calling paracyclists 
“wobblies”. Sutton continues to deny the claims.

“I sympathised with [Varnish] losing her place on the team but we were about 
performance and Jess hadn’t done that in quite some time. This is nothing to do 
with sexism,” he said.

“I like to tell the truth, maybe to my detriment sometimes, and the truth is 
I’m not a sexist and that is the only thing that has really hurt me in all of 
this.”

Sutton joined British Cycling in 2002 and together with Dave Brailsford 
masterminded stunning medal returns at the 2008 and 2012 Olympic Games, in 
which Britain won eight golds at each.
 