
It’s hard to write a love letter to someone who was allergic to bullshit. I 
keep reminding myself that she would have laughed in my face. That’s enough of 
a reason to keep this saccharine-free.

Rob Delaney and I were desperate to get Carrie in our show 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/04/how-carrie-fisher-joined-catastrophe.html>. 
Even three series in, we could still barely believe it. To begin with, we 
treated her like everyone else did: as an icon, not a real human. Which is why, 
I think, it took a while to become pals. And because she mostly turned down my 
invitations, with charming, poetic and hilarious texts. Sometimes she was 
tired; sometimes it was just not the right night for her. I invited her to a 
dinner where I thought (knew) she would like the other guests and they would 
(of course) like her. She messaged to say that she wasn’t in the right frame of 
mind for new people, that she would be better off with people who already knew 
her madness, so she could relax and be as crazy as she fancied. She turned down 
the invitation, but she made me promise never to stop asking. And I didn’t.

When she came to my house in Hackney, we sat on a sofa with our dogs and 
talked about everything. Mainly her life. She talked about herself a lot, 
thankfully, because it was always, always entertaining and wise and scattershot 
and full of quips and quotes with a dash of subliminal therapy. But her life 
was complicated. There was pain there, and responsibility, and her own demons. 
It added up to a head full of aggravation, as well as incredible anecdotes. I 
asked her when she ever got to have a moment of normal. She pointed at me and 
then back at herself on the sofa and said: “Doing this.”

The night before she got her flight back to Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/23/carrie-fisher-heart-attack-london-la-flight>
, we had dinner. It was the day after our last day’s filming of Catastrophe and 
I was monstrously hungover and tired and incapable. I tried to cry off and she 
reminded me that she had dragged her ass all the way out to Hackney to see me 
the week before and I should return the favour. So I did. Thank the dark lord, 
I did.

Her good, long-term pal Salman Rushdie was there, too. I had used him as my 
first reason not to join. “I’m not feeling smart enough to talk to him.” Her 
response was: “Are you kidding? He’s just gonna talk about girls.” So we met 
and chatted and laughed and Gary (her dog 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/reliable-source/wp/2016/05/01/actress-carrie-fisher-brought-her-service-dog-to-the-white-house-correspondents-dinner-and-he-was-a-hit/?utm_term=.34ea04b2e3a0>
) farted while Carrie handed out presents (me, an antique cocktail stick 
holder; Salman, a pair of chocolate tits). When he popped to the loo, Carrie 
said: “See? Isn’t he fun? Do you like him?” Of course I did. But what I liked 
more was that she cared enough to make sure I was having fun. And that was her 
wont. If she felt that she was talking about herself too much, she would say: 
“Wait! What about you? We haven’t talked about you.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcarrie-fisher-sharon-horgan-so-real-it-was-dangerous%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff15b28055513c0e58d1784b2304258ee1347ccab%2F124_86_3914_2349%2F3914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sharon%20Horgan%3A%20%E2%80%98Carrie%20Fisher%20was%20so%20real%20it%20was%20dangerous%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcarrie-fisher-sharon-horgan-so-real-it-was-dangerous%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sharon%20Horgan%3A%20%E2%80%98Carrie%20Fisher%20was%20so%20real%20it%20was%20dangerous%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcarrie-fisher-sharon-horgan-so-real-it-was-dangerous%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff15b28055513c0e58d1784b2304258ee1347ccab%2F124_86_3914_2349%2F3914.jpg>
 Fisher, right, with Horgan and Rob Delaney in Catastrophe. Photograph: Ed 
Miller/Channel 4 
But who would want to do anything but listen to a lady like her with a life 
like that? It was, as she described it, something of a soap opera. She was no 
ordinary celebrity. She was, she said, Mickey Mouse. Everybody owned a piece, 
or felt they had the right to a piece. But the beautiful truth about Carrie is 
that she was genuine. She knew her talents, she knew her cultural importance, 
but she was humble, too. She didn’t have to feign her modesty. Her modesty and 
insecurity were part of her makeup. She was so real that it was almost 
dangerous. Actually, it was dangerous. Because she didn’t play the game. She 
said what she thought and, in an industry where that’s not always welcome, it 
sometimes came back to bite her. But she couldn’t help herself. She had very 
little filter.

My God, girls, we owe her a lot. Not many women of her generation called out 
the double standards of the film industry 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lZ97s396kb0> the way she did. And how it 
treats women of a certain age. She knew that a man in her position wouldn’t 
have got the flak that she got. And he didn’t. She knew that she had to keep 
mouthing off about it. And she did it with great wit. But it hurt her. Make no 
mistake about that. She was very aware of what people thought and said. And I 
didn’t like that she felt so hurt by it, and I didn’t like that she criticised 
her own looks so much. But it’s hard not to, when the world is telling you that 
you’re not allowed to age like a regular human.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20actor%20and%20writer%2C%20dies%20at%2060%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20actor%20and%20writer%2C%20dies%20at%2060%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary&media=>
Carrie Fisher, actor and writer, dies at 60 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-video-obituary>
When she was going up to her room after dinner, she was mocking herself for 
her slow pace, her “old lady body”. She looked back at me and said: “If I’d 
known back then that I had something worth looking at, I’d have looked after it 
better. I was in good shape.” Then she passed a hallway mirror and took a quick 
glance. “But I’m not in such bad shape now.” I’m glad I got to hear her say 
that, a rare moment of uncritical self-love.

Carrie Fisher <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> isn’t around 
any more. And that’s just horrible. As my dad said: shit happens, but some shit 
is worse than others. And I want everyone to remember her and all the great 
things she was. A wonderful writer, a fine actress, a great mother, a caring 
daughter, a loyal friend, a wit, a prolific present-giver, a lunatic, a legend.
 