
There was an excellent passage in Lord Wolfson's review of Next's annual 
results 
<http://www.nextplc.co.uk/~/media/Files/N/Next-PLC/pdfs/reports-and-results/2013/full-year-results-jan-2013.pdf>
 that could have been titled "Share Buybacks for Dummies".

It should be required reading in the boardroom of any company contemplating a 
buyback. Why? BecauseNext <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> was a 
pioneer in this field and is virtually alone in making this form of 
distribution of cash work effectively for shareholders, as the rise in the 
firm's share price from £5 in 1999 to £43 today well illustrates.

Other companies, it often seems, assume any buyback that enhances earnings per 
share must automatically be beneficial. It's not that simple, as Wolfson shows.

He offers six rules. Even number one, about ensuring enhancement to earnings, 
carries a qualification. A buyback must also a make healthy "equivalent rate of 
return" (EER) – in other words, a return better than could be achieved from 
investing the cash in an alternative investment.

In the case of Next, buy-backs would enhance earnings beyond £60 a share. But, 
applying the EER calculation, Wolfson says Next would be "less enthusiastic" 
about buybacks if returns dropped much below 9%, equivalent to a share price of 
about £45.

"So to a certain extent the share price provides a natural moderator of a 
disciplined buyback programme," he concludes.

If only other companies were as disciplined. Most never mention EER and most 
breach Wolfson's fifth rule – "be consistent". Next has bought back shares 
every year for a decade, halving the number in issue.

By contrast, most boards conduct one big splurge over the course of a year or 
so. That's usually pointless, especially if the core business doesn't have 
clear prospects of long-term growth (rule six) and rising earnings per share.

Frankly, the number of companies that meet all Wolfson's criteria is probably 
tiny. That's why so many – Marks & Spencer andHome Retail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/homeretailgroup> being two prime 
offenders in the retail sector – end up buying shares at prices that soon look 
silly.

In fact, rather than merely reading Wolfson's rules, it ought to made 
compulsory for boards launching buybacks to show how they measure up against 
them.
 