
Can you imagine a more affordable source of lighting for the world’s poorest 
families than a lamp powered by gravity, or a more ingenious way to charge 
electric cars than by harvesting the air turbulence they cause alongside 
motorways? Can you imagine more fitting forms of clean energy forBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> than barbecue fuel briquettes made 
from used coffee beans, or football floodlights powered by the players’ runs on 
the pitch?

These are among the sustainable business ideas being showcased in Rio de 
Janeiro this week at an event that mixes seven startups, three saccharine sweet 
pop stars and and one fossil-fuel behemoth – Shell – in a campaign to 
#makethefuture and clean up the latter’s dirty corporate image.


Staged in the striking setting of the Santa Marta favela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2013/nov/04/favelas-rio-de-janeiro-in-pictures>
, the event blends recycled macchiato and the British singerPixie Lott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pixie-lott>, kinetic-energy producing 
football pitches and Brazil’sLuan Santana 
<https://twitter.com/luansantana?lang=en>, weight-powered lights and Nigeria’s 
Yemi Alade 
<https://twitter.com/yemialadee?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 in a 21st-century public relations concoction par excellence.


But for all the fluff, corporate cynicism and the army of media communication 
consultants, there was just about enough intelligence and idealism on display 
to ensure the event inspired a little hope as well as suspicion.


The overarching concept was simple: take seven sustainable business ideas that 
normally receive little attention, then ramp up their prominence and impact 
with a promotion event in a sexy location with big-name artists who can amplify 
the message to a young audience through music videos, Snapchat and other social 
networks.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdef2ac9f4d3ffe529c2f4bcb1b2bf668d164f72c%2F0_70_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shell%E2%80%99s%20Rio%20roadshow%3A%20springboard%20for%20green%20startups%20or%20just%20a%20Lott%20of%20oily%20spin%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Watts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shell%E2%80%99s%20Rio%20roadshow%3A%20springboard%20for%20green%20startups%20or%20just%20a%20Lott%20of%20oily%20spin%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Watts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdef2ac9f4d3ffe529c2f4bcb1b2bf668d164f72c%2F0_70_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Luan Santana, Yemi Alade and Pixie Lott performed at Shell’s #makethefuture 
launch event in favela Santa Marta. Photograph: #makethefuture/Shell's Facebook 
page 
It was a little weird, nonetheless, to see the world’s third most valuable oil 
company temporarily commandeer a favela to produce a music video about clean 
energy and stage a press conference with canapguardian canapés for journalists 
flown in from distant continents. The dissonance was both encouraging and 
unsettling.

Encouraging because the overriding message was that positive change is 
possible. Santa Marta is a symbol of that. Fifteen years ago, this community of 
8,000 residents – like many favelas in Rio – was off the social grid. Gangs 
ruled the streets. There was almost zero public or private investment. 
Residents stole electricity by tapping power lines so there was little 
incentive to conserve energy or switch to clean power.


But since 2008, when it was the first favela to be “pacified” with a permanent 
police presence, Dona Marta has become something of a model community. A new 
cable car has improved access. With crime down, tourism – driven by the 
spectacular views of Rio and the nearbyChrist the Redeemer statue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/aug/02/rios-christ-the-redeemer-statue-in-pictures>
 – is up. The utilities have moved in. Some new homes have installed sewer 
pipes and electricity cables.


Since the end of last year, this is also the site of a pilot project 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/energy/2015/12/151218-sponsor-content-shell-and-brazilian-startup-light-up-santa-marta-community/>
 to bring solar power to favela communities. Shell is paying the small local 
startupInsolar <http://www.insolar.eco.br/> to install more than 150 
photovoltaic <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photovoltaics> cells on buildings 
with a communal use. Look down now from the cable car and you can see blue 
panels on the creche, samba school and residents’ association. In the near 
future, there will be solar trees, where locals can charge mobile phones.


“People thought we were crazy when we said we want to promote solar use in 
poor communities in Rio,” said Insolar founder Henrique Drumond. But he said 
the creche now gets 70% of its energy from the panels, which means considerable 
savings on a power bill that – since pacification – has to be paid. With a 
panel lifespan of 25 years and lots of sun in Rio, the hope is that, over time, 
residents of other communities will see the benefits and – once a financing 
system is in place – choose to invest themselves. In that sense, Santa Marta is 
a shop window.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d2928530fe42fb3b174a770a2e093347dcab4d%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shell%E2%80%99s%20Rio%20roadshow%3A%20springboard%20for%20green%20startups%20or%20just%20a%20Lott%20of%20oily%20spin%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Watts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shell%E2%80%99s%20Rio%20roadshow%3A%20springboard%20for%20green%20startups%20or%20just%20a%20Lott%20of%20oily%20spin%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Watts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d2928530fe42fb3b174a770a2e093347dcab4d%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
 Solar panels on the roof of the creche in Santa Marta, installed by local 
startup Insolar and paid for by Shell. Photograph: Courtesy Insolar 
“Solar brings energy and jobs,” said the community “ambassador” Marcelo de 
Souza. “We hope this can spread not just in Santa Marta but to all the Rio 
communities. We want to create not just jobs, but business.”


Commercial viability is, however, still a distant prospect for most of the 
projects being exhibited. A greater priority for now is demonstrating that the 
technology works and getting the word out. This is where Shell’s marketing 
clout – rather than an equity investment – comes in.


That process is already well underway at Pavegen <http://www.pavegen.com/>, a 
UK company that built the world’s first player-powered football pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/02/sustainability-football-green-game-sport>
 at Rio’s Morro da Mineira favela in 2014. That too was a Shell-sponsored 
project and – with their backing –inaugurated by Pelé 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/southamerica/brazil/11089313/Pele-unveils-unique-football-pitch-where-players-energy-produces-electricity.html>
.


The idea is ingenious, but expensive. Kinetic energy panels are laid under the 
playing surface. Each step on them generates about five watts (depending on the 
player’s weight). A single five-a-side game can power floodlights for several 
hours.


Underscoring the importance of public security as well as energy in any 
development, the founder, Laurence Kemball-Cook, was advised not to return to 
Morro da Mineira because of rising violence in the unpacified community, but 
his company’s technology was showcased at Santa Marta with a breakdance display.


Kemball-Cook initially had to take risks to push his ideas. He says his first 
pilot project was installed without permission on a building site on the South 
Bank and he was also detained for putting one on the steps of 10 Downing 
Street. Now, however, he has Shell’s support, £2m raised from a kickstarter 
campaign, 40 staff and a growing list of trial sites, including West Ham 
station, a Kia factory in South Korea and – soon – several entire blocks of a 
US city. He is hopeful the collaboration with music artists can take it 
further, increase demand and help to drive the cost down.


“If you believe in an idea, you can’t just sit on your backside,” he said. “We 
have great technology, but amplifying it is hard. We partner with artists to 
amplify it. A 16-year-old won’t listen to me or to Shell but, with a song, you 
can reach them.”


The artists – who will collaborate for a promotional video – were chosen to 
appeal to global youth with one representative from each continent. Of the 
three who were in Santa Marta this week, Santana has 50 million social media 
followers, Alade is a Nigerian afropop star, and Lott was recently in a West 
End show.


“The idea is to spread the word about these fantastic ideas,” said Lott, who 
performed on the roof of a favela creche, while on the street below visitors 
were shown around display booths. “It is really good to be involved in 
something so positive and inspiring. These are fantastic ideas that I would 
have never thought about from people who really care about the world. I hope 
these things become normal in the future. It is really important for young 
people to realise it’s going on.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc8a6b407f50b65c04a92a189760ca9c3c90366b%2F0_0_640_534%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shell%E2%80%99s%20Rio%20roadshow%3A%20springboard%20for%20green%20startups%20or%20just%20a%20Lott%20of%20oily%20spin%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Watts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shell%E2%80%99s%20Rio%20roadshow%3A%20springboard%20for%20green%20startups%20or%20just%20a%20Lott%20of%20oily%20spin%3F%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Watts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fshell-rio-green-business-startups-pixie-lott-oil-spin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc8a6b407f50b65c04a92a189760ca9c3c90366b%2F0_0_640_534%2F640.jpg>
 Yemi Alade, Luan Santana and Pixie Lott perform in the Santa Marta favela. 
Photograph: @yemialadeworld 
Youth appeal, however, is probably more important for Shell – which needs to 
greenwash its 100-plus-year history of profiting from dirty carbon fuels – than 
for the young entrepreneurs, most of whom are more in need of backing from 
investors and governments.


Take Sanwal Muneer, founder of Capture Mobility <https://vimeo.com/94982491>, 
a firm that produces roadside turbines that generate energy from the air 
turbulence caused by passing cars. These sophisticated devices also tap solar 
power and use filters to remove harmful pollutants from vehicle emissions. 
Having started in Pakistan last year, it is now based in Edinburgh and is 
already planning four major pilot projects, including one in Germany that will 
use the collected power to charge electric cars.


Arguably the most elegant idea on display was also the simplest. Gravity Light 
<http://gravitylight.org/>, a UK-based firm, aims to provide power – with a 
ceiling winch and a bag of sand or stones – to the one in seven homes in the 
world that lack electricity. All users need to do is pull the weight up and let 
it fall. This turns a small turbine that can power an LED light (or a radio) 
for up to 25 minutes. In its target market of sub-Saharan Africa, the price 
would be just $25 (£19) for an energy source that would last for several years, 
does not require batteries and would be several times brighter – and, 
ultimately, much less of a drain on household finances – than kerosene lamps, 
which are currently the main alternative source of lighting.


Other entrepreneurs get power from waste. China-based MotionEco 
<http://www.motioneco.com/> turns used cooking oil into diesel, thereby 
reducing the public health threat of a product that has, notoriously, been 
scooped out of gutters and reused for food. UK-basedBio-Bean 
<http://www.bio-bean.com/about-us/> collects industrial quantities of used 
coffee and extracts essential oils and biodiesel and then uses what is left to 
make fuel briquettes that, it says, are cheaper and longer-burning than wood.


On the main road of Santa Marta, the latter were being used to grill chicken 
kebabs and sausages at one of the ubiquitous street churrascos. Daniel 
Crockett, the communications head of the three-year-old company, hoped the 
principle could spread further.


“Coffee is just one organic waste stream. If we could spread the idea that 
this is possible then that would be great,” he said. “But we know that many of 
these places have more pressing issues of clean water and basic sanitation.”


That touched on one of the three unsettling questions raised by the event. 
Will Santa Marta turn out to be a Potemkin favela used to temporarily showcase 
the future even as other communities are unable to enjoy the basic services 
that should be available in the present?


The second question is about Shell’s motives. Is it genuinely pushing for an 
energy transformation, simply hedging its bets, or just engaged in PR to 
salvage its reputation, particularly among the young ? It is probably no 
coincidence that #makethefuture comes at a time when there is growing pressure 
from students for universities and other institutions todivest their funds from 
fossil fuel companies <http://gofossilfree.org/commitments/>. 

Shell declined to say how much it spent on the project in Santa Marta, though 
it – and other clean energy investment by the company – was almost certainly 
minuscule compared with its investments in dirty carbon-based energy. The third 
question, then, is will that balance shift?


The company’s external relations manager, Glauco Paiva, was clear in his 
answer. “Shell believes the future of energy is renewable,” he said at a press 
conference in the Santa Marta samba school hall. “The idea is to change the 
world.”


If so, this week’s exhibition is a tiny but welcome step in the right 
direction. But if Shell’s investment strategy does not also change 
substantively, the bright ideas will have been shrouded in a PR sham.
 