
That was proper Sherlock <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>. 
A dark, real-life parallel, scores of hidden easter eggs for repeat viewers and 
Mrs Hudson speeding in a sports car.

Initial praise must lie with the director, Nick Hurran, who also directed the 
2014 episode The Last Vow and, according to his IMDB page, a 1991 episode of 
snooker gameshow Big Break. Sometimes Sherlock’s filming style can look chintzy 
and tea-timey, but this was shot beautifully, particularly the scenes in which 
Watson was hallucinating his dead wife, the camera spinning around the room in 
confusion and mental anguish.

A respectful nod to the BBC, too: there must have been some unease in the 
corporation about having an episode in their flagship drama series in which a 
beloved public figure – in this case Culverton Smith, a businessman and 
philanthropist played with yellow-toothed mendacity by Toby Jones – uses his 
position of power and fame to commit monstrous crimes. Smith’s perversion was 
murder rather than paedophilia, but like Jimmy Savile, he is close friends with 
the great and good, commits his crimes at a children’s hospital, of which he is 
a patron. He also has an obsession with corpses. The real-life allusions 
transformed what could have been a cartoonish villain into a chilling 
character; a grotesque reminder of the ease with which Savile committed his 
crimes, enabled by his career.

‘The most dangerous and despicable human being I have ever encountered’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F614f507d98a7aed0ffdc51d9228e0c78107d7f7d%2F0_0_4045_3025%2F4045.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Lying%20Detective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Lying%20Detective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F614f507d98a7aed0ffdc51d9228e0c78107d7f7d%2F0_0_4045_3025%2F4045.jpg>
 A picture of yellow-toothed mendacity … Toby Jones as Culverton Smith. 
Photograph: BBC/Hartswood Films/Robert Viglasky 
Unlike Savile, Smith regularly confesses to his crimes, deriving pleasure from 
doing so, but after he divulges his sins he wipes the memories of his 
confidants, administering them with a drug that causes anterograde amnesia. 
This was the only part of the episode that felt hammy to me, a bit of sci-fi 
trickery that doesn’t make sense if you think about it too much. At the start 
of the episode, we see Smith’s daughter try to scrawl what she can remember of 
the confession before her father prises the paper from her hands.


Somehow, she retrieves it and brings it to Sherlock, who, following Mary’s 
death, is in the midst of a bout of extreme drug abuse, his powers of 
observation partly blinkered. Perhaps because he is feeling analytically rusty, 
Sherlock suddenly seems able to feel pity. He takes Faith, who he believes to 
be suicidal, out for chips and agrees to tackle her case (although he also has 
a bit of fun telling Mycroft, who is tracking him via drone, to “fuck off”, by 
spelling out the letters in the walking route they take).

Mycroft doesn’t have too much else to do here, except get hit on by Lady 
Smallwood and make more references to Sherrinford, his no-longer-very-secret 
sibling.

Meanwhile, a grief-stricken John is receiving therapy and being visited by 
Mary. John spends an awful lot of time grief-stricken, doesn’t he? Remember the 
hissy fit he pulled when he thought Sherlock had died? Well this time, he is 
refusing to talk to Sherlock and has closed himself off emotionally, unable 
even to look after his daughter. It’s down to Mrs Hudson to kidnap Sherlock in 
the boot of her sports car, bring him to John’s therapist’s house, and force 
the game to become afoot. Sherlock shows John that he predicted everything 
about his own kidnapping two weeks earlier as a means of demonstrating his 
sound mind and the urgency with which they need to deal with Smith, who 
Sherlock has since worked out is one of the most grotesque serial killers ever 
to walk this earth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c0d5e422bfb46e3cf9c959d616635c5de445298%2F0_0_4288_2854%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Lying%20Detective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Lying%20Detective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c0d5e422bfb46e3cf9c959d616635c5de445298%2F0_0_4288_2854%2F4288.jpg>
 Sherlock has worked out that Smith is one of the most grotesque serial killers 
ever to walk this earth. Photograph: BBC/Hartswood Films/Ollie Upton 
There’s a lot of back and forth over what are Sherlock’s genius deductions and 
what is heroin-addled nonsense. When Faith turns up, he realises she is an 
entirely different woman from the one who turned up at Baker Street and doubts 
are cast over his theory. But eventually Sherlock, beaten by his own addiction, 
ends up in a bed at Smith’s hospital. It turns out that Smith had the ward 
built especially so he can creep into patients’ rooms and murder them. Sherlock 
knew that was his fate, and tells Smith he doesn’t want to die but knows he 
must let himself be killed. There are particularly sinister scenes while Smith 
is drugging and strangling Sherlock, demanding that Sherlock keep looking him 
in the eye as he dies, and passing shots of Smith’s crotch allude to some 
sexual gratification.

Back at Baker Street, John has discovered Mary’s message to Sherlock from last 
week’s episode. Seen for the first time in full, we learn that Mary demanded 
Sherlock to “go to hell”, to allow himself to be in such danger that John would 
be forced to save him (hence the heroin addiction and willingness to be 
murdered by Smith). With this, Watson races to the hospital, of course saving 
Sherlock in the nick of time.

‘Oh he’s making a funny face, I think I’ll put a hole in it’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5c6aeb5ece6be7fc141a0b677edb7e6e97d9adc%2F0_243_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Lying%20Detective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Lying%20Detective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5c6aeb5ece6be7fc141a0b677edb7e6e97d9adc%2F0_243_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 John spends an awful lot of time grief-stricken doesn’t he? Photograph: 
BBC/Hartswood Films/Robert Viglasky 
But the fun barely stops there. In a lengthy epilogue, we learn Irene Adler is 
still alive and still sexting with Sherlock, especially on his birthday. John 
admits his infidelity to his hallucination of Mary, something his imagined 
version of his wife immediately forgives him for (what are the chances). Then, 
in the final twist, it seems John’s therapist knows slightly more than she 
should about Sherlock’s secret sibling. John calls her out on it, and the 
reveal begins: she is Sherlock’s secret sister Euros and, in various disguises, 
was also the woman John met on the bus, and the “Faith” that first met 
Sherlock, providing him with the note that began the whole case. She says that 
she was given Faith’s original note, which Smith stole as soon as it was 
written, “by a mutual friend”. So does that mean Smith was involved in the plot 
from the start, or just that they are in some kind of criminal mastermind club? 
And could that mutual friend be Moriarty?

Also, are we to assume that Sherrinford is somehow Euros? “Didn’t it ever 
occur to you that Sherlock’s secret brother could be a secret sister?” as she 
puts it. Here’s the thing: Mycroft has been keeping in regular contact with 
Sherrinford, so either Sherrinford is a codename, or they are in cahoots, 
working together to do Moriarty’s bidding.Or is there actually a fourth Holmes 
still to be discovered? As Sherlock says here, people always give up looking 
after three.

Anyway, the episode ends with Euros apparently shooting John in the face for 
no reason whatsoever – although if you believe that, you’ll believe anything.

Mysteries unsolved

• When Sherlock first meets “Smith’s daughter”, he makes deductions that she 
has been in a very small kitchen with no visitors, hiding the paper in a book 
to avoid it being discovered by her lover. Perhaps the small room was actually 
a cell, and the lover some kind of prison guard.

• Euros explains to John her name means “the east wind”. We know from His Last 
Vow that Mycroft used to tell Sherlock a story about “the east wind coming to 
get him”. It used to terrify him. But perhaps Mycroft used the story to make 
Sherlock forget about the real east wind, and what she did to him.
• There’s something odd going on with Lady Smallwood. Previously she’s been 
“Elizabeth Smallwood” but on the card she left for Mycroft she was “Alicia 
Smallwood”.

• I’ve often thought there was more to Miss Me, Moriarty’s oft-repeated 
posthumous coda. Perhaps now realising it’s an acrostic: Mycroft, Irene 
(Adler), Sherlock, Sherrinford, Moriarty, Euros.


Notes and observations
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F435cb1acdbee55dd76f909e3c39cde5ba22d4b02%2F0_0_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Lying%20Detective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Lying%20Detective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F435cb1acdbee55dd76f909e3c39cde5ba22d4b02%2F0_0_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Solving mysteries in a smack-fuelled daze … Sherlock. Photograph: 
BBC/Hartswood Films/Ollie Upton 
• It was lovely to see Benedict Cumberbatch flexing his Shakespearean muscle, 
reciting the monologue from Henry V while in a smack-fuelled daze.


• “Even I text, John. I have this terrible feeling that we might all just be 
human. Even you.” Sherlock tells John to forgive himself for his adulterous 
sexting, although I’m not so sure flirting with some random you met on the bus 
while your wife comforts your child counts as an unavoidable part of the human 
condition, to be honest.

• Whatever you think of last week’s episode – and there has been a broad 
spectrum of reviews; I believe Giles Corencompared 
<https://twitter.com/gilescoren/status/818152771744579585> it to “a 90-minute 
film of Mark Gatiss having a wank” – the dignified response of the 
programme-makers would be noble silence. Instead, we had Mr Gatissresponding to 
a piece in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/03/sherlock-slowly-perversely-morphing-into-james-bond-benedict-cumberbatch>
 that was concerned with Sherlock’s similarities to Bond with ahumourless poem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/04/is-sherlock-worse-for-too-much-action-mark-gatiss-sends-his-verse-reaction>
: “Here is a critic who says with low blow/ Sherlock’s no brainbox but become 
double-O.” I think some critics unfairly scold Sherlock for deviating from the 
formula, but Gattis’s intervention did feel a lot like self-pleasure.

That’s it. We’ll be back next week for the 100-minute finale, The Final 
Problem.

 