
The New Year’s Day season opener of the new series of Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/01/sherlock-benedict-cumberbatch-review-james-bond-margaret-thatcher-mark-gatiss-steven-moffat-detective>
 trounced the opposition, becoming the most watched television programme of the 
day, capturing 8.1 million viewers.


Featuring a bloodhound, a harrowing death scene, a motherless baby, an animal 
howl of anguish from Martin Freeman as Watson, and the great detective blinking 
away what would have been a tear in the eye of anyone less cold blooded than 
Benedict Cumberbatch’s Holmes, the programme took just under a third – 32.8% – 
of the viewing audience.

It became the second most popular programme of the festive period, beaten only 
by the New Year’s Eve countdown and midnight fireworks, which got 11.6 million 
viewers. It was also slightly down on last year’sSherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> special, The Abominable 
Bride, which had 8.4 million viewers and went on to win two Emmy awards for the 
best television drama, and sold to 216 international broadcasters, the 
corporation’s biggest export success.

This time Sherlock beat the Queen, though her Christmas message 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38488141> was the most popular 
programme of Christmas Day, watched by 7.7 million, recorded before she caught 
thebad cold which has kept her out of the public gaze for the entire festive 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/01/queen-misses-new-years-day-church-service-due-to-lingering-cold>
.

 The Six Thatchers, Sunday’s opener in what may be the last Sherlock series 
due to the increasing commitments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/30/sherlocks-future-in-doubt-as-stars-hollywood-schedules-fill>
 elsewhere of both its stars, left the Brown family trailing in its wake: the 
Mrs Brown’s Boys New Year special, the BBC’s second most popular offering, 
which attracted just 6.7 million viewers – though almost precisely the same 
audience share, presumably as many viewers took their hangovers to bed.


At a preview screening, co-creator Mark Gatiss warned that the new three-part 
series of Sherlock could be the last.

“We would love to do more, but we are not lying, we absolutely don’t know. 
It’s up to all kinds of factors, scheduling. Willingness to do it is all here, 
but we are just not sure.”

Both lead actors have become international stars since Sherlock, based on 
updated versions of the classic Sir Arthur Conan Doyle stories, began in 2010. 
Cumberbatch played the hero in Marvel’s Doctor Strange this year, and is due to 
appear in at least two more films in the series. Freeman starred in The Hobbit 
films, and in the Fargo television series.
 