
Spoiler alert: this recap contains spoilers to the Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> episode The Six Thatchers, 
which aired on 1 January 2017.

Steven Moffatt and Mark Gattis have never shied from fiddling with the format 
ofSherlock <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>. For each 
“normal” episode – clever deductions, crime solving, battling Moriarty in a war 
of wits – we get a “weird” one: a big set-piece wedding, conflicting 
explanations for Sherlock’s resurrection, a drug-induced fever dream set in 
Victorian London. Occasionally these odder episodes stray too far from the 
formula, trying too hard to impress the obsessives, while giving too little to 
the casual viewer.

Sherlock review – Cumberbatch channels Bond in the most explosive outing yet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/01/sherlock-benedict-cumberbatch-review-james-bond-margaret-thatcher-mark-gatiss-steven-moffat-detective>
This time around, they got it spot on, combining rewarding scenes of 
Sherlock’s smart-aleck detective work with grand series arcs, empathetic 
character evolution and a shocking and series-altering death. And for the first 
time, we see Sherlock’s arrogance, his need to be smarter than everyone else, 
proving to be his downfall rather than his saviour.

Throughout the episode we hear repeated versions of the same story: 
Appointment in Samarra, an old fable about being unable to escape an 
appointment with death. The story, first read in its entirety by Sherlock, is 
based on an ancient Mesopotamian fable that appears in the Babylonian Talmud. A
1934 American novel <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appointment_in_Samarra>, 
about the eventual suicide of the fictional character Julian English, was also 
inspired by the tale and borrowed its title. Here too, it is used as a 
forebringer of elective self-destruction, with Mary, after spending much of the 
episode on the run, facing up to the inevitability of her death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34388377a5b90dcab1579bddf8984bd66b4d17df%2F0_71_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Six%20Thatchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Six%20Thatchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34388377a5b90dcab1579bddf8984bd66b4d17df%2F0_71_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 For the first time, we see Sherlock’s arrogance proving to be his downfall 
rather than his saviour. Photograph: BBC/Hartswood Films/Robert Viglasky 
Before we get into all that, a quick catch-up for anyone who has forgotten a 
few of the finer details in the three-year gap between series. In the final 
episode of the third series (His Last Vow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jan/12/sherlock-recap-series-three-episode-three-his-last-vow>
), Sherlock shot media mogul Magnussen, in order to prevent him from revealing 
Mary’s true identity and blackmailing John. That forced Mycroft to banish 
Sherlock from the UK, sending him on a mission in eastern Europe that would 
likely result in his death. Sherlock is recalled four minutes later as 
Moriarty, thought to be dead, appeared on every screen in the country with his 
chilling new catchphrase, “Did you miss me?”. Then in 2016’s one-off special 
(The Abominable Bride), Sherlock entered a drug-induced stupor which returned 
him to Victorian London, all to reach the not-that-startling conclusion that 
Moriarty is probably really dead, but getting other people to do his posthumous 
bidding.

“Are those ginger nuts? I love ginger nuts.”

We pick up with Sherlock and Mycroft in the Cabinet Office. Sherlock is like 
an excitable child, grabbing fistfuls of biscuits and tweeting, with a 
Trumpesque brashness, about his return to Britain. Mycroft and senior figures 
in the government, including Elizabeth Smallwood, explain how they’ve covered 
up his assassination of Magnussen by doctoring the footage to make it look like 
someone else did it. But Sherlock shows little gratitude, instead opting to 
engage the secretary, Mrs Norbury, in a brief riff on Mivvis, the discontinued 
ice lolly. Norbury is also told not to take any minutes because this operation 
is so top secret it must never be spoken about.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20Sherlock%20Holmes%20return%20in%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20Day%20episode%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20Sherlock%20Holmes%20return%20in%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20Day%20episode%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video&media=>
Watch Sherlock Holmes return in New Year’s Day episode trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/17/watch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video>
“A jellyfish? You can’t arrest a jelly fish!”

There’s a lovely sequence that follows where Sherlock, thrilled to be back on 
the job, solves scores of seemingly impossible cases mostly without ever 
standing up. It’s a humorous nod to what this show has chosen not to be: a 
conventional detective drama where a few sneaky clues give away the killer. The 
BBC also brought back its other noticing-things detective this week,Jonathan 
Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/29/jonathan-creek-review-suitably-silly-scary-arch-pleased-with-itself>
. In the first Creek episode, a mother and her children mysteriously dying was 
lazily put-to-bed with a last-minute mention of a rare blood disease. This 
section feels like it is mocking the slapdash answer of shows like Creek, when 
Sherlock apparently solves eight murders in under a minute with throwaway lines 
like “Odd socks? Arrest the brother-in-law” and “If the dog can’t swim the 
neighbour did it.” Sherlock’s still solving mysteries via text when Mary goes 
into labour, and refuses to put his phone down when John asks him to be 
godfather to their newborn daughter, or even during the christening.

“Mary? This is about Mary”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffddd2e89f1b7614b87a97b992b333ed56efb2294%2F0_0_2856_4284%2F2856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Six%20Thatchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Six%20Thatchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffddd2e89f1b7614b87a97b992b333ed56efb2294%2F0_0_2856_4284%2F2856.jpg>
 And so to the meat of the episode … Mary’s death. Photograph: Laurence 
Cendrowicz/BBC/PA 
So to the meat of the episode: after Sherlock resolves a case about a dead boy 
mysteriously appearing in his own car (he was wearing a vinyl car seat for a 
birthday prank, of course) he becomes obsessed over a smashed bust of Margaret 
Thatcher. Soon more smashed Thatchers start appearing all over England. A handy 
hacker reveals that all the statues were made in Tbilisi, a run of six. 
Sherlock hunts down the final statue in Reading, where he catches its robber 
red-handed, engaging in some wild hand-to-hand combat, and a violent scene 
where they try to drown each other in a swimming pool. Sherlock assumes it’s 
Moriarty behind all this, somehow sending underlings to search for the valuable 
Borgia pearl hidden inside one of the statues. But when he smashes the final 
statue open he finds a USB stick, seemingly the same USB stick Mary gave John 
in His Last Vow, with all the information about her former life as a freelance 
assassin. The bust thief, Ajay, says he used to work with Mary before she 
betrayed him, and that he is intent on killing her.

Sherlock promises to protect Mary, referring to the vow he made at the 
christening (turns out he was listening after all), but she doesn’t think he 
can … so she drugs him and does a runner.

Throughout the episode Sherlock talks earnestly about the vows he’s made to 
Mary and John, promising to be a protector for the family. This, coupled with 
the flashy combat scenes, seems to add up to Sherlock taking the role of a more 
traditional action hero, something alluded to by the creators who said 
previously that they wanted to make Sherlock more of a goodie and, in the words 
of Cumberbatch, “less of a dick”.

Anyway, Mary goes on the run, rolling dice to decide which country she should 
go to next. One thing she didn’t count on is that Sherlock stuck a tracking 
device in her USB stick. After endless travels and assumed identities, she 
doesn’t seem that pissed off when Sherlock and John show up in Egypt having 
tracked her down without any fuss. Indeed Mary and Sherlock are getting on 
famously, making jokes at John’s expense and forming the main double act of the 
episode. It’s all japes and laughs between the two of them, despite the fact 
that he’s completely ruined her cover and Ajay appears moments later, armed and 
ready to kill her. He tells Mary she betrayed him during a mission in Tbilisi, 
and blames her for his six years of torture by his captors. He says the 
Georgian terrorists had been tipped off about the mission by someone with the 
codename Ammo – a British woman. Mary tries to explain that this wasn’t her, 
but Ajay is killed before she has the chance.

“So many lies, I don’t just mean you…”

In a slightly unsatisfying subplot, John meets a mystery women on the bus who 
gives him her number. We learn later that he followed up on the encounter, 
having some very weak flirty banter – “Night Owl?” “Vampire” – and potentially 
meeting up too. It seems unlikely the perfect John Watson would have had an 
affair with a stranger, cheating on the mother of his child, so there’s likely 
more to this story than first appears. John eventually breaks things off by 
telling her “I’m not free” rather than “I’m not single”, so perhaps it was 
Sherlock she was asking him to betray, not Mary.

“A nice location for the final act”

After a quick bit of mindpalace deduction, Sherlock works out it was the 
secretary, Mrs Norbury, who actually betrayed Agra all those years ago, and 
they arrange to meet in the London Aquarium, both of them enjoying the drama of 
the location.

Norbury admits she had been selling state secrets for cash, but was about to 
rumbled by the British ambassador in Georgia. Fortunately, the ambassador was 
taken hostage, but when Norbury found out Agra were going in to save them, she 
knew she’d be found out. So she tipped off the terrorists, ensuring everyone 
died and her secret would never be discovered. She told them the code name too, 
Ammo, or Amo, Latin for “Love”, which is also Elizabeth Smallwood’s codename. 
So if anyone did enquire, they might assume it was Smallwood who had given the 
order (as Sherlock did earlier on).

At this point it could have all been over. Lestrade walks in with the police, 
Norbury is arrested, everyone goes back to Baker Street for a nice cup of tea. 
But Sherlock has to push things further, analysing Norbury, accusing her of 
acting out of jealousy towards her powerful colleagues, and goading her about 
her loneliness, alcoholism and predictability. Mrs Norbury is successfully 
provoked, and in a last-ditch attempt to prove her spontaneity, fires a gun in 
the direction of Sherlock, but Mary jumps to take the bullet. A minute later, 
she’s dead. In her final moments she tells Sherlock they are now equal (after 
the time she shot him) and describes her love for John, who groans in 
uncontrollable agony, only breaking to tell Sherlock he betrayed his vow. It’s 
a brutal scene, and one that leaves John a widow, just like in the Conan Doyle 
stories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21cc043b27216dc5bf5ee97ce7db471edf108467%2F0_0_2856_4284%2F2856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Six%20Thatchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sherlock%20recap%3A%20series%20four%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Six%20Thatchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fsherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21cc043b27216dc5bf5ee97ce7db471edf108467%2F0_0_2856_4284%2F2856.jpg>
 Brutal … John is left a widow, betrayed by Sherlock. Photograph: Laurence 
Cendrowicz/BBC/Hartswood Films 
Having said that, I take slight issue with the manner of Mary’s death. 
Certainly Sherlock avoids the boring cliche of other TV shows where guns are 
waved around as a threat but never actually fired. But it does seem like 
characters are shot in the chest quite a lot in this series. After a while, you 
do hope for something a little more dramatic – particularly when the assembled 
parties are gathered next to a shark tank.

In the run-up to this episode, there was concern from some that Moffat and 
Gattis’s decision to amend Conan Doyle’s The Six Napoleons to The Six Thatchers 
was going to cause controversy, with the writers having to defend themselves 
against accusations that the luvvie-lefty BBC was indulging them in their 
desire to show Thatcher’s head being repeatedly smashed to rubble.

But in the end, there was nothing political about the episode. In fact it was 
the Iron Sherlock that was not for turning, his lack of compromise and cruel 
characterisations leading to the death of Sherlock’s new best pal. In the final 
scene back at Baker Street, he tells Mrs Hudson that any time he is getting too 
cocky, she should say the word “Norbury” to him – a reminder that his ego can 
cause misery as well as brilliance.

Mysteries unsolved

 * Redbeard, Sherlock’s childhood dog, and the one word Sherlock wrote in his 
notebook at the end of the 2016 episode, makes another appearance – this time 
in a dream when Sherlock is briefly drugged by Mary. At the end of the episode 
Sherlock tells a psychiatrist that he keeps having the same dream. Could this 
be about Redbeard too?

 * In one of the final scenes, Mycroft removes a takeaway menu from his fridge 
(weird that Mycroft has a fridge? Or would consider ordering takeaway?) to 
reveal a Post-it note reading “13th”. He sighs, then makes a call – “put me 
through to Sherrinford please”. Sherrinford was the name Conan Doyle originally 
intended to use for Sherlock, but has since been taken by other writers as 
Sherlock and Mycroft’s older brother. Could we be about to meet a third Holmes? 
Notes and observations

 * John jokingly asks if it’s “too early for a divorce?” when he’s left on 
childcare duties. It’s one of a couple of lines that seems 
poignant-in-retrospect, as we’ve since learnt thatMartin Freeman and Amanda 
Abbington had separated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/22/martin-freeman-amanda-abbington-split-up-16-years-sherlock>
 shortly before filming this episode.

 * John Watson is an army man, a man who respects authority and observes the 
conventions of polite society. Why on Earth, may I ask, did he leave a London 
bus through the front door? 
That’s it – see you back here next week for the introduction of Toby Jones as 
Culverton Smith.
 