
One of the stories in “Dr Who” earlier this year ended with the scene of 
dozens of tailor’s dummies smashing their way through plate glass windows and 
shooting down the populace: the dummies had come to life.

It was a dramatic scene full of sinister possibilities and, in a curious way, 
prophetic of what is actually happening. For although (one hopes) it will be 
many, many years before dummies take the law into their own hands, they are 
becoming increasingly lifelike and, because of this, are exerting an influence 
on fashion as never before.


Until the beginning of the 1960s, most tailor’s dummies were imported from 
France and Denmark and they were exactly what they sound, mute, stupid-looking 
objects which struck poses - feet splayed out and arms stiffly held out at the 
sides - which no one in his right mind would ever adopt, let alone hold for any 
length of time.


They had neither life nor movement: they were abstract figures acting as 
glorified clothes pegs, and the clothes they displayed took on the stiffly 
formalised character of the dummies themselves. It was because the dummies were 
such perverse stuck-up creatures thatAdel Rootstein 
<http://www.rootstein.com/pages/Adel_Rootstein/>, who had previously made 
animals for display purposes, decided to produce some dummies (only she calls 
them mannequins) herself. Hers were to be modelled on real people and, more 
than that, the poses they struck and the make-up they wore were to reflect, if 
not actually lead, the fashion world around them.


Because the mannequins were to be so closely related to fashion, it was 
natural that Adel Rootstein’s first models should be fashion models - Imogen 
Woodford and Jill Kennington - and this practice has continued ever since. The 
process of manufacture is simple. The models pose for John Taylor, who makes a 
clay sculpture of them around a wire frame, and a plaster cast is then made 
from which a mould is taken so that the mannequins - any number of them - can 
be cast in glass fibre.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmannequins-lifelike-shops-1970-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0c01a96e3678f15a929b8483f6133fad16d7e71%2F0_408_4565_6285%2F4565.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shop%20mannequins%20to%20be%20more%20lifelike%20-%20fashion%20archive%2C%2017%20April%201970&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmannequins-lifelike-shops-1970-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shop%20mannequins%20to%20be%20more%20lifelike%20-%20fashion%20archive%2C%2017%20April%201970&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmannequins-lifelike-shops-1970-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0c01a96e3678f15a929b8483f6133fad16d7e71%2F0_408_4565_6285%2F4565.jpg>
 Mannequins in Mary Quant’s boutique ‘Bazaar’ on London’s Kings Road, 1966. 
Photograph: Michael Putland/Getty Images 
At the plaster cast stage, the arms and legs may be cut off and given joints 
so that the mannequins have a limited amount of movement, but the real movement 
is in the pose itself, and each fashion model is sculpted in several different 
poses. The results are striking attitudes which stem from the model herself, 
and a series of mannequins all of which are closely related.


Adel Rootstein’s other innovation was her treatment of the face and hair. The 
dummies prior to her own creations had featureless and characterless faces, 
just like those in “Dr Who,” whereas John Taylor takes just as much care over 
the modelling of the head as he does over the rest of the body, and the 
mannequin’s face is a close though simplified version of the model herself. 
Even the makeup is often true to life.


Perhaps the greatest success after Woodford and Kennington was the mannequin 
based onTwiggy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twiggy>, which was modelled in 
1966 and introduced to the American market at the same time as Twiggy herself - 
probably to the benefit of both. Adel Rootstein also introduced the first 
Negress mannequin, based onDonyale Luna 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2013/07/first-black-supermodel-whom-history-forgot.html>
, and although there was initially a great deal of opposition to the black 
mannequin, in America at least it has now become widely accepted.


Like Twiggy, Donyale established her own look - an outer space look - just as 
the latest collection of mannequins, called The Group, takes on the free and 
easy poses of swinging London and suggests an unconventional and carefree 
attitude to dress.

Adel Rootstein designs all the clothes used for the mannequins in her showroom 
in Soho Square, London - The Group, for example, wears chiffons and velvets 
hand painted by Hanna Meek - though the shops which buy the mannequins, of 
course, dress them as they please. Besides The Group, there are three other new 
mannequins based on Gloria Lewis and her two daughters, Suzanne and Vicky. For 
the first time, mannequins can easily be used to show how a whole family can 
dress alike.

The Group, in fact, has pushed reality still further, because the mannequins 
have been designed to display see-through clothes as well. As a note in the 
factory says, “All mannequins to have painted nipples from now on.” One wonders 
how long it will be before the pubic hair is shown, too. And, because the 
mannequins are intended to keep pace with fashion, more and more attention is 
being paid to men, already (like children) in the collection, but to be greatly 
extended next year. If Gloria Lewis has any sons, it seems certain that they, 
too, will be in the shop windows in 1971.
 