
Retailers are already being forced to cut the price of their winter ranges as 
yet another mild autumn wilts demand on the high street for warmclothing.

Department store chains House of Fraser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/house-fraser> and Debenhams are offering 
up to 30% off coats, knitwear and boots this weekend, forcing rival John Lewis 
into a round of price matching due to its Never Knowingly Undersold price 
promise. Other stores ranging from Hobbs to Phase Eight and Monsoon are also 
trying to drum up business with selected discounts, while Whistles is offering 
up to £50 off coats and knitwear.

Black Friday discounts drive surprise rise in UK retail sales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/17/black-friday-discounts-drive-surge-uk-retail-sales>
David McCorquodale, head of retail at KPMG, said retailers were trying to 
kickstart spending as shoppers were holding back on purchases in the weeks 
leading up to Black Friday, the online shopping bonanza at the end of November. 
“Last year, Black Friday was bigger than Christmas, with promotions running 
over four days, so people are holding off spending and that diminishes 
retailers’ sales in the weeks before and after,” he said.

Fashion retailers are struggling to win over shoppers at a time when spending 
their disposable income on leisure activities such as eating out and holidays 
has become more popular.

Analysts at Kantar Worldpanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/17/another-high-street-name-could-join-bhs-scrapheap-kantar-sales-decline-uk-fashion>
 said earlier this month that spending on clothes and footwear in the UK had 
dropped to its lowest level in seven years. Its figures showed that shoppers 
spent £700m less on clothing, shoes and accessories in the year to 25 September 
than they had during the previous 12 months.

On Tuesday, Debenhams said its clothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/debenhams-targets-bhs-customers-with-new-lighting-departments>
 business had fared slightly better than the 4% decline seen across the market 
in the past six months as growth in holiday clothing, including swimwear, and 
outfits for special occasions rose, while sales of everyday clothing slid. 
“Maybe gone are the days of just buying. You have got to really want something 
to buy,” said Suzanne Harlow, the group’s trading director.

The weather has not been kind to fashion industry executives in recent years, 
with mild winters followed by erratic summer temperatures making it difficult 
to persuade Britons to update their wardrobes at the start of a new season.

However, some of the malaise in spending was self-inflicted, said 
McCorquodale: “Fashion retailers have tried to straddle the seasons, but have 
not done a particularly good job of it. A lot of the fashion has just not been 
that inspirational.”

The cold snap earlier this month provided clothing chains with a much-needed 
boost, according to the weekly high street sales tracker produced by advisory 
firm BDO, which monitors the performance of mid-sized fashion chains.

However, its latest data shows sales are once again falling, with 
like-for-likes down 1.21% in the week to Sunday 23 October. “While some of the 
upscale and bespoke fashion retailers enjoyed moderate boosts, this was offset 
by declining sales amongst mid-range fashion retailers and across the peer 
group,” said BDO.

Analysts are keenly watching how clothing market leader Marks & Spencer reacts 
to the tough trading environment. Its new boss, Steve Rowe, appears to be 
holding his nerve, with the most notable winter promotion being a chance to buy 
a wool scarf for £5 when customers spend £40. Rowe is trying to wean the 
retailer off an over-reliance on discounting after more than 40% of its 
clothing was sold on promotion last year.
 