
Every day, Elizabeth Kiker cycles to her work through the streets of Seattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seattle>. As the executive director of a 
big bicycle club, she wants to show people that you don’t need fancy gear to 
ride a bike – so she rides in her skirt and office shoes. But she does wear a 
helmet. If she didn’t, she would risk a $102 (£67) fine.

Seattle is one of the few big cities in the world where cyclists of all ages 
are legally required to wear a helmet. “There’s an interesting conversation 
going on about this, because it could dissuade people from cycling,” says 
Kiker. “And yet, it is safer if you fall. I once slipped with my bike and fell 
on my helmet and I was glad I was wearing it.”

Five thousand miles to the east, Marco te Brömmelstroet cycles to his job as 
director of the UrbanCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> 
Institute of the University of Amsterdam. The wind is blowing freely through 
his hair. “Cycling without a helmet is something I take for granted, I never 
give it any thought,” he says. “But it does amplify the feeling of ultimate 
freedom.”

In Amsterdam, adults don’t wear helmets while riding city bikes – they don’t 
even consider it an option. Helmets are mainly worn by tourists and expats, 
whom the Dutch regard with bemusement, even ridicule. They know their country 
is a very safe place to ride a bike: in the Netherlands, the number of cyclists 
killed per travelled mile is thelowest in the world 
<http://blogs-images.forbes.com/niallmccarthy/files/2015/02/20150224_Cyclists_Fo.jpg>
.

Cycling without a helmet is something I take for granted, I never give it any 
thought
Marco te Brömmelstroet  Marco te Brömmelstroet is the director of the Urban 
Cycling Institute of the University of Amsterdam 
 Should cyclists in cities wear helmets? And should there be such a thing as a 
helmet law? Only last week, Britain’s transport minister Robert Goodwill was 
criticised because he urged cyclists to wear helmets –while admitting he rides 
bareheaded through London himself 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/tory-transport-minister-tells-cyclists-6573852?utm_content=buffer90caa&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
. The helmet question has stirred up a heated debate for a long time and it’s 
not likely to end very soon. Both critics and advocates seem to have a point.

“Helmets are very effective in preventing head injuries and there are many 
studies to prove it <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejm198905253202101>
,” maintains Randy Swart of the American Bicycle Helmet Safety Institute. 
“These are medical studies, some of them based on emergency room data, some of 
them based on crash data from accident scenes. Just as important is the 
information that comes from bicycle clubs and organisations. From their 
experience, they confirm what the medical studies show: that helmets are 
effective. There’s a lot of argument about the precentage of injuries that can 
be prevented by wearing a helmet, but I estimate it to be somewhere around two 
thirds.”

Te Brömmelstroet does not agree. “The problem is precisely that there are not 
so many studies and that most of the existing studies aremethodologically not 
very sound 
<http://www.fietsberaad.nl/library/repository/bestanden/Overestimation%20of%20the%20effectiveness%20of%20the%20bicycle%20helmet2.pdf>
,” he says. According to him, there only are a limited amount of scenarios in 
which helmets provide protection. “That is when the cyclist falls without being 
involved in a crash. But when you collide with a car that drives faster than 20 
miles an hour, a helmet does nothing to save you.”

In the US, where rules on helmets vary from state to state, Seattle made them 
mandatory 12 years ago. The helmet law came about mainly due to pressure from 
people who worked in local health care. “It didn’t come about because Seattle 
would be more dangerous for cyclists than other cities,” Kiker says. “There has 
been some debate lately, because it was feared the helmet law would hurt our 
new bike share programme, but it hasn’t. They have been very innovative about 
how to incorporate the helmet law into the programme. You can now check out a 
helmet when you check out a bike.”

The answer to the helmet question is not as simple as it seems, says Te 
Brömmelstroet. “It is important to realise that wearing a helmet can have 
negative effects. It does not always make cycling safer. Cyclists with helmets 
are liable to take more risks because they consider themselves safe. And an 
English study has shown thatmotorists give considerably less space 
<http://www.bath.ac.uk/news/articles/releases/overtaking110906.html> whilst 
overtaking cyclists with helmets than when they overtake cyclists that go 
bareheaded. If you look at it this way, wearing a helmet could lead to more 
injuries than not wearing one.’’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fbike-helmets-compulsory-seattle-amsterdam-cycling-safety%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc393d5d348d09069ec4c948068441e91b001115%2F0_186_5469_3283%2F5469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20bike%20helmets%20be%20compulsory%3F%20Lessons%20from%20Seattle%20and%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fbike-helmets-compulsory-seattle-amsterdam-cycling-safety%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20bike%20helmets%20be%20compulsory%3F%20Lessons%20from%20Seattle%20and%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fbike-helmets-compulsory-seattle-amsterdam-cycling-safety%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc393d5d348d09069ec4c948068441e91b001115%2F0_186_5469_3283%2F5469.jpg>
 Cycling in Melbourne. Helmets are compulsory for cyclists across Australia and 
New Zealand. Photograph: Alamy 
That wearing a helmet can lead to more aggression from motorists, at least in 
the Netherlands, is something Te Brömmelstroet knows from experience. “I cycle 
to work on a city bike without a helmet, but at the weekends, I wear one while 
riding my racing bicycle. In the last case, I encounter more aggression. I 
suddenly seem to belong to a group that triggers a lot of anger.’’

Although they disagree on the safety that helmets provide, Swart, Kiker and Te 
Brömmelstroet all agree on one thing: it’s not helmets that make cycling truly 
safe, butthe amount of cyclists on the road 
<http://injuryprevention.bmj.com/content/9/3/205.short>. “In all American 
cities where bike riding has gone up, crashes have come down,” says Kiker.

The big question here, of course, is: do cycle helmets increase or decrease 
the number of cyclists in a city? “If you want to encourage cycling, helmet 
laws are certainly not a good idea,” says Te Brömmelstroet. “When you make 
helmets mandatory, people will think that cycling is impractical and even 
dangerous. For example, in Australia the number of cyclistswent down drastically
 <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/000145759490006X> after 
helmets became mandatory.”

“If a helmet law were going to reduce cycling significantly, I would say you’d 
have to think very seriously before passing it. It is a valid consideration,” 
Swart agrees. “But Australia is half a world away. Compulsory helmets might 
start a revolution in one place but can be just fine in another. A lot of what 
we are talking about is simply cultural. In the US, we do not have any 
documented situations where passing a helmet law reduced cycling.”

It was feared the helmet law would hurt our new bike share programme, but it 
hasn’t
Elizabeth Kiker  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fbike-helmets-compulsory-seattle-amsterdam-cycling-safety%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444325677683%2Fa70792e4-beb6-4a4f-b2df-028b8f98e7e2-2060x1485.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20bike%20helmets%20be%20compulsory%3F%20Lessons%20from%20Seattle%20and%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fbike-helmets-compulsory-seattle-amsterdam-cycling-safety%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20bike%20helmets%20be%20compulsory%3F%20Lessons%20from%20Seattle%20and%20Amsterdam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fbike-helmets-compulsory-seattle-amsterdam-cycling-safety%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444325677683%2Fa70792e4-beb6-4a4f-b2df-028b8f98e7e2-2060x1485.jpeg>
 If Elizabeth Kiker did not wear a helmet in Seattle she could be fined $102 
“In Seattle, the amount of cyclists has definitely gone up,” says Kiker. “Of 
course, there are fewer bikes on the road than in Dutch cities. But I do feel 
safe while riding through the city. And I ride everywhere. My bike is how I get 
around.”

When the numbers of cyclist go up, there is a clear impact on how drivers 
treats cyclists. Swart explains: “In most cities in the United States, drivers 
are not expecting bicycles. So they aren’t looking in the right direction when 
they overtake one. In some places, drivers don’t even know how to react to a 
cyclist. When more people cycle in a city, drivers become accustomed to them, 
they accept them and they learn how to safely deal with them. More cyclists 
means greater safety, so we should do all we can to encourage cycling.

“In cities where there is a lot of cycling, the majority of the motorists also 
often ride a bicycle. So they are much more aware of the impact of their 
driving style on cyclists,” says Te Brömmelstroet. “Car speeds come down in 
cities where cycling is important, and this opens opportunities to mix traffic 
in such a way that motorists behave as guests. In the Netherlands, you can see 
this in so-calledfietsstraten, or bicycle-streets, where cyclists are the 
dominant mode of transport.”

The problem is not only that helmet laws would reduce cycling, he says. “When 
governments make helmets compulsory, they leave the responsibility for safety 
in the hands of the cyclists. They are blaming the victim. Whereas in the 
Netherlands, we believe in the responsibility of the motorist. That’s why our 
government has introduced strict liability.”

The most cycle-friendly cities in the world – your pictures and stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/guardianwitness-blog/2015/jun/01/cycle-friendly-cities-world-your-pictures-and-stories>
This means that in Amsterdam, in case of a crash, the motorist is liable for 
financial damage, unless he can prove that the cyclist was at fault – but then 
he still will be liable for half of the damage.

Swart is not totally convinced whether this is a good measure: “There are two 
considerations here. One is: it will make the motorist more careful. And that 
is very good. But secondly, I can also imagine that the motorist will consider 
it unfair when the cyclist didn’t wear a helmet and is then subject to an 
injury that would not have happened if he were wearing one.”

“As a scientist and as a father, I am not against helmets,” says Te 
Brömmelstroet. “But I am certainly against helmet laws. If you want to make 
cycling safer, start with good infrastructure: build segregated cyclepaths. I 
am against the false idea of security that helmets offer. They may have some 
protective value, but not as much as people tend to think. And why all this 
focus on protecting the head?’’ he adds jokingly. “If you want to be really 
safe, you should also consider elbow, knee and back protection. And why all 
this emphasis on the need to wear helmets onbikes? The majority of head 
injuries occur in cars, but motorist wouldn’t dream of wearing a helmet!”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 