
Given that Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> is 
currently embroiled in potential financial messiness, should I stop buying 
clothes from Topshop?

Karyn, by email

Diary of a BHS worker: ‘If there were a Dignitas for department stores, I 
would make the call’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-worker-diary-department-store-jobs>
“Philip Green is embroiled in financial messiness”? Karyn, please. Show some 
manners.Sir Philip Green is embroiled in financial messiness, OK? Honestly, 
people just don’t have any respect for the moneymakers these days.

Oh Philip, Philip, Philip. Big Phil, as I imagine he likes to be called. Uncle 
Phil, asKate Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss> calls him, 
probably just before she kisses his shiny, scabby head and then takes off with 
his yacht for two weeks. (“Yah, yah, I’ll bring it back in perfect condition, 
promise. Luv you, Uncle Phil!”)

Even before the events of the past few months, in which Green has been accused 
ofenriching himself at the cost of the high-street chain BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 and its 11,000 workers, I doubt anyone would have struggled too much to tell 
the difference between Philip Green andMother Teresa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/mother-teresa>. Green has long seemed to make 
it his life’s mission to live up to every negative stereotype of a rich person:
the wife in Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/tina-green-lady-of-leisure-or-lioness-heading-her-pride>
, thedaughter on reality TV 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2034604/Made-In-Chelsea-Chloe-Green-takes-centre-stage-promo-shot-second-series.html>
, theinfamous rudeness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2003/mar/04/supermarkets>, the displays 
of expenditure so over the top he makes Donald Trump seem self-deprecating. So 
many examples of this come to mind, but my favourite will always be the 
three-day£4m barmitzvah he threw for his son 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1490030/Philip-Green-gives-4-million-party-for-his-sons-bar-mitzvah-but-no-present.html>
, Brandon, at the Grand-Hotel du Cap-Ferrat in 2005. Live performances from 
Andrea Bocelli and Destiny’s Child could, I guess, be considered the party’s 
highlights. But I was always intrigued more by the – and I’m quoting an actual 
interview with Green – “pop-up synagogue” constructed in the hotel’s garden, 
designed byGreen’s wife, Tina, a woman whose talents truly cannot be contained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/tina-green-lady-of-leisure-or-lioness-heading-her-pride>
.

“We’ll probably ship it to Israel afterwards, but we haven’t decided where 
yet,” Green told reporters at the time, apparently feeling the Middle East 
hadn’t suffered enough tragedy yet. Should any readers, Israeli or otherwise, 
know further details of what happened to Tina Green’s synagogue, please do 
write in, ideally with photographs.

How strange it must be to be Philip Green. How many elaborate gymnastic 
routines you must perform so that even though you know, deep down, that all 
these politicians and celebrities who suck up to you wouldn’t spit on you to 
put out a fire if you were poor, you can still tell yourself that they’re your 
friends. Green is, of course, not alone in suffering from this delusion – it is 
common to most famous and wealthy people. But he does seem to suffer from it 
more than most, given the palpable pleasure he has always taken inposing with 
models at fashion shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/01/curious-silence-philip-green-celebrity-friends-bhs-kate-moss>
, who are often, coincidentally, on the Topshop payroll. How strange it must be 
to have to pay your friends to sit next to you.

Tina Green: Lady of leisure or 'blonde hurricane' of a formidable partnership?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/tina-green-lady-of-leisure-or-lioness-heading-her-pride>
Fans of Topshop have had to do their own internal gymnastics for some time. 
Protesters have become almost as regular a feature of the store as the crappy
faux band vests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/01/curious-silence-philip-green-celebrity-friends-bhs-kate-moss>
 on permanent sale. Most recently there wereprotests demanding a living wage 
for the store’s cleaners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/24/topshop-arcadia-philip-green-living-wage-campaign-britannia-cleaners-minimum-wage>
. Previously, there were protests about howGreen and his wife are tax avoiders 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-11918873>, protests about sweatshops 
<http://peopleandplanet.org/navid5644>, protests about the store’s use of 
skinny mannequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/27/topshop-mannequin-customer-complaint-facebook>
. It is true that pretty much all high-street clothing stores have incurred 
similar protests. But because Green, with his whale-sized ego, has insisted on 
making himself the face of his stores, it is harder to put his brand’s failings 
down to the faults of a faceless corporate brand. When you hear about one of 
Primark’s suppliers paying illegal workers £3.50 an hour (as they did in 2009 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7833023.stm>), you probably feel a momentary 
flare of outrage, but eventually forget it as the story comes without a central 
figure. When you hear about Topshop or any of the stores in Green’s Arcadia 
stable doing something similar, you know precisely who is being enriched at 
someone else’s cost, because he’s in your newspaper, posing in St Tropez.

What’s more, Green couldn’t care less, as proven by his purchase of a £46m 
private jet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/19/sir-philip-green-takes-delivery-of-46m-private-jet-says-media-report>
 and £100m yacht just weeks after being questioned by MPs about his role in the 
demise of BHS. Tina, of course, is said to be doing the private plane’s 
interior decor at at cost of £300,000. Truly, her range defies description. Do 
any of us really want to contribute to this absolute shower? Because there’s 
enjoying fashion, and then there’s giving Green more money so he can hire 
Beyoncé to sing at a 13-year-old’s party.

But here’s the real kicker: it’s not so much, should you shop at Topshop but 
do youwant to? Yes, it was once great, but it hasn’t been since Green was so 
daft as to lose itsformer fashion boss Jane Shepherdson 
<http://fashion.telegraph.co.uk/news-features/TMG3364886/Jane-Shepherdson-from-Topshop-to-Oxfam.html>
 in 2007. The truth is, Topshop has long since lost the ground toAsos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> when it comes to cheap, fun clothes 
that look as if they could be designer. So, rejoice! You probably should hold 
off on shopping at Topshop. But you don’t want to go there, anyway.
 