
Should aid continue to flow to middle-income countries, or should the world’s 
poorest countries receive a greater share? It is a debate that has intensified 
since world leaders set the millennium development goals (MDGs) 15 years ago, 
during which timemore than 30 countries 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/developmenttalk/growing-graduation-low-income-middle-income-status>
 have moved from low- to middle-income status.

MDG8, which aims to “develop a global partnership for development”, includes a 
target <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/global.shtml> to increase aid to the 
world’s 48 least developed countries (LDCs). Some campaigners argue this should 
be the priority, while others insist the world would fail most of the world’s 
poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/feb/23/aid-to-middle-income-countries>
 if aid to middle-income countries (MICs) was cut.

We asked two experts to share their thoughts on where the priorities should 
lie.

Sarah Harcourt: ‘We must support the countries furthest behind’

The case for giving more aid to the least developed countries is clear. The 
eighth – and often overlooked – millennium development goal sought toimprove 
financing and policies <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/global.shtml> to 
support development, particularly for countries facing special challenges, such 
as the LDCs.

While overall aid has increased to its highest ever level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/08/foreign-aid-spending-2014-least-developed-countries>
, aid to the LDCs – the world’s poorest countries - hasbeen in decline 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/aidtopoorcountriesslipsfurtherasgovernmentstightenbudgets.htm>
. Since 2010, aid to LDCs has fallen by 6% 
<https://s3.amazonaws.com/one.org/pdfs/DATA_Report_2015_EN.pdf>, and as global 
aid has continued to rise that means the share going to LDCs has fallen, to 
30.3% of total aid in 2014.


While overall aid has increased to its highest-ever level, aid to the world’s 
poorest countries has been in decline
Sara Harcourt 
Yet these are the countries generally the furthest behind in meeting the MDGs 
and the countries with the fewest resources. A staggering 43% of people in LDCs 
live on less than $1.25 a day, as compared with 13% across other developing 
countries. By 2030, half of the people living in extreme poverty are projected 
to live in one of the 48 current LDCs.

Women in LDCs also get a rough deal. Nine out of 10 countries with the highest 
rates of child marriage 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/files/Child_Marriage_Report_7_17_LR..pdf> are 
LDCs. A woman in Sierra Leone is 183 times more likely to die bringing a new 
life into the world than a woman in Switzerland.

Addressing these inequities won’t be easy. Among LDCs, the average level of 
public revenues in 2013 was just $123 (£78) per person – a level at which it is 
impossible to provide basic services such as health and education. Private 
investment in these countries is nominal. At least in the medium term, 
development assistance is a lifeline for these countries. Yet, when you assess 
levels of aid per poor person in LDCs, it averages just $139 per year – lower 
than in other developing countries.

While there’s been a lot of criticism around allocating aid based on income 
categories alone, the LDCs encompass the most vulnerable nations across all 
country groupings. The LDC category is based on criteria of poor socio-economic 
and human development, along with measures of national income and the 
vulnerability of the economy. The majority of LDCs are low-income countries, 
but about one-third are extremely vulnerable middle-income countries.

Two-thirds of the fragile states are LDCs. Tackling the even more ambitious 
sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 will require the effective use of all financial resources. If we are really to 
leave no one behind in the new development agenda, we must allocate half of 
overall aid to the LDCs, which need it the most.

 * Sara Harcourt is policy director of research and publications at the 
advocacy organisationOne. <http://www.one.org/international/> 
Judith Tyson: ‘Aid to middle-income countries should continue’

What is the purpose of aid? For some, it is just about stopping the worst 
human suffering – to help people devastated by conflict, hunger or disease in 
very poor countries. But such aid – even when it is worthy and effective – 
changes little for the world’s poorest in the long term.

 What is needed to end poverty permanently is economic growth. This includes a 
need – as stated by the UK development secretary, Justine Greening – for“trade, 
not aid” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/nov/05/uk-invests-tanzania-trade-china>
 for middle-income countries. They need to assume their responsibility for this 
agenda and many are now fully able to do so. Aid to them is not justified.

 However, to withdraw aid from all countries as they cross the threshold from 
low- to middle-income status is too simplistic.

Some middle-income countries – for example, India, China and Brazil – are now 
strong and an end to aid is justified
Judith Tyson 
First, economic transformation needs to be permanent. Too often – as 
documented by economists such asDani Rodrik <http://rodrik.typepad.com/> – 
growth spurts peter out before true prosperity is achieved. Aid can help to 
ensure that economic gains are long-lasting – in development jargon, 
“catalytic” – for middle-income countries.

 However, it needs to take a different form from low-income countries. It 
needs to include technical assistance, loans rather than grants, and 
co-financing with private capital. Such forms of aid can assist in achieving 
permanent economic strength through building the private sector, eradicating 
corruption and creating the tax systems that enable government to deliver 
public infrastructure and services themselves.

 Second, while some middle-income countries – for example, India, China and 
Brazil – are now strong and an end to aid is justified, others remain 
vulnerable. This includes those countries that have only marginally crossed the 
threshold from low to lower-middle income, such as Congo-Brazzaville, Senegal 
and Sudan. It includes those that are vulnerable because of their small size – 
such as Vanuatu, where acyclone caused chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/vanuatu-cyclone-pam-el-nino-reconstruction>
 – and states that are politically and economically fragile , such as Pakistan 
and Egypt. Aid to these countries should continue so that their progress is not 
reversed.

Finally, those in rich countries should serve their own self-interest – and 
that means continued aid to selected middle-income countries. Shared economic 
and political links – which are built and deepened by aid – with strong and 
stable states can contribute to tackling our shared problems, such as climate 
change, migration and political instability.

This brave new world needs aid to – as well as trade with – middle-income 
countries to cease being a fantasy and become reality.

 * Judith Tyson is a research fellow at the Overseas Development Institute 
<http://www.odi.org/> 


 