
The Silicon Valley comedian TJ Miller was arrested for battery on Friday, Los 
Angeles <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> police said on 
Friday, for allegedly hitting an Uber driver over a political dispute.

A Los Angeles police spokesman, officer Aareon Jefferson, said Miller was 
arrested about 1am at his home, after police received a call from the 6900 
block of Camrose Drive in Hollywood Heights.

Jefferson said Miller had been arrested for battery and was “later released 
under his own cognizance” but could not confirm any details about what led to 
the arrest. On Thursday night Miller hadattended 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/2364662/tj-miller-shocks-with-grisly-ear-wound-on-red-carpet-at-gq-awards-with-model-wife-kate-gorney/>
 a magazine party, after which he took an Uber ride home, according to the 
celebrity gossip siteTMZ 
<http://www.tmz.com/2016/12/09/t-j-miller-arrested-fight-uber-driver/>.

TMZ reported that the driver and Miller had gotten into an argument about 
President-electDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, 
and that Miller had slapped the driver on the head. The driver had then called 
police and “requested a prior personal arrest”, Jefferson said.

Contacted by BuzzFeed 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/claudiarosenbaum/silicon-valley-star-tj-miller-arrested?bftwnews&utm_term=.uo79kmAwX#.xw2xRMQ1O>
, Miller declined to comment. In November, heburned a Trump-brand tie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NShLWUBn8Jg> on a late-night talk show, 
joking: “That’s how shitty Donald Trump’s ties are – they’re not even 
flammable.”

Miller, 35, is best known from his role on the HBO comedy Silicon Valley, and 
his co-stars Kumail Nanjiani‏ and Thomas Middleditch reporteda tense argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/kumail-nanjiani-thomas-middleditch-trump-supporters>
 with Trump supporters last month, a few days after the presidential election. 
According to Nanjiani and Middleditch, two men approached them at a bar and 
began berating the actors as “cucks”, eventually threatening a fight.


Kumail Nanjiani and Thomas Middleditch confronted by Trump fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/kumail-nanjiani-thomas-middleditch-trump-supporters>
“At this point, the bouncer runs over, grabs them, kicks them out,” Nanjiani 
wrote on Twitter. “The bartender is awesome and apologetic. Thomas and I are 
stunned. This happened at a bar in LA surrounded by [people]. I can’t imagine 
what it must be like to be someone who looks like me in other parts.”

A Pakistani American, Nanjiani has for months criticized Trump and the racist 
language of some of his supporters, who include theformer Ku Klux Klan leader 
David Duke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/former-ku-klux-klan-leader-and-us-alt-right-hail-election-result>
.

“We can’t let hate/racism/bigotry/sexism be normalized,” Nanjiani‏ wrote. “If 
something happens, be safe, but let it be known we won’t stand for this.

The Southern Poverty Law Center, a left-leaning organization that monitors 
hate groups, counted867 hate incidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/trump-related-hate-crimes-report-southern-poverty-law-center>
 in the 10 days following Trump’s election, including racist graffiti, 
vandalism and threats to mosques and immigrants. In an interview with CBS, Trump
told supporters not to commit such acts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/muslim-americans-donald-trump-hate-crimes-surveillance>
: “If it helps, I will say this, and I will say right to the cameras: stop it.”
 