
Sir Nicholas Serota is to leave his post as director of Tate galleries after 
nearly 30 years to become chairman ofArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>. Serota will replace 
Sir Peter Bazalgette when his four-year tenure ends on 31 January next year.


Serota, one of the most powerful men in the visual arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/23/nicholas-serota-tops-art-world-power-100-list>
, has turned Tate into a powerhouse, opening Tate Modern in 2000 and, during 
the most challenging of economic times,its £260m extension in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/14/tate-modern-switch-house-review-brain-fizzing-art-pyramid>
. He is expected to remain at the helm of Tate well into the new year, and will 
do both jobs until he leaves. No official date has yet been set.


Serota said the job was an “enormous honour, given the 70-year history of the 
council, its success in recent years and the crucial role that it plays in 
promoting art and culture in this country”.



Nicholas Serota: art's modern champion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/how-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england>
He said there had been a “sea change in public appreciation of the visual arts 
in this country” over the past 30 years and he was proud that Tate had played a 
part in the transformation “alongside other national and regional museums and 
the new galleries that have opened across the country in places like Walsall, 
Margate, Wakefield, Gateshead and Nottingham”.

He added: “Tate has always been fortunate to have enjoyed the support of 
artists and to have benefited from the international acclaim for the work of 
British artists in recent years. I leave an institution that has the potential 
to reach broad audiences across the UK and abroad through its own programmes, 
partnerships and online.”

Tate’s chairman, Lord Browne, called Serota “one of the world’s greatest 
museum directors and a leader for the visual arts on a global stage”.

Serota has helped make Tate one of the most respected arts organisations in 
the world and it was his vision, passion and drive that brought about the 
creation ofTate Modern <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> 
on the site of a former power station.


It opened in 2000 with predictions of 2 million annual visitors, but the 
actual figure was closer to 5 million, making it the most popular museum of 
modern art in the world. He has also been the driving force behind the creation 
of St Ives and the successful, but high risk, opening of Tate Modern’s 
extension.

The news that Serota, 70, will lead Arts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>, which as the Arts 
Council of Great Britain received its royal charter in the same year he was 
born, has been widely welcomed in the arts world.

Stephen Deuchar, director of the Art Fund and a former director of Tate Britain
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain>, said: “I cannot think 
of anyone, anywhere, better suited to the job, or more likely to succeed. This 
is truly momentous news for the UK arts world.”

John Kampfner, director of the Creative Industries Federation, praised 
Serota’s “incredible track record within the arts” and “remarkable” tenure at 
Tate. “He completely understands the relationship between all parts of the 
creative sector, which will be so important in the new role – particularly now, 
as the UK charts a new course on the international stage.”

His appointment would have been sanctioned by Theresa May and was announced by 
the culture secretary, Karen Bradley.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50ea76c42e07f1fe29452ebf663182a33781d392%2F0_69_4857_2914%2F4857.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Nicholas%20Serota%20appointed%20chairman%20of%20Arts%20Council%20England&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Nicholas%20Serota%20appointed%20chairman%20of%20Arts%20Council%20England&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50ea76c42e07f1fe29452ebf663182a33781d392%2F0_69_4857_2914%2F4857.jpg>
 Tate Modern, which opened in 2000. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
She said: “Nicholas Serota has transformed the Tate during his time there, 
making it one of the leading art institutions in the world, and I am delighted 
he is taking up the position as chair of Arts Council England.

“He brings unparallelled experience, creativity and wisdom and will continue 
to be an enthusiastic champion of the arts in his new role. I would like to 
thank SirPeter Bazalgette <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/peter-bazalgette>
 for his fantastic energy and hard work in the role as he passes the baton to 
Nicholas.”


Serota, is the son of the late Labour peer Lady Beatrice Serota, who became 
deputy speaker of the Lords. His career has included running what is now Modern
Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Oxford when he was in his 
20s and the Whitechapel Gallery, where he was appointed director in 1976. He 
became director of the Tate in 1988.

Serota joined the old Arts Council as a regional exhibitions officer in 1970, 
but it is a far bigger beast now. From 2015-18 ACE expects to invest £1.1bn of 
public money and about £630m national lottery cash in the arts and culture 
sector. The most pressing issues it faces are a lack of diversity and an 
imbalance between spending in London and the regions. Plus what the 
consequences of Brexit will be on a sector which overwhelmingly wanted to 
remain in the European Union.

The news was welcomed by ACE. Its chief executive, Darren Henley, said Serota 
was “a visionary arts leader of immense national and international standing, 
whose cultural credentials are second to none”.

His start date in the £40,000-a-year part-time role is 1 February.

Tate said a search for Serota’s replacement would begin immediately. The 
candidates to lead the huge arts organisation – comprising Tate Modern, Tate 
Britain, Tate Liverpool and Tate St Ives – are likely to include Frances 
Morris, who has spent most of her working life at Tate and was appointed 
director of Tate Modern earlier this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3deb6e0ce2067512a84b4edf689789498b6b23b1%2F0_278_5118_3071%2F5118.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Nicholas%20Serota%20appointed%20chairman%20of%20Arts%20Council%20England&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Nicholas%20Serota%20appointed%20chairman%20of%20Arts%20Council%20England&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3deb6e0ce2067512a84b4edf689789498b6b23b1%2F0_278_5118_3071%2F5118.jpg>
 Sir Nicholas Serota laying the last brick in the extension of the Tate Modern 
in February. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
Another possibility could be Nicholas Cullinan, who was 37 when he was 
appointed director of the National Portrait Gallery in January 2015. He was a 
curator at Tate Modern for five years before joining the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art in New York.

Other names include Maria Balshaw, the director of Manchester City Galleries 
and the Whitworth; Iwona Blazwick, the director of the Whitechapel Art Gallery 
since 2001; Luke Syson, formerly at the National Gallery and now head of 
European sculpture and decorative arts at the Met and Sheena Wagstaff, another 
Tate curator who is in charge of modern and contemporary art at the Met.

Bazalgette’s stewardship of ACE has been viewed as a success, particularly the 
lobbying of the government when George Osborne was chancellor,which resulted in 
a funding freeze when big cuts had been feared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/25/arts-council-museums-galleries-relief-funding-settlement-autumn-statement>
.

He told the Guardian in January that he wanted new challenges “before I pop my 
clogs” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/15/peter-bazalgette-resigns-arts-council-england-chair>
. He added: “I will be 63 next January. I spend a lot of time on the Arts 
Council and that’s fine, I love it. But the question is: do I want to do it for 
eight years? I am very active in the creative industries and intend to continue 
to be active but I want to do a few other things.

“It is, in a way, with regret but on the other hand you get into your 60s and 
think, ‘God, what do I want to do?’”

What Bazalgette, still best known to some as the creator of TV’s Big Brother, 
wanted to do turned out to be return to broadcasting.He was named chairman of 
ITV, succeeding Archie Norman. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/16/sir-peter-bazalgette-itv-chairman>
 