
The Team Sky principal, Sir Dave Brailsford, painstakingly attempted to 
wrestle with the questions assailing him with increasing ferocity since the 
so-called Fancy Bears dumped the TUE information ofSir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> online.

No, he did not believe that Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> had done anything wrong. Yes, he 
knew all about the three applications for a powerful corticosteroid just before 
the rider’s major races in 2011, 2012 and 2013. His team had complied with the 
rules at all times and stayed “the right side of the line”.

As Brailsford’s matter-of-fact recollection of events proved, the facts are 
pretty clear – it is the interpretation of them that differs. “There’s a rider, 
there’s a doctor. They agree to visit a consultant. The consultant’s report is 
pretty categorical in saying there is an issue here and I recommend the 
following medication,” he told the Guardian. “That then goes to the anti-doping 
authorities. They say yes, we agree with this. Or they can say no. There are 
different steps to this process that should give us confidence. I believe in 
that process. I still do.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-use-of-tues-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dave%20Brailsford%20defends%20Bradley%20Wiggins'%20use%20of%20TUEs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-use-of-tues-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dave%20Brailsford%20defends%20Bradley%20Wiggins%27%20use%20of%20TUEs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-use-of-tues-video&media=>
Dave Brailsford defends Bradley Wiggins’ use of TUEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/27/dave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-use-of-tues-video>
He could offer no real clarity on the contentious timing of the injections or 
the process by which they were agreed, beyond saying the decision was taken by 
a specialist and agreed by the UCI and Wada. “That is what we did. We did do 
that. And we wouldn’t have done that if we didn’t think it was what was 
appropriate,” he repeats, circling the question as one might attack the track 
above the office in which we meet.

Bradley Wiggins TUEs ‘not performance-enhancing’, claims Team Sky’s Brailsford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/dave-brailsford-defends-bradley-wiggins-tue>
Brailsford’s justification might as well have been delivered to a soundtrack 
of Je Ne Regrette Rien, were it not for the fact that beyond his bald 
insistence that no rules had been broken there remained questions that hung in 
the air as heavily as the drizzle outside.

At the same time as saying he had absolute trust in the system, he seemed to 
also be questioning it. Pat McQuaid, the much criticised former president of 
the UCI during some of cycling’s darkest years, has been among those to accuse 
Team Sky of being hypocritical.

“It would look like it’s more Sky and their ethical policy. Their attitude is 
that marginal gains are anything that’s possible as long as it’s in the rules,” 
he toldCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> News when asked if 
Wiggins was to blame. “TUEs are in the rules. When you’re trying to preach the 
ethics and this, that and the other, and you’re seeming to be bending the rule, 
it’s a bit hypocritical, to be honest with you.”

McQuaid’s line of criticism is one echoed by many – that Team Sky has been 
preaching one thing and doing another.

Team Sky have much to explain after Bradley Wiggins meets Andrew Marr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/team-sky-bradley-wiggins> 
For the first time, Brailsford’s hackles rise. “Some of the people who have 
made those comments, I think it’s a bit rich. Coming from ex-dopers and the 
then president of the UCI who, after all, was in charge of the process,” he 
says. “If he had any concerns about the process I’d question his leadership 
ability and his ability to manage that process. He should start by looking at 
his own operation that he was in charge of.”

Brailsford says that it is important to distinguish between substances taken 
for illegal gain and those prescribed for a medical need.

We move on to the crux of the matter – whether a “marginal-gains” mantra that 
now apparently stretches into a desire to do everything within the rules to win 
is compatible with Sky’s lofty ideals. “We started out with our famous 
zero-tolerance policy. You ask if I regret that and no I don’t. It’s given us 
some challenges along the way but I don’t regret it,” says Brailsford.

What happens, though, in the grey zone where marginal gains collide with zero 
tolerance? “It’s a good question. I don’t think marginal gains is medical. We 
want healthy athletes, for sure. When we map out our season and our critical 
success factors, our key impact indicators we call them, one of them is to 
ensure our riders are in absolutely robust health. For me, marginal gains is 
about continuous improvement.”

Does that translate as doing everything you can to win within the rules? “To a 
certain extent. But equally I don’t think it’s medical. We would look at the 
health of a rider but what we wouldn’t look at is performance enhancement or 
improving the performance of a rider by abusing the rules.”

Brailsford says the right things in terms of calling for more transparency on 
the number of TUEs issued by each team and, more problematically, who and what 
they are for. But critics have detected similar damage-limitation strategies 
before, when bold promises come to little.

Bradley Wiggins operated within doping rules – but rules may be wrong | 
Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-doping-rules-fancy-bears-tues>
“There are areas in all walks of life when you think: ‘Where’s the line?’ And 
one thing’s for sure, we never cross the line,” he insists. Can he be sure? “I 
think so. I think at times it’s challenging. You can see from the scrutiny and 
the debate around this. It’s opinion. One thing is for sure, that you can see 
from the hack that the TUEs are there,” he said.

“In that sense nothing wrong has been done in terms of breaking the rules. I 
think what people are questioning is whether it was inappropriate. At the time, 
having been involved in that process, I don’t think it was.” But, as he 
concedes several times, that will also be for others to judge.

The other question is this: did an injection of a powerful corticosteroid, 
praised by former dopers for its performance-enhancing benefits, days before 
Bradley Wiggins started his charge towards the Champs Élysées in 2012, help him 
to that historic victory?

“The question is more about whether it mitigated the illness that he presented 
for. I just don’t think it’s possible to answer that,” says Brailsford. One 
more unknowable to add to the pile.
 