
In the past couple of days one of Sir Bradley Wiggins’s principal rivals in 
his teenage years, the Hemel Hempstead cyclist Sam Collins, has been posting 
photographs on social media of the pair in their junior and under-16 racing 
days. The images show two gangly lads against backgrounds as diverse as 
Walthamstow High Street and an eerily empty Manchester Velodrome, baggy 
jerseys, crew-cuts and awkward smiles. They mark a point in time, a generation 
ago, when amateurs in west London headed for their races in the Middlesex lanes 
or on the unopened Hayes bypass fearing the possible arrival of one of the 
country’s most talented youngsters, with the inevitable kicking that would 
entail.

Related: Bradley Wiggins announces retirement from professional cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/28/bradley-wiggins-announces-retirement-from-cycling>

Wiggins’s retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/28/bradley-wiggins-announces-retirement-from-cycling>
, announced through his Instagram page on 28 December, marks the end of a 
drawn-out departure – spanning the 20 months since his last race for Team Sky 
in April 2015 – but as those photographs emphasise, his exit also denotes the 
end of an era. The “Kid from Kilburn” was the last remaining member of the 
Great Britain able-bodied cycling squad who had begun competing in the 
mid-1990s, before the transformative era of lottery funding started under the 
direction of Peter Keen in 1998.

Wiggins has left his sport as Great Britain’s most decorated Olympian and 
boasting one of the finest all-round records cycling has ever seen:a Tour de 
France win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-pictures>
, multiple stage race victories, thecoveted one-hour record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/bradley-wiggins-uci-hour-record>
, world and Olympic titles on both track and road, and world titles in the 
Madison relay. His title in Manchester sticks in the mind, so toohis and Rob 
Hayles’s last-gasp effort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/aug/26/athensolympics2004.cycling> for 
a bronze medal in Athens. He can stake a reasonable claim to be the most 
versatile winner the sport of cycling has known since Eddy Merckx.

In the 20 or so years since those photographs were taken Wiggins has been at 
the heart of cycling’s metamorphosis from an arcane backwater to the British 
sporting mainstream, with a wealth of household names from Laura Kenny to Mark 
Cavendish, a host of high-profile events, a multiplicity of teams, huge 
participation figures and booming bike sales. It would be facile to pin all 
this on Wiggins’ shoulders alone but his string of successes played a 
persistent part in raising the sport’s profile, year after year since the 
Athens Olympics.

One key to Wiggins’s high profile is his chameleon personality. He has 
constantly reinvented himself via a wealth of contradiction – cycling historian 
riding the most modern kit with a period twist, Kid from Kilburn and rugby 
league aficionado, two-wheeled Modfather with the most famous sideburns in the 
country, man of the cycling grassroots once spotted at a polo club, clowning 
comedian and misanthrope, grumpy socialist knight of the realm,Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> leader who founded his eponymous 
squad to be the opposite of the Murdoch monolith. That in turn means that most 
fans can project something of themselves on to the “Wiggo” persona.

Related: Bradley Wiggins wins the Tour de France - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-pictures>

And whereas fellow Olympians such as Sir Chris Hoy and Victoria Pendleton were 
seen only on television screens and in velodromes, Wiggins was the exception 
who successfully made the cross-over from the track to road racing, competing 
in his first Tour de France in 2006. When the Tour of Britain was relaunched in 
2004, shortly after he took his first gold medal, at Athens, his was thename 
written on thousands of roadside posters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/sep/01/cycling.cycling>.

From the moment he moved to the nascent Team Sky at the end of 2009, however, 
he has acutely divided public opinion, much as his team have done. He could win 
over a press conference – as he did at the end of the 2012 Tour and prior to 
the 2015 Paris-Roubaix – and make crowd-pleasing quips, such as his comment on 
receiving the yellow jersey in Paris that it was time to pull the raffle 
tickets, but that same year he produced probably the mostexpletive-laden rant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/08/tour-de-france-bradley-wiggins-yellow-jersey>
 to leave the lips of a Tour winner when asked about persistent online 
speculation that his and Sky’s performances were simply too good to be 
completely natural.

Those divisions have deepened since the Fancy Bears hackers leaked Wiggins’s 
therapeutic use exemption (TUE) certificates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
 in mid-September, revealing that he had been administered thepowerful 
corticosteroid triamcinolone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/david-millar-triamcinolone-drug-use-banned-wada-hacking-scandal>
 before the 2011 and 2012 Tours de France and the 2013 Giro d’Italia. The TUEs 
were in order, backed up by explanatory doctors’ notes saying they were needed 
to treat Wiggins’s pollen allergies, so no rules had been broken.

Given that, how one reacts to it boils down to gut feeling: my personal sense 
remains that, even while keeping within the rules, this travels a step too far 
into the grey zone of the ethical spectrum, particularly given Wiggins’s 
consistently hard line on doping and proven dopers, and Sky’s clearly stated 
policies on moving the sport away from its troubled past.

From the only full-length interview he gave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues> 
after the leaking of his TUE details, it was clear Wiggins felt bitter about 
the reaction to the story, which was underlined by his comments at what 
amounted to his farewell press conferenceafter the Gent Six 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/bradley-wiggins-retirement-plans-ghent-six-day-race>
. It was also impossible to avoid the sense that he felt the process had taken 
on a life of its own, as indeed it has since the opening of a UK Anti-Doping 
inquiry into the contents of a jiffy bag delivered to Team Sky on the day he 
took hisbreakthrough stage race victory at the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jun/12/bradley-wiggins-dauphine>.

Precisely how sporting posterity will view Britain’s greatest cyclist will be 
conditioned in part by the outcome of that Ukad inquiry, the precise scope of 
which remains unclear. That could be the final irony in a career packed with 
contradiction: a man who craved control wherever possible, who could put 
structure into pretty much any sporting challenge, may now be dependent on 
others to define his legacy.
 