
Sky has entered the world of 360-degree videos with a free new Sky VR app for 
Android <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bskyb.vr00>, iOS 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/sky-vr/id1147226832> and Oculus VR headsets, 
pushing content from sports, films, racing, music and news.


With the establishment of a dedicated 360-degree content house, Sky VR Studio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/17/sky-sets-up-in-house-studio-virtual-reality-content>
, the UK broadcaster becomes one of the first mainstream media companies to 
start creating high-quality, big budget content for the new viewing platforms.

The Sky VR app launches with 20 different pieces of content related to Star 
Wars and other bits of Disney, including the Jungle Book. There are also pieces 
linked to the films The Martian and Suicide Squad. For sports fans there is 
content from the Williams F1 team, cyclists from Team Sky, boxer Anthony Joshua 
and several pieces fromDavid Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham>.

Perhaps the most interesting pieces, however, will be Sky’s use of 360-degree 
videos in news, including a documentary on the refugee crisis called Calais: 
The Jungle, and coverage of the US elections and a piece called Tutankhamun’s 
Tomb – The Search for Nefertiti. Sky will also put out a re-imagining of 
English National Ballet’s production of Giselle for VR and a piece featuring 
Paul McCartney guiding viewers through the creation of his song Dance Tonight 
and its music video.

Gary Davey, managing director for content at Sky, said: “Interest in VR 
content is building, generating more excitement every day. We are just at the 
beginning of our VR journey at Sky, launching Sky VR studios earlier this year 
and we are already breaking new ground. Now comes the creative challenge of 
deploying this immersive experience with engaging story-telling.”


The app will be available on most mid-range and higher-end smartphones through 
Google’s Cardboard and Samsung’s Gear VR, as well as through dedicated VR 
headsets from Facebook’sOculus <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/oculus>. 
It will also be viewable in 2D without a headset.

Sky is not the only company producing 360-degree content. Facebook, Google and 
others are also pushing the new form of immersive content, but the UK 
broadcaster has one crucial edge for mainstream viewers: its content 
partnerships with big-name and popular brands, shows and sports.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fsky-360-videos-vr-app-beckham-star-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6759be603ee54bf98c126d69257ed1e99ea84acb%2F0_0_2133_969%2F2133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sky%20launches%20360-videos%20VR%20app%20with%20Beckham%2C%20Star%20Wars%20and%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fsky-360-videos-vr-app-beckham-star-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sky%20launches%20360-videos%20VR%20app%20with%20Beckham%2C%20Star%20Wars%20and%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fsky-360-videos-vr-app-beckham-star-wars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6759be603ee54bf98c126d69257ed1e99ea84acb%2F0_0_2133_969%2F2133.jpg>
 Team Sky - VR shot Photograph: Sky 
Interest in VR following the launch of headsets from HTC and Oculus, Samsung 
and Google’s Cardboard has increased, but the available content for mainstream 
viewers beyond games has been minimal, with only a few pieces primarily centred 
around promotion of products or movies being widely available.

As with 3D, Sky has been an early adopter of new content technologies, and as 
with 3D, a broadcaster the size of Sky jumping on board feels like a turning 
point.

Whether 360-degree and VR video is the new big thing, or just another fad like 
3D remains to be seen, however. The barriers to entry – having to have a 
headset or smartphone strapped to your face – are high, meaning only content 
that grabs viewers’ imagination will likely convert an early adopter fad into a 
mainstream trend.

 * ‘VR isn’t a thing you do it’s a place you visit’: readers review Oculus Rift
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/28/vr-isnt-a-thing-you-do-its-a-place-you-visit-readers-review-oculus-rift>
 