
When the first Skylanders title arrived in 2011, it did much more than revive 
the career of cutesy PlayStation heroSpyro the Dragon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/dec/23/legend-spyro-dawn-dragon> – 
it invented a whole new type of video game.

The so-called “toys-to-life” genre, mixes on-screen action with physical 
action figures that can be placed on a RFID-equipped portal and then digitally 
transferred into the game. Kids loved it because they got to collect cool 
figures as well as play a diverting action adventure; parents were less sure 
because the growing range of plastic toys was getting expensive after five 
instalments – especially when you factored in the rival franchises:Disney 
Infinity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/05/disney-infinity-30-review-plenty-of-value-but-lots-more-to-buy>
,Lego Dimensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/05/lego-dimensions-review-best-game-yet>
 and Nintendo’s Amiibo collection.

This month however, Disney announced that it was cancelling the Infinity 
series and shutting down the development studio responsible. And then everyone 
started wondering about the future of the whole genre. Is it too overcrowded 
now? Have publishers got too greedy? Are they running out of ideas?

Significantly, then, Skylanders Imaginators, this year’s instalment, is a 
slightly different take on the recipe. In short: players will be able to 
create, customise and play as their own Skylanders characters, using a simple 
but vast editing mode that provides hundreds of body parts to mess about with. 
Of course, there will be no physical action figure of this user-created avatar. 
Instead, the game comes with a creation crystal – a sort of plastic test tube 
with a glowing rock inside, that players can put on the portal. The lore tells 
us that these crystals are what the ancients used to birth the original 
Skylanders heroes, so it all makes sense within the game’s weirdly thorough 
fictional universe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fskylanders-imaginators-activision%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96bbd5f40de52898be6f21f7fd1c3d516f532de6%2F41_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skylanders%20Imaginators%3A%20Activision%20pins%20its%20hopes%20on%20player%20creativity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fskylanders-imaginators-activision%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skylanders%20Imaginators%3A%20Activision%20pins%20its%20hopes%20on%20player%20creativity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fskylanders-imaginators-activision%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96bbd5f40de52898be6f21f7fd1c3d516f532de6%2F41_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 In Skylanders Imaginators, familiar characters such as the Golden Queen return 
as new sensei figures. Photograph: Activision 
To ensure lots of variety, players first choose an elemental class for their 
new hero, and then a battle class, which dictates how they’ll fight – with 
magic, braun or weaponry. They can then change the head, eyes, ears, chest, 
arms, legs and tail of the character, selecting from the range of 
possibilities, then tweaking colours and physical sizes. There’s a randomiser 
function too, so you can instantly create a whole new character at the touch of 
a button. Activision reckons there are “millions” of combinations and the 
characters we saw provide a good combination of wacky idiosyncratic creativity 
and recognisable Skylanders design traits.

Afterwards, it’s possible to craft a catchphrase for your beast, using a set 
vocabulary of suitably heroic and self-confident words, which is then vocalised 
in the game whenever you attack something. Unfortunately, the options seem 
disappointingly sensible at the moment, with developerToys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/toys> For Bob resisting the 
temptation to put in lots of surreal or mildly suggestive possibilities that 
would have greatly amused children.

While exploring the world, players can uncover new body parts to try out in 
future characters. Some of these are ranked ‘rare’, ‘epic’ and ‘mythic’ 
depending on how hard they are to find, so fans will be able to show off to 
their friends if they find something particularly unusual.

Activision isn’t abandoning the action figure element entirely though. The 
game also comes with 30 new sensei figures, supposedly powerful battle masters 
who have trained Skylanders throughout history. When you put a sensei on the 
portal alongside your creation crystal, it boosts your custom character’s level 
cap and gives them a secret attack. You can also choose to play the whole game 
as a sensei.

The starter pack comes with one crystal (which means you can design on 
user-generated character at a time) and two sensei figures. It’ll apparently 
also be available to take your crystal to a friend’s house and use it on their 
version of the game.


So, it’s a good idea and for once the innovation is on the digital side rather 
than focusing on new ways to sell extra figures (“these ones can swap parts!”, 
“these ones light up!”, “these ones have cars!”). Clearly, the aim is to 
compete more closely with Lego Dimensions and its more creative, tactile 
approach to the genre, afforded by the use of actual Lego bricks.

When asked about the recent demise of Disney Infinity, Activision were 
predictably evasive, and sought to stress that their focus is on continuing 
their own series. “It’s all about creating a different experience every year,” 
says Jeff Poffenbarger, senior executive producer at Toys for Bob. “We have to 
focus on what the innovation is that will pull in new players, but one that the 
veteran players will respect. We don’t have an IP that’s 75 years old, where we 
can just give out the same thing, and say, ‘hey here’s that thing you love’. We 
have to recreate the magic every year - our focus is trying to find what that 
innovation is.”


Right now, Activision isn’t saying anything about the game itself – apart from 
that it is set in the familiar Skylanders universe, where Kaos is using the 
creation crystal to build his own army of Doomlanders. The pre-E3 demo is 
showing a level set around the Sky Baron fortress, home of Jet-Vac, but that’s 
all we’ve seen. Some kind of map editor or environmental customisation would 
make sense, but nothing was obvious on screen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fskylanders-imaginators-activision%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cb9bb62464614ccf179d600d5dc21b9f3f47c6d%2F111_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skylanders%20Imaginators%3A%20Activision%20pins%20its%20hopes%20on%20player%20creativity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fskylanders-imaginators-activision%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skylanders%20Imaginators%3A%20Activision%20pins%20its%20hopes%20on%20player%20creativity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fskylanders-imaginators-activision%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cb9bb62464614ccf179d600d5dc21b9f3f47c6d%2F111_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Another sensei character, King Pen, who can lend his powers to player created 
Skylanders. Photograph: Activision 
The Skylanders series has generated $3bn (£2bn) in revenue during the last 
five years, selling over 250m toys in the process. While Disney seemed to have
eight studios working on Infinity 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/michaelthomsen/2015/06/19/why-are-eight-studios-working-on-disney-infinity-3-0/#607cdb5a7201>
 the Skylanders production pipeline is more streamlined, with two studios, Toys 
For Bob and Vicarious Visions, sharing main development duties on annual 
iterations, with Beenox working on Nintendo conversions. However, with hundreds 
of toys already out there, and five previous games behind it, Imaginators will 
need to work hard to maintain interest. Activision has already been through the 
death of a peripherals-focused genre – namely the music game, which was killed 
off when the market became saturated with rival guitars, microphones and 
plastic DJ booths.

So far, this looks like an interesting diversion, but Toys For Bob will need 
to inject a heck of a lot of humourand provide a creative palette that moves 
beyond interchangeable character parts to recapture the interest of consumers. 
The toys-to-life space remains intensely competitive, and elsewhere there are 
plenty of new digital toys – from MakerBloks to Megasaurs to Anki Overdrive 
sets – competing for the attention of youngsters and the credit cards of their 
parents.

Skylanders Imaginators is released on PS3, PS4, Wii U, Xbox 360 and Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one>, on 14 October (UK) and 16 
October (US)
 