
The announcement of five days of postal strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/post-office-workers-to-stage-five-days-of-strikes-next-week>
 in the runup to Christmas is unwelcome news for business owners. Christmas is 
always a busy time of year for entrepreneurs, when many send more post more 
than usual.


Postal workers plan to strike over pensions, jobs and branch closures, 
although the Post Office has stated disruptionwill be minimised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/post-office-says-it-will-mostly-be-business-as-usual-despite-strike>
 and that it will be “business as usual”. It says that although close to 300 
crown post offices will be affected, 97% of branches will not. However, as the 
strike falls at the busiest time of the year for businesses, many are concerned 
consumers will be put off and deliveries and drop-offs will be affected.

Frankly, it’s a terrible thing for an online business

Many online retailers aim to make the majority of their annual sales during 
December. Among them is Jo Watkins, founder and owner of Bonhomiegames.uk, 
which sells board and card games online. “Frankly, it’s a terrible thing for an 
online business which makes 60% of its yearly takings in theChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> period,” says Watkins. “I 
hope people will shop early to ensure they can purchase what they need on time, 
but I expect it will harm sales. I expected the forthcoming weekend to be a 
busy one, but now people may not shop online, despite the Post Office’s 
assurances that it’s business as usual.”

Watkins says her company, based in South Wales, already offers personal 
drop-offs for local sales and is “promoting like mad” this week to generate 
sales, but thinks the big issue is consumer confidence.

Post Office workers to stage five days of strikes next week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/post-office-workers-to-stage-five-days-of-strikes-next-week>
Helen Lewis, director of Literally Public Relations, which promotes books and 
authors in the publishing industry, says Christmas is always “ridiculously 
busy” for the publishing industry, with a big spike in book sales. The 
Kent-based business usually spends much of December posting books for review. 
“We always expect delays at this time of the year anyway, but we predict the 
strike will exacerbate these. If a reviewer or critic needs a book urgently, we 
will have to courier it and incur the cost to avoid missing out,” she says.

In the meantime, Lewis will attempt to mitigate the effect on her company by 
acting earlier and ensuring as many people as possible know the strike is 
planned. “[We will] keep communicating with our authors via email and social 
media, follow the news to see if the strike gets cancelled, get the books sent 
out this week and not send any out next week, except via courier.”

The end of the year is a busy time for accountants, too, given that the tax 
return deadline of 31 January is not far away. Sam Boothroyd, founder of 
accountancy firm Rymer Associates, is anticipating a glut of paperwork awaiting 
him when he returns from his Christmas break. “This could have a big impact on 
us and on our clients, with the tax return deadline fast approaching,” he says. 
“If clients are delayed in getting their paperwork to us, this could cause a 
huge backlog of work in January.”

Boothroyd has been in touch with clients via email or by phone and, like many 
businesses, is tackling the problem as well as he can. “We have a system where 
clients can upload their paperwork to our website, but some still prefer to 
send it in. We’ve sent emails and phoned everyone to remind them about the 
strike and tried to prompt them to get everything to us as early as possible, 
but really there is not much else we can do without incurring a huge expense.”

Indeed, business owners are simply not going to accept being unable to trade 
because of a strike. In the digital age, there are so many ways of 
communicating that many will happily forego the “snail mail”.

Catherine Shuttleworth, CEO at retail marketing agency Savvy, says her 
business already seeks alternatives and the strike will only encourage her to 
avoid the Post Office. “In a market where we rely less and less on thePost 
Office <https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> to deliver post and 
more and more on couriers and delivery firms to do this work – and more 
efficiently – this industrial action makes me even more likely to look 
elsewhere for my delivery needs,” she says.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 