
When Facebook bought Instagram for $US1 billion in 2012, it had just 13 
employees. But it also had global recognition and more than 30 million 
customers.

And in the years since, the power of small companies to compete with the 
titans of commerce has only grown, as digital technology continues to empower 
minnows to make whale-sized splashes.

Australian examples abound, like digital creative job market Freelancer.com. 
Launched just seven years ago, it now has more than 20 million users and a 
market value of more than $630 million. Or online shopping powerhouse Kogan, 
which has retail giants like Harvey Norman and JB Hi-Fi in its sights despite 
being just 10 years old. Similarly, the world-beating Australian 
collaboration-software company Atlassian was built by a pair of university 
friends and originally financed on their credit cards. Despite having no 
traditional sales team, the firm debuted on the US stock exchange last year 
with a market capitalisation of $US4.37 billion.

How do the most valued brands in the world meet customer expectations?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/salesforce-the-unfair-advantage/2016/sep/27/how-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations>
Australia’s biggest companies are paying attention to these agile new 
competitors in their midst too. Not only are banks losing their monopoly over 
capital markets because of emerging options like crowdfunding, they are also 
losing their grip on the payments market as more alternatives emerge, partially 
courtesy of leading smartphone makers.

So worried are Australia’s big four banks about the potential disruption to 
their long-held market dominance, that all have made considerable investments 
into becoming more agile and developing their own customer-focused digital 
offerings. Throw in Telstra and Woolworths and it’s clear that some of 
Australia’s largest companies are endeavouring to think big and small at the 
same time.

So what are the tools and techniques allowing small companies to punch above 
their weight? Forget David’s sling; today’s Goliaths are being challenged in 
almost every industry by the advent of cloud computing services and advanced 
customer service software.

Take veterinary pharmaceuticals company Jurox. The family business was well 
established in Australia when it set its sights on the UK and the US, expanding 
its potential client base more than 13-fold, from 2400 veterinary practices to 
more than 33,000.

With global reach and flexibility a key priority, sales and marketing manager 
JJ O’Brien instituted new cloud-based services for his sales reps, allowing 
them to consolidate customer information and sales activity from the road, 
giving sales managers better insights.

Jurox also underpinned its sales and marketing campaigns with automation 
software, ensuring each and every potential customer is mapped and tracked 
along the path to purchase, delivering powerful insights into who their 
customers are and what they want. And this means Jurox knows when and how their 
reps should contact their customers for maximum effect.

“We’re small compared to our main competitors, so we must tell our story and 
provide the right touch-points to reduce customer enquiry time,” O’Brien said. 
“We operate a small, agile team, run tight deadlines and we are fast to market.”

This approach has grown Jurox’s revenue at a double-digit rate year-on-year, 
but so far this growth has not necessitated a recruitment drive. “We’re selling 
more with the same number of people,” O’Brien said.

Using technology to put customers at the centre of their operations has also 
been the magic formula for Redback Conferencing, as it takes on giants such as 
Microsoft and GoToMeeting in the competitive world of telephone and web 
conferencing services.

Although the industry is fundamentally based around technology, many operators 
focus so heavily on technical features and bells and whistles, they overlook 
the role of customer service. But offering exceptional customer service is 
exactly how Redback has stood out and made its mark.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsmall-businesses-using-technology-as-the-great-equalizer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3545a140ac9da2526039514ed307728971fbf233%2F0_59_5500_3300%2F5500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Small%20businesses%20using%20technology%20as%20the%20great%20equalizer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsmall-businesses-using-technology-as-the-great-equalizer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Small%20businesses%20using%20technology%20as%20the%20great%20equalizer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fsmall-businesses-using-technology-as-the-great-equalizer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3545a140ac9da2526039514ed307728971fbf233%2F0_59_5500_3300%2F5500.jpg>
 Customer service is key to retaining customer relationships, but can also 
provide valuable insights about your broader business. Photograph: Thomas 
Barwick/Getty Images 
This approach has driven remarkable year-on-year growth and helped triple the 
size of Redback’s workforce, from just three to more than 35.

We have the ability to give every one of our customers the sense that they are 
the one and only
Beau Adams, Roses Only Group Sales Director 
However, Marketing Director Sara Gonzalez said that growth was not without 
initial hiccups. Redback’s internal systems did not communicate properly 
between each other, leading to wasted effort.

“The disconnection meant that prospects were getting called six times by six 
different sales reps,” she said. “It was a bad look for a young company.”

By ensuring all their systems could talk to each other and creating a single 
portal where everything could be managed, Redback was able to turn all of its 
energies into delivering exceptional service to its customers.

“Our salespeople can see what’s happening without having to do anything – 
intelligence comes to them,” Gonzalez said.

“It’s very powerful, because when everyone can see what’s happening there’s 
more accountability – and no more ‘I’m not getting enough leads,’ or, from 
marketing, ‘sales aren’t closing the leads. I can sit down with the sales 
manager and review reports that show everything.”

For Roses Only Group 
<http://www.salesforce.com/au/customers/stories/roses-only.jsp> Sales Director 
Beau Adams, having that bird’s-eye view while maintaining a personal touch is 
vital. It’s why the company’s corporate gift team depends on a customer 
relationship management platform that automatically tracks and analyses the 
hundreds of daily interactions his team has with its prospects, generating 
real-time insights.

“We have the ability to give every one of our customers the sense that they 
are the one and only,” he said. “It helps us strengthen personal relationships 
with our customers, and uphold the same level of service, day in, day out.”

High-speed internet connections and cloud computing have smashed the tyranny 
of distance, giving savvy enough businesses the equivalent of a shop-front on 
the high street of every town across the globe, as well as allowing businesses 
to cast their hiring net much wider.

Meanwhile, the best of this new breed of business are designing their systems 
to ensure they never lose sight of the all-important customer, even as their 
growth means they are competing in the same arenas as the biggest players in 
their fields.

Customer expectations of what constitutes good service are rising rapidly and 
the businesses thriving today are those that have figured out how to harness 
technology to maintain small-business customer service standards, even as 
customer numbers boom.

Continue the conversation at salesforce.com/why 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/312078411;139842507;b>
 