
If you’ve had Google autocomplete a search query for you, or Netflix suggest 
your next favourite television show to you, then you’ve already been the 
beneficiary of AI’s helping hand.

But recent huge strides in data processing and AI programming mean the world 
is on the cusp of an AI boom which promises to transform how we manage almost 
every part of our lives, as thoroughly as electricity did in the 20th century.

Sound overblown? Consider the case of self-driving cars. Literally science 
fiction a decade ago, Google’s self-driving cars have already driven more than 
2.6 million kilometres, the equivalent of the moon and back three times. And 
anyone who owns a Tesla can already drive vast distances without ever touching 
the controls.

So what’s powering this AI boom, and what does it mean for those in business?

Though to many AI might seem like a recent invention, it has in fact been an 
area of inquiry and investigation for great technical minds since at least the 
1950s, as they strived to create computer systems that are able to understand 
and react to conditions affecting their environment, instead of relying on 
instructions from humans.

But progress in the sector has boomed in recent years, thanks to ever-cheaper 
sensors supplying more and more data and rapid increases in data-processing 
power and affordability.

You can hire smart people to write code and gain access to resources. The real 
challenge is customer empathy.
Robert Wickham 
In addition, programmers have made breakthroughs in how AI is created in the 
first place. For many years, much research was focused on analysing how human 
experts made decisions and endeavouring to program computers to emulate those 
thought processes.

Now, however, much of the buzz is coming from machine learning, which involves 
creating artificial neural networks that can then learn rules and behaviours 
through repetition. For instance, Google’s powerful image identification AI has 
learnt to identify what is in an individual image after being exposed to 
millions of other images and told what it is looking at, allowing it to now 
recognise objects using its own “intuition”, rather than a prescribed set of 
rules from a programmer.

A potent example of the power of machine learning came in early 2016, when 
Google’s AlphaGo system thrashed 18-time world Go champion for the first time. 
To win at the notoriously complex game, Google’s engineers built a neural 
network and made it watch countless games of Go between human players, helping 
it learn to recognise and plan moves intuitively.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fsmarter-faster-brighter-business-in-an-ai-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e741aac22756f2dbcb8ad54c2912912f5d67acb%2F0_0_1080_607%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smarter%2C%20faster%2C%20brighter%3A%20business%20in%20an%20AI%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fsmarter-faster-brighter-business-in-an-ai-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smarter%2C%20faster%2C%20brighter%3A%20business%20in%20an%20AI%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fsmarter-faster-brighter-business-in-an-ai-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e741aac22756f2dbcb8ad54c2912912f5d67acb%2F0_0_1080_607%2F1080.jpg>
 Match 3 of AlphaGo vs Lee Sedol. Photograph: Flickr/erikbenson 
But AI is upending expectations in arenas far removed from board games. In 
fact, wherever data streams exist, AI has the potential for impact.

Salesforce APAC Vice President Robert Wickham said the rapid spread of mobile 
devices, along with the first stirrings of the Internet of Things, has meant 
the creation of a deluge of data.

“90% of the world’s total data was created in the past two years, which is a 
staggering statistic,” he said. “But less than 1% of that data is harvested, 
analysed and used.”

The reason for this? Big data analysis has traditionally been difficult to 
integrate into a business’ existing operations, and expensive, relying upon the 
expertise of data scientists.

However, machine learning AI programs are promising to upend this state of 
affairs, by thriving on enormous datasets and learning how to make the most 
effective suggestions for a given set of parameters.

But although the rapidly increasing accessibility of AI means it is soon to 
become a lot more commonplace in the business world, using AI effectively won’t 
be a set-and-forget proposition.

“Technology is not the challenge,” Wickham said. “You can hire smart people to 
write code and gain access to resources. The real challenge is customer 
empathy.”

“How do you structure your business to be a real customer-oriented enterprise? 
How do you ensure from day one that you understand as best you can exactly what 
your customer wants to do? If you can’t do that, you can’t scale.”

Wickham said along with customer empathy, another essential for a businesses 
wanting to thrive in an AI-powered world is the ability to embrace constant 
change and operate at speed.

How do the most valued brands in the world meet customer expectations?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/salesforce-the-unfair-advantage/2016/sep/27/how-do-the-most-valued-brands-in-the-world-meet-customer-expectations>
“Think of it as being able to change the tyres of a race car while it goes 
around the track,” he said. “You can run experiments in real time, testing what 
works and what doesn’t as you go, and then move the most successful elements 
into the mainstream.”

Crucially, well designed AI should make it easier for staff to do their job of 
attending to customer needs as effectively as possible.

This is where even the simplest of AI solutions has potential to affect 
positive change to how even the smallest business operates. Take, for example, 
a simple system to integrate a user’s email and calendar, offering prompts to 
help the user be more productive. For business owners struggling to keep 
multiple balls in the air, putting a simple AI system in place can act like 
hiring an invisible personal assistant to organise your priorities and boost 
your peace of mind.

It’s what many in the technology industry now refer to as ‘democratisation of 
AI’, or ‘AI for everyone’. Sales, service, and marketing are set to be among 
the chief beneficiaries, with concepts like gut-feel, intuition and serendipity 
soon to be not supplanted, but supported, by data.

How do you best ensure a good understanding of your value to potential 
customers? -Find out if your innovative business has a customer-centric DNA 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/311948398;139706475;x>
 