
While the French government and rail company SNCF continue their dispute with 
the CGT union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/french-rail-workers-strike-labour-dispute>
 over new labour laws, the rail giant’s relations with another old foe have 
changed dramatically. The SNCF, one of the biggest landowners inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/paris>, spent years in long-drawn-out 
battles with art collectives that squatted its disused sites. But now it is 
cooperating with artists on a series of projects. From this summer, five 
derelict railway sites across the capital are being transformed into creative 
venues alive with music, debate, and gardens. On 10 June, the first of14 
projects <http://sitesartistiques.sncf.com/fr/challenges/challenge> opened. La 
Station is a platform for emerging local music and also for cooking, gardening, 
and recycling. It is in a former warehouse,Les Mines  
<http://www.mu.asso.fr/station/>in the 18th arrondissement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F309e41f69ba298bea377bb6dec173e5bc2188c28%2F0_117_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SNCF%20gives%20a%20green%20light%20to%20Paris's%20art%20and%20music-based%20renewal%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SNCF%20gives%20a%20green%20light%20to%20Paris%27s%20art%20and%20music-based%20renewal%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F309e41f69ba298bea377bb6dec173e5bc2188c28%2F0_117_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Tuning in … La Station is a platform for emerging local music. Photograph: 
Julien Gawor 
In September more projects are scheduled to open, including Case, on a vacant 
plot of land in the 10th arrondissement, where shipping containers will be used 
for art exhibitions and events promoting upcycling and sustainability. And in 
the suburb of Saint-Denis, Open Cathedral, on an abandoned industrial site, 
will focus on art, urban farming and events exploring issues such as food 
wastage.

The projects are not the first to have transformed derelict spaces in the 
city. The two-year-oldLa REcyclerie <http://www.larecyclerie.com/> is a 
bar-restaurant built inside a former railway station on the Petite Ceinture 
line (abandoned in 1934) that hosts free weekly conferences and workshops about 
sustainable initiatives.

Close by on rue Ordener, the newly opened Grand Train 
<http://thetouristinparis.com/paris/en/grand-train-your-summer-pop-up-electic-playground-in-north-paris/>
, a temporary hybrid venue inside an old SNCF depot, hosts a train exhibition, 
live music and events and comprises several restaurants and a bar. An urban 
farm and local produce market are also in the pipeline.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d94356269cb7bbc73723b77d99b93a507feb34a%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SNCF%20gives%20a%20green%20light%20to%20Paris's%20art%20and%20music-based%20renewal%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SNCF%20gives%20a%20green%20light%20to%20Paris%27s%20art%20and%20music-based%20renewal%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d94356269cb7bbc73723b77d99b93a507feb34a%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Little wonder … bars and recycling projects on the Petite Ceinture line. 
Photograph: Palmyre Roigt 
In another derelict train station, in the northern 18th, music venue and 
restaurantLe Hasard Ludique <http://www.lehasardludique.paris/> is set to open 
in early 2017. “We want to involve the community in building this new venue 
because we want them to feel part of it and that it’s theirs,” says co-founder 
Vincent Merlet. “Although it will be focused on music, the venue will support 
all the arts and it will have a bar and restaurant with accessible prices for 
the local community.”

The rise of local arts venues is part of a broader movement in Paris that 
recognises the need to tackle environmental and social issues and has seen 
initiatives across the spectrum from road use (closing the Champs-Élysées to 
cars once a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/champs-elysees-car-bans-month-paris-smog>
); toplans to make the Seine swimmable 
<http://www.lonelyplanet.com/news/2016/05/18/paris-seine-swim-2017/>; to the 
rise of food co-ops, such as Dada (a Bioco-op franchise) in the 10th 
arrondissement and La Louve, a community-led supermarket slated for September; 
and organic and zero-waste restaurants (part of a bid for the 2024 Olympics).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b431e7032d1b7953ad0dfd574855f12558737fa%2F0_185_4102_2460%2F4102.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SNCF%20gives%20a%20green%20light%20to%20Paris's%20art%20and%20music-based%20renewal%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SNCF%20gives%20a%20green%20light%20to%20Paris%27s%20art%20and%20music-based%20renewal%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fsncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b431e7032d1b7953ad0dfd574855f12558737fa%2F0_185_4102_2460%2F4102.jpg>
 Clandestine canteen ... Freegan Pony, ‘hidden’ under a flyover, serves food 
made with leftovers from Rungis food market. Photograph: Dominique 
Faget/AFP/Getty Images 
“Things are changing in Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> – even 
at government level now,” says Aladdin Charni, co-founder of Freegan Pony, a 
vegan restaurant set up inside a concrete storage space at Porte de la Villette 
(19th arrondissement). Highlighting the problem of food wastage, unsold produce 
from Rungis (Paris’s largest wholesale food market) is used by rotating 
professional chefs to make dishes like ratatouille and stir-fried vegetables. 
Customers pay what they like.

In 2014, mayor Anne Hidalgo announced a €20m budget participatif inviting 
Parisians to have their say in projects that would improve life in their city. 
This year the amount was increased to €100m. Under another mayoral project
Reinvent Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/feb/03/reinventing-paris-10-winning-urban-designs-transform-city>
invited architects to submit designs to transform the use of public spaces.

Paris may be short on green spaces, but it is embracing greener ways of living 
like never before.
 