
The timing of London Collections Men SS17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-collections-men> was a perfect 
storm of pageantry, politics and patriotism. It opened the day before the Queen 
celebrated her 90th birthday, the first match of Euro 2016 and a day after the 
televised referendum debate. Designers took note, with Brexit and ideas of 
Britishness emerging as a key theme of the collections.

Fashion has had an uneasy relationship with political statements. From 
Katharine Hamnett’s politicised sloganeering (such as theChoose Life T-shirts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jun/19/slogan-t-shirts-hamnett>) 
to Chanel’sSS15, possibly ironic, feminist protest-themed show, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/sep/30/karl-lagerfeld-chanel-show-paris-fashion-week>
 which celebrated womanhood through “He for She” placards, accessories, and the 
song I’m Every Woman. Statements made in the isolation of the catwalk or on a 
T-shirt can feel oblique.

At LCM, the EU referendum was tackled with both explicit and subtle 
references. Culture secretary Ed Vaizey (whose brief includes fashion) did the 
latter in his opening-day speech. “This is an industry that creates jobs,” he 
told a crowd that included David Gandy; “(it’s) a Remain event.” To highlight 
the point,Remain posters designed by photographer Wolfgang Tillmans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/apr/26/anti-brexit-posters-wolfgang-tillmans-eu-referendum>
 were displayed in the reception of the British Fashion Council, where many of 
the shows were taking place. For Tillmans (whose father is English and mother 
is French), this visual protest was to protect against the “enemies of 
freedom”. The British Fashion Council later released the stats of a survey 
polling 290 UK designer businesses. Ninety per cent said they would vote to 
remain with only 4.3% voting to leave.

But, while the political message from the fashion world was clear, the 
corresponding catwalk aesthetic wasn’t so straightforward. While some shows 
embraced the European project, others embraced Britishness.

Designer Christopher Raeburn’s astronomy-themed show featured pieces such as a 
white hoodie and a blue jacket, with the word “In” printed proudly on a pocket 
or repeated in between space-themed logos. Patrick Grant, the designer behind 
theE Tautz <http://www.vogue.co.uk/brand/e-tautz> label, shared Raeburn’s 
sentiments. He took his bow in a Hamnett-like “In” T-shirt (as did Sibling’s 
Sid Bryan and Cozette McCreery). Both the theme of the E Tautz collection 
(“inspired by the heroes of European lower league football”) and recognition of 
the different nationalities of the creative team and models (who came from “at 
least eight European countries”) felt pointed. Confusingly, Grant’s collection 
– with its pinstripe, single-breasted jacket and pleated navy trousers (very 
Simon Le Bon posing on a boat) – felt more the type of thing a young Boris 
Johnson might have worn at a Bullingdon summer party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac7e8772b47782d3881d1e39a1137f0f7ac2a0ca%2F7_125_2840_4054%2F2840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac7e8772b47782d3881d1e39a1137f0f7ac2a0ca%2F7_125_2840_4054%2F2840.jpg>
 Patrick Grant at the end of the E Tautz show, London Collections Men, SS17. 
Photograph: ReX/Shutterstock 
Meanwhile, Gordon Richardson, Topman’s design director, admitted that his 
whole collection was inspired by questions of whether to remain or leave. “The 
kernel of the idea came about when the discussions about Europe were 
beginning,” he said backstage. His collection was a love letter to Britishness 
across the ages. It was everywhere you looked: historical symbols of Britain’s 
past were woven in Topman’s modern interpretations of smart/casual beachwear; 
beaded red Tudor roses appeared twice, on a green towelling one-piece and as a 
shoulder patch on a tri-tone hoodie. Meanwhile, a Richard I-inspired lion bust 
emerged on a Nudie suit. There was also a celebration of slightly seedy seaside 
hedonism – models with a sweaty, sunburnt look wore sweatshirts emblazoned with 
“Margate” and “Dirty Weekend”. Britain, the collection seemed to imply, was 
enough as it was. Was that the position that Only Fools and Horses’ Del Boy 
would take? It was a question posed by designers Agi & Sam, whose collection
featured the much-loved character’s face on a T-shirt 
<http://www.londoncollections.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?DesignerID=1785>.

Meanwhile, the collection of Fashion East’s Charles Jeffrey (AKA Loverboy) was 
all about railing against those who have supported Brexit. Days before his 
show, Jeffrey had posted Tillmans’ poster on Instagram. “If people like 
Vladimir Putin, Nigel Farage, George Galloway, Marine Le Pen and Isis want 
Britain to leave the EU, where does that leave you?” it asked. Accordingly, 
Jeffrey’s collection was a prayer to anti-authoritarian chic and the flipside 
of Topman Design’s lads-on-the-razz aesthetic. Featuring models who looked as 
if they’d been cast on the street dolefully sporting corsets, chain-mail 
chokers andMarcel waves <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcelling> in their 
hair, it was a gender-fluid show that recalled misfit time capsules such as the 
Blitz club and anti-establishment narratives such asDerek Jarman’s Jubilee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jul/20/popandrock4>. Then, just to make 
things really clear, the final moments of the collection featured the bong, 
bong, bong of Big Ben’s chiming bell.PE

Four moments to remember at London Collections Men

A$AP Rocky at J.W.Anderson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe754045e2e3f55e151ad96d578b9dd8fbdc89451%2F0_0_4836_2902%2F4836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe754045e2e3f55e151ad96d578b9dd8fbdc89451%2F0_0_4836_2902%2F4836.jpg>
 A$AP Rocky in ‘teddy bear’ jacket and purple plaid jacket at the JW Anderson 
show. Photograph: Christian Vierig/Getty Images 
The news that rapper A$AP Rocky would be collaborating with London designer 
J.W.Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/03/jw-anderson-loewe-interview> 
broke days before LCM began. So, it was a pretty sure thing that the rapper 
would attend the designer’s show on Sunday. Still, when he turned wearing the 
collection’s “teddy bear” jacket, layered with a purple plaid jacket, there was 
a collective swoon.

Grace Wales Bonner’s collection
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9fd0510ff6c838a62508f896bb9440848b2a038%2F0_0_3192_4771%2F3192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9fd0510ff6c838a62508f896bb9440848b2a038%2F0_0_3192_4771%2F3192.jpg>
 Grace Wales Bonner at London Collections Men SS17. Photograph: 
WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
The debut solo catwalk show of 25-year-old Wales Bonner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/09/grace-wales-bonner-menswears-designer-fashion-chanel-blaxploitation>
 was the hot ticket of LCM and it lived up to the hype. In a salon in 
Knightsbridge, male and female models wore embroidered capes, wide hats, 
earrings and PVC macs. Style watchers also clocked Wales Bonner’s own look: a 
smart cream blouse, tailored trousers and backless mules with socks. A good bow 
look? That’s halfway to becoming a successful designer.

Haters Direct at Christopher Shannon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7748cb0cc2fa6c533ae7df2355e1cf5e86f352e%2F0_60_2886_4153%2F2886.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7748cb0cc2fa6c533ae7df2355e1cf5e86f352e%2F0_60_2886_4153%2F2886.jpg>
 ‘Haters Direct’ at Christopher Shannon, London Collections Men, SS17. 
Photograph: WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
The ripples from Mike Ashley’s moment in Parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/mike-ashley-admits-sports-direct-staff-were-not-paid-minimum-wage>
 made their way on to the catwalk at Christopher Shannon. Towards the end of 
his sportswear-themed show, four models appeared with reworked Sports Direct 
logos on T-shirts, sweatshirts and the boxy reusable bags seen at the store. 
Instead of “sports”, though, the logos read “Lovers Direct” or “Haters Direct”. 
Whichever one you go for, it’s safe to say Ashley would not approve.

Puppets at Aitor Throup
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1aa86bc8714df29d97cba13bb4f262d01cf0c1%2F0_136_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20In%20right%20now%3A%20fashion%20enters%20the%20Brexit%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Ffashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1aa86bc8714df29d97cba13bb4f262d01cf0c1%2F0_136_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Puppeteers perform with a puppet model at the Aitor Throup show. Photograph: 
Neil Hall/Reuters 
An Aitor Throup show is never going to be a straightforward affair. He has 
made kits for England <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yQQzHcTdDp0>, based 
designs onJean Charles de Menezes 
<http://www.itsnicethat.com/features/aitor-throup-the-anomalous-designer-we-meet-aitor-thoup-in-his-studio-to-discuss-his-unusual-practice>
,the Brazilian shot dead after a case of mistaken identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/30/jean-charles-de-menezes-your-questions-answered>
 and had a moment as acreative director of Kasabian 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandculture/article/20636/1/aitor-throup-on-his-curtain-raising-moment>
. His return to fashion’s schedule came with a typically conceptual bent. 
Called The Rite of Spring/Summer/Autumn/Winter, the performance featured a 
puppet operated by actors in white masks. The puppet eventually exploded and 
came back to life. The whole models-walking-down-a-catwalk-in-clothes thing 
looked positively normcore by comparison.LC
 