
If you’re buying Thankyou water at the supermarket or The Big Issue from a 
street vendor, you’re supporting a social enterprise – a business driven by 
both profit and a higher purpose.

Starting a social business can be tough. Tom Dawkins is co-founder and CEO of 
StartSomeGood, <http://startsomegood.com/> a crowdfunding platform that acts as 
a springboard for hundreds of social and environmental projects every year. He 
says, “Starting a social enterprise is doing very hard things simultaneously: 
starting a business and trying to change the world.”

He adds, “90% of small businesses fail within five years and most attempts to 
make real change fall short, so doing both at once is just about the hardest 
thing you can do!”

Often these businesses have to make tough decisions at first in order to 
underpin their impact moving forward, such as “giving away all their profits”, 
or “taking on employees with higher needs and greater training costs”.

However, the potential rewards can often outweigh the initial hardships. “If 
it works the upside is enormous: a sustainable approach to changing lives, 
unaffected by changes in government or trends in philanthropy,” says Dawkins.

Building a bright future for Australian social enterprise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/ing-direct-dreamstarter/2016/oct/18/building-a-bright-future-for-australian-social-enterprise>
Meet some people who’ve done it

The best way to understand the challenges faced by social enterprises is to 
hear from some successful social entrepreneurs.

Meet Jamie, Jessica and Jackie. They each had an idea for doing social good, 
they each worked day and night to create their startup, and the impact from 
each of their social enterprises is already being felt.

One Night Stand


Inspired by his own experience of sleeping rough, following the failure of his 
café business, Jamie Green set up sleepwear brandOne Night Stand 
<http://onenightstandsleepwear.com.au/>. For every product purchased, one meal 
is delivered to a young homeless person in need through partner charityOzHarvest
 <http://www.ozharvest.org/>. Plus, 50% of profits are donated to projects that 
provide shelter and employment for homeless youth. You can buy the sleepwear 
online and in General Pants stores.

What was your first step, after you’d had the idea for the social enterprise?

“One of my friends actually emailed me to say there was a scholarship for 
School for Social Entrepreneurs <http://sse.org.au/> and I applied for that. I 
knew there were brands out there doing it, but I didn’t know there was an 
environment or any people supporting this type of business yet.” Jamie received 
the scholarship in 2012.

What was your biggest hurdle in the early days?

“There’s not a huge amount of support from the idea stage through to that 
first phase of getting the business off the ground. There are plenty of 
programs to get funding for half a million dollars plus – once you’ve proven 
your concept – but that first initial stage is really difficult.

“For us, the initial support came from ING DIRECT’s Dreamstarter 
<https://www.campaigns.ingdirect.com.au/dreamstarter> program. It provided 
funding and helped drive awareness of our business, which really helped us get 
off the ground.”

What’s been your happiest day?

“The day I finally got the email from General Pants to say they were going to 
stock our stuff: I felt like all the hard work I’d put in had finally paid off 
and we were actually going to survive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3a40ac797a1c9fc0c572dc6c26e78aca0b5a8f%2F0_164_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Social%20enterprise%20masters%3A%20people%20combining%20profit%20with%20purpose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Social%20enterprise%20masters%3A%20people%20combining%20profit%20with%20purpose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3a40ac797a1c9fc0c572dc6c26e78aca0b5a8f%2F0_164_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Jamie Green created One Night Stand after being inspired by his own experience 
of sleeping rough. Photograph: Supplied by One Night Stand 
Your biggest business achievement to date?

“Donating over 10,000 meals to homeless youth. For the mission, and for the 
purpose, that’s been really, really important. And inspiring other young 
entrepreneurs to give it a crack is really important as well.”

Knowing what you know now, what would you tell people who want to start up a 
social enterprise?

“Seek out partners whose values are well aligned and will help you with the 
support and funding you need to get ahead. Go out and find a really strong 
mentor in the industry you’re looking to enter, get a lot of advice from that 
mentor and then find the other people that can help you identify what you need 
to do to get this business moving.”

Your ultimate dream for your business? 

“Within the next ten years to be next to Peter Alexander as the go-to pyjama 
brand.”

...a social enterprise is doing very hard things simultaneously: starting a 
business and trying to change the world
Tom Dawkins, co-founder and CEO of StartSomeGood 
The Bread & Butter Project

Jessica Grynberg and her partner Paul Allam of Bourke Street Bakery fame 
foundedThe Bread & Butter Project <http://thebreadandbutterproject.com/> with 
three others, including Paul’s business partner David McGuinness. Paul and 
David decided to start a wholesale bakery business and gifted it to The Bread & 
Butter Project, which now re-invests 100% of profits into the training of 
refugee and new migrant bakers, and to developing employment pathways for their 
trainees.

What was your first step, after you’d had the idea for the social enterprise?

“To develop a really good business plan that explained exactly what we were 
going to do, who we were, what the product was and what the market was, and how 
we were going to work with people, train people and support people.

“People were really impressed with that document: it opened doors.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafd451f4c5c1084d9c441f3035753463e40b84ae%2F0_16_900_540%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Social%20enterprise%20masters%3A%20people%20combining%20profit%20with%20purpose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Social%20enterprise%20masters%3A%20people%20combining%20profit%20with%20purpose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafd451f4c5c1084d9c441f3035753463e40b84ae%2F0_16_900_540%2F900.jpg>
 The Bread & Butter Project reinvests 100% of profits into the training of 
refugee and new migrant bakers. Photograph: Supplied by Bread and Butter Project
What was your biggest hurdle in the early days?

“In the very early days our biggest hurdle was finding a site. Paul and Dave 
must have looked at 60 places. The landlords wouldn’t give it to us: they saw 
us as a charity and a risk.”

What’s been your happiest day?

“The graduation ceremony every year is just really, really wonderful. They’re 
all dressed up, their families are there, everyone’s so happy and celebrating. 
They’ve all moved into employment at that point too.”

Your biggest business achievement to date?

“Reaching operational sustainability of the business.”

Knowing what you know now, what would you tell people who want to start up a 
social enterprise?

“It’s going to take over your life. [laughs] You need to do your homework, and 
know what you’re doing – it makes a big difference. And get to know everybody 
in that space.

“Getting the support of initiatives like ING DIRECT’s Dreamstarter has also 
really helped us to continue to offer training to refugees and new migrants in 
Australia.”

Your ultimate dream for your business? 

“For one of our graduates to come back when they’re really experienced and run 
the Project. For them to be really owning it.”

The Social Outfit

Jackie Ruddock spent 12 years working in the not-for-profit sector before 
discovering a Melbourne social enterprise called The Social Studio, which gives 
jobs and training to refugee and new migrant tailors and seamstresses. Jackie 
decided to bring their model to Sydney and operate it as a sister business 
calledThe Social Outfit. <http://thesocialoutfit.org/> The clothing 
manufactured in their Newtown workshop is sold in their retail store, and 
online.

What was your first step, after you’d had the idea for the social enterprise?

“To create an articulate, well thought out argument about why The Social 
Outfit would be of benefit to the community and to Sydney more broadly.”

What was your biggest hurdle in the early days?

“A lot of people have a lot of opinions about how you do things and that’s 
great. The real challenge is being able to listen to a range of stakeholders 
and work out which things you can take action on and which opinions and 
insights you might not be ready for yet.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4c36c3d70f7e262e066c48b3e14af800115b256%2F0_34_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Social%20enterprise%20masters%3A%20people%20combining%20profit%20with%20purpose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Social%20enterprise%20masters%3A%20people%20combining%20profit%20with%20purpose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4c36c3d70f7e262e066c48b3e14af800115b256%2F0_34_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 The Social Outfit provides jobs and training to refugee and new migrant 
tailors and seamstresses. Photograph: Georgia Blackie/Supplied by Social Outfit 
What’s been your happiest day?

“We just celebrated two years, and we now have staff members who’ve been 
employed for two years – and that was their first job here in Australia. Three 
of our staff members have exited our program and hold ongoing work externally.”

Your biggest business achievement to date?

“From our first year of operations to our second year of operations we grew 
our sales income by 35%. We’ve been so fortunate to have the early support of 
partners like ING DIRECT’s Dreamstarter – recently we also received word that 
we’d been successful in getting another round of funding through Dreamstarter’s 
Grants for Growth program. This will help us focus on training young refugees 
and new migrants in retail sales and customer service.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50526bdbddc0b33ff56504bec37a7f2bf6c0060%2F0_21_1000_645%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Social%20enterprise%20masters%3A%20people%20combining%20profit%20with%20purpose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Social%20enterprise%20masters%3A%20people%20combining%20profit%20with%20purpose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-dreamstarter%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsocial-enterprise-masters-people-combining-profit-with-purpose%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50526bdbddc0b33ff56504bec37a7f2bf6c0060%2F0_21_1000_645%2F1000.jpg>
 The Social Outfit is expanding their business after being successful in ING 
Dreamstarter’s Grants for Growth program. Photograph: Georgia Blackie/Supplied 
by Social Outfit 
Knowing what you know now, what would you tell people who want to start up a 
social enterprise?

“Just because we think it’s a good idea it isn’t always enough to get everyone 
on board. There’s more noise nowadays, across a whole bunch of programs and 
social good, and I think that means people are asking more sophisticated 
questions: why should you exist, and how are you providing something that 
hasn’t been provided before. It needs a lot of determination.”

Your ultimate dream for your business? 

“To employ more people as sewing technicians and grow our ethically-made brand 
into a very solid Australian quality fashion brand that people love and adore.”

One Night Stand, The Social Outfit and The Bread & Butter Project are among 
more than 50 businesses that ING DIRECT has helped through successful 
Dreamstarter campaigns so far.
 