
“It’s déjà vu all over again”. Yogi Berra’s famous words came to me when I 
heard thatthe government planned to split the quango that funds and oversees 
social housing providers 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-11-30/HCWS294>
 into separate investment and regulatory arms.

Investment and regulation have very different objectives, so it is important 
that those functions should be independent of one other, but this will be the 
third reorganisation in eight years – a period of political meddling that will 
have wasted millions of pounds.

For 44 years, between 1964 and 2008, housing associations were funded and 
regulated by theHousing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> 
Corporation, whose role became increasingly important during the 1980s, when 
council house-building was supposedly replaced by housing association 
development.

In 2008 the Labour government decided to scrap the Housing Corporation and 
create a new regulatory body, the Tenant Services Authority (TSA), and a new 
investment quango called the Homes and Communities Agency. The TSA was 
responsible for monitoring the activities of housing associations, ensuring 
they maintained set standards of viability, probity, governance and tenant 
involvement. In 2010, the TSA’s remit was expanded to include local 
authorities, Arms Length Management Organisations (semi-independent bodies 
managing council housing) and co-ops. The Home andCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> Agency (HCA) was responsible 
for funding new homes.

With the death of pay to stay, is the Housing Act crumbling? | Colin Wiles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/death-pay-to-stay-government-housing-act-crumbling>
When the coalition government was formed in 2010, the then housing minister 
Grant Shapps took a severe dislike to the TSA. Its decision to tour the country 
in a pink camper van talking to tenants and its lively merchandising seemed to 
rile him beyond words. He told journalists that it was a “quango too far” and 
announced that“the TSA is toast” 
<http://www.housingexcellence.co.uk/features/home-grant-shapps-mp>.


In April 2012 the TSA was merged back into a revamped HCA and a “chinese wall” 
was established between its investment and regulatory arms.

Then in March this year the government undertook a review of the HCA. This 
month it was announced that the agency would be split into two new bodies, a 
quango dealing with investment and another dealing with regulation. Sound 
familiar?

The government has also decided that Registered Housing Providers, which 
includes councils that still own housing will be required to pay an annual fee 
to the regulator. Providers with fewer than 1,000 homes will pay a flat annual 
fee of £300 and larger providers will pay a fee of £5 per property per year. 
This means that the new Clarion Group with 125,000 homes, formed from the 
merger of Circle and Affinity Sutton, will pay £625,000 a year for the pleasure 
of being regulated by the new body.

So at the end of eight years we are back at square one. Heaven knows what the 
cost of this ping-pong has been. The costs of re-structuring government 
quangos, with new chief executives and management structures, office moves, 
redundancies etc are huge. At a time when many tenants are struggling to make 
ends meet the government has effectively wasted millions of pounds splitting up 
the Housing Corporation to make two new bodies, merging them, and now splitting 
them up again. You couldn’t make it up.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 