
Sony <> yesterday unveiled the machine that could make it the world's dominant 
player in home entertainment. The PlayStation 2 will not only be the world's 
most advanced games console, it will also play DVD movies.

The company hopes that the new machine will become the focal point of a 
network of devices including televisions, audio systems and digital cameras, 
while also connecting users to the internet.

Sony <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> is already the market 
leader in the games console business. Since entering the market five years ago 
it has sold more than 70m PlayStations worldwide, including 5.7m in Britain. 
This suggests that a fifth of all British households have PlayStations.

The system accounts for about a quarter of the company's turnover and up to 
40% of its profits, according to Ray Maguire, the managing director ofSony 
Computer Entertainment <> in Britain. 

The more powerful PlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> 2 could do even better. 
Sony hopes to sell 2m units as soon as it goes on sale in Japan, and its 
factories are al ready producing half a million machines a month.

When the company offered 1,000 machines for Japanese users to pre-order over 
the internet yesterday its website crashed after taking 100,000 hits in a 
minute.

Frederic Diot, a senior analyst at Datamonitor <>, a UK-based market research 
company, said Japan is "voracious for any new consumer electronics". He 
expected Sony to sell 450,000 units in the UK this year, following a launch in 
the autumn. At a projected price of £299.99 the same launch price as the 
original PlayStation, sales would be worth £135m.

However the real money is in the games, which sell for between £20 and £35. 

Mr Diot said that last year sales of console games were worth $6.4bn (£4bn) in 
the US and Europe, including £920m in Britain.

Datamonitor expects the market to be worth $17.2 bn (£10.7bn) by 2003. 

In unit terms, the PlayStation currently has more than 70% of UK console games 
market, according to Rick Smith of ChartTrack, which collects data from 
retailers.

The rest is shared between the Nintendo 64 <>, Nintendo Game Boy and Sega 
Dreamcast <>. Sony now has 40% of the software market tracked by ChartTrack, 
including PC games and CD-roms.

The company hopes to capitalise on the strength of its software line-up by 
enabling the PlayStation 2 to run most PlayStation software. Unlike personal 
computers, next-generation games consoles do not usually run programs written 
for earlier machines.

There have been five generations of console technology since Atari established 
a worldwide market with the VCS (Video Computer System) at the end of the 1970s.

Each generation of technology has been dominated by one firm, with Atari, 
Nintendo, Sega and Sony succeeding one another as market leaders.

The PlayStation 2 will undoubtedly be challenged by an improved version of 
Sega's Dreamcast, Nintendo's forthcoming Dolphin, and by the still-unannounced 
X-Box expected from Microsoft.

Sony hopes the PlayStation 2 will make it the first company to dominate two 
successive generations of console technology.
 