
Sony is developing at least five smartphone games based on PlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> titles, which will be 
released in the next 18 months.

According to Japanese news site Nikkei, the games will be initially launched 
in the Asian market in the business year ending March 2018.

In March, the company announced a new division, ForwardWorks, formed 
specifically to produce new smartphone titles for both iOS andAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> platforms, based on well-known 
PlayStation characters and intellectual property.

It is not the first time Sony has brought the PlayStation brand to mobile 
phones. In 2012, the company launched PlayStation Mobile, a software platform 
that allowed owners of “PlayStation certified” phones such as some models in the
Sony Xperia range 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/03/sony-battery-life-playstation-4-new-xperia-z3-smartphones>
 to download a selection of classic and independently produced PlayStation 
titles. However, the concept failed to generate enough interest from phone 
owners, while the PlayStation Vita handheld console, which also supported 
PlayStation Mobile games, did not sell in great numbers. PlayStation Mobile was 
canned in the summer.

This year, Nintendo made its own foray into the smartphone sector. After the 
successful release of itsMiitomo title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/31/miitomo-first-look-review-nintendo-mobile-app-any-good>
 in March, the company invested in the development of smash-hit augmented 
reality title Pokemon Go, which, has been downloaded more than 500m times since 
its launch in July.

In April, the company, which resisted the smartphone sector for several years, 
also revealed that it bring favourite console titles Animal Crossing and Fire 
Emblem to phones, and the legendary designer Shigeru Miyamoto announced Super 
Mario Runwould be coming to iPhones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-launch-nintendo-super-mario-run-game>
 and then to Android devices, at Apple’s iPhone 7 press conference in September.

The fact that its rival Nintendo has now embraced the smartphone sector so 
fully will no doubt be a motivating factor for Sony. ItsPlayStation 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> console is currently 
leading with sales of over 40m, but there is huge potential in bringing the 
brand to the casual smartphone gaming audience.

There is no word on which PlayStation brands will be coming to phones, or if 
the developer is working on original titles or conversions of classic games. 
Names like Crash Bandicoot, Uncharted, Wipeout and Gran Turismo will surely all 
be in the frame.

 * Super Mario Run: Nintendo’s mascot finally makes the jump to mobile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-launch-nintendo-super-mario-run-game>
 