
What are we to make of the launch of Samantha Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/samantha-cameron>’s fashion label 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/30/sam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label>
?
Michael, by email

What indeed, Michael, what indeed? As you may or may not have heard, Samantha 
Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/samantha-cameron>, née Sheffield, 
has launched her very own fashion label, Cefinn; an anagram, sort of, of her 
children’s names, which is sweet.

Cameron pitches her label as “sitting between Joseph 
<http://www.joseph-fashion.com/en/ecomuk/page/home?gclid=CLzi8vOpq9ECFZG6GwodBzUF1g>
 andWhistles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/aug/24/whistles-middle-market-success>
”, she told Vogue last month, which means dresses that cost about £300 ($370), 
tops at £100 and,from what we’ve seen of it 
<http://www.cefinn.com/?gclid=CMyememFtdECFfcK0wod0DQHiQ>, clothes that look 
vaguely reminiscent of the sort of stuff you find atThe Kooples 
<http://www.thekooples.co.uk/?gclid=CNaMzpmtq9ECFULGGwodPzAHpw> and Maje 
<http://uk.maje.com/en/sale-2/?gclid=CIvd85-tq9ECFccV0wod3NUFgA>. And, as is 
the way in these kinds of articles about novice celebrity designers (see 
literally any fashion interview withVictoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham> or Alexa Chung), much 
time was spent telling the reader how, ACTUALLY, Cameron has always been 
“fascinated” by design. She understands what “normal” women need from their 
clothes, that this totally isn’t an ego thing but a calling, yadda yadda yadda.

In these articles, and in this one specifically, claims about how the aspiring 
designer really understands things like how skirts shouldn’t ride up when you 
sit down and blouses shouldn’t gape around the buttons are relayed as proof of 
the interviewee’s heretofore untapped design genius, as opposed to being the 
baseline minimum requirement for anyone wanting to work in fashion, but 
whatever. I would say these interviews write themselves, but I’d be putting 
myself out of a job.

I’ve thought about this issue a lot over the past few weeks, trying very hard 
to be reasonable. I have no doubt that Cameron is a nice person. God knows, 
articles about her tell me enough times she is and, heck, she looks it and I 
write about fashion so I’m clearly happy to go by surface appearances. I’ve 
also long argued that the sins of the husband should not be visited upon the 
spouse if she has stayed out of the issue. And yet. YET.

Even Cameron’s most loyal defenders who clamber over each other to give quotes 
about how Sam Cam is so 
aspirational-but-real-but-also-aspirational-but-in-a-really-real-way would 
surely concede that the only reason her label is getting any publicity – the 
main reason it exists, to be frank – is because of her husband. Contrary to 
what fashion interviews would have you believe, there are plenty of creative 
fortysomethings around who have had no experience in fashion design but 
understand how a dress should look – but only one of them is being gifted her 
own label. “When she decides to do something, there is nothing that will stop 
her doing it,” says one of Cameron’s friends in the Vogue article. To which the 
obvious response is, well, yes, good for her, but this has less to do with any 
extraordinary qualities within Cameron herself and more to do with the fact 
that she is – as Vogue put it – “almost indecently well-connected”. Achieving 
your dreams is not quite as difficult when your mother is an Astor, your father 
a baronet and your husband the former prime minister.

So posh people get ahead in Britain – not news, right? The real question is 
how to feel about Cameron launching a label, and, to be honest, it makes me 
want to move to the Hebrides and stick my head into a pile of wet leaves. 
Because the truth is, Cameron’s celebrity is, as I said, entirely down to who 
her husband is, and whatever else he achieved in office, his legacy will be 
that he needlessly gambled on this country’s future on the astonishingly 
foolish referendum, because he thought he could pull the result out of his back 
pocket, like an essay crisis at Brasenose College, Oxford, like a bit of 
bluffing in an Eton English class when you haven’t really read the set text. 
And when it all went wrong, he resigned with thehum of a jaunty tune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/david-cameron-hums-a-merry-tune-as-he-hands-over-to-theresa-may>
. So here we are today, thanks to Cameron’s hubris, in a country riven by 
Orwellian prophecies, with experts derided as traitors if they don’t parrot 
Number 10’s line (not that even Number 10 knows what that line is). The 
elevation of the stupid: that is what the referendum has led to. And, like 
Anthony Eden and Suez, that is all David Cameron will be known for, and that’s 
how it should be.

Related: Sam Cam the brand – what to expect from the Cefinn fashion label 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/30/sam-cam-the-brand-what-to-expect-from-the-cefinn-fashion-label>

The Camerons are, of course, private citizens now, and free to do as they 
please. But I’m free, too, and forgive me if I don’t feel like bumping up the 
Cameron bank account by buying Samantha’s clothes, no matter how much she 
understands buttons. I’m not saying she should go into purdah, but maybe 
someone could have a think about the weirdness in her charging £300 for a dress 
when the country is about to enter a period of – to use the favoured euphemism 
– extreme economic uncertainty because of her husband’s arrogance. There’s 
something about watching all my money lose its value that really doesn’t put me 
in the mood for shopping.

I said it before and I’ll say it again: I’m sure Cameron is a nice person (it 
is a legal requirement that all articles about her include that claim at least 
17 times.) Whereas I, by contrast, am a miserable remoaner. Or maybe I’m just 
stating the blinking obvious facts. Who knows? We’re in the post-truth world 
now, right?

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com <>.
 