
Two-year-old Zeka screams as a health worker measures the circumference of her 
arm while another holds her legs and presses her flesh. The nurses agree: Zeka 
has clear signs ofedema <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edema>, a swelling 
condition caused by extreme hunger.

“She will live, but she needs to go to hospital. The situation in this area is 
much worse than when we were here just a few weeks ago.

UK aid money spent trying to boost British role in Malawi oil sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/uk-aid-money-spent-trying-to-boost-british-role-in-malawi-oil-sector>
“It looks like 10% of children here are now malnourished. It will certainly 
get worse,” said chief health assistant Ane Banda, who is leading a government 
assessment of rural areas near Nsanje, close to the Malawian border with 
Mozambique.

“We have not eaten for days,” said Zeka’s mother, who has been living off wild 
fruit, water lilies and the kindness of neighbours but has been told to attend 
a food handout in her village the next day.

Malawi is one of seven southern African countries on the brink of starvation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/africa-worst-famine-since-1985-looms-for-50-million>
 and in a situation that the UN says needs requires immediate action.

It has been devastated by a combination of a long drought caused by a strong 
El Niño weather cycle and climate change. Successive maize harvests have 
failed, leaving communities there and in Zambia, Congo, Zimbabwe, Mozambique 
and elsewhere, desperate for food.

Madagascar is the most critical, said David Phiri, UN food and agriculture 
coordinator based in Harare, Zimbabawe.

“Hundreds of thousands of people are on the brink of famine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/madagascar-drought-catastrophe-looms-as-850000-go-hungry-says-un>
. We may see deaths there from starvation. People appear to have no food or 
money. The cost of inaction or further delaying our response is too ghastly to 
contemplate. It needs immediate action,” he warned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fsouthern-africa-climate-change-drought-crop-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0a9ffa755fe70c1bb3eae3e0a40195a6b64bbfe%2F0_454_5784_3470%2F5784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southern%20Africa%20cries%20for%20help%20as%20El%20Ni%C3%B1o%20and%20climate%20change%20savage%20maize%20harvest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fsouthern-africa-climate-change-drought-crop-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southern%20Africa%20cries%20for%20help%20as%20El%20Ni%C3%B1o%20and%20climate%20change%20savage%20maize%20harvest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fsouthern-africa-climate-change-drought-crop-failure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0a9ffa755fe70c1bb3eae3e0a40195a6b64bbfe%2F0_454_5784_3470%2F5784.jpg>
 People stand in line for food aid at a school in the village of Malikopo. 
Photograph: Andrew Renneisen/Getty Images 
Hunger levels in parts of southern Madagascar stand at phase four of a 
five-point scale used by aid agencies, in which five is famine. “Our fear is 
not a widespread famine across southernAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> but hotspots of deep hunger in 
different countries. People have exhausted all their reserves now and their 
coping mechanisms.

“If food does not arrive, it will lead to serious issues like childhood 
stunting, which have lifelong impacts. Even if people recover, they will be 
prone to cardiovascular diseases.”

Forty million people in southern Africa and a further 11 million in Ethiopia 
will need food aid over the next few months, Phiri said. But many may get 
little or nothing because only 25% of the $2.9bn in aid sought by the seven 
most affected countries has been pledged. A separate World Food Programme 
appeal for $600m is only half-funded.

“We expected more money to have been pledged by now but we understand donor 
budgets are limited. There are many hotspots around the world which need food 
relief and which are considered more critical than southern Africa,” said Phiri.

“The numbers of people needing emergency food are rising fast,” said Coco 
Ushiyama, head of the World Food Programme inMalawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>. “The situation is building up. In 
November 5.7 million Malawians needed food, in December it will be 6.2 million.

“By January we will have 6.5 million hungry people – almost one in three 
people. This will last until at least March. Malawi is the highest impacted of 
all the affected countries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fsouthern-africa-climate-change-drought-crop-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c7d2ddaf902b5267a498a07727ce60e1af086e0%2F0_346_4224_2534%2F4224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southern%20Africa%20cries%20for%20help%20as%20El%20Ni%C3%B1o%20and%20climate%20change%20savage%20maize%20harvest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fsouthern-africa-climate-change-drought-crop-failure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southern%20Africa%20cries%20for%20help%20as%20El%20Ni%C3%B1o%20and%20climate%20change%20savage%20maize%20harvest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fsouthern-africa-climate-change-drought-crop-failure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c7d2ddaf902b5267a498a07727ce60e1af086e0%2F0_346_4224_2534%2F4224.jpg>
 A Malawian woman carries food aid distributed by the UN World Food Progamme. 
Photograph: Mike Hutchings/Reuters 
“Money [from donor governments] has come, though not as fast as we would like. 
We have had to cut people to half rations when there was not enough. We are 
diverting ships, and money is being reallocated from other budgets.”

“The peak of the crisis will be in January. Distributing the food to remote 
areas will be difficult,” said Danny Harvey, country director of Concern 
Worldwide in Zambia, where nearly 1 million people need aid. Southern Africa 
has been forgotten again.

“The food is just not there in some places. The water situation is quite 
desperate in some places. Streams have dried up,” she said .

China has delivered 5,500 tonnes of rice to Zimbabawe, but the country has 
received only 40% of the $350m requested to feed 5.5 million people, said the 
UN.

Britain says the Department for International Development has given the second 
most humanitarian aid after the US.

Across Africa, the worst food crisis since 1985 looms for 50 million
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/africa-worst-famine-since-1985-looms-for-50-million>
“[We have provided] £356m for the total UK response to El Niño across Africa, 
including £43.1m for Malawi. The humanitarian system as a whole still needs to 
improve its early response mechanisms,” said James Wharton, international 
development minister.

“While some international agencies reacted well to the El Niño early warning 
in 2015, others have not.

Tackling the global challenges of our time, such as climate change, which can 
fuel migration, insecurity and instability, is firmly in Britain’s national 
interest,” he said following a visit to Malawi.

DfId says 52 million people suffer from food insecurity, one million children 
require treatment for severe acute malnutrition and 5.8 million people need 
emergency water and sanitation in Ethiopia alone.

“The response to this predicted, slow-onset crisis has been too little too 
late. Despite the crisis coming on the heels of a poor growing season in 2014 
and an economic downturn, the region’s governments were slow to scale up their 
response, as were the humanitarian agencies,” said Oxfam in a briefing note.

Above-normal rains are predicted in most parts of the region, which could 
support harvests and replenish water sources, but are also likely to bring the 
threat of flooding, said Nellie Nyang’wa, Oxfam Zambia director.

“Farmers desperately need seeds and fertilisers if they are to take advantage 
of rains and produce better harvests next year,” she said.
 