
Southern African countries have launched an emergency appeal for $2.8bn 
(£2.1bn) to help feed nearly 40 million people hit by one of the worst regional 
droughts in 35 years.

According to the South African Development Community, which comprises 15 
countries, 23 million people require urgent humanitarian assistance and a 
further 13 million are food insecure following thestrongest El Niño event 
recorded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/05/el-nino-weather-climate-change-noaa-nasa>
.

Lesotho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/18/lesotho-green-drought-hunger-rain-malnutrition-disease>
,Malawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/mar/30/drought-new-normal-el-nino-worsens-food-shortages-malawi-zimbabwe-africa-podcast>
, Namibia, Swaziland andZimbabwe have already declared national drought 
emergencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/21/drought-southern-africa-heavy-toll-students-fainting-malawi-zimbabwe>
,South Africa has a drought emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/17/farmers-bear-brunt-of-south-africas-severe-drought-all-we-can-do-is-pray>
 ineight of its nine provinces 
<http://www.sabc.co.za/news/a/1446f1804d145859b06af293fd523eaa/Eightundefinedprovincesundefineddeclaredundefineddroughtundefineddisasterundefinedareas-20161006>
, andMozambique declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/mozambique-drought-hopes-harvest-evaporate>
 a 90-day“red alert” for some areas 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/mozambique/mozambique-government-declares-red-alert-severe-drought>
.

El Niño is over – but it leaves nearly 100 million people short of food
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/30/el-nino-is-over-but-it-leaves-nearly-100-million-people-short-of-food>
Food shortages are expected to peak between October, when supplies will run 
lowest, and March, when the next harvest is due, so the number of people in 
extreme need is expected to rise significantly if insufficient assistance is 
given.

The US has pledged $127m 
<http://abcnews.go.com/International/wireStory/severe-drought-threatens-southern-africa-us-127m-40851962>
 (£97m), lifting its contribution to the region to about $300m. Britain has 
delivered $250m to Africa since July 2015 as part of its El Niño response, and 
the Netherlands, Switzerland and Italy last week announcedpledges totalling $22m
 
<http://www.unocha.org/top-stories/all-stories/el-ni%C3%B1o-donors-pledge-some-us22-million-address-climate-linked-humanitarian->
.

But the gap between funds needed and pledged is thought to have risen to more 
than $4bn. According to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs, $6bn has been requested by the governments of the 60-odd countries 
affected by El Niño but less than $2bn has been pledged.

“Mobilising humanitarian assistance will be critical to save lives and reduce 
suffering. Our additional contribution will help meet growing needs by 
providing emergency food assistance, nutrition and health support, access to 
safe drinking water, and seeds ahead of the upcoming planting season to promote 
agricultural recovery,” said a USAid spokesman.

“It has been clear for months that this drought is having a devastating impact 
on the southern Africa region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/drought-high-temperatures-el-nino-36m-people-africa-hunger>
, and we know things could get even worse. People are struggling now. They have 
watched their crops wither and their animals starve to death. Even in the 
best-case scenario the next major harvest is not expected until early next 
year,” said Rebecca Sutton, Oxfam’s El Niño campaign manager.

“Given the scope of the disaster globally the shortfall of $4bn needed for 
this crisis is shocking. This disaster is too big for just a handful of donors 
who have given generously to be relied upon; others need to step up.”

Drought and rising temperatures 'leaves 36m people across Africa facing hunger'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/drought-high-temperatures-el-nino-36m-people-africa-hunger>
“The full force of the emergency will be felt over the coming months,” said 
Save the Children’s east and southern Africa regional director, David Wright. 
“Harvests will continue to fail; families will run out of essentials as their 
livelihoods dry up or are washed away; and children forced from their homes 
will leave healthcare, security and loved ones behind.

“The sheer scale of the crisis far outstrips the coping capacities of 
communities and the resources of governments, putting decades of development 
gains at risk.”

Ertharin Cousin, executive director of the World Food Programme who was 
recently in Malawi, said the situation was worrying. “I heard and saw 
first-hand the hardships and worries …El Niño’s impact in Malawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/21/drought-southern-africa-heavy-toll-students-fainting-malawi-zimbabwe>
 alone has been severe: 6.5 million people will endure food insecurity, almost 
40% of the population.”


The UK’s international development minister James Wharton said, “Widespread 
drought means millions of people across Africa are being forced to go without 
vital food and clean water, while others are being displaced by severe 
flooding, losing their homes and their livelihoods.

“The UK is leading the way in helping to prevent and prepare for the impact of 
El Niño by providing lifesaving food, water and shelter to people in urgent 
need. Support for people affected by El Niño is important to Africa and firmly 
in Britain’s interest.”

The UN has warned that humanitarian disasters are to be expected with climate 
change.

“This is a human-induced aggravation of a traditional weather pattern. We’re 
into a new normal where it is no longer El Niño – it is El Niño affected by 
climate change,” said Mary Robinson, UN special envoy on El Niño and climate.

“The international community has to take responsibility, particularly the 
countries that are more responsible for [carbon] emissions.”

Countries across five continents have called states of emergency. According to 
the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, other countriesseriously affected by 
El Niño <http://www.fao.org/emergencies/crisis/elnino-lanina/en/> include:

Where drought is the new normal: El Niño worsens food shortages in Malawi and 
Zimbabwe – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/mar/30/drought-new-normal-el-nino-worsens-food-shortages-malawi-zimbabwe-africa-podcast>
 * Ethiopia <http://www.fao.org/emergencies/countries/detail/en/c/151593/> – 
an estimated 10.2 million people need food assistance this year. Malnutrition 
rates remain extremely high.

 * Somalia – drought has been declared in Puntland and Somaliland 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/19_february_humanitarian_bulletin.pdf>
 (pdf), where some communities have not experienced normal rains for up to four 
seasons, spanning two years.Nearly 4.7 million people are food insecure 
<https://twitter.com/faoknowledge/status/698831626780995584>.

 * Sudan – 4.6 million people are food insecure 
<http://www.fao.org/emergencies/countries/detail/en/c/148725/>, primarily due 
to the effects of El Niño, and this is likely to increase due to below-average 
agricultural production last year, rising staple food prices and continued 
conflict.

 * Haiti – an estimated 3.6 million are food insecure 
<http://www.fao.org/emergencies/countries/detail/en/c/161491/>. The 2015 cereal 
harvest was the lowest in 12 years,with losses as high as 90% 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/world/2015-2016-el-ni-o-early-action-and-response-agriculture-food-security-and-nutrition-5>
 in most-affected areas.

 * Central America – the worst drought in decades has hit the region, 
affecting food insecurity for a second consecutive year. More than3.5 million 
people need humanitarian assistance 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-latam-drought-idUSKCN0YI12S> after suffering 
major crop losses due to prolonged drought.

 * Fiji – crop damage from recent cyclones 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-03-07/fiji-before-after-photos-cyclone-winston/7220784>
 is combining with unusual rainfall patterns to intensify food security risks.

 * Papua New Guinea 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/papua-new-guinea/papua-new-guinea-el-nino-response-bulletin-1-february-2016>
 – a third of the population – 2.7 million people – are affected by drought and 
frost.

 * Vietnam 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/timdaiss/2016/05/25/why-vietnam-is-running-dry-worst-drought-in-nearly-100-years/2/#6981ef04427f>
 – more than 83% of the country’s area has been affected by drought.
 