
At least 56 rebels and four government soldiers have been killed in heavy 
clashes inSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, in a 
worrying new surge of violence.

A Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> People’s Liberation Army 
(SPLA) spokesman, Brig Gen Lul Ruai Koang, said that rebels aligned with the 
former vice-president, Riek Machar, attacked government troops near the 
country’s second-largest city of Malakal.

Violence between Machar’s supporters and troops loyal to his political foe, 
President Salva Kiir, has blighted the nation for much of its hard-won 
independence from Sudan in 2011.

UN peacekeepers refused to help as aid workers were raped in South Sudan – 
report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/un-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report>
“The rebels of Riek Machar attacked us in two places of our defence, that is 
Wajwok and Lelo, and we heavily impacted on them. The dead bodies of the rebels 
confirmed after [the] count was 56,” the spokesman said, adding that the 
clashes began on Friday evening and ended the next day.


“On our side we lost four SPLA fighters and 20 were wounded.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsouth-sudan-at-least-56-rebels-four-government-soldiers-killed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64df1b07dec5ef577c7994356145b1bc4479b6f4%2F0_0_4750_2850%2F4750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Sudan%3A%20at%20least%2056%20rebels%20and%20four%20SPLA%20soldiers%20killed%20in%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsouth-sudan-at-least-56-rebels-four-government-soldiers-killed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Sudan%3A%20at%20least%2056%20rebels%20and%20four%20SPLA%20soldiers%20killed%20in%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsouth-sudan-at-least-56-rebels-four-government-soldiers-killed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64df1b07dec5ef577c7994356145b1bc4479b6f4%2F0_0_4750_2850%2F4750.jpg>
 SPLA soldiers cross the Nile at Malakal, northern South Sudan, on 16 October. 
Photograph: Albert González Farran/AFP/Getty 
Malakal is the closest town to the oilfields in the Upper Nile region that 
bring in the government’s greatest revenue, and has changed hands several times 
since fighting broke out in 2013.

Forces loyal to Kiir invited journalists to the region on Sunday to show they 
were in control of the area and a photographer reported seeing up to 40 bodies.


However, Maj Dickson Gatluak, with the rebel SPLA in Opposition (SPLA-IO), 
insisted his forces were in control of two towns as well as the northern part 
of Upper Nile state. “What we are trying to do now is, our forces are trying 
our level best to try to march to Malakal town. So our forces are not yet 
displaced from those areas and this is not true,” he said.

Gatluak said fighting was continuing, although an AFP photographer reported it 
was calm on Sunday.


“It is just a matter of time [before] our forces will take Malakal ... we have 
realised that there is no political settlement in Juba, there is not any 
political space in Juba, so we have to organise ourselves because the 
government has failed,” he said.

South Sudan descended into war just two and a half years after it gained 
independence, when Kiir accused Machar – whom he had sacked as his deputy – of 
plotting a coup in December 2013.

Kiir is a member of the Dinka tribe, while Machar is a Nuer and fighting has 
split the country along ethnic lines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsouth-sudan-at-least-56-rebels-four-government-soldiers-killed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c24b3e9db293b78e86a3d227cc0e750dbe1451a%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Sudan%3A%20at%20least%2056%20rebels%20and%20four%20SPLA%20soldiers%20killed%20in%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsouth-sudan-at-least-56-rebels-four-government-soldiers-killed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Sudan%3A%20at%20least%2056%20rebels%20and%20four%20SPLA%20soldiers%20killed%20in%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsouth-sudan-at-least-56-rebels-four-government-soldiers-killed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c24b3e9db293b78e86a3d227cc0e750dbe1451a%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 South Sudan’s government troops on a lorry preparing for a journey to the 
frontline in Malakal. Photograph: Xinhua/Barcroft 
Numerous attempts to shore up a fragile 2015 truce have failed and, in a major 
setback to peace efforts,fierce clashes erupted in Juba on 8 July this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/09/violence-south-sudan-orchestrated-by-government-un-report-reveals>
 between Kiir’s forces and those loyal to Machar.

The international community has expressed deep concern over a spread in 
violence since the July clashes, which pushed the number of refugees past a 
million, according to the UN.

In a further blow to peace hopes, Machar urged “a popular armed resistance” 
against his rival’s government last month.

Machar, who fled to Khartoum after the July fighting, left for South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> last week for medical tests.

Last week an influential group of South Sudanese politicians known as the 
“former detainees” – after their arrest when war broke out in 2013 – warned 
that “the country is on the edge of a precipice”.

In a sign of growing frustration in the region with the warring leaders of 
South Sudan, Kenyan politicians threatened sanctions last week. The defence and 
foreign relations committee chairman, Ndung’u Gethenji, said they were 
considering sanctions “against those who are perpetuating war-like activities, 
genocide and killing [so that they] may no longer enjoy having their assets in 
our country, their children studying in our schools in relative comfort – in 
peace and security – while they continue to destroy the lives of their people 
back in their own country.

“Kenya can no longer afford to have another failed state on its border,” he 
said.
 