
South Africans have shocked the African National Congress (ANC) in local 
council elections by handing significant gains to the opposition, but it is 
clear from the low turnout in crucial areas that the outcome is less about 
voting for the Democratic Alliance (DA) than taking a stand against the ruling 
party.

With the final results still to be tallied, the DA has declared victory in the 
Nelson Mandela Bay area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/south-africa-ruling-anc-party-loses-control-nelson-mandela-bay?CMP=twt_a-world_b-gdnworld>
 and looks as though it may take over in metropolitan areas including Pretoria 
and Johannesburg.

It seems that urban black voters in particular – fed up with the ruling party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/south-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc>
 and the country’s president Jacob Zuma, but distrustful of an opposition 
considered to represent the interests of a small and predominantly white 
minority – simply stayed away.

The DA is led by Mmusi Maimane, a young black man from Soweto, but it has 
struggled to shake off its historical ties to the apartheid system.

“Many people who are disappointed by the ANC nevertheless cannot bring 
themselves to vote for a party that they perceive to be dominated by white 
people,” said Shireen Hassim, a professor of politics at the University of the 
Witwatersrand.

She said voters did not trust the more radical Economic Freedom Fighters party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/18/brawl-erupts-in-south-african-parliament-as-opposition-party-ejected>
, which they feel is irresponsible. “In that context they stay away from the 
polls and let the chips fall where they may. I think this trend started in the 
2014 election, which explains the lower voter turnout,” she said.

The choice to stay away was not confined to urban settings. In the town of 
Vuwani in Limpopo province, which saw schools burned down in anti-government 
protests in June, only 1,600 people out of a total of 44,000 registered voters 
turned out to cast their ballots.

Despite this virtual boycott, the ANC secured a win in the area, but the 
complaint will have registered. ANC leaders have been “taken aback by lower 
than expected turnouts in areas that were their traditional strongholds,” said 
the respected South Africanjournalist Ranjeni Munusamy 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2016-08-05-lge2016-results-anc-takes-battering-while-opposition-heads-for-coalition-talks/#.V6TC92XJvJo>
.

 Opposition parties are bullish as the results trickle in, and voters are 
celebrating the opportunity to put the politicians on notice.

 It is important, however, not to underestimate the ruling party. The ANC 
continues to have a strong historical connection to the majority of black South 
Africans and to hold a special place in their hearts.

Opposition parties do not benefit from the same history, nor will they 
necessarily be given the time, space and goodwill the ANC has enjoyed.

National elections in 2019 are still very much the ANC’s for the taking, not 
only in rural areas where the party’s support has remained relatively 
consistent, but in urban areas as well.

 If the ANC acts against Zuma, who has been tainted by corruption allegations, 
in the coming weeks, black urban voters will almost certainly return to the 
fold. If not, this election shows that the goodwill will not last forever.
 