
Trains with a guard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-rail-strikes-driver-says-lifesaver-guards-have-to-stay>
 become driver-only trains, which then become driverless trains. That’s the 
fear underlyingAslef’s dispute with Southern railways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/when-where-why-southern-rail-strike-industrial-action>
 and accounts for the rearguard action to prevent further job losses across the 
rail industry.

It’s not the only reason for the dispute. There is also scorn for Southern’s 
management, which has attacked drivers’ basic terms and conditions, and there 
is anger at transport secretary Chris Grayling’s anti-union stance. But, at its 
heart, the dispute is over the status and even the very existence of the job of 
train driver, which has been around for nigh on 200 years.

Like most people, train drivers will have read the screaming headlines warning 
of a robot revolution that spells the end for millions of jobs.

Countless futurologists have been joined by figures like the chief economist 
of the Bank of England, Andy Haldane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/robots-threaten-low-paid-jobs-says-bank-of-england-chief-economist>
, arguing that white-collar jobs face being “hollowed out” as repetitive tasks 
are automated, much as blue-collar manufacturing jobs have been in recent 
decades.

Economists are divided over the effect of increasing automation. Some hark 
back to the introduction of threshing machines into 19th-century agriculture 
and say that train drivers are the new luddites. Far from being the beginning 
of the end, the disappearance of farm jobs was a precursor to the growth of the 
manufacturing and services sectors that not only soaked up the rural working 
class, but also an expanding labour force.

On the other side of the fence are economists who argue that the extraordinary 
scope of today’s software revolution, from voice recognition to problem-solving 
algorithms, is a different beast and will knock out jobs in almost every 
industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87acb964e09491736bfbec4d4dd4a959b78b3bad%2F0_36_3327_1996%2F3327.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southern%20rail%20dispute%20reflects%20workers%E2%80%99%20growing%20fears%20about%20rise%20of%20automation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southern%20rail%20dispute%20reflects%20workers%E2%80%99%20growing%20fears%20about%20rise%20of%20automation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87acb964e09491736bfbec4d4dd4a959b78b3bad%2F0_36_3327_1996%2F3327.jpg>
 Amazon fails to replace the workers displaced by its online model. Photograph: 
Paul Sakuma/AP 
Martin Ford, author of Rise of the Robots, 
<https://www.linkedin.com/in/martin-ford-5a70428> which won the Financial Times
/McKinsey business book of the year in 2015, says that a large percentage of 
jobs are, at some level, routine and can be broken down into a discrete set of 
tasks that are repeated over and over each day.

He believes the sheer volume of jobs lost should force governments to consider 
a minimum income for all workers. He says: “As machine-learning and robotics 
technologies advance, a large fraction of these job types will be at risk of 
being automated away.”

In the US, automation has worked its way up the food chain for some, with the 
effect of shunting workers into lower-skilled jobs on lower wages.

There is plenty of American academic literature on the effects of automation, 
but only one study has taken a detailed look at wages over the last 30 years 
and appeared to show the effect on individuals’ living standards.

Robert Shapiro, a former economic adviser to Bill Clinton who now runs the 
Sonecon consultancy in Washington, spent six months hacking his way through 
more than three decades of census data and found that themost profound impact 
on the wages of college-educated, middle-income groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2015/sep/06/america-decline-in-wages-can-be-traced-from-the-george-w-bush-era>
arrived along with the internet at the turn of the century.

The widespread adoption of technology in almost every industry meant that 
solid office jobs that paid above-average wages began to disappear at an 
alarming rate from 2001/2002 onwards. The arc of rising wages during a working 
life that continued through the 1980s and 1990s, became a decline for many 
people from their 40s onwards during George W Bush’s presidency. The 2008 
financial crash accelerated the process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef0a97b641b4ea3c540333b500a0bbca791551c5%2F0_190_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southern%20rail%20dispute%20reflects%20workers%E2%80%99%20growing%20fears%20about%20rise%20of%20automation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southern%20rail%20dispute%20reflects%20workers%E2%80%99%20growing%20fears%20about%20rise%20of%20automation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef0a97b641b4ea3c540333b500a0bbca791551c5%2F0_190_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Deloitte says 35% of today’s jobs in the UK are at high risk of automation in 
10 to 20 years. Photograph: Ritchie B. Tongo/EPA 
UK studies have found the hollowing out of particular industries has failed to 
dent average wages, mainly because there has always been another bunch of 
middle-income jobs to replace those lost.

Adam Corlett, a researcher at The Resolution Foundation, says: “Jobs such as 
those in secretarial work, administration and manufacturing have been replaced 
by new jobs in business, management, science, teaching and care.”

If anything, he says, the UK needs more investment in technology to raise 
productivity, which has slumped since the financial crash and stayed low. The 
UK’s productivity, as measured by hours worked per unit of output, is around 
30% less than the US.

Step forward Capita, which provides services ranging from electronic tagging 
for offenders to store-card services for retailers. It said last week that 
2,000 office jobs would be made redundant after it found workers assisted by 
automated robotic technology could achieve “ten times the amount they used to”.

“It doesn’t remove the need for an individual but it speeds up how they work, 
which means you need less people to do it,” the company said.

A series of studies by the professional services firm, Deloitte, has argued 
that the Capita move is a sign that technologies are increasingly behaving like 
a laxative for employers, flushing out jobs that are no longer needed.

Deloitte says 35% of today’s jobs in the UK are at high risk of automation 
within the next 10 to 20 years. Only four in 10 are in the low-risk category.

Across the UK, jobs paying less than £30,000 a year are nearly five times more 
likely to be replaced by automation than those paying more than £100,000. In 
London, lower-paid jobs are eight times more likely to be replaced.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8762848b9887c63993d0be02219ca98d32538534%2F0_552_3944_2366%2F3944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southern%20rail%20dispute%20reflects%20workers%E2%80%99%20growing%20fears%20about%20rise%20of%20automation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southern%20rail%20dispute%20reflects%20workers%E2%80%99%20growing%20fears%20about%20rise%20of%20automation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frobotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8762848b9887c63993d0be02219ca98d32538534%2F0_552_3944_2366%2F3944.jpg>
 From 2001 onwards, office jobs that paid above-average wages began to 
disappear. Photograph: Rick Neibel/REX 
The only good news from the surveys is that firms apparently expect to create 
more of these highly paid jobs.

It’s for this reason British university students must behave more like their 
continental and US counterparts, who often think nothing of educating 
themselves into their late 20s and amassing a collection of postgraduate 
qualifications.

But the race for better qualifications to win an elite job – one that is 
better paid and more immune to automation – is going to get tougher as the new 
breed of almost jobless firms grab the lion’s share of economic activity.

Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>, Google and Facebook, 
which have seen their incomes and profits grow immeasurably in recent years, 
are not among the postwar generation of firms desperately automating their 
processes to stay in business – they automate from the very outset.

Twenty years ago, a company with a similar stock market value and number of 
customers as Facebook would have employed hundreds of thousands more staff than 
the tech firm does today.

Not only does Amazon minimise the amount of tax it pays as a corporation, it 
fails to replace the sheer volume of workers who are displaced by its online 
sales model.

Rail company Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> says it 
has no intention of introducing driverless trains, but with driverless cars 
already being tested, it might not be too long before the technology arrives 
and train drivers are consigned to being another piece of railway history.

ROBOT WARS

Automation is not just going to rob a vast swath of school leavers and 
graduates in the developed world of a skilled and well-paid job. The robot wars 
are also going to disrupt the progress of developing nations as they move from 
a dependency on agriculture for employment to manufacturing and the services 
industries.

In October, the World Bank said automation threatens nearly seven out of 10 
jobs in India and 77% in China. In the UK, four out of 10 of jobs are at risk, 
according to one report. Here are some of the companies planning to swap staff 
with robots.

Capita The UK-based company that runs the London congestion charge said it 
needed to axe 2,000 jobs as part of a cost-cutting drive in response to poor 
trading. It said it would use the money it saved from sacking thousands of 
staff to fund investment in automated technology across all of the company’s 
divisions. It expects to use automation to take on tasks such as IT processing.

Uber The taxi-hailing app was testing driverless cars (above left) in San 
Francisco until last week, when the California department of motor vehicles 
ordered it to stop after the cars jumped red lights. The company, which has a 
deal with Volvo, is pushing ahead with the technology that could see thousands 
of self-driving cars on the road within a couple of years. Electric car maker 
Tesla has taken more than 325,000 reservations for itsModel 3 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/cars/news/tesla-model-3-launch-elon-musk-unveils-new-25000-electric-car/>
, which has driverless technology and is due to arrive in late 2017. Millions 
of taxi drivers, lorry drivers and chauffeurs could be put out of work, though 
there will be jobs managing and maintaining driverless cars.

Carl’s Jr and Hardee’s restaurants could become overwhelmingly reliant on 
self-service if the chief executive of the firm that owns theUS restaurant 
chains <http://fortune.com/2016/03/17/automate-fast-food/> gets his way.

Andy Puzder, inspired by Eatsa, a restaurant where all front-of-house 
procedures are computerised, says he could afford to invest in healthier food 
options once he has shed surplus staff.

“Millennials like not seeing people,” he said. “I’ve actually seen young 
people waiting in line to use the kiosk, when there’s a person standing behind 
the counter, waiting on nobody.”

Adidas The sportswear brand produces 301m pairs of shoes a year and output is 
growing at more than 10% annually.A new automated shoe factory in Ansbach, 
Bavaria <http://fortune.com/2016/05/25/adidas-robot-speedfactories/> (above 
right) is the answer to its growing pains. It will still need skilled staff to 
oversee operations, it says, but not the legions of semi-skilled staff of old.

The rollout of similar factories to growing markets in the US, South America 
and Asia, will only need 130 new staff per site, which means the arrival of a 
shoe factory in town will not give employment in the area a serious boost.
 