
A decision on whether David Silva faces England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> will be left until Tuesday 
afternoon, after he was forced to train alone on Monday night.

Spain’s players prepared at one end of the pitch at Wembley while the 
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> 
midfielder, wearing trainers rather than boots, was at the other end jogging 
with a physiotherapist. Silva had a problem with a toe after he had been 
trodden on and medical staff preferred him not to wear boots. The final 
decision will depend on his progress overnight and while there are doubts over 
his presence on Tuesday night, he has not been ruled out. City face Crystal 
Palace away at the weekend.

Joe Hart says he had to rein in England passion after Euro 2016 errors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/joe-hart-england-passion-euro-2016-errors>
The Spain coach, Julen Lopetegui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/spain-england-julen-lopetegui-wembley>
, had said before the session that he had doubts about his lineup just 48 hours 
after their 4-0 victory over Macedonia in Granada. “We have to see how the 
players are; we have to see that ‘final photo’ to make the decision [on the 
team],” Lopetegui said. “We have an idea but we don’t know.”

The expectation was already for it to be a changed side, an opportunity to 
give minutes to players who have not yet had them, including debuts for 
Manchester United’s Ander Herrera and possibly, from the bench, for the former 
Liverpool striker Iago Aspas. Silva’s condition makes the inclusion of Juan 
Mata or Isco from the start more likely. Pepe Reina is in line for an 
opportunity in goal. “Whoever plays it will be a competitive side,” Lopetegui 
said.

Aritz Aduriz is expected to start up front, completing an astonishing 10-day 
period for the Athletic Bilbao striker. He became the first Spaniard to score 
five goals in a game for half a century in Athletic’s 5-3 win over Genk on the 
same night that he became a father for the second time. He then came on as a 
substitute and scored forSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> 
against Macedonia – aged 35 years 275 days. That saw him break José María 
Peña’s Spanish record, which had stood since 1930.

It was only Aduriz’s second goal for his country, having gone almost six years 
without a call-up between his first cap in October 2010 and his return in 
February 2016, after hisgoalscoring record improved following his 30th birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/03/aritz-aduriz-better-age-athletic-bilbao>
. Although he went to Euro 2016, Aduriz did not make Lopetegui’s first squad 
but was called up for these two fixtures. The Spain manager called him an 
“example”.

Spain’s new coach Julen Lopetegui: Why I am passionate about English football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/spain-england-julen-lopetegui-wembley>
“This is a friendly but as soon as the referee blows the start of the game, 
that’s history. We’ll go out there to try to win,” said the Arsenal defender 
Nacho Monreal, who scored his first Spain goal against Macedonia. It is a game 
that Spain’s players have been keen to take part in. When they joined the 
national team’s training camp in Las Rozas last week, Lopetegui urged them to 
forget it and focus on the World Cup qualifier Macedonia instead. With that 
game won, the message is different now.

Lopetegui described it as an “honour and a pleasure” to meet England at a 
stadium that is “hard to match”, insisting: “The team and the stage will oblige 
us to produce a great performance.”

Answering in English, he also said that England have improved under Gareth 
Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/gareth-southgate-long-term-vision-england-spain>
 and agreed that there are certain parallels between the two men, who have 
coached their countries at under-21 level. “I think the England team is 
improving; they [are] show[ing] different skills in [the] offensive phase and I 
think they’re trying to work on that: that’s my impression,” Lopetegui said. “I 
think he is doing a very good job and I wish him the best. England are a good 
team in very good form and they have good players.”
 