
Hiking holidays with kids can go badly wrong. One walking trip we did was 
cited long afterwards by our youngest as an infliction of cruelty. But we had 
much better luck in northern Spain’s Picos de Europa range. In part this was 
down to the beauty of the mountains, which are dramatically steep and craggy – 
the Dolomites of Spain.

Our first walk, the 10km Bajo los Picos trail above Mogrovejo village, began 
with a long uphill slog through forest, inspiring grumbles of “I’m not doing 
this again,” till the trees suddenly opened up, to reveal a wall of mountains 
right above us, dizzyingly precipitous. Thereafter, the views were so 
captivating that complaints halted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2023e8fd276de00529cbcc49b205d981b2a738be%2F0_175_5242_3145%2F5242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spanish%20steps%3A%20family%20hiking%20in%20the%20Picos%20de%20Europa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spanish%20steps%3A%20family%20hiking%20in%20the%20Picos%20de%20Europa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2023e8fd276de00529cbcc49b205d981b2a738be%2F0_175_5242_3145%2F5242.jpg>
 Mogrovejo village. Photograph: Alamy 
The Picos de Europa range – which is inland from the Spain’s Atlantic coast – 
is in that select category of travel destinations where school summer holidays 
are actually the optimum time to visit. The weather on Spain’s “green coast” 
can change fast and it is important to have rain gear at the ready, and so 
August, the driest month of the year, represents the best time to try a trek. 
We had a few murky days but most were warm, sunny and clear.

In the Picos de Europa national park 
<http://www.magrama.gob.es/es/red-parques-nacionales/nuestros-parques/picos-europa/>
 it’s possible to stay overnight in refuges – but there’s little need, as 
almost all trails can be enjoyed as day walks. The mountain range is small, 
just 40km by 20km, though roads are so winding that driving a circuit round it 
takes a full day. To avoid hours in the car, we mostly kept to the area where 
we were staying, outside the national park, in the village of Vega de Liébana. 
We found out about some hikes from the very helpful tourist information kiosk 
at Vega; others we gleaned fromTeresa Farino 
<http://www.iberianwildlife.com/picos-europa/flora-fauna-picos-europa.htm>’s 
excellent walking guide, Picos de Europa.

Even in high summer the roads and trails were surprisingly quiet. Only the 
main resort town of the area, Potes, felt busy. Compared with the Alps or the 
Lake District, this area seems to have stayed beneath hikers’ radar. This may 
be down to association: northern Europeans associate Spain with heat, beaches 
and Moorish architecture, not craggy, Atlantic mountains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3aaa2226e5c31b4cd35b2d632dee3e16a648d91%2F0_289_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spanish%20steps%3A%20family%20hiking%20in%20the%20Picos%20de%20Europa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spanish%20steps%3A%20family%20hiking%20in%20the%20Picos%20de%20Europa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3aaa2226e5c31b4cd35b2d632dee3e16a648d91%2F0_289_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Fuente Dé cable car. Photograph: Alamy 
The only time we experienced real crowds was when waiting for the Fuente Dé 
cable car. This is very popular but has just two small cars making the dizzying 
800-metre climb. But our two-hour wait was relatively painless, as we relaxed 
in a park till we heard our numbers called out on the PA. And it was well worth 
it. The views at the top were spectacular, and from there we enjoyed a 
wonderful 8km hike through the national park, almost all downhill, past craggy 
mountains, still with pockets of snow, and eagles soaring above us, till we 
descended into beautiful, lush oak forest. The whole way we met only a handful 
of other walkers. The one walk that was truly busy was the spectacular hike 
along the Cares gorge: the most popular in the range – and even this was not 
overcrowded.

Many of the walks we did were outside the national park, though the landscape 
was still beautifully unspoiled. On a tired-feet day we followed a gentle 5km 
stroll round the Bedoya valley that took us through villages full of vestiges 
of lost times, such as a special porch for the shoeing of cows, or a tiny 
disused school. The Picos is still a busy farming area but times are changing 
fast. Abandoned farmhouses – sometimes with sinks, furniture and other domestic 
items still piled on balconies – now sit beside perfectly refurbished holiday 
homes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe90f510bd989ac2538f9014ee7c40da04bec878%2F0_211_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spanish%20steps%3A%20family%20hiking%20in%20the%20Picos%20de%20Europa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spanish%20steps%3A%20family%20hiking%20in%20the%20Picos%20de%20Europa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Ffamily-hiking-holiday-picos-de-europa-asturias-northern-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe90f510bd989ac2538f9014ee7c40da04bec878%2F0_211_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Cares gorge. Photograph: Alamy 
If the weather does turn, there are things to do. We visited the Casa de las 
Doñas <http://www.xn--casadelasdoas-skb.es/> (house of the women; €5 adults, €3 
13-18s, €1 6-12, under fives free) in Enterria village. Once home to the 
village’s richest family, it is now a museum in which every detail of the past 
has been carefully preserved, revealing how basic life was in the Picos, even 
for the rich. The house also offered glimpses of the area’s tough 20th-century 
history. Our guide told us how, during the Spanish civil war, the men fled to 
join Franco’s army, Republican troops commandeered the house and the women were 
sent to live in a tiny bakery house.

The Picos are well looked after and all the trails we followed were 
well-marked with signposts or painted markers on trees and rocks. We never got 
lost. On the few occasions when we needed to check directions people were 
always helpful – and the area is definitely family-friendly.

If we experienced disappointment it was with the food. Our trip was a house 
swap with a local family throughhomeexchange.com 
<https://www.homeexchange.com/en/>, and we mostly cooked at home. But our few 
forays into restaurants, such as the popularCasa Cayo <http://casacayo.com/> in 
Potes, while good value, were nothing special. Compared with Madrid or the 
Basque Country, Picos’s food is old-fashioned and heavy on meat, potatoes and 
eggs, with pigs’ snout and tripe often lurking on the menu, too (always check 
the dictionary before ordering).

Overall Picos de Europa was delightful and I would strongly recommend the area 
to anyone looking for a walking holiday. Who knows, we might even be able to 
persuade our children to venture back into mountain country again next year.
 