
I arrived in the UK from Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> 
with my family at the age of eight to join my dad who lived here. All through 
my schooling, my parents were trying to sort out their immigration status. It’s 
a long and complicated process that ended with multiple appeals and 
applications.

Lots of money was spent on lawyers, and we only received our status – “limited 
leave to remain” – after I had left school. The stress of my immigration issues 
was one of the reasons I studied so hard: my education was something I could 
control; the immigration case was out of my hands, but studying was up to me.

If Theresa May’s policy of “deprioritising” those with unresolved immigration 
status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/may-wanted-to-deprioritise-school-places-for-children-of-people-illegally-in-uk>
 had been in force then, sending them to the back of the queue for school 
places, I would have been one of those affected. However hard I worked, I would 
not have done as well had I been shunted off to a failing school – which is 
what Mrs May wants to happen to people like me.

Children of immigrants more likely to go into higher education – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/15/children-immigrants-higher-education-england-oecd-study>
My school, Robert Clack in Dagenham <http://robertclack.co.uk/>, east London, 
was one of the best state schools in the borough, with high demand for places. 
I loved school – almost too much. I felt at peace there, being around people 
who wanted to study as much as I did.

When I was in year 13, a friend and I set up a mentoring scheme for students 
in the year below. We realised there was only so much the teachers could do to 
prepare them for the stress of A-levels. It certainly made a difference. Of the 
16 pupils we mentored, 12 went on to Russell Group universities.

It was nice to see students, regardless of what might have been going on at 
home, becomingexcited about their education and at the prospect of doing well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/15/children-immigrants-higher-education-england-oecd-study>
. I enjoyed being part of the journey.

I’m currently at a Russell Group university, in my first year studying history 
at King’s College London. My ambition is to become a lawyer. Two of my 
schoolfriends are now at Oxford. Like me, they came to the UK from Nigeria. 
Another friend, from Algeria, and one from Tanzania are at Warwick. One who 
came from Ghana is at Cambridge. Although they all arrived as young children, 
some of them were also finalising their immigration status as they went through 
school. Like me, they have had their applications accepted, and are on their 
way to becoming British citizens. These are the students that Mrs May wants to 
penalise for something that is not within their control.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBumdwKTbyZQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBumdwKTbyZQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBumdwKTbyZQ&media=>
Children’s immigration status is not their fault. I didn’t ask to come to the 
UK. But I have made the most of living here, and not just by studying hard.I am 
an e-mentor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jun/03/top-tips-for-choosing-university>
 and student ambassador at my university. I am a young leader at my church.

I am also active in the Let us Learn campaign 
<http://www.justforkidslaw.org/let-us-learn>, which was set up by the youth 
justice charity Just for Kids Law in 2014. Even without Mrs May’s proposals to 
dump pupils like me in sink schools, children from migrant backgrounds already 
face additional barriers to our education. Even though we have grown up in the 
UK and this is our home, many of us are not recognised as “home students” by 
government or some universities. We aren’t eligible for student loans in the 
same way as most of our friends, anduniversities can charge us international 
fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/22/british-international-student-fees-masters>
 – which can be as high as £26,000 a year.

My mum works as a carer and could never afford to meet these kinds of costs. I 
was only able start my degree this year thanks to a scholarship, which King’s 
set up to give students like me the chance to study. Without that, I would be 
stuck in educational limbo, after being turned down for a student loan. A 
handful of other leading universities have followed suit, but demand for this 
kind of funding far outstrips the small number of scholarships available. Many 
universities aren’t even aware of the issue.

Reform of the kind proposed by Mrs May would make matters far worse. Ambitious 
young people who have lived in the UK for most of their lives would have little 
chance of getting the grades we need for university in the first place, and so 
have no hope of ever pursuing a professional career.

Let us Learn is in touch with around 650 young people from all around the 
country, who have beenoffered university places that they can’t take up 
<http://www.justforkidslaw.org/let-us-learn/younggiftedandblocked> for lack of 
a student loan. They include would-be doctors, chemists, actors, lawyers, event 
organisers, social workers and scientific researchers, among others.

If Mrs May revises her “deprioritisation” idea, now she is prime minister, I 
would urge her first to speak to some of the hardworking and aspirational young 
people whose futures and careers she would be blighting.
 