
Spider-Man’s impish cameo in Captain America: Civil War turned doubters into 
true believers. After two middling AmazingSpider-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spider-man> movies starring the unfortunate 
Andrew Garfield, Marvel managed to make the masked wall-crawler feel fresh 
again, merely by introducing him into a more colourful and diverse universe of 
superheroes where Spidey is no longer required to beat up Flash Thompson, or 
grieve for Uncle Ben, every second movie.

Does Catwoman deserve a ninth life on the big screen?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/21/catwoman-sienna-miller-ben-affleck-the-batman>
But can the Disney-owned studio restore the webslinger to his rightful 
position on the tallest plinth in the comic book movie pantheon when he no 
longer has dozens of former or future Avengers for company? Here are eight 
takeaways from our first look at Spider-Man: Homecoming.

Time is on the new Spidey’s side
 Photograph: YouTube 
As promised by Marvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel>, this is a 
genuinely green, high school-age wall-crawler. Unlike either of his big-screen 
predecessors – Tobey Maguire was 27 when he first played the role; Andrew 
Garfield 29 – at 20 years old, British actor Tom Holland looks like he really 
could still be a teenager. That marks Spider-Man: Homecoming out nicely from 
the rest of the rapidly-aging MCU and ensures the new Peter Parker needn’t be 
rushed into full-time membership of The Avengers.

Spider-Man is now a winged wall-crawler

Thanks to a previous teaser trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NbLP_SmhtuM>, we already knew that the 
all-new, all-different Spidey is continuing to get tactical support from Robert 
Downey Jr’s Tony Stark following the events of Civil War. Presumably this Steve 
Ditko-inspired winged suit is useful when you’re taking on a menacing flying 
monster, otherwise known as Michael Keaton’s villainous Vulture.

Tony Stark is a hesitant mentor
 Photograph: YouTube 
Marvel’s ability to show Iron Man’s gradual transition from arrogant 
overreacher to chastened stick-in-the-mud over the course of a half dozen 
movies may just be one of the most impressive aspects of its pioneering 
cinematic universe. During his run as the power-suited hero, Robert Downey Jr’s 
Tony Stark has saved the world from alien invaders, then helped usher in an 
artificial intelligence that nearly destroyed the planet. The genius 
billionaire has fought alongside Captain America, then battled against the 
patriotic hero. So it should come as no surprise that he makes a rather 
hesitant mentor to Peter Parker, especially as Stark isn’t really the avuncular 
type. Where’s Nick Fury when you need him?

Marvel has semi-redacted Spidey’s superhero status

Stark suddenly seems unsure whether Parker’s ready for superhero duties, which 
seems a bit rich given he was ready to call on the MCU’s newest hero to battle 
the likes of Captain America, The Winter Soldier and Falcon during the events 
of Civil War. There has been some suggestion that Spider-Man: Homecoming might 
straddle the events of the earlier episode, rather than taking place after it, 
which would make sense of the older man’s cautious approach.

The Vulture looks the real deal

 Photograph: YouTube 
Bad villains have always killed Spider-Man movies, from The Amazing 
Spider-Man’s poorly-rendered Lizard to the awful triple whammy of Venom, 
Sandman and James Franco’s junior Green Goblin in Sam Raimi’s ill-fated final 
turn in the hot seat, Spider-Man 3. But Michael Keaton’s Vulture, all hellish 
insectoid carapace, freaky machine-mask and those infernal emerald peepers, 
already looks like an impressively scary specimen. He may not be the most 
famous of Spidey villains, but Keaton’s first comic book movie turn since 
1992’s Batman Returns could change all that in a whisk of those matte-black 
wings.

Umm … Zendaya may not be playing Mary Jane Watson after all

The fanboy blogosphere (including myself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/22/spider-man-colourblind-casting-zendaya-mary-jane-watson>
) –and even the great Stan Lee 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/pop/7487628/stan-lee-defends-zendaya-in-spider-man-homecoming>
 – might need to ready ourselves for a giant egg-on-face moment. When usually 
reliable Hollywood trade bible The Wrap“confirmed” in August 
<http://www.thewrap.com/zendaya-spider-man-homecoming-role-reveal-mary-jane-watson/>
 that the pop star and actor would be playing Peter Parker’s perennial 
paramour, the news generated scores of pieces praising the casting of an 
African American actor in the traditionally Anglo-Saxon role.

The only problem is, Zendaya doesn’t appear to be playing MJ after all: the 
distinctly non-red-headed young woman berating Peter Parker and his pal in the 
trailer is rumoured to be named Michele. Could she be Michele Gonzalez, 
room-mate and sometime love interest for Spidey in the comics? To be fair,
Zendaya has continued to insist 
<http://www.etonline.com/media/video/exclusive_zendaya_insists_she_michelle_not_mary_jane_spider_man_homecoming-203398/>
 that she is not playing MJ, and it’s looking increasingly unlikely that this 
is yet another example of“I am Khan”-style smoke and mirrors 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/j-j-abrams-admits-lying-about-star-trek-2s-khan-was-a-1475078061>
.

But Marvel is addressing its diversity problem
 Photograph: YouTube 
Making Mary Jane mixed-race made sense because Queens, where Spidey lives and 
goes to school, boasted a non-Hispanic white population of just 26.2% in 2014, 
the date of the most recent census. But looking around the new Midtown high, 
this does seem to be a more realistic rendition than we’ve seen before in the 
Sony movies. Parker’s best friend Ned Leeds is played by the Asian American 
actor Jacob Batalon, while rumored love interest Liz Allan is portrayed by 
African American actor Laura Harrier. An even better known member of the Spidey 
supporting cast, Flash Thompson, will be played by The Grand Budapest Hotel’s 
splendid Tony Revolori, who is of Guatemalan descent.

Iron Man is far from retired

Regular Marvel observers wondered if Tony Stark might keep the power-suits 
firmly locked away for a while in the wake of Civil War’s bruising 
inter-superhero battles. But given the cost of hiring Downey Jr, it was 
probably inevitable that Iron Man would find himself swooping through the 
Manhattan skyline at some point. Is the Vulture simply too powerful for one 
teenage superhero to take down alone?
 