
The financial reporting watchdog will investigate the accountancy firm Grant 
Thornton for signing off on an arrangement between Sports Direct, 
majority-owned byMike Ashley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, 
and a delivery company owned by his brother.

The Financial Reporting Council said it was looking into the auditor over its 
failure to report adeal that Sports Direct struck with Barlin Delivery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/sports-direct-pays-mike-ashleys-older-brother-international-delivery>
, owned by John Ashley.

The announcement comes in a week where corporate governance will be high on 
the news agenda, with the prime minister expected to publish a green paper on 
the topic, possibly on Tuesday.

Mike Ashley asked to explain 'secret filming' of MPs' Sports Direct visit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/mike-ashley-asked-to-explain-camera-mps-sports-direct-visit-warehouse>
According to Sports Direct’s website, some of its international delivery to 
online purchasers was handled by Barlin, which said earlier this year that it 
made about £300,000 in annual profit thanks to the arrangement.

Britain’s biggest sportswear chain did not disclose the relationship with 
Barlin, whose registered address is a detached house in a cul-de-sac in the 
Lincolnshire seaside town of Cleethorpes.

Listed companies are supposed to report any business arrangement with a 
“related party” business to promote high standards of corporate governance.

Sports Direct said earlier this year that Grant Thornton had decided the 
company did not need to disclose its arrangement with Barlin despite the 
business being owned by the brother of its founder and executive deputy 
chairman.

John Ashley, a computer science graduate, built Sports Direct’s IT systems 
from scratch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/whos-who-at-sports-direct-mike-ashley>
 after joining his brother’s business in 1989.

Mike Ashley also attracted criticism for putting his daughter’s boyfriend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/boyfriend-of-mike-ashleys-daughter-gets-key-sports-direct-role>
 in charge of the company’s property team despite his lack of experience in 
commercial property.

A small FRC team of two or three investigators will look into Grant Thornton’s 
role in failing to report the nature of the company’s relationship with Barlin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsports-direct-auditor-under-investigation-over-companys-family-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85bdc95f263776313e728e44aa30f06878c30ef1%2F0_74_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20auditor%20under%20investigation%20over%20company's%20family%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsports-direct-auditor-under-investigation-over-companys-family-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20auditor%20under%20investigation%20over%20company%27s%20family%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsports-direct-auditor-under-investigation-over-companys-family-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85bdc95f263776313e728e44aa30f06878c30ef1%2F0_74_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Sports Direct founder Mike Ashley. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
If investigators determine that Grant Thornton did not do its job properly, it 
could face a public reprimand or a sizeable fine.

The FRC can open an investigation after a case is referred by a third party, 
but in this case the accounting watchdog is understood to have acted of its own 
accord.

“The Financial Reporting Council has commenced investigations under the 
accountancy scheme and the Audit Enforcement Procedure in relation to the 
preparation, approval and audit of the financial statements ofSports Direct 
International <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sports-direct-international>
 plc [“Sports Direct”] for the 52-week period ended 24 April 2016,” the FRC 
said in a statement.

“These decisions follow reports of an arrangement between Sports Direct and 
Barlin Delivery Ltd which was not disclosed as a related party in the company’s 
financial statements.”

Sarah Wilson, the chief executive of the corporate governance research firm 
Manifest, said: “Shareholders have been concerned for some time about the 
interlinkages between Mike Ashley’s personal financial arrangements and those 
of Sports Direct Plc. It is disappointing that Grant Thornton did not make the 
disclosures at the time as Grant Thornton also audits Mike Ashley’s personal 
investment holding firms, Mash Beta and Mash Alpha. This calls into question 
Grant Thornton’s ability to provide independent and objective advice.”

Sue Almond, the head of assurance for Grant Thornton UK, said: “Grant Thornton 
is committed to delivering the best possible assurance services to clients and 
continually enhancing the quality of our audits. The FRC and Grant Thornton 
have a common interest in promoting good corporate governance and reporting 
standards. We shall of course be cooperating fully with their investigation.”

Sports Direct did not comment.

The FRC’s inquiry will intensify the scrutiny on Sports Direct, which has 
already been investigated by MPs after theGuardian revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 some staff at its Shirebrook warehouse were being paid less than minimum wage.

Tension between the company and politicians escalated earlier this month after 
Sports Direct wasaccused of planting a hidden camera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/six-mps-surprise-visit-sports-direct-shirebrook-warehouse>
 to record MPs’ conversations during an official visit to Shirebrook.
 