
The chairman of Sports Direct has criticised MPs, trades unions and the media 
for waging a campaign against the business as the retailer reported a 57% drop 
in first-half profits.

The sports retailer, reeling from a year-long scandal over working practices, 
said underlying profit before tax slumped to £71.6m from £166.4m in the six 
months to 23 October.

Chairman Keith Hellawell, a former police chief who has been widely criticised 
by shareholders, said an “extreme political, union and media campaign waged 
against this company” had damaged its reputation, influenced customers and had 
a negative impact on the morale of Sports Direct’s staff.

Sports Direct chairman should face the final whistle | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-chairman-should-face-the-final-whistle>
He added: “I begin to question whether this intense scrutiny is all ethically 
motivated.”

Hellawell said the directors accepted “responsibility for our shortcomings, 
but there has also been disproportionate, inaccurate and misleading commentary”.

The retailer’s staff, he said, were “increasingly upset and angry at the 
barrage of detrimental comments about the company which in their view is 
unjustified”.


An undercover Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 last year exposed how Sports Direct workers were being paid less than the 
minimum wage. A scathing parliamentary committee report latercompared 
conditions at its Shirebrook warehouse to a Victorian workhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
. Since then the company has been forced to pay £1m in back pay to staff and 
offer more staff guaranteed working hours. But it has come under mounting 
criticism from unions, politicians and shareholders.

Speaking on Radio 4’s Today programme, Simon Walker, director general of the 
Institute of Directors, said the company was making changes, but that they did 
not go far enough. “It’s a start … and it has to be a good step, but they 
continue to have real problems.”

He noted that Sports Direct’s share price had more than halved since last 
December, from 650p. “This is a reflection on what happens when a company lets 
its governance systems collapse.”

The IoD’s Walker said: “The problem with Sports Direct is fundamentally [chief 
executive] Mike Ashley, who owns more than half the company and is totally 
dominant. It needs a board that is capable of standing up to him so that the 
normal checks and balances that apply to most companies are in place.”

In the wake of the Guardian’s investigation Walker called Sports Direct “a 
scar on British business”.


Sports Direct’s shares fell by 10% to 280p on Thursday. The company has 
suspended its planned share buyback “until further notice”.

The retailer said its profit margins had been hit by the pound’s sharp decline 
since the Brexit vote.


However, Sports Direct added that it is also about to take delivery of a new 
corporate plane, worth $51.1m (£40m). The company already has its own 
helicopter, a fleet of vehicles and also owns an inn in Worksop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fsports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81360c83e32e03022716cf78e44b459a86b72ddf%2F0_148_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20chairman%20criticises%20'extreme%20campaign'%20as%20profits%20fall%2057%25&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fsports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20chairman%20criticises%20%27extreme%20campaign%27%20as%20profits%20fall%2057%25&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fsports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81360c83e32e03022716cf78e44b459a86b72ddf%2F0_148_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Sports Direct founder Mike Ashley outside its headquarters in Shirebrook, 
Derbyshire. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
The company has also done a deal with a beauty company run by the youngest 
daughter of Mike Ashley, the billionaire founder of the company.

Double Take – a cosmetics company owned by Mike Ashley and where 20-year-old 
Matilda Ashley is a director – is licensing the rights to a beauty brand called 
Sports FX to Sports Direct. Royalties and other fees may be paid to Double 
Take, but not until after 2019.

This is not the first deal to involve members of Ashley’s family. The retailer 
has a deal with a delivery company called Barlin, which is 100% owned by Mike 
Ashley’s brother John. Barlin processes international sales for Sports Direct 
and the arrangement is under investigation by City watchdogs. In its half-year 
profits update Sports Direct said the Barlin deal “was entered into under 
market terms, and makes good commercial sense”.

Ashley said: “The last six months have been tough for our people and 
performance.

 Our people have once again found themselves in the spotlight through no fault 
of their own, yet they remain hard working and loyal. My immediate priority 
will be to protect the people at Sports Direct.”

Clive Lewis MP, Labour’s shadow business secretary, said: “It is not 
surprising that Sports Direct’s profits have taken a hit given the revelations 
that employees have been paid less than the minimum wage for years, made to 
work in Victorian conditions, and the collapse of corporate governance 
structures that followed.

“The reputational damage caused to the company is entirely of Mike Ashley’s 
own making. He should focus his energies on reforming his business, instead of 
blaming those who have held him to account in the name of the public interest.”



Ashley said his long term ambition for Sports Direct was to become the 
“Selfridges of sports retail”.

The company has appointed investment banker David Brayshaw as a non-executive 
director. Brayshaw has more than 30 years’ experience with firms such as 
Barclays Capital, HSBC, Citigroup and glass manufacturer Pilkington

 and said he was “delighted to be joining the board of one of the UK’s most 
dynamic companies”.

So, Mike Ashley, can we handle the truth?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/04/mike-ashley-sports-direct-results>
Neil Wilson, senior market analyst at forex and spread-betting firm ETX 
Capital, said: “The company is blaming everyone else and it’s true that 
negative PR of this scale is very hard to shake. But Sports Direct has had lots 
of chances to get its house in order and is paying the price today for failing 
to really overhaul its corporate governance.


“But if chairman Keith Hellawell does eventually go on 5 January [at a 
shareholder meeting] and someone like independent director David Brayshaw steps 
in, then we might see investors warm a little more to the stock and this could 
be the nadir.”

The Financial Reporting Council said 
<https://www.frc.org.uk/News-and-Events/FRC-Press/Press/2016/December/Findings-of-the-Financial-Reporting-Review-Panel-i.aspx>
 it had discussed certain issues with the company following its review of the 
2015 annual report and accounts. The main issue was whether the retailer’s 
strategic report complied with the Companies Act 2006 requirement to be 
balanced and comprehensive.

The financial reporting watchdog noted that there was no discussion of Sports 
Direct’s international stores, which are a significant part of its business. 
The company included information about stores in Austria and the Baltic states 
in Thursday’s results and the FRC said its inquiries had been concluded.

The regulator is also investigating the accountancy firm Grant Thornton over 
its failure to report adeal that Sports Direct struck with Barlin Delivery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/sports-direct-pays-mike-ashleys-older-brother-international-delivery>
.
 