
Sports Direct’s embattled chairman, Keith Hellawell, has come under renewed 
pressure to step down as a series of City investment groups said shareholders 
should oppose his re-election to the retailer’s board this week.

The poll comes after the former chief constable lost a vote of independent 
shareholders in September. He faces a second ballot on Thursday to continue in 
his post.

Paul Lee, the head of corporate governance at the Sports Direct shareholder 
Aberdeen Asset Management, said: “Though we welcome the positive progress the 
company has made over the last three months we remain deeply concerned about 
its governance. We are therefore again opposing the election of Mr Hellawell.”

Sports Direct chairman should face the final whistle | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-chairman-should-face-the-final-whistle>
The second vote has been triggered under new rules whereby independent 
shareholders are ostensibly given an increased say in the running of companies 
in which there is a dominant shareholder.

Sports Direct’s founder, Mike Ashley, owns 55% of the company, but was not 
allowed to vote on Hellawell’s role in the first ballot at the group’s annual 
meeting in September, when53% of the votes cast by investors excluding Ashley 
opposed the chairman’s re-election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/07/sports-direct-annual-general-meeting-showdown-mike-ashley-business-live?page=with:block-57d021eae4b042bbfb3243ab#block-57d021eae4b042bbfb3243ab>
.

That result forced a second poll in which Ashley can vote. Dissenters may 
repeat their protest on Thursday, but company watchers believe Hellawell is 
likely to prevail because of the billionaire founder’s support.

Apart from Aberdeen, investors including Legal & General, Standard Life, Royal 
London and Hermes opposed Hellawell last time.


Shareholder advisory bodies, which assist shareholders in deciding how to 
vote, also weighed into the debate.

One of them, Pirc, told its clients: “It is important for the shareholders to 
be confident about the board’s ability to represent their best interests and 
not those of the controlling shareholder. This is no longer the case with the 
existing chairman and an oppose vote is therefore recommended.”

Sports Direct chairman seeks shareholder support as profits tumble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/sports-direct-chairman-keith-hellawell-shareholder-support-profits-mike-ashley>
Institutional Shareholder Services said Hellawell had overseen a “catalogue of 
governance and operational failures” and also advised shareholders to vote 
against his re-election.

Rival Glass Lewis, which supported Hellawell last year but voted against 
Ashley’s reappointment, said: “While we acknowledge that many shareholders may 
choose not to support Hellawell’s re-election ... we are cognisant of the need 
for continuity in the leadership of the board, particularly in this period of 
flux.”

The crisis at Sports Direct was triggered by a Guardian investigation in 2015, 
which revealed that workers at its giant Derbyshire warehouse were paid less 
than the national minimum wage. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>


The scandal prompted a parliamentary inquiry last year, in which MPs likened 
the depot to a Victorian workhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
, reigniting long-held concerns about the level of control Ashley enjoys at the 
company.

The newspaper reports also encouraged some investors to react after years of 
backing the board, including76% of independent shareholders voting for 
Hellawell’s reappointment 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sports-direct-intl---spd-/rns/result-of-agm/201509091319135673Y/>
 at the 2015 annual meeting.

Aberdeen, which owns just 0.3% of the Sports Direct, said it viewed the 
company as having made progress by implementing anindependent review into 
working practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/sports-direct-bows-to-pressure-and-agrees-to-independent-review>
 andappointing the investment banker David Brayshaw as a new non-executive 
director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
.

It also sees the departures of chief executive Dave Forsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/sports-direct-mike-ashley-step-in-after-ceo-resigns>
 and actingchief financial officer Matt Pearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/sports-direct-acting-finance-director-matt-pearson-leaves-company>
 as positive moves.

Before the September vote, Hellawell attempted to appease disgruntled 
shareholders by saying he had offered to go, only for the board to refuse to 
accept his resignation. He said that if shareholders voted against him at the 
group’s 2017 annual general meeting, he would step down.

Despite that offer seeming to acknowledge that he and the board accepted 
responsibility for the group’s situation, last month Hellawell criticised MPs, 
trade unions and the media for waging a campaign against the business as it 
reported a 57% drop in first-half profits.

The results represented the latest disappointing financial statement after the 
company’s share price halved during 2016. The group wasrelegated from the FTSE 
100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/sport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions>
 in March.
 