
Sports Direct has bowed to shareholder pressure by agreeing to an independent 
review of its working practices and corporate governance.

Mike Ashley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, the company’s 
founder and majority owner, admitted in a rare TV interview that he had taken 
his eye off the ball but claimed the problems at the company’s warehouse were 
caused by “the odd rotten apple”.

The company had said the law firm Reynolds Porter Chamberlain (RPC), which 
carried out a preliminary review published this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/sports-direct-to-ditch-zero-hours-contracts>
, would conduct a further investigation. However, after strong shareholder 
backing for an independent review at the Sports Direct AGM this month, the 
company has now said that “an independent party other than RPC” would conduct 
the review.

Sports Direct’s share price, which has taken a battering over the past 12 
months, rose about 3% after the announcement and Ashley’s BBC Breakfast 
interview, to 290p.

Ashley was forced to look into his company’s working practices after a 
Guardian investigation exposed a climate of fear at its warehouse in Shirebrook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
, Derbyshire. MPs later compared it to a Victorian workhouse.

RPC has worked extensively for Ashley and Sports Direct, which is one of its 
biggest clients. Its report, published the day before Sports Direct’s AGM, 
criticised the company and prompted Ashley to apologise to staff for practices 
that were “potentially oppressive” at its warehouse.


The company also said a worker representative would be elected to the board by 
all staff “directly engaged or employed by Sports Direct”. Ashley announced 
plans to put an employee on the board to show his willingness to listen to staff
after the Guardian’s revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 and a campaign by the Unite union battered his company’s reputation.

Ashley said he had not known about the poor treatment of employees but claimed 
there was little wrong at Sports Direct and that its reputation had been 
brought low by a few mistakes.

He told BBC Breakfast on Tuesday: “It is odd, isolated instances. It’s the odd 
rotten apple in the barrel and then you say: ‘OK, I’ve got to go and find the 
rotten apple in the barrel’ … I’m now coming in to work very closely with HR, 
the warehouse and the [employment] agencies.”

Ashley said Sports Direct had paid out more than £200m in staff bonuses in the 
past five years and that one cleaner had received £80,000 in addition to her 
standard pay. He said his job was to fix the few things the company had done 
wrong to bring them up to the standard of what it had done right.

“I’ve taken my eye off the ball. I’ve said I’m going to fix it and I will.”

Revealed: how Sports Direct effectively pays below minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
A union resolution at Sports Direct’s AGM calling for a fully independent 
review was supported by a majority of independent shareholders. After the AGM 
on 7 September, large shareholderstold the board they wanted the review carried 
out by an independent party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/sports-directs-biggest-investors-want-independent-review-mike-ashley-keith-hellawell>
.

The company said it would consult shareholders about the terms and timing of 
the review. Options include bringing in another law firm or a senior individual,
as the Co-operative Bank did when it appointed Sir Christopher Kelly, a former 
civil servant, to write a report on its near-collapse, at a cost of £4.4m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/30/co-op-bank-report-poor-management-over-ambition>
. Sports Direct had said the review would take up to a year but shareholders, 
coordinated by the Investor Forum, want it completed more quickly.

Andy Griffiths, the Investor Forum’s executive director, said: “Our members 
believe this is an opportunity to bring about meaningful and lasting change, 
and are committed to working constructively with the board and the independent 
reviewer to ensure it can be a turning point in rebuilding trust.”

An unprecedented 57% of independent shareholders failed to support the Sports 
Direct chairman, Keith Hellawell, at the AGM, but Ashley insisted he was 
staying in the role for at least another year and that they would work together 
to improve the way the sports chain was managed.


At the AGM, Ashley at one point said the retailer’s problems had been caused 
by Unite and hinted that he might walk away from the company he founded in 1982 
if he was unable to improve the way it was run.


Unite’s assistant general secretary, Steve Turner, said: “We will continue to 
make the case that only with decent, direct employment right across the 
business can this company truly convince its stakeholders and the watching 
world that it is genuine about making the much-needed changes to practices that 
have shocked people everywhere.”


Ashley told the BBC it would take longer than a year for him to make the 
necessary changes but that he was listening to shareholders, who called for the 
independent review as a condition for Hellawell staying on.

“I had to support Keith Hellawell at the AGM to give him an opportunity for 
another year and he said if he doesn’t get the support of independent 
shareholders he will go. Dave Forsey [the chief executive] lost his bonus, 
which was £3m or £4m. We take this a lot more personally than anyone can 
possibly imagine.”

There was also a protest vote against Sports Direct’s three other 
non-executive directors. More than 30% of independent shareholders failed to 
back their reappointment amid widespread concern that they had not held Ashley 
to account.

Ashley defended his use of a helicopter and private plane when Sports Direct 
workers were on low pay and zero-hours contracts.

“I do like to go by plane and by private plane. People will say: ‘How can you 
have a plane when your workers are on the minimum wage?’ I say: ‘I don’t set 
the minimum wage.’ If the minimum wage should be the the living wage then the 
government, who set the rules, should set it at the living wage.”
 