
Sportswear tycoon Mike Ashley has capped a week of deal-making 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/20/mike-ashley-sports-direct-newcastle-rangers>
 by taking a bet that the share price of department store chain Debenhams will 
rally.

The Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sports-direct-international> chain 
controlled by the billionaire owner of Newcastle United football club said on 
Friday night it had agreed a so-called put-option deal with Goldman Sachs over 
a 10.5% stake in Debenhams. The deal replaces an agreement covering a 6.6% 
holding that was announced this time last year.

The punt is the latest throw of the dice by the unpredictable tycoon, who on 
Tuesday sold a 2.6% stake, worth £117m, in the company he founded.

The use of the complex financial instrument means that if the Debenhams share 
price is less than the agreed exercise price when the contract expires, Sports 
Direct could be required to buy the stake – the equivalent of 128.9m shares – 
at that price. If the price rises above the exercise price, Sports Direct 
receives the premium but has no further obligations. It has set up asimilar 
deal over Tesco shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/25/sports-direct-mike-ashley-43m-punt-tesco-shares>
.

Sports Direct said its maximum exposure under the new put-option was 
approximately £85m; however it already has £46m on the table to cover another 
put-option, this time relating to a 6.1% stake inDebenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams>, that was struck in November. 
Together the investments represent a 16.6% interest in the department store 
chain’s shares.

Experts say buying put-options is a way of gaining access to a sizable stake 
in a company without tying up capital.

In a statement issued after the stock market had closed, Sports Direct said it 
had no intention of making an offer for Debenhams. In the past Ashley has 
described these financial plays as part of a “wider conversation” with the 
target company – both Debenhams and Tesco have recently allowed Sports Direct 
to put outlets in some of their spare retail space.

“Sports Direct does not intend to make an offer for Debenhams and would 
encourage the Debenhams’ leadership team to concentrate fully on delivering 
their strategic plans,” it said.
 