
The morale of staff at Sports Direct has suffered, says chairman Keith 
Hellawell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
, but here’s news to cheer them up: profits may have halved but the company can 
still afford to spend £40m on a new corporate jet. Employees can even hire it 
themselves for a jolly – though they will have to pay “open market rates”.

But the arrangement that will surely infuriate outside shareholders is the 
deal whereby Sports Direct will buy cosmetics – under that must-have brand 
Sport FX – from a company where founder Mike Ashley’s 20-year-old daughter, 
Matilda, is a director.

Matilda’s outfit is called Double Take, which is probably what shareholders 
did. Yes, Sports Direct really has responded to accusations of nepotism – after
a distribution deal with Ashley’s brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/sports-direct-pays-mike-ashleys-older-brother-international-delivery>
 and a potentially lucrative property consultancy for the boyfriend of Ashley’s 
other daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/boyfriend-of-mike-ashleys-daughter-gets-key-sports-direct-role>
 – by doing this deal. Critics said Sports Direct is run as a personal fiefdom 
rather than a public company. Ashley, it seems, doesn’t care what they say.

Sports Direct chairman criticises 'extreme campaign' as profits fall 57%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
Chairman Keith Hellawell, though, sounds jolly angry about how the media, 
politicians and trade unions have “waged” an “extreme campaign” against Sports 
Direct. “I begin to question whether this intense scrutiny is all ethically 
motivated,” he said.

Unfortunately, the former chief constable of West Yorkshire didn’t say what 
conclusions he has reached. Here are a few facts to help his inquiries. This 
paper’s exposé of working conditions at the Shirebrook warehousewas honoured at 
the British Journalism awards this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/07/guardian-scoops-three-prizes-at-british-journalism-awards>
. Thebusiness select committee’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
 was a cross-party affair and supported the thrust of the complaints made by 
Unite, the trade union, for many years. Sports Direct workershave been awarded 
£1m in back pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
 as a result of the scrutiny and the company itself has admitted to 
“shortcomings” and pledged to do better.

No doubt, life under the spotlight is uncomfortable. But there is a simple 
remedy, at least for Hellawell. After seven years in the job, and having failed 
to spot a crisis that was brewing for ages, he could resign. That wasthe wish 
of a majority of outside shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/07/sports-direct-annual-general-meeting-showdown-mike-ashley-business-live?page=with:block-57d021eae4b042bbfb3243ab#block-57d021eae4b042bbfb3243ab>
 at the annual meeting in September.

Ashley, with his 53% stake, saved his chairman but it remains hard to see how 
Sports Direct can genuinely claim to have turned a corner while Hellawell 
remains in post, raging impotently about scrutiny that would be applied to any 
public company.
 