
Sports Direct’s efforts to rehabilitate its reputation after a year-long 
scandal over working practices took a farcical turn on Monday when the retailer 
was accused of secretly recording a group of MPs visiting its controversial 
warehouse.

Six MPs from the business select committee, which in the summer published a 
scathing report into company, also claimed the company treated the 
parliamentarians with “hostility” and implemented “diversionary tactics” as 
they carried out an impromptu inspection of the sportswear group’s warehouse.

The allegations of secret recordings were made after the parliamentarians had 
finished their tour, when they adjourned to a meeting room in Sports Direct’s 
offices in order to discuss the day’s events and take refreshments.

Mike Ashley running Sports Direct like 'Victorian workhouse'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
Anna Turley, the Labour MP for Redcar and a member of the committee, told the 
Guardian: “The sandwich lady came in and she put them on [a stool] in the 
corner. I watched her do it because I thought it was a bit weird her putting 
them in the corner of the room rather than where we were sitting. I saw her 
kneel down and put a device under the stool.

“I watched her and waited until she got out of the room and I went over [to 
the stool] and it was a camera that [Sports Direct representatives] had with 
them on the visit, [when] they were recording every question we asked and 
everything we said.”
Anna Turley MP (@annaturley) 
Here is the camera I found which was placed under the stool on which the 
sandwiches were placed for our private meeting at#sportsdirect 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/sportsdirect?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/aD6StnX5T9 
<https://t.co/aD6StnX5T9>
 <https://twitter.com/annaturley/status/795689611951542272> November 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/annaturley/status/795689611951542272> Anna Turley MP 
(@annaturley) 
Here is another pic from a colleague. This is where it was hidden & where I 
found it before picking it up & placing on top as previous pic.
pic.twitter.com/HPIoUJanQ4 <https://t.co/HPIoUJanQ4>
 <https://twitter.com/annaturley/status/795694275493294080> November 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/annaturley/status/795694275493294080> 
Iain Wright, chairman of the business select committee, said the whole day had 
reminded him of visiting factories in China.

He added: “I knew it wasn’t going to be the finished product. I knew we were 
going to see work in progress, as it were. But the hostility, the controlling 
manner, with which they dealt with us, the diversionary tactics ... I wanted to 
to go to [the old part of the warehouse which had been at the centre of the 
scandals] and it took us about three hours to get there”.

Wright, along with five colleagues, had arrived at the group’s Shirebrook, 
Derbyshire headquarters at about midday on Monday, after notifying the company 
earlier that morning that the MPs were arriving for a surprise tour.

The visit had come after Wright’s committee had accused Mike Ashley, the 
billionaire Sports Direct founder, of running the business like a Victorian 
workhousein a report published in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
.

The MPs concluded that Ashley had built his success on a business model that 
treats workers “without dignity or respect”, after they launched an inquiry 
followingan undercover Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 last year that exposed how Sports Direct workers were being paid less than the 
minimum wage.

It is understood Ashley was not present at Shirebrook for the inspection and 
the MPs were instead shown around by the group’s global operations head,Karen 
Byers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/26/karen-byers-sports-direct-hard-hitting-head-retail>
.

In his excoriating appearance before the committee in June, Ashley pledged to 
look at areas where the company might improve conditions of its workers, 
including looking at the “six strikes and you’re out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
” policy which threatened workers with the sack after a series of perceived 
crimes such as long toilet breaks. He also pledged to review if the company 
needs to engage so many of its workers’ temporary contracts.

The committee has no real powers to punish the tycoon if he fails to deliver 
on his pledges, although Wright had promised to “continue to hold Mr Ashley’s 
feet to the fire, in as constructive a manner as possible, checking on the 
progress he makes on improving working conditions for workers at his premises”.

In September, the company announced a suspension of the six strikes policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/sports-direct-inquiry-key-points-working-practices>
 and a trial to move some temporary staff on to permanent contracts. It had 
previously addressed the minimum wage breach by increasing the pay of warehouse 
workers, while it had also committed to reimbursing with backpay those affected.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fsix-mps-surprise-visit-sports-direct-shirebrook-warehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F233b6934f90d0878c014c6a99d6578b2c31e9dc0%2F1376_582_2868_1721%2F2868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20accused%20of%20secretly%20recording%20MPs%20during%20warehouse%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fsix-mps-surprise-visit-sports-direct-shirebrook-warehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20accused%20of%20secretly%20recording%20MPs%20during%20warehouse%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fsix-mps-surprise-visit-sports-direct-shirebrook-warehouse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F233b6934f90d0878c014c6a99d6578b2c31e9dc0%2F1376_582_2868_1721%2F2868.jpg>
 Iain Wright, business committee chair. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the 
Guardian 
The retailer has suffered a stream of criticism over its working practices, 
with officials from the Unite union campaigning against a strict culture in the 
warehouse that has made workers afraid to speak out over low pay and conditions 
in case they lose their jobs.

Last year, primary schoolteachers told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-staff-shirebrook-strikes-policy-sick-leave>
 that parents working at Sports Direct were too frightened to take time off 
work, resulting in pupils attending school while ill or returning home to empty 
houses.

Wright and Turley were joined on his visit by fellow committee members Amanda 
Solloway, Peter Kyle, Michelle Thomson and Craig Tracey.

Ashley appeared in front of the select committee in June having initially 
challenged the authority of parliament to summon him.

He called the parliamentarians “a joke”, saying MPs needed to come to visit 
Shirebrook for themselves, but eventually backed down. He then extended an open 
invitation for MPs to visit the site.

Sports Direct did not return phone calls seeking comment.
 