
Sports Direct has issued a further profit warning after the overnight “flash 
crash” in the value of sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/confusion-as-pound-falls-10-in-insane-asian-trading-and-no-one-knows-why>
 caused the company to lose £15m in the currency markets.

In a statement to the stock exchange on Friday, the company said a bet 
designed to protect itself against a slump in sterling had gone wrong and would 
reduce full-year profits. The group’s shares slumped by 9.1%.

In the past year Sports Direct has been hit by a scandal over its treatment of 
workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 and a series ofearnings downgrades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/07/sports-direct-not-going-private-in-near-future-says-mike-ashley>
, which have been blamed on tough trading conditions.

Immediately after the EU referendum result in June, the company said 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sports-direct-intl---spd-/rns/response-to-eu-referendum/201606241338322422C/>
 the fall in the pound against the dollar was “likely to impact purchases for 
which the company is currently not hedged for the [full financial year] and 
beyond”.

However, a subsequent move to hedge the group against a fall in the value of 
sterling, seems to have gone wrong.

Sports Direct said on Friday: “Extreme movements [in the currency markets] 
overnight resulted in a crystallisation of [the hedge] rate at 1.19, resulting 
in a negative impact of approximately £15m on the company’s [full-year] 
underlying [earnings] expectation.”

It added: “If the GBP/USD rate is 1.20 on average for the remainder of [the 
financial year], then the negative impact on the company’s underlying 
expectation would be in the order of a further £20m.”

The company is adversely affected by a drop in the value of the pound against 
the dollar, as it needs to acquire US currency in order to buy stock in Asia.

The latest embarrassment will pile further pressure on the company to hire a 
permanent finance director. Matt Pearson has been the acting chief financial 
officer since the summer of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/04/sports-direct-chief-financial-officer-matt-pearson-mike-ashley-power>
. Sports Direct has been without a permanent finance director since Bob Mellors 
stood down on health grounds in late 2013.

Pearson could not be contacted and company spokespeople did not return calls.

Sports Direct shares closed down 9% at 273p. 

Analysts at the investment bank Liberum slashed its price target on the shares 
to 310p from 380p and they said that the impact could continue for two years. 
“[We] have modelled this impact [of falling sterling] for 2018 and 2019 as 
well,” Liberum said. It predicted that earnings per share might fall by 20%-23% 
over the next three years.
 