
Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sports-direct-international> has 
confirmed that the future of its chairman, Keith Hellawell, will be voted on 
for the second time in four months in January.

The special meeting has been called by the struggling retailer after 57% of 
independent shareholders failed to support Hellawell at the annual shareholder 
meeting in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/07/sports-direct-founder-mike-ashley-stands-by-under-fire-chairman>
.

Sports Direct chairman criticises 'extreme campaign' as profits fall 57%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
Under new financial regulatory rules which give independent shareholders more 
of a voice on the appointment of non-executive directors, the company has to 
hold a second vote 90 to 120 days after the first meeting if it wants to hold 
on to Hellawell.

At the second meeting, which will be held at Sports Direct’s headquarters in 
Shirebrook, Derbyshire, Hellawell’s reappointment can be pushed through with 
the backing of new CEO Mike Ashley’s 55% majority stake. In September, Ashley 
insisted his chairman was staying put for at least another year, and they would 
work together to improve the way the sports chain is managed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsports-direct-chairman-keith-hellawell-shareholder-support-profits-mike-ashley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81360c83e32e03022716cf78e44b459a86b72ddf%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20chairman%20seeks%20shareholder%20support%20as%20profits%20tumble&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsports-direct-chairman-keith-hellawell-shareholder-support-profits-mike-ashley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20chairman%20seeks%20shareholder%20support%20as%20profits%20tumble&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsports-direct-chairman-keith-hellawell-shareholder-support-profits-mike-ashley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81360c83e32e03022716cf78e44b459a86b72ddf%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 With the support of Ashley, the majority shareholder, Hellawell is likely to 
remain chairman. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
In a notice to shareholders announcing the meeting, Sports Direct said it had 
been disappointed that a majority of independent shareholders had not backed 
the re-election of Hellawell as required under listing rules.

Earlier this week Hellawell criticised MPs, trades unions and the media for 
waging a campaign against the business.The company did promise to improve its 
treatment of workers and corporate governance in September. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/sports-direct-bows-to-pressure-and-agrees-to-independent-review>
 This week it announced the appointment of a new non-executive director, 
investment banker David Brayshaw. But it also revealed a deal with a cosmetics 
company linked to Ashley’s daughter and the purchase of a new jet despitea 57% 
dive in pretax profit to £71.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
.

The board said they recommended that shareholders back Hellawell: “The board 
believes that the re-election of Dr Hellawell, when combined with the 
appointment of David Brayshaw, will provide a balance of continuity and fresh, 
independent insight. The board is also mindful of the importance of maintaining 
the stability of the leadership of the company as it seeks to implement certain 
improvements in working practices.”

A notice to shareholders published late on Friday made clear that if Hellawell 
is re-elected in January, but subsequently does not receive the support of a 
majority of independent shareholders at the next annual general meeting in 
September 2017, he will “step down at that time with immediate effect.”

Hellawell, a former police chief who has been widely criticised by 
shareholders, said an “extreme political, union and media campaign waged 
against this company” had damaged its reputation, influenced customers and had 
a negative impact on the morale of Sports Direct’s staff.

 