
Keith Hellawell, the embattled chairman of Sports Direct, has been rejected by 
independent shareholders for the second time in four months, as outside 
investors repeated calls for the former police chief constable to be ousted 
from the sportswear retailer’s board.


In a second poll, forced by independent investors under new City rules, 54% of 
the group’s outside shareholders voted against Hellawell’s re-election to the 
group’s board.

They had defeated a similar company resolution to retain Hellawell at the 
annual meeting in September.

However, Hellawell will remain in position after winning 81% of the vote, 
because of the support of Sports Direct’s founderMike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, who owns 55% of the company.

In a statement issued to the stock exchange announcing the result, Ashley 
said: “Keith has my full backing and will be continuing in his role on the 
basis that he has the unanimous support of the board. I note that many of those 
who voted against Keith have acknowledged that we have made positive progress 
since the AGM.”

At the previous vote in September, Hellawell tried to assuage disgruntlement 
among investors by promising to step down at the 2017 annual meeting if he did 
not win the support of independent investors again.

However, Ashley risked inflaming relations once again by adding: “I have 
spoken to Keith Hellawell this afternoon to inform him that I hope that he will 
reconsider his intention to stand down if he does not receive the backing of a 
majority of independent shareholders at the 2017 AGM.”

The company also appeared to row back on a commitment to conduct an 
independent review of working conditions and corporate governance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/sports-direct-bows-to-pressure-and-agrees-to-independent-review>
, adding: “In view of continuing frustrations, the board will meet in the near 
future to reconsider all options in relation to its review of corporate 
governance.”

The additional statements prompted an immediate reaction from Aberdeen Asset 
Management, the City fund manager which has been among Ashley’s more vocal 
critics.

Paul Lee, head of corporate governance at Aberdeen, said: “The board should 
focus on delivering the significant governance change that is expected over the 
next eight months.

“That is the best way to encourage shareholders to support all resolutions at 
the AGM in September. If that happens, there will be no need for any discussion 
of Keith Hellawell standing down.”

Ashley’s majority stake did not count towards an independent resolution on 
Hellawell’s re-election in the first ballot at the group’s annual meeting in 
September, when53% of the votes cast by investors excluding Ashley opposed the 
chairman’s re-election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/07/sports-direct-annual-general-meeting-showdown-mike-ashley-business-live?page=with:block-57d021eae4b042bbfb3243ab#block-57d021eae4b042bbfb3243ab>
 on a marginally higher turnout. That result forced Thursday’s re-election, in 
which Ashley’s stake counted.

Apart from Aberdeen, the City dissenters included Standard Life, Royal London 
and Hermes, which advises a string of investors.


Standard Life said the insurance company was concerned at the lack of progress 
being made by the retailer: “In particular, we are disappointed to note the 
lack of progress in recruiting a chairperson for the independent governance 
review, an initiative that we see as being fundamental to Sports Direct 
fulfilling its long-term value creation potential.”

Before the vote last September, Hellawell also attempted to appease 
disgruntled shareholders by saying he had offered to go, although the board had 
refused to accept his resignation.

Despite that offer seeming to acknowledge that he and the board accepted 
responsibility for the group’s situation, last month Hellawell criticised MPs, 
trade unions and the media for waging a campaign against the business as it 
reported a 57% drop in first-half profits.

The results represented the latest disappointing financial statement after the 
company’s share price halved during 2016. The group wasrelegated from the FTSE 
100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/sport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions>
 in March.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsports-direct-chairman-keith-hellawell-rejected-shareholders-for-second-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2475f97d02a666b2b721e65c9b75e785153d5152%2F0_67_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20chairman%20Keith%20Hellawell%20rejected%20by%20shareholders%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsports-direct-chairman-keith-hellawell-rejected-shareholders-for-second-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20chairman%20Keith%20Hellawell%20rejected%20by%20shareholders%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsports-direct-chairman-keith-hellawell-rejected-shareholders-for-second-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2475f97d02a666b2b721e65c9b75e785153d5152%2F0_67_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Sports Direct chairman Keith Hellawell. Photograph: Darren Staples/Reuters 
Sarah Wilson, chief executive of the shareholder proxy voting service 
Manifest, said Hellawell must stand aside at the September 2017 AGM and Sports 
Direct had to make big changes: “They have eight months until the next AGM to 
get new people in. They are losing goodwill and this is an existential threat 
to the business, and they have to respond to do something about it.”

Other shareholder advisory bodies have also weighed into the debate. Pirc and 
Institutional Shareholder Services advised clients to vote against Hellawell, 
with the latter saying he had overseen a “catalogue of governance and 
operational failures”.

However, their rival Glass Lewis, which supported Hellawell at last year’s AGM 
when it instead recommended a vote against Ashley’s reappointment, urged its 
clients to back the chairman again.

The crisis at Sports Direct was triggered by a Guardian investigation in 2015, 
which revealed that workers at the firm’s Derbyshire warehouse were paid less 
than the national minimum wage. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>


The scandal prompted a parliamentary inquiry last year, in which MPs likened 
the depot to a Victorian workhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
, reigniting long-held concerns about the level of control Ashley enjoys at the 
company.

The newspaper reports also encouraged some investors to react after years of 
backing the board, including76% of independent shareholders voting for 
Hellawell’s reappointment 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sports-direct-intl---spd-/rns/result-of-agm/201509091319135673Y/>
 at the 2015 annual meeting.

Aberdeen, which owns 0.3% of Sports Direct, said it viewed the company as 
having made progress by implementing anindependent review into working practices
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/sports-direct-bows-to-pressure-and-agrees-to-independent-review>
 andappointing the investment banker David Brayshaw as a non-executive director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
.

It also views the departures of the chief executive, Dave Forsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/sports-direct-mike-ashley-step-in-after-ceo-resigns>
, and actingchief financial officer, Matt Pearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/sports-direct-acting-finance-director-matt-pearson-leaves-company>
, as positive moves. The company has not had a full-time, board-level finance 
director for more than three years.
 