
UK house prices increased in March at their fastest monthly rate since 2004 as 
buy-to-let investors accelerated their purchases ahead of a stamp duty rise in 
April.

The Office for National Statistics said its UK house price index increased by 
2.5% betweenFebruary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/12/london-property-values-plummet-after-office-national-statistics-revises-figures>
 and March to take the average price of a home to £291,820.

Only a steep drop in prices across Scotland, which has seen values slump since 
the oil price collapse in 2014, stopped the annual rate for the UK hitting 
double figures. The UK average home increase was 9% over the last year while 
Scotland fell 6.1%.


House prices fall in London’s luxury postcodes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/17/house-prices-drop-london-luxury-postcodes>
London continued to outstrip the rest of the country, though most regions grew 
strongly and are now above their 2008 peak.

Separate data from HMRC showed that housing transactions surged by 70% in 
March from a year ago as buyers rushed to complete purchases before the 
supplementary 3% stamp duty charge on second homes came into effect.

Jeremy Duncombe, director of Legal & General’s mortgage club, said: “Given 
that these figures cover the period leading up to the buy-to-let stamp duty 
rise, it’s no surprise that they show another strong monthly increase in house 
prices.


“However, even without this surge in buy-to-let activity, house prices are 
still increasing annually at a rate that sits well above any rise in average 
earnings, making our housing market even less affordable as each month goes by.”


The north-east was the only English region to remain below its peak before the 
financial crash after prices flatlined in March. The region, which has 
struggled with steel plant closures in the past year, remains 3.5% below the 
high point registered in January 2008.

Wales reached another record high in March while Scotland is 0.9% below the 
pre-economic downturn peak and Northern Ireland 42.3% lower than 2008.

Richard Snook, senior economist at PwC, said the strong performance was once 
more centred on London and the south-east, where annual growth in house prices 
remained in double digits at 13.0% and 12.2% respectively.


“There are no signs of any Brexit related slowdown in this month’s figures, 
although the underlying trends are masked by the effects of the stamp duty 
change.”


Howard Archer, chief economist at IHS Global Insight said the underlying trend 
would be of weaker growth once buy-to-let investors and second-home buyers 
revert back to the normal trend.

“There is evidence that housing market activity is now being seriously 
pressurised not only by a marked waning of interest from the buy-to-let and 
second home sectors following the rush to beat April’s stamp duty increase for 
these sectors, but also by heightened concerns and uncertainties over the UK 
economic outlook, particularly in the run-up to June’s referendum on EU 
membership,” he said.

High-end London homes have seen prices fall since April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/17/house-prices-drop-london-luxury-postcodes>
, according to some reports, as the higher stamp duty rates and fears of a 
Brexit deter wealthy buyers.

The International Monetary Fund is one of many economic forecasters to warn 
thatUK house values will plummet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/imf-warns-stock-market-crash-house-price-fall-eu-referendum-brexit>
 should Britons vote to leave the EU in the June referendum.
 