
The sale of Staples has taken the number of UK retail jobs affected by 
business failures this year to almost 26,000 – the highest figure since 2012 
when the sector was still reeling from the recession.

With six weeks of 2016 remaining, 22 medium and large retailers employing 
25,933 people have failed, according to the Centre for Retail Research (CRR). 
The number of jobs affected is almost four times the 6,845 for all of last year 
and exceeds the 25,140 total for 2013.

The CRR figures do not take into account businesses that fail but are then 
revived under new owners. The numbers also exclude job cutsby companies that 
are still trading, including Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/tesco-considering-cutting-store-staff-by-39000-over-three-years>
 andMarks & Spencer, which is cutting up to 500 head office jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/03/marks-spencer-500-job-cuts-london-head-office>
 and closing stores.

Staples, the struggling US stationery chain, has sold its UK business to Hilco 
Capital for a nominal sum 
<http://www.hilcocapital.com/news/2016/11/17/hilco-capital-to-purchase-staples-uk-retail-business>
. Hilco, the retail restructuring firm which revived HMV, will take on 
Staples’s 106 stores, which employ more than 1,100 people.

The stores will remain open while Hilco decides what to do with the business, 
though the Staples brand will be phased out in the next six months.

Staples is the latest familiar retail name to face difficulties this year, 
after the collapse of BHS and Austin Reed, as well as the planned closure of US 
retailers American Apparel and Banana Republic’s UK stores. Exhibit, a fashion 
chain in Northern Ireland employing 100 staff, went into administration last 
month after 33 years.

Professor Joshua Bamfield, director of the CRR, said the rate of failure was 
alarming because the economy had been growing for the past few years and 
businesses shutting now had made it through the recession, which was meant to 
have cleared out redundant or inefficient operators.

He said CRR had added almost 1,500 jobs to the 2016 running total since the 
end of October <http://www.retailresearch.org/whosegonebust.php> and that this 
was worrying so close to Christmas, the peak trading period for most retailers.

“Though there are fewer companies failing than a few years ago the impact is a 
lot bigger because the chains that are going have managed to survive since the 
recession. Many of them are quite large or they are people who, after years of 
clinging on for dear life, are saying it’s not worth bothering any more.

“People closing before Christmas is also a really bad sign because Christmas 
is where you make your profits so if you’re saying it’s not worth carrying on 
for a couple of months that is a bad signal.”

High streets face multiple pressures as consumers buy more goods online and 
shift their often diminished spending power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/06/the-way-we-shop-now-the-revolution-in-british-spending-habits>
 from physical goods to leisure activity such as eating out and holidays. High 
business rates and other costs, which have risen faster than spending, have 
made matters worse.


Bamfield said: “This is the biggest change we have seen in retail in such a 
short period of time.”

The worst year for retailers in the past decade was 2008, when 54 companies, 
including Woolworths, failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/nov/26/woolworths-administration-high-street-retailers>
 affecting almost 75,000 jobs. Retail jobs affected by business failures fell 
to fewer than 11,000 in 2010 but rose again to more than 48,000 in 2012 before 
easing as the economy picked up.
 