
Just a short walk from Campo de’ Fiori in central Rome, the Roscioli cafe, the 
latest in the Roscioli empire, ups the ante with a new take on the traditional 
Roman cafe, and its reinvention of thepanino – the humble sandwich.

Down the street from its sister shops – Roscioli Salumeria, a 
delicatessen/restaurant, and the Antico Forno bakery – the cafe has high 
ceilings and is decorated in muted colours, more art gallery than old-school 
cafe. The counter is laid with Roman pastries and sandwiches –maritozzi 
(cream-filled sweet buns), Mont Blanc meringues, traditional triangular
tramezzini and ovalini, small oval sandwiches filled with rocket and tuna, or 
artichokes and salmon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Ffoodie-roscioli-cafe-rome-italy-panino-sandwich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1273591c92bf2f9fa1af7a373ea479a65fc30d38%2F0_0_4608_2764%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Starring%20roll%3A%20high%20art%20paninis%20in%20a%20Roman%20cafe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Ffoodie-roscioli-cafe-rome-italy-panino-sandwich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Starring%20roll%3A%20high%20art%20paninis%20in%20a%20Roman%20cafe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Ffoodie-roscioli-cafe-rome-italy-panino-sandwich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1273591c92bf2f9fa1af7a373ea479a65fc30d38%2F0_0_4608_2764%2F4608.jpg>
 The Roscioli cafe is the latest addition to a mini chain 
Roscioli serves cappuccino, caffè corretto and all other coffee incarnations. 
Though pricier than in the average Roman bar – espresso €1.50, cappuccino €2.25 
– the coffee is expertly made by Roscioli’s veteran team. There’s a small, 
cave-like back room with tables, where the owners host V60 coffee tastings (a 
manual coffee-making method using a cone-shaped glass filter and 100% arabica 
grinds), wine tastings andaperitivi.

Trattorie in Rome: readers’ travel tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/04/trattorie-in-rome-italy-readers-travel-tips>
But it’s the sandwich menu that sets Roscioli apart. Brothers Pierluigi and 
Alessandro say they set out to create the very best. The Club is a triple-layer 
monument of Roscioli’s wholewheat bread, grilledguanciale (cured pork cheek, a 
bit like fat bacon), Sicilian tomato and a free-range fried egg. The Francesina 
is filled with succulent slow-roasted breast of veal and mustard mayonnaise, 
and the Fritcassè is a playful homage to Rome’s fried cod. It’s art, stuffed 
into a bread roll.
• Piazza Cairoli 16, facebook.com/Rosciolicaffe 
<https://www.facebook.com/Rosciolicaffe>
 