
Near a sacred volcanic lake for the Oromo people in the Ethiopian town of 
Bishoftu, a boisterous crowd seized an unusual opportunity to chant 
anti-government slogans during their annual Irreecha cultural celebration.

Disregarding the Oromo officials and traditional leaders at the 2 October 
ceremony, the youthful protesters crossed their arms in a symbol of defiance 
and edged forward towards police armed with batons. In a defining moment for 
the Oromo resistance, one man got on stage, grabbed the microphone and sent the 
thousands in the audience into fever pitch as he led a chant.

“Down, down, Woyane! Down, down, TPLF!” he yelled, referring to the Tigrayan 
People’s Liberation Front party 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tigrayan_People%27s_Liberation_Front>, which 
opponents say has controlled the strategically vital Horn of Africa nation for 
25 years.

In Ethiopia, anger over corruption and farmland development runs deep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/18/ethiopia-anger-over-corruption-farmland-development-runs-deep>
Minutes later, as demonstrators threatened to take over the stage, Oromia 
police triggered a deadly stampede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/ethiopia-many-dead-anti-government-protest-religious-festival>
 by firing tear gas. The crackle of gunfire followed from armed officers and an 
armoured vehicle sped into action, exacerbating the panic. People fell into a 
deep ditch and were crushed. Others drowned in the lake, contributing toan 
official death toll of 52 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-ethiopia-protests-idUSKCN1231PL?il=0>, while 
rights groups estimate that more than 100 died.

Social media activists characterised the bungled dispersal as a “massacre”, 
falsely accusing soldiers of shooting people from a helicopter, and called for 
“five days of rage”. A week later,the government announced a state of emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/ethiopia-declares-state-of-emergency-as-deadly-protests-continue>
 after protesters rampaged across Oromia, burning government buildings, and 
torching farms and factories.

The events may mark a turning point in the 11-month uprising by the Oromo, 
Ethiopia’s most populous ethnic group, who cite frustrations over political and 
economic marginalisation. The movement, along with a series of violent 
demonstrations occurring since late July in the historically powerful Amhara 
region, had already threatened the authority of the government, a favoured
partner of the UK <https://devtracker.dfid.gov.uk/countries/ET> and other 
donors that provideclose to $4bn <http://dagethiopia.org/new/oda-to-ethiopia> 
(£3.2bn) in aid a year.

The state of emergency is likely to mean the increased use of federal security 
forces, including the military, to quell unrest at the expense of regional 
states’ autonomy, as well as occasional curfews and suspensions of due process. 
The US Department of State said the move could “further enshrine” the 
repression that has contributed to the crisis.


 The government has killed about 500 Oromo demonstrators so far during the 
crisis, while detaining tens of thousands more in an effort to discourage civil 
resistance. The message from those efforts and the latest round of unrest, 
however, is that it will be hard to subdue protesters, who see the government 
as discredited and embattled. That means the possibility of escalating violence 
in Africa’s second-most populous nation.

“If the government persists with the current stand, Ethiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> may be in for long-term 
instability,” said Hassen Hussein, a US-based regional analyst who has written 
sympathetically about the Oromo struggle.

The Bishoftu violence was preceded by a two-month lull, as new Oromo ruling 
party leaders emerged and pledged reforms. Before that, on 6 August, activists 
called for a day of “grand Oromo protests”, which resulted in about 70 deaths 
and included a rare demonstration inAddis Ababa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/29/insider-guide-addis-ababa-car-crashes-coffee-contemporary-art>
, the capital. Federal police dispersed that rally, scattering attendees with 
batons and boots.

Among those subsequently detained was an educated young man calling himself 
Gudina Jalata. He’d previously stayed away from protests out of fear, but felt 
compelled to participate by witnessing continuing injustice across the 
sprawling region that encircles the capital. “First you have to be respected 
for your dignity – that is why I got involved. There is a lot of discrimination 
against the Oromo,” he said.

 Before the government came to power in 1991 by removing a socialist junta, 
Ethiopia was a unitary state. A 1995 federal constitution ensured self-rule for 
minorities and promoted local languages in schools and government. However, 
Oromo allege the state is controlled by Tigrayans,who comprise 6% 
<http://ecadforum.com/2016/08/17/ethiopia-the-untold-plight-of-the-amhara-people/>
 of the country’salmost 100 million-strong population 
<http://data.worldbank.org/country/ethiopia>, and say farmers are being 
unfairly evicted by investors tied to ruling elites.

'Unbridled violence' in Gambella leaves Ethiopia searching for answers | 
William Davison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/20/unbridled-violence-gambella-ethiopia-south-sudan>
The divergent narratives feed a furious debate. Far from being oppressors, 
TPLF elites say their community made huge sacrifices during a 16-year struggle 
that liberated the Oromo and other groups from Amhara domination. They add that 
ethnic federalism now protects those hard-won rights, and power is shared 
equitably within government, while the statist development model pushed byMeles 
Zenawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2012/aug/21/ethiopia-renaissance-meles-zenawi>
, the former TPLF chairman and prime minister who died in 2012, helped Ethiopia 
advance.

For Gudina and the other detainees, such claims seem fanciful. After time in a 
cramped cell, his group was driven to a federal police facility in the Awash 
area; some were held for a week and then released, others were held for up to 
two weeks. There were no showers or toilets and they were given only small 
amounts of bread and water. The camp had three components: gruelling barefoot 
exercises on gravel under a scorching sun, political lessons and bouts of 
investigation.

The workouts included being forced to hop forwards with hands behind their 
head. Even the injured had to participate; if there was any slacking off, they 
were beaten. “It was really inhuman,” Gudina said.

Tigrayan officers, the interviewed detainees claimed, gave lessons on 
federalism and ruling coalition doctrines. While they felt contempt for their 
instructors, the prisoners were compliant, although one bucked the trend and 
was severely beaten. “The constitution they are teaching us is not broken by us 
– they themselves break the law. For example, it’s our right to protest,” one 
explained.

Mass detention is not a new tactic for a government that has largely failed to 
move Ethiopia on from an authoritarian past. There have been similar 
initiatives during these Oromo protests,Human Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/> said in June, while thousands have also been detained in 
Amhara. After the disputed elections in 2005, when Ethiopia faced its last 
major political crisis, the US state department said up to 18,000 youths were 
kept at a military camp for longer than a month.

While the regime undertakes another mass roundup of suspects 
<http://www.voanews.com/a/ethiopian-mayor-says-1000-arrested-this-month-after-violence/3556118.html>
, the efforts to indoctrinate Oromo youth are increasingly futile, Hassen 
believes. “If anything, it makes people even more defiant,” he said. “It’s 
exposing how empty the regime is, making it more vulnerable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fstate-of-emergency-likely-ramp-up-repression-fractured-ethiopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F992e995a2eba9c55deae7237767293f91ba2d533%2F0_0_2228_1485%2F2228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=State%20of%20emergency%20likely%20to%20ramp%20up%20repression%20in%20fractured%20Ethiopia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fstate-of-emergency-likely-ramp-up-repression-fractured-ethiopia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=State%20of%20emergency%20likely%20to%20ramp%20up%20repression%20in%20fractured%20Ethiopia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fstate-of-emergency-likely-ramp-up-repression-fractured-ethiopia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F992e995a2eba9c55deae7237767293f91ba2d533%2F0_0_2228_1485%2F2228.jpg>
 In Denkaka, Kebele, on 3 October, women mourn during the funeral of Tesfu 
Tadese Biru, a construction engineer who died during the stampede after police 
fired warning shots at an anti-government protest in Bishoftu. Photograph: 
Tiksa Negeri/Reuters 
Ethiopia’s crisis developed after only one opposition lawmaker won a federal 
parliamentary seat in 2010 andlast year’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/24/ethiopian-election-marred-by-harassment-claims>
 produced no opposition representative. The multi-ethnic ruling coalition 
emphasises its success in building infrastructure, improving social services, 
and helping millions out of extreme poverty, while acknowledging the democratic 
deficit.

Donor support for the government, which is also a security ally in Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> and South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, is unwavering. That 
relationship gives officials leeway to reject western criticism of abuses as a 
neocolonial attempt to impose liberal norms. Ethiopia’s leaders believe 
democratic pluralism is the product of development, not a means to achieve it.

When parliament reconvened, the largely ceremonial president, Mulatu Teshome, 
an Oromo, promised to create jobs and introduce some proportional 
representation at elections. And using familiar refrains, the government blamed
Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> and Eritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea> for stoking the violence by backing 
a weakened, fragmented Oromo rebel group.

But the primary threat to Ethiopia is that a portion of its population is now 
committed to liberating regime change, rather than campaigning for reforms – 
including the young Oromo the police tried to re-educate. “Until we get our 
freedom, our self-determination as Oromo, I will continue struggling. I will 
continue to death,” said one.
 