
Extended breaks in exotic foreign lands – or, at the very least, the Riviera – 
are so over. These days, the most a French government minister can expect in 
the way of a summer holiday is a couple of days in Normandy, preferably in a 
tent.

Hit by dire popularity ratings, assorted scandals and persistent economic 
woes, François Hollande, the president, has in previous yearsfelt obliged to 
ask his cabinet to confine themselves to France 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-23397289> and stay away no longer than 
a fortnight.

This year, with the country’s state of emergency extended for a further six 
months following a string of terror attacks and presidential and parliamentary 
elections in the offing, the instructions are even stricter.

Officially, the cabinet meets for the last time before its three-week summer 
break on Wednesday. But seemingly determined that senior ministers should not 
be seen absent from office – not to mention sunning themselves – at such a 
critical time, Hollande has scheduled security meetings throughout the summer.

David Cameron took a holiday in Lanzarote. What was he thinking? | Chris Mullin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/02/david-cameron-holiday-lanzarote-politicians>
“I didn’t get a holiday last year and I’m fairly sure I won’t get one this 
year,” said the government spokesman, Stéphane le Foll, who along with the 
prime minister, Manuel Valls, interior minister Bernard Cazeneuve, defence 
minister Jean-Yves Le Drian, justice minister Jean-Jacques Urvoas and foreign 
affairs minister Jean-Marc Ayrault, will attend the weekly meetings at the 
Élysée Palace.

According to Europe 1 radio 
<http://www.europe1.fr/politique/les-vacances-limitees-des-ministres-2807896>, 
Valls will spend a short time in Provence with his family but commute from 
Paris; Cazeneuve is grabbing “a day or two” at his house an hour north of the 
capital; Le Drian has abandoned plans to go to Spain, and Urvoas will profit 
from a brief break to the southern Vaucluse to visit three prisons.

While not required for the security summits, the rest of the government has 
clearly got the message. “It looks like a competition to find the least 
ostentatious destination,” the radio said. The finance minister, Michel Sapin, 
will be on the Atlantic island of Ile d’Yeu, and the labour minister, Myriam El 
Khomri, in Gironde.

Axelle Lemaire, the deputy minister for digital affairs, has done particularly 
well: her summer holiday, she has said, will be under canvas. But the 
environment minister, Ségolène Royal,takes the top prize, said Le Point 
<http://www.lepoint.fr/politique/les-vacances-low-cost-du-gouvernement-01-08-2016-2058409_20.php>
: she is spending August in the Antarctic, on a scientific mission.

With the nation as fraught, angry and divided as it is, “political reality – 
or public relations – have plainly won out”,Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 1 said. Perhaps ill-advisedly: 
given France’s current state, the clear minds gained from a proper holiday 
“might not altogether be a bad thing”.
 