
It has been an emotional Paris fashion week. The Vogue-versus-the-bloggers 
plotline had laid bare the tension and rivalry embedded in a group of people 
currently spending 12 hours of every day of the week together, even beforeKim 
Kardashian’s ordeal at gunpoint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/03/kim-kardashian-west-held-at-gunpoint-fake-policemen-paris-hotel-kanye-concert>
 escalated the nervy mood.

So at Stella McCartney’s Monday morning show at the Opéra Garnier you could 
cut the atmosphere with a knife. Or, it turns out, you could cut through it 
with a flashmob finale in which the modelsditched the po-faced strutting in 
favour of a brilliantly silly dance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-FsYc0sD_vY>, which choreographer Blanca Li 
had created late the night before, that being the only time the models weren’t 
busy with other shows. “I wanted to have a more emotional connection this 
season,” said McCartney backstage. As a British brand showing in Paris, she 
wanted her first show after June’s referendum to “show love, throw our arms 
around everyone, make people happy”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71bb9a6c96fdd6764f59177fa96226b454a7770%2F144_0_2415_4151%2F2415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stella%20McCartney's%20flashmob%20finale%20ditches%20strutting%20for%20dancing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stella%20McCartney%27s%20flashmob%20finale%20ditches%20strutting%20for%20dancing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71bb9a6c96fdd6764f59177fa96226b454a7770%2F144_0_2415_4151%2F2415.jpg>
 A model presents a Stella McCartney creation. Photograph: Patrick 
Kovarik/AFP/Getty Images 
McCartney’s fashion week raison d’être has always been about more than 
aesthetics. Her pioneeringanti-fur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/09/paris-fashion-week-stella-mccartney-unveils-fur-free-fur>
 andanti-leather stance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/oct/05/stella-mccartney-fashion-heartless>
, widely considered the hippy eccentricity of a Beatles daughter when she 
launched her label 15 years ago, has since been adopted by Ralph Lauren, Tommy 
Hilfiger and Giorgio Armani. Last week, her brand released its first annual 
environmental profit and loss accounts, examining the environmental impact of 
the business from raw material to retail. This focus on sustainability reflects 
a nascent change across the industry, as fashion responds to a new generation 
of millennial consumers who expect their clothes to reflect their values.

Demna Gvasalia reinvigorates Balenciaga with strategic disrespect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/02/demna-gvasalia-reinvigorates-balenciaga-with-strategic-disrespect>
A racer-back T-shirt dress on the Stella McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/stella-mccartney> catwalk spelled out “NO 
FUR”; a jumpsuit read “NO LEATHER”. “We’ve got a lot to say at this house, and 
sometimes you’ve just got to spell it out,” McCartney said after the show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd44e59322f569bb58e136517778b901b7f72aa2f%2F0_241_3712_5288%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stella%20McCartney's%20flashmob%20finale%20ditches%20strutting%20for%20dancing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stella%20McCartney%27s%20flashmob%20finale%20ditches%20strutting%20for%20dancing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd44e59322f569bb58e136517778b901b7f72aa2f%2F0_241_3712_5288%2F3712.jpg>
 A model during the Sonia Rykiel show. Photograph: Pascal Le Segretain/Getty 
Images 
The great Parisian designer Sonia Rykiel, who died in August aged 86 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/27/sonia-rykiel-the-pioneering-knitwear-designer-who-couldnt-knit>
, would have loved McCartney’s finale. Rykiel always felt that the traditional 
frosty stalk of the catwalk model jarred with her passion for clothes that 
liberated and empowered women, and preferred her models to walk arm in arm, 
smiling and chatting.

The first Sonia Rykiel catwalk since the death of the label’s founder was 
bookended by tributes. It was staged at the École des Beaux Arts in Paris’s 
Saint Germain district, not far from where Rykiel’s fashion business began with 
her 1960s Rue de Grenelle boutique, and opened with a lineup of models whose 
initialled sweaters spelled out “Rykiel Forever”. This being fashion, however, 
the true homage was not in the wording but in the silhouette: the sweaters had 
the distinctive skinny rib shape, with tight sleeves and high armholes, with 
which Rykiel made her name as an icon of a distinctive Saint Germain aesthetic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd8f2c1193e2f243d0a9f5d0c63e4b75ab1cd503%2F0_0_3500_2335%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stella%20McCartney's%20flashmob%20finale%20ditches%20strutting%20for%20dancing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stella%20McCartney%27s%20flashmob%20finale%20ditches%20strutting%20for%20dancing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstella-mccartney-paris-fashion-week-flashmob-dancing-sonia-rykiel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd8f2c1193e2f243d0a9f5d0c63e4b75ab1cd503%2F0_0_3500_2335%2F3500.jpg>
 Sonia Rykiel’s skinny rib, rainbow-striped sweaters paid tribute to the talent 
of the label’s founder, who died in August. Photograph: Charles Platiau/Reuters 
Rykiel herself had stepped down from design duties long before her death, but 
her daughter and granddaughter remain engaged in the brand. The challenge for 
Julie de Libran, an alumni of Prada and Louis Vuitton who has been the creative 
director since 2014, is to keep the Rykiel spirit alive and dynamic. (Memories 
may be precious, but mawkishness doesn’t sell.) This collection channelled the 
confident, independent spirit that Rykiel represented into modern pieces: a 
nautical spin on oversized jackets, an August-in-Provence take on smocked 
summer tunics.


It was an accomplished and contemporary collection. But the ultimate tribute 
to the talent of Rykiel were the skinny rib, rainbow-striped Lurex sweaters in 
which models lined up under the finale’s glitter shower: a classic look of the 
original Sonia Rykiel era that stood out even today as the most instantly 
desirable of pieces.

 