
All herald Team GB. With the 2016 Olympics three months away, designer Stella 
McCartney <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/stella-mccartney> has fired the 
starting pistol, unveiling a new kit forTeam GB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> and ParalympicsGB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympicsgb> which features a new heraldic 
coat of arms as its logo.

“The coat of arms is all around us in Britain. It’s so much a part of us that 
we barely even notice it, but it is so distinctively British,” said McCartney 
shortly after presiding over the launch wearing six-inch high heels, 
shoulder-robing a red coat over a cream blouse and black silk jogging bottoms. 
She was flanked on stage in central London by Tom Daley, who sported the new 
coat of arms on his tiny navy trunks, and Jessica Ennis with the image 
emblazoned on a two piece.

The proud puffed chests of the lions on the coat of arms made for an 
unmistakably patriotic image, and a confident one which stands out among the 
futuristic graphics that abound on most sportswear. Meanwhile, the proportions 
of both Daley’s and Ennis’s kit appeared to have taken inspiration from the 
Brazilian taste for barely-there beachwear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a929e96333d25184634e35ceb87390c06602e73%2F556_0_4006_3377%2F4006.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stella%20McCartney's%20Team%20GB%20kit%20is%20confidently%20patriotic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stella%20McCartney%27s%20Team%20GB%20kit%20is%20confidently%20patriotic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a929e96333d25184634e35ceb87390c06602e73%2F556_0_4006_3377%2F4006.jpg>
 A nod to the ancient British mastery of the supposedly modern notion of 
branding. Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
Catwalk images are all very well, but if the Rio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> kit is to make it into glorious 
finishing-line images and podium photo calls, these clothes will need to 
deliver at performance level. To this end, Adidas claim technical advances will 
give this year’s athletes an advantage on their 2012 predecessors. Fabric is on 
average 10% lighter than in 2012, helping athletes go faster and further. 
‘Climachill’ technology has been employed to cope with the different challenges 
of the Brazilian climate, keeping cool air flowing in and heat and sweat 
flowing out. According to Adidas product manager John Stewart, six sports 
including marathon, tennis and basketball will benefit from boost technology in 
footwear, which is designed to direct energy back into the foot on impact.

It was feedback from the athletes, rather than a nod to Rio-style swimwear, 
which demanded the precise, close-cut shapes. “Tom Daley loves this kit, 
because it’s so streamlined,” said McCartney. Rugby player Emily Scarratt, 
modelling the new kit for the first time, also approved of the close fit. “The 
last thing you want in rugby is baggy fabric, which gives your opponent more to 
grab hold of.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac5a3c4c167758d016602fdd13ce568be7e3a9f%2F0_0_3488_2284%2F3488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stella%20McCartney's%20Team%20GB%20kit%20is%20confidently%20patriotic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stella%20McCartney%27s%20Team%20GB%20kit%20is%20confidently%20patriotic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac5a3c4c167758d016602fdd13ce568be7e3a9f%2F0_0_3488_2284%2F3488.jpg>
 ‘The coat of arms is all around us in Britain,’ says Stella McCartney. 
Photograph: Adam Duke/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
But the national team kit has a purpose above and beyond the practical. “I 
want to deliver for the athletes,” said McCartney, “but I’ve got to please the 
nation as well. This project has to make a lot more people happy than I’m used 
to. In my day job, the women who buy my clothes come to me because they already 
identify with me in some way. This project isn’t like that – it has to 
emotionally and visually tick a lot of boxes for a lot of people, while keeping 
functionality paramount. In a way, it’s the most intricate thing I do.” It is 
also, says McCartney, the most rewarding. “I have so many incredibly proud 
memories from 2012. I remember every single newspaper front page, and how 
incredible the athletes looked in the kit.”

How much do aesthetics matter to an Olympic team? “Well, they matter a huge 
amount to the athletes themselves,” says McCartney. “Athletes dedicate their 
entire lives to their bodies. Their bodies are literally their temples. So of 
course they are proud of them and want to celebrate them. And if it’s important 
to them, then it matters, right?” This means delivering a perfect silhouette – 
“for instance, the women’s podium jackets are belted this time around; and I’ll 
put extra ribbing for shape” and a high style level in the more casual 
‘village-wear’. Women’s sweatshirts come cropped to the waist, in keeping with 
current athleisure trends. Grey marl jersey – a timeless classic of 
sportswear-meets- weekend-casual – features in racer-back cool-down vests and 
hoodies with red drawstrings. Backstage after the launch, an off-duty Jessica 
Ennis sported a white neoprene sweatshirt with a coat of arms broken up by bold 
GB capital letters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccebd955601bb91542bd18f0746bacfd63aa00a4%2F0_0_3488_2301%2F3488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stella%20McCartney's%20Team%20GB%20kit%20is%20confidently%20patriotic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stella%20McCartney%27s%20Team%20GB%20kit%20is%20confidently%20patriotic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccebd955601bb91542bd18f0746bacfd63aa00a4%2F0_0_3488_2301%2F3488.jpg>
 Tom Daley, John Stewart and Stella McCartney at the launch. Photograph: Adam 
Duke/WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
The new coat of arms – visual branding in its most traditionally British form 
– was created by the College of Arms in partnership with a digital artist, and 
becomes the new ‘logo’ of the Olympic teams’ official kit. Any coat of arms 
represents proud heritage – in this case, historic victories in the great 
battles of London 2012. If the coat of arms seems to project a newly confident, 
boisterous patriotism aroundTeam GB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> 
then this is in keeping with the very different pre-Olympic mood. It is easy to 
forget, with hindsight, that in the run-up to the 2012 games much of the mood 
music was about blown budgets, lack of preparation and whether the city’s 
transport system would crack under the pressure. This time around, the mood is 
more confident – and, without the strain of hosting, more laid-back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe89dc31fe0b7820fcdd37937a0e571b00e184cf6%2F0_211_2336_3289%2F2336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stella%20McCartney's%20Team%20GB%20kit%20is%20confidently%20patriotic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stella%20McCartney%27s%20Team%20GB%20kit%20is%20confidently%20patriotic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fstella-mccartney-team-gb-olympic-kit-is-confidentially-patriotic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe89dc31fe0b7820fcdd37937a0e571b00e184cf6%2F0_211_2336_3289%2F2336.jpg>
 Rugby player Tom Mitchell: ‘When you’re walking around the village, it creates 
that immediate link.’ Photograph: Adidas UK/PA 
The union jack is represented in an abstract starburst graphic in the 
background of many pieces, and badged more traditionally on the hip elsewhere. 
“I believe we have one of the greatest flags in the world, so I wanted to use 
the flag as much as possible. But I thought about the context of Rio, and I 
pumped up the purity of colour,” said McCartney. “Last time I used lots of 
different tones of blues and reds, but this time I wanted to really punch it 
out, use lots of contrast rather than shading, because you are trying to stand 
out against a very vibrant, colourful backdrop.”

Besides standing out from the crowd, Team GB needs to look cohesive together. 
“There are so many different personalities, all these completely different 
sports and schedules,” said Rugby player Tom Mitchell, who modelled kit at the 
launch, “and the kit is important because it unites us as a team. When you’re 
walking around the village, it creates that immediate link.”

The new heraldic badge for Team GB incorporates a crown of medals and relay 
batons, representing continuity and teamwork, while three lions hold Olympic 
torches and wear laurel wreaths. The four home nations are represented by a 
rose, a thistle, a leek and a flax, while the motto translates as ‘Joined in 
One’.

The Team GB kit in pictures  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/apr/27/team-gb-launch-new-kit-olympic-games-rio-stella-mccartney-in-pictures>

 * This article was amended on 27 April 2016 to add in quotes from Stella 
McCartney  