
Steve Rowe, the new boss of Marks & Spence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/ms-boss-marc-bolland-to-step-down>
r, is an M&S lifer who has been with the company for more than 26 years and 
made his name as the head of its highly successful food division.

Described as “collegiate” and a people person, Rowe can nevertheless be tough 
when required - an approach which has earned him the nickname “Nails” with some 
colleagues.

Marc Bolland was closely involved in grooming Rowe, 48, as his successor - 
sending him off to Harvard for a global strategic management course for senior 
leaders last summer.

With Rowe at the helm, the M&S food halls have been the only bright spot at 
the retailer in recent years. Its main clothing division has struggled as 
customers have left its womenswear on the rails, leading to three years of 
falling profits.

M&S boss Marc Bolland to step down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/ms-boss-marc-bolland-to-step-down>
Rowe became the favourite internal candidate to succeed Bolland last year when 
hetook over from John Dixon as head of M&S’s clothing and homewares business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/16/marks-spencers-clothing-director-set-to-quit-after-sales-slip>
 last July.

Dixon, who had been with M&S for nearly 30 years, had been viewed as the 
favourite to replace Bolland but he quit when it became clear that Rowe was the 
more likely successor.

Rowe, a Millwall fan, began his retail career aged 15 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/markets/article-3089788/Food-chief-serving-tasty-profit-Steve-Rowe-emerges-frontrunner-succeed-Marc-Bolland-Marks-Spencer.html>
 as a Saturday boy at M&S’s Croydon store in south London, but joined Topshop 
as a trainee when he left school at 18. Four years later he was a store manager 
but defected to join M&S because he thought it offered a better career path – 
following in his father’s footsteps, who was a director of M&S until 2000.

Rowe has worked across the company 
<http://corporate.marksandspencer.com/aboutus/our-leadership-team/team-folder/steve-rowe>
 in store management, menswear and furniture and held a number of senior 
positions including director of retail and e-commerce. He joined the board in 
2012 when he became head of the food division.

Despite fierce competition from rivals ranging from Waitrose to Aldi and Lidl, 
Rowe kept the food division growing for 25 consecutive quarters on a 
like-for-like basis. Hebagged the biggest bonus paid to M&S executives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/04/marks-spencer-bosses-bonuses-marc-bolland>
 last year after the retailerposted its first profits rise in four years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/20/marks-spencer-profits-jump-mark-bolland>
.
 