
Ikea <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ikea> has warned people not to try 
to sleep over in its stores when they close, saying they would be considered 
trespassers and would only end up getting into trouble with the law.

On Wednesday, the Swedish firm’s spokeswoman Johanna Iritz said the firm takes 
the matter seriously, adding: “we can’t guarantee safety”.

The trend reportedly started when two teenagers spent the night in an Ikea 
store in Belgium in August this year, then posted a video of their exploits 
online.

Ikea's sleepy customers - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2014/jul/07/ikeas-sleepy-customers-in-pictures>
According to the Associated Press, Iritz said Ikea has recorded about 10 such 
incidents in the past year in the United States, Canada, Britain, Belgium, the 
Netherlands, Sweden, Japan, Australia and Poland. The agency said it was 
unclear whether anyone had been prosecuted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstop-holding-sleepovers-in-our-stores-ikea-warns-pranksters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf234257d574692316068275f6da79bfa400ab5%2F0_328_6000_3602%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stop%20holding%20sleepovers%20in%20our%20stores%2C%20Ikea%20warns%20pranksters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstop-holding-sleepovers-in-our-stores-ikea-warns-pranksters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stop%20holding%20sleepovers%20in%20our%20stores%2C%20Ikea%20warns%20pranksters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fstop-holding-sleepovers-in-our-stores-ikea-warns-pranksters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf234257d574692316068275f6da79bfa400ab5%2F0_328_6000_3602%2F6000.jpg>
 In Chinese stores, sleepers are actually encouraged to try out Ikea furniture. 
Photograph: Kevin Frayer/Getty Images 
In August, Florian Van Hecke and Bram Geirnaert hid in wardrobes in an Ikea 
store in Belgium – coming out once it had closed. They filmed themselves using 
the display furniture overnight and finally left the store without being caught.
Their video on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mFLLIngIKV8> was 
subsequently viewed more than 1.7m times.

The latest incident involved two 14-year-old girls trying to stay over in an 
Ikea branch in Jönköping, Sweden, last weekend. According to local media, the 
firm did not report the incident because of the girls’ age.

“Instead, we have spoken with their parents … to resolve the situation. We 
hope that this trend will slow. We do not see what it is fun about it,” an Ikea 
spokesman toldAftonbladet 
<http://www.aftonbladet.se/senastenytt/ttnyheter/inrikes/article24123756.ab>.

Speaking on Wednesday, Iritz reiterated that the fun associated with sleeping 
over in an Ikea store after closing time was “overrated”.

Her statement comes two years after Ikea invited people to stay over in one of 
its Australian stores as part of a joint publicity stunt with Airbnb. Ikea 
listed one of its Sydney stores on the homesharing website.

At that time, the firm said the opportunity promised “guests a truly unusual 
experience, where the Ikea bedroom displays will be transformed into a quirky 
accommodation option”.
 