
According to Tacitus 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Tacitus-Roman-historian>, perhaps the 
greatest of all Roman historians, it was the great temple of Jupiter Optimus 
Maximus on the Capitoline Hill that held the key to the future of ancient Rome.

Writing about a fire at the temple 
<http://www.loebclassics.com/view/tacitus-histories/1925/pb_LCL249.103.xml> in 
AD69, Tacitus assumed the conflagration would embolden the enemy Gauls into 
thinking they might finally conquer the city, such was the symbolism of the 
temple. “This fatal conflagration has given proof from heaven of the divine 
wrath,” he wrote, “and presages the passage of sovereignty of the world to the 
peoples beyond the Alps.”

But Tacitus’s fears were not realised. The Gallic revolt was crushed and the 
temple rebuilt – as it was again and again right up until its closure by the 
Christian emperor Theodosius I in AD392. Indeed, even after Roman power had 
shifted to the east, and theVandal invasion of 455AD 
<http://burnpit.us/2013/06/vandals-sack-rome-decline-western-empire-accelerates>
 had stripped all gold from the doors of the temple, the prefect of Italy,
Cassiodorus <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cassiodorus>, was moved to write: 
“To stand on the lofty Capitol is to see all other works of human intellect 
surpassed.”

This focal point above the city was begun nearly 1,000 years earlier by Lucius 
Tarquinius Superbus, the last Roman king – but only completed and dedicated, 
according to legend, in the year of his overthrowing and the creation of the 
Roman republic in 509BC.

 It was a massive structure for its time – the largest temple in the 
Italo-Etruscan world – standing on a stone plinthmeasuring 53 by 63 metres 
<http://www.aviewoncities.com/rome/capitolinehill.htm>, and with a broad red 
roof supported on 24 columns. Also known as the temple of the Capitoline Triad, 
inside were statues of the three gods most venerated by the Latin people: Juno, 
Jupiter and Minerva. On the apex of the roof was aquadriga, a blatant symbol of 
martial triumph depicting four horses being driven by Jupiter himself.

The Romans considered the Capitol important because it was home to the state 
religion
Robert Coates-Stephens 
“Here was where the Roman kings established the centre of its most important 
cult: the temple of the Capitoline Triad – Jupiter Optimus Maximus, Juno Regina 
and Minerva,” says Prof Filippo Coarelli from the University of Perugia. “They 
were hoping to draw the political centre of the Latin League [a confederation 
of about 30 towns mainly south of the Tiber] to Rome and displace the league’s 
traditional cult centre on Mons Albanus – present-day Monte Cavo.”

According to Dr Robert Coates-Stephens, a fellow at the British School at 
Rome, the temple inspired a sense of destiny and invulnerability: “The Romans 
considered the Capitol important because it was home to the state religion and 
because, according to optimistic tradition, since the hill failed to be taken 
by the Gauls in 390BC, it had always remained inviolable.”

The temple building was copied across the Roman empire as the focal point of 
new settlements or of old enemy cities that were embracing the Roman way of 
life. It is telling that when Constantine built his new eastern capital on 
seven hills along the Bosphorus in AD330, he removed the colossal statue of 
Hercules that stood in front of the Temple of the Triad to confer legitimacy on 
his new Capitolium.

Indeed it might be said that, had the Romans not succeeded in focusing the 
Latin League on this temple, Rome may not have achieved its domination of the 
league. And without that, we would not have had the Roman empire, one of the 
most influential forces in the development of urbanisation there has ever been.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c8868c01c1aaeae41ad55533fbca5674aeccb11%2F0_0_5911_2991%2F5911.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%232%3A%20Rome%20wasn't%20planned%20in%20a%20day%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20fact%20it%20wasn't%20planned%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%232%3A%20Rome%20wasn%27t%20planned%20in%20a%20day%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20fact%20it%20wasn%27t%20planned%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c8868c01c1aaeae41ad55533fbca5674aeccb11%2F0_0_5911_2991%2F5911.jpg>
 An 1899 illustration depicting Rome in the time of the Emperor Augustus. 
Illustration: Alamy 
The selection of the site on which Rome was founded in the eighth century BC 
is the stuff of myths. Whether it was Romulus and Remus,Virgil’s Aeneas 
<http://www.sparknotes.com/lit/aeneid/characters.html> or one of the early 
Etruscan kings 
<http://www.penfield.edu/webpages/jgiotto/onlinetextbook.cfm?subpage=1660456> 
who founded the city hardly matters, as the reasons for choosing this hilly 
bend on the river Tiber were obvious.

“Rome is at the lowest point on the course of the Tiber where the river is 
naturally crossable, and like many important ancient or medieval cities (think 
of London) Rome is close to the sea, but not close enough to be in serious 
danger from pirates,” explains Georgy Kantor, associate professor in ancient 
history at St John’s College, Oxford. “Also this was the point where Via 
Salaria, the Salt Road, leading to important salt pans inland, joined the main 
coastal road.”


As well as creating a spiritual focal point devoted to victory on the 
Capitoline Hill, the kings also drained the malarial marshes between the seven 
defensible hills of Rome so that people could meet and trade. Additionally, 
during the reign of the penultimate king, Servius Tullius (who reigned 
578-534BC), they completed a wall round the hills to keep this huge city safe.

“By the late sixth century BC, the city of Rome had united around a central 
space, surrounded by a defensive wall and in the shadow of a temple which was 
one of the largest in Italy, and by its simple monumentality an indication of 
Rome’s importance,” says Prof Christopher Smith, director of the British School 
at Rome.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F843d07c7e4b96e30ea3881914be8feeaf2e686f3%2F0_0_2422_3028%2F2422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%232%3A%20Rome%20wasn't%20planned%20in%20a%20day%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20fact%20it%20wasn't%20planned%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%232%3A%20Rome%20wasn%27t%20planned%20in%20a%20day%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20fact%20it%20wasn%27t%20planned%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F843d07c7e4b96e30ea3881914be8feeaf2e686f3%2F0_0_2422_3028%2F2422.jpg>
 A model of the temple of the Capitoline Triad in ancient Rome. Photograph: G 
Dagli Orti/Rex/Shutterstock 
Because of the policy of making trading allies of its defeated enemies, money 
flooded into Rome in the early days of the republic. The city that sprung up 
below the temple of the Triad was a hodgepodge of narrow streets and tall 
wooden buildings with forums and markets created by individual donors.

So was there any guiding principle behind the development of Rome? Certainly, 
there was no Dinocrates of Alexandria to lay out the city for the first kings 
and their republican successors. But according to the Roman historian Livy in 
hisAb Urbe Condita, the early Etruscan kings did try for rational urban 
planning of the kind found at Rhodes, Pella, and Philippi – but all that was 
swept away when the Gauls sacked Rome (390BC) and by the unbridled speculative 
building that followed.

In 63BC, the great orator Cicero lamented the discrepancy between the regular 
planning of Roman cities in Campania, with the hilly and swampy conditions in 
Rome itself.


The lack of any effective urban plan is shown in the way that a victorious 
general, after processing in triumph up to the temple on the Capitoline Hill, 
had the right to build a new temple wherever he chose – and in the way that 
wealthy politicians such asJulius Caesar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/14/julius-caesar-may-have-suffered-mini-strokes-say-doctors>
 would build a marketplace to curry favour with the people.Pompey 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Pompey-the-Great> built a theatre to 
honour himself, andSulla 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Lucius-Cornelius-Sulla> a new state 
archive.


This level of individualism was both Rome’s strength and weakness. When most 
of Rome burned down underemperor Nero 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/nero.shtml> in AD64, Tacitus 
chronicled how a new plan for stone buildings at a standard height with wide 
streets was drawn up – but reported that the people lamented the lost, ad hoc 
nature of republican Rome.

“Still, there were those who held that the old form had been the more 
salubrious, as the narrow streets and high-built houses were not so easily 
penetrated by the rays of the sun,” he wrote, “while now the broad expanses, 
with no protecting shadows, glowed under a more oppressive heat.”

In 1563, England’s Queen Elizabeth I coined the Latin phrase “Romam uno die 
non fuisse conditam” (Rome wasn’t built in a day). She might have also added: 
“And it was hardly planned at all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F352de196a0f05ebec473cf170f03e60a13bc8b6b%2F0_0_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%232%3A%20Rome%20wasn't%20planned%20in%20a%20day%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20fact%20it%20wasn't%20planned%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%232%3A%20Rome%20wasn%27t%20planned%20in%20a%20day%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20fact%20it%20wasn%27t%20planned%20at%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fstory-cities-part-2-secret-ancient-rome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F352de196a0f05ebec473cf170f03e60a13bc8b6b%2F0_0_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
 Ancient Rome today: ruins of the Temple of Saturn below the Capitoline Hill 
(right of picture). Photograph: 167/Kenneth Ginn/Ocean/Corbis 
Today, the Rome of the republic lies buried beneath medieval and renaissance 
Rome. It further disappeared under the 19th-century expansion that followed 
Italian unification in 1871. Those famous seven hills have been levelled and 
built over to the point that their obscured contours have merged with the 
rising level of the valleys below.


Indeed, you could be forgiven for not realising that a marshy valley once ran 
between the Capitoline and Palatine hills. The only reason we can see this 
valley at all today is because in the 1930s, Mussolini demolished more than 
eight acres of buildings and removed rubble lying 20 feet deep to expose the 
forum.

Ancient Rome – the powerful, republican city that so rapidly conquered the 
known world – has, of course, given us so many ideas about urban planning. 
Today we talk about capital cities and forums, as well as structures such as 
amphitheatres, basilicas, metalled roads, pavements and multi-storey apartment 
blocks because of the idea of the city that Rome bequeathed us.

Yet it is ironic that the grid system (what the Romans called centuriation), a 
city planning concept they exported all over Europe from the third century BC 
onwards, was never employed in Rome itself. The Romans got their idea of laying 
out their cities on a square grid from the military encampments they 
constructed on campaign, but it was never possible to implement it properly in 
Rome because of the power of individual initiative – and, of course, those 
hills.

Story of cities #3: the birth of Baghdad was a landmark for world civilisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/16/story-cities-day-3-baghdad-iraq-world-civilisation>
After the empire moved its capital to Constantinople in AD326, everyone who 
could afford to leave Rome followed suit. The city was repeatedly looted and 
only began to recover some its lost significance during the Renaissance, and 
with the return of the popes. It took until the 20th century for it to regain 
its ancient proportions.


Nevertheless, the temple of the Triad lasted until AD1536 when its remains 
were demolished as part of a palace and piazza development conceived by 
Michelangelo for Pope Paul III. What is left of it is now under Michelangelo’s 
Palazzo dei Conservatori, one of the Capitoline Museums. These days, you can 
see some of its mighty plinth exposed if you walk up to the first floor.

Rome remains a hodgepodge, one of the worst examples of the very notion of the 
well-planned city, an idea that it bequeathed to us via – among others – 
Chester in Britain, Verona in Italy, Trier in Germany and Sinop in Turkey. But 
the impact of its Temple of the Triad can still be seen now if you stand down 
in Mussolini’s reconstructed forum and gaze up at the Capitoline museums.

As for the idea of the Capitoline Hill, that reached eventually as far as 
America where today there are nine Capitol hills across the United States, 
including the seat of the US congress in Washington.

Does your city have a fascinating story behind how it was built? Share it in 
the comments below or on Twitter using #storyofcities
 