
In the mid-1850s, Barcelona was on the brink of collapse. An industrial city 
with a busy port, it had grown increasingly dense throughout the industrial 
revolution, mostly spearheaded by the huge development of the textile sector.

The city was living at a faster pace than the rest of Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>, and was ready to become a European 
capital. Yet its population of 187,000 still lived in a tiny area, confined by 
its medieval walls.

With a density of 856 inhabitants per hectare (Paris had fewer than 400 at the 
time), the rising mortality rates were higher than those in Paris and London; 
life expectancy had dropped to 36 years for the rich and just 23 years for the 
working classes. The walls were becoming a health risk, almost literally 
suffocating the people of Barcelona – who were addressed directly in the 
following public statement of 1843:


“‘Down with the walls!’ has said this province’s council, and ‘Down with the 
walls!’ has no doubt answered your town hall, which knows the importance of 
making this girdle disappear that is squeezing and choking us.”

Demolition work would finally start a year later. Now the city and the Spanish 
government had to design and manage the sudden redistribution of an overflowing 
population. It was a controversial and highly political decision – which 
ultimately led to the then unknown Catalan engineer Ildefons Cerdà’s radical 
expansion plan for a large, grid-like district outside the old walls, called
Eixample 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/48/Ensanche_-_eixample_-_Barcelona.jpg>
 (literally, “expansion”). In the process, Cerdà also invented the word, and 
study of, “urbanisation”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5020bbb9379299c6d9ce216ed5b81732d9474fe8%2F78_87_5149_3088%2F5149.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2313%3A%20Barcelona's%20unloved%20planner%20invents%20science%20of%20'urbanisation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2313%3A%20Barcelona%27s%20unloved%20planner%20invents%20science%20of%20%27urbanisation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5020bbb9379299c6d9ce216ed5b81732d9474fe8%2F78_87_5149_3088%2F5149.jpg>
 The troops of Philip V enter through the walls of Barcelona in 1714; drawing 
by P Rigaud and engraving by M Engelbrecht, 1722. Illustration: Historical 
Museum of Barcelona/Alamy 
By the early 19th century, the old walled city of Barcelona had become so 
crammed that the working classes, bourgeois society and factories all 
co-existed in the same space. “Everyone was suffering the consequences of an 
Asian-level density,” says the writer and essayist Lluís Permanyer, whose book
Eixample: 150 Years of History 
<https://www.amazon.es/LEixample-anys-dhist%C3%B2ria-Fotografia-segle/dp/8483306700?ie=UTF8&*Version*=1&*entries*=0>
 chronicles that period.

As there was no more land left inside the city walls, all kinds of inventions 
were used to build more lodgings – houses were literally being created on empty 
space. Arches were erected in the middle of streets to be built upon, and a 
technique calledretreating façades 
<https://c1.staticflickr.com/9/8636/16546649961_bb0590ab97_b.jpg> saw house 
fronts extended out into the street as they rose up – until they almost touched 
the building opposite (this practice was banned in 1770, as it prevented air 
circulation).

Traffic – in those days, horse-drawn carts – was problematic too: the city’s 
narrowest street (now gone) was just 1.10 metres wide, while around 200 were 
less than three metres across. This, combined with residents’ Mediterranean way 
of life (which meant being on the street whenever it was light – and in the 
case of some artisanal professionals, working there too), worsened an already 
severe lack of hygiene in the city.
 Retreating facades, taken from L’Eixample: 150 Anys d’Història 
<http://www.vienaeditorial.com/mostrarllibre.asp?ididioma=1&idllibre=622&> 
Barcelona’s epidemics were devastating: each time they broke out, 3% of the 
population died, according to Montserrat Pallarès-Barberà, geography and 
urbanism professor at Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. Cholera alone killed 
more than 13,000 people between 1834 and 1865.


Into this came Cerdà. His plan consisted of a grid of streets that would unite 
the old city with seven peripheral villages (which later became integral 
Barcelona neighbourhoods such as Gràcia and Sarrià). The united area was almost 
four times the size of the old city (which was around 2 sq km) and would come 
to be known as Eixample.

This unknown engineer was revolutionary in what he envisioned – but also in 
how he got there. Cerdà decided to avoid repeating past errors by undertaking a 
comprehensive study of how the working classes lived in the old city. “He had 
thought he would find all these urbanism books, but there were none,” Permanyer 
says. So he was forced to do it himself.

Cerdà’s eye was as careful as it is fascinating. His was the first meticulous 
scientific study both of what a modern city was, and what it could aspire to be 
– not only as an efficient cohabiting space, but as a source of wellbeing (not 
a straightforward concept back then).

He calculated the volume of atmospheric air one person needed to breathe 
correctly. He detailed professions the population might do, and mapped the 
services they might need, such as marketplaces, schools and hospitals. He 
concluded that, among other things, the narrower the city’s streets, the more 
deaths occurred.

Cerdà's was the first meticulous scientific study both of what a modern city 
was, and what it could aspire to be

In short, Cerdà invented “urbanisation” – a word (and discipline) that didn’t 
exist in Spanish or Catalan, nor English or French, and which he codified in his
General Theory of Urbanisation in 1867 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/40113676?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents>. His work 
is still studied in Catalan schools to this day. “The high mortality rates of 
the working class population, and poor health and education conditions, pushed 
Cerdà to design a new type of urban planning,” wrote Pallarès-Barberà in a 
recent paper about the district.

Gardens in the centre of each street block; rich and poor accessing the same 
services; and smooth-flowing traffic were among his then revolutionary, even 
utopian-sounding ideas – many of which materialised to at least some extent 
(although not the central gardens).

Eixample remains a prominent part of Barcelona’s image today: the octagonal 
blocks 
<https://ednatravels.files.wordpress.com/2012/04/barcelona-looks-like-a-chessboard-from-above-1325754012-3904.jpg>
, chamfered in the corners, were his unique idea to deal with traffic, allowing 
drivers to see more easily what was happening to the left and right. Cars 
hadn’t even been invented yet – but when Cerdà discovered railways: “He 
realised there would be some sort of small machines moved by steam that each 
driver could stop in front of their house,” Permanyer explains. Even today, 
this design makes traffic circulation infinitely easier in Eixample.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb68fa139cd122ef713ed7f7839aec724f0f7114a%2F0_0_1677_1114%2F1677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2313%3A%20Barcelona's%20unloved%20planner%20invents%20science%20of%20'urbanisation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2313%3A%20Barcelona%27s%20unloved%20planner%20invents%20science%20of%20%27urbanisation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb68fa139cd122ef713ed7f7839aec724f0f7114a%2F0_0_1677_1114%2F1677.jpg>
 Plan of the Eixample development in Barcelona (1859), by Ildefons Cerdà. 
Illustration: Archives of the Kingdom of Aragon, Barcelona/Ministerio de 
Cultura/Ministerio de Cultura 
And yet, none of these ideas were well-received or appreciated in Barcelona at 
the time. In fact, when the council originally opened a public competition for 
the extension plan in 1859, it had awarded it to its chief architect, Antoni 
Rovira. But in an unexpected intervention, the Spanish government stepped in 
and, via the creation of a new ministry of public works (which suddenly ruled 
over city councils), imposed Cerdà in a sign of historical – and future – 
tensions between Spain’s central and Catalan administrations.

This would forever taint Cerdà’s legacy in the city. A well-travelled but 
little-known engineer when he began his career-defining project, he was 
immediately mistrusted by Barcelona’s architects, who were in the middle of a 
considerable rivalry with engineers. As it was impossible to oppose the rulings 
coming from Madrid, his opponents instead tried to discredit him ideologically 
and intellectually.

Leading architects such as Domènech i Montaner (designer of the city’s 
celebratedPalau de la Música 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palau_de_la_M%C3%BAsica_Catalana>) and Josep 
Puig i Cadafalch slashed and patronised the streets’ excessive width, the 
monotony of the grid, and the sameness of the “communist phalanstery-like 
squares”.

“He has been nibbling at and turning all the gardens ... and spaces destined 
to public buildings into the monotony of an American city, destined for a 
pretentious tribe without more aspirations than the agglomeration of houses to 
eat, drink and sleep,” wrote Cadafalch.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb92bc3beb447eb318b2563c6073dacfc9f959d46%2F0_407_2496_1497%2F2496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Story%20of%20cities%20%2313%3A%20Barcelona's%20unloved%20planner%20invents%20science%20of%20'urbanisation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Story%20of%20cities%20%2313%3A%20Barcelona%27s%20unloved%20planner%20invents%20science%20of%20%27urbanisation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fstory-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb92bc3beb447eb318b2563c6073dacfc9f959d46%2F0_407_2496_1497%2F2496.jpg>
 The Eixample district is characterised by its strict grid pattern and 
octagonal intersections. Photograph: DigitalGlobe/REX Shutterstock 
But if Barcelona’s rival architects turned their back on Cerdà, the 
bourgeoisie didn’t – at least not all of it. Some members were the first to 
benefit (and pay for) his new district, wherein affluent families experimented 
and commissioned architects such asAntoni Gaudí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi> to design their homes, 
turning them into beautiful, organic structures that evoked nature.

With this explosion of modernism, an unspoken urban competitiveness emerged. 
According to Permanyer, property owners and architects alike wanted to build 
“the biggest, tallest, most attractive house. This is why there’s such a rich 
diversity in architecture in the district – one that matches the anarchist 
touch of the local bourgeoisie”.

Cerdà had created a neighbourhood without class divisions where the population 
would be spread out equally

This drive to be different is illustrated by an anecdote Salvador Dalí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/dali> once told Permanyer. According 
to the artist, when asked how he wanted his house, a member of the bourgeoisie 
said: “I’m only asking for one thing: for it to be taller than my neighbour’s, 
so that I can piss on it!”

Cerdà’s plan, though, was a “liberation for everyone”, according to Permanyer. 
The engineer was a utopian socialist – and at the centre of his urbanism was a 
deep sense of equality and a populist ideology.

He had created a neighbourhood without class divisions where, both for 
ideological and public health reasons, the population would be spread out 
equally, and there wouldn’t be exclusive areas for the rich or poor. Over the 
following decades, Eixample grew with magnificent modernist buildings standing 
cheek by jowl with artisan homes demanding much cheaper rents.

Story of cities #14: London's Great Stink heralds a wonder of the industrial 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/04/story-cities-14-london-great-stink-river-thames-joseph-bazalgette-sewage-system>
Ramon Casas <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramon_Casas_i_Carb%C3%B3>, a 
painter who had grown up in a shadowy house in the old town, was one of the 
modernist artists who moved to this new district, and could often be seen 
strolling orriding a bike 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramon_Casas_and_Pere_Romeu_on_a_Tandem> on its 
streets with fellow cultural figures. His palette changed with the new 
luminosity that Eixample balconies let in – showing, with art, how a whole city 
was ready to look, and step, outside.

Barely cited in any urbanism books not written in Spanish or Catalan to this 
day, Cerdà finally began attracting praise from his compatriots, and even 
internationally, in the 1980s and 90s, when Catalan architects started revising 
history and recognising him – something that became “official” when the city 
hosted the 1992 Olympics.

These days, Barcelona is consistently praised as an urban success story. And 
its fortunes are inextricably linked to Cerdà’s work, which propelled it, in 
the words of Permanyer, “from a provincial town where it was difficult to live, 
to a truly modern city”.

Does your city have a little-known story that made a major impact on its 
development? Please share it in the comments below or on Twitter using 
#storyofcities
 