
Not everyone is as lucky as Kim Kardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> – only she can employ 
a supporting cast ofNorth and Saint West for her 2017 Instagram return 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BO0CReajH6Y/?taken-by=kimkardashian&hl=en> (you 
did leave enigmatically and abruptly last year, didn’t you? C’mon). But an 
update of a pose is as good as a January makeover, and all without any need to 
consume green juice orube 
<http://www.refinery29.uk/2016/09/123771/ube-instagram>. Ditch the teacup, the 
peace sign and the fish gape – here are the three Insta-poses to practically 
guarantee 4m likes with your next selfie.

The hair touch (the new peace sign)

Krismas 🎄 <https://www.instagram.com/p/BObVxSZhu4t/>

A photo posted by Kylie (@kyliejenner) on Dec 24, 2016 at 8:45pm PST



In the world of social media hair, a proper mane wins the 
#beckywiththegoodhair contest every time. And how to add an alpha humblebrag? 
Give that mane a bit of a tease in your selfie – Kylie Jenner and theHadids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2016/may/16/gigi-and-bella-hadid-the-sisters-taking-over-the-world>
 excel at this. Gigi calls it a “glam check” – ironic considering it is 
combined with a full face of makeup. Kardashian has already slayed this 
category – or at least her people have. Inher second Instagram post this year 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BO2gCpKD41-/?taken-by=kimkardashian&hl=en>, she is 
pictured with her youngest, Saint, who is dressed inVetements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vetements>-approved velour, running a 
flawlessly chubby hand through his mother’s hair. That’s Madonna and child, 
2017 style, right there.

The chin prop (the new fish gape)

❤️ <https://www.instagram.com/p/BJyaBMahhuU/>

A photo posted by Lily Aldridge (@lilyaldridge) on Aug 31, 2016 at 2:08pm PDT

Everyone knows that social media is no place for your real face. Hence the 
popularity of the fish gape 
<http://www.marieclaire.com/beauty/news/a16150/fish-gape-pose-trend/>, itself 
an update on duck face, all in the pursuit of the perfect 
I’m-not-pouting-honest caught-unawares expression. For 2017, however, lips are 
out. It’s all about bone structure. Enter, the chin prop. It looks pretty caj, 
but handily hides any under-chin flaws in the process.Taylor Swift 
<https://www.instagram.com/taylorswift/> is big on this, so is Rihanna 
<https://www.instagram.com/badgalriri/>, Lily Aldridge 
<https://www.instagram.com/lilyaldridge/> and Ashley Graham 
<https://www.instagram.com/theashleygraham/>. We can’t imagine any of them have 
IRL problems with neck wattle, but still. A bit of a prop from a spare 
manicured hand can’t be beat.


The thigh grab (the new teacup)

@asapferg: Feliz Ano Novo!!! O ano de brilhar!!!! 2017 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BOuBBpfDL1g/>

A photo posted by Hailey Baldwin (@allaboutbaldwin) on Jan 1, 2017 at 2:49am 
PST

The party selfie is where celeb-stagram and the red carpet meet. The teacup 
pose – hand on the hip, an awards-ceremony classic – is more than 10 years old, 
ie positively jurassic in social media terms. Ifthe raptor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/12/raptor-applause-the-new-red-carpet-pose>
 (a sort of graceful arms-out pose designed to make you look waifish) had a 
moment, the #strongnotskinny era we inhabit means something a bit more athletic 
is in order. The thigh grab – a bitStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/29/fashion-lessons-strictly-come-dancing-sequins-superheroes-tight-trousers>
, a lot “I’ve walked the Victoria Secret runway” – is now the only acceptable 
way to do a group selfie. See Bella Hadid, Kendall Jenner and friends onHailey 
Baldwin’s Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/p/BOuBBpfDL1g/>. Or Joan Smalls. 
Of course, if you’re Joan Smalls, you don’t need other people –you and your 
thigh <https://www.instagram.com/p/BOrtwophmyw/> is quite enough.
 