
The dumped Liberal minister Stuart Robert will stand again for the Gold Coast 
seat of Fadden at the next federal election.

Robert quit the Turnbull government frontbench after it was found he had 
breached ministerial standards on a 2014 trip to China.

Stuart Robert loses job as minister after China trip furore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
He has since come under fire after Department of Finance documents were 
released showing he claimed taxpayer funds to travel to the opening of a north
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> goldmine in 
which he and his family had bought shares.

The documents show Robert claimed for return flights from Brisbane to 
Townsville on 10 April 2013, the day he visited the $200m Mount Carlton mine of 
gold producer Evolution Mining.

Robert charged $1,091 for the flights from Brisbane to Townsville and return 
to Brisbane and chalked up Comcar limousine charges of $205 and a further $376 
travel allowance for a night in Brisbane before inspecting his private 
investment.

At the time he was the opposition spokesman for defence, science, technology 
and personnel, with no official role related to the mine, in which he had 
bought shares the previous year.

The MP has written to the finance department offering to voluntarily pay back 
the Townsville trip money, plus a penalty.

Robert had close ties with Paul Marks, one of Evolution Mining’s directors at 
the time, who had more than 6m shares in the company and is a Liberal party 
donor. His controversial trip to China also involved Marks.

Stuart Robert says he will pay back costs of trip to mine in which he had 
financial interest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/stuart-robert-may-be-investigated-over-trip-to-mine-in-which-he-had-financial-interest>
In an interview with the Gold Coast Bulletin 
<http://www.goldcoastbulletin.com.au/news/gold-coast/disgraced-mp-stuart-robert-apologises-for-error-of-judgment/news-story/2e1ecf93355839126f73cbb7663f9632>
, Robert said he was far from finished as a politician. He said he had no 
knowledge he owned shares in the goldmine and blamed an unnamed trustee for the 
error.

“What I said to the parliament, that I believe I acted appropriately, was true 
– I wasn’t aware of the share issue at all, it was the trustee,” Robert told 
the Bulletin. “However, I do understand and I do appreciate that merely turning 
up to an event like that was probably an error of judgment.”

The MP denied the information about the two trips had been leaked to the media 
by supporters of the former prime minister Tony Abbott.
 