
In just under three months, António Guterres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/antonio-guterres-next-un-secretary-general>
 will become theninth UN secretary general 
<https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/former-secretaries-general>, taking over 
from Ban Ki-moon. During Ban’s 10-year tenure, conflict has forcedrecord 
numbers of people to flee their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/20/one-in-every-113-people-uprooted-war-persecution-says-un-refugee-agency>
, while theUN’s overall spend has nearly doubled, to more than £42bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/what-has-the-un-achieved-united-nations>
. The UN security council has been heavily criticised for itsperceived failure 
to protect civilians in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/24/angelina-jolie-un-security-council-syria-refugees>
, and has been accused of a”gross failure” to address abuse allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/17/un-gross-failure-sexual-abuse-french-troops-central-african-republic>
 against its own peacekeepers. Yet there have also been significant 
achievements, notably the adoption of thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
.We asked students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/09/students-speak-ban-ki-moon-united-nations-secretary-general-your-verdict>
 to assess Ban’s decade as UN secretary general. Below is a selection of the 
best responses.

'We can be the first generation that ends poverty'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/10/first-generation-ends-poverty-ban-ki-moon-development-finance-addis-ababa>
He made the UN more inclusive

For me, Ban Ki-moon’s biggest accomplishments and legacy are his strengthening 
of thecivil society within the UN system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/07/un-to-recognise-gay-marriages-staffers>
, in particular of youth activists, LGBT advocates and women. Meaningful 
representation of young people, beyond the photo ops, still leaves much to be 
desired within the system. But during Ban’s term important steps were 
accomplished, such as establishing the position of theUN secretary general’s 
envoy on youth <http://www.un.org/youthenvoy/>, and security council resolution 
2250 <http://www.un.org/press/en/2015/sc12149.doc.htm> on youth, peace and 
security.

What impressed me the most was hearing Ban speak in his home country during the
66th UN Department of Public Information/NGO conference 
<http://outreach.un.org/ngorelations/conference/>, in Gyeongju in South Korea. 
He was not afraid to address controversial societal issues such as LGBT rights, 
which he said he wanted to be part of his legacy along with youth empowerment. 
While he might have had a tough time at first stepping out of the charismatic 
shadow of his predecessor, Kofi Annan, I am grateful for everything Ban has 
achieved in his quiet but decisive way. Through his approachability he has made 
the UN and its connected sphere more inclusive than I expected 10 years ago.

 * Sylvia Wittmer, Humboldt University, Berlin 
Business as usual on failing to protect civilians

Judging Ban Ki-moon’s legacy is a daunting task, not least because of the 
range of affairs his office was expected to tackle. Yet there is one metric by 
which we should measure his performance, because it forms the historical 
bedrock on which the UN was built –its response to the slaughter of innocent 
civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/un-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia>
.

While the UN could, and very likely should, be criticised for its lack of 
meaningful intervention in times of conflict (look no further than Syria today) 
it is perhaps even more shocking when this intervention fails to protect those 
who need it most. Former Lt GenRoméo Dallaire’s accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/romeo-dallaire-rwanda-united-nations>
 of the impotence of the UN mission he headed to halt the Rwandan genocide is 
shocking on its own. Yet, when placed in the context of themassacres at 
Srebrenica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1995/jul/12/warcrimes.balkans> 
and in Darfur, it becomes part of a gruesome pattern of systemic failure at the 
UN. It is a pattern that was sustained under Ban’s stewardship, emerging again 
in the war crimes in Sri Lanka, in theabuses by UN peacekeepers in Central 
African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/26/head-un-mission-central-african-republic-pledges-end-troop-abuses-minusca-parfait-onanga-anyanga>
, and in the re-emergence of hostilities only months ago inSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/un-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report>
.

Will Ban be remembered for this? It is hard to say. What is perhaps most 
disheartening is that, in this regard, his UN is virtually indistinguishable 
from Annan’s, from Boutros Boutros-Ghali’s. While the UN may have been under 
new management during Ban’s term as secretary general, it was certainly 
business as usual.

 * Eimhin O’Reilly, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland

Ban Ki-moon: ‘Close the gap between the world that is and the world that 
should be’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/09/ban-ki-moon-world-un-humanitarian-summit-conflict-leadership>
He promoted equal rights

Throughout Ban Ki-moon’s 10-year term, the South Korean has been subject to 
many criticisms. But there have also been a significant number of successes. 
While it is true that the UN has suffered in many aspects, in particular 
relating to its lack of involvement in the Syrian civil war, Ban has triumphed 
in areas such as his role as a supporter of LGBT rights (especially notable 
given South Korea’s less than welcoming stance on homosexuals). He has also 
presentedstrong opinions on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/12/last-generation-tackle-climate-change-un-international-community>
, an increasingly important problem. Perhaps the most important issue he has 
tackled is women’s rights. Gender equality has been a concern for decades and, 
once appointed as UN secretary general, Ban not only pioneered the creation of
UN Women <http://www.unwomen.org/en/about-us/about-un-women>, but also 
increased the number of women employed by the UN. This was a very important 
step in the quest for equal rights, not only throughout the world, but also 
within the UN itself. We cannot lay the blame for the organisation’s recent 
failures solely on one man, nor can we attribute to him all its 
accomplishments. We can, however, appreciate what he has done in trying to 
improve the world in which we live.


 * Sofia Srdanovic, gap-year student, UK  