
More than 7 million people in the UK are living in poverty despite being part 
of a working family, according to a study which uncovers how deprivation is 
increasingly linked to the high cost and insecurity of private rented 
accommodation.

The report, commissioned by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/> (JRF) also found that disability is increasingly 
linked to the changing nature of poverty. If the costs of disability are taken 
into account, half of those in poverty are either disabled or living with a 
disabled person.
Disability graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-06T18:20:43/embed.html>
Overall poverty levels have remained flat since 2010, in part because of a 
general economic recovery, according to the study carried out by theNew Policy 
Institute <http://npi.org.uk/>, which researches issues connected to poverty 
and housing.

However, it warns that much of this is down to steady economic growth. The JRF 
is urging the government to carefully monitor changes in poverty amid the 
repercussions of Brexit.

There were 13.5 million people living in households classified as poor in 
2014-15, defined as below 60% of the median once housing costs are deducted. 
This is 21% of the UK population, a proportion barely changed in more than a 
decade.

However, the report found, 55% of those in poverty are now in working 
households, a record high. This comprises a total of 7.4 million people – 1.1 
million more than in 2010-11 – among them 2.6 million children.
Working families graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-06T18:29:55/embed.html>
In contrast, there are 400,000 fewer pensioners in poverty from a decade ago, 
despite there being 1.7 million more people in that age bracket, the study, 
MonitoringPoverty <https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> and Social 
Exclusion 2016, reported.

A significant factor in these shifts, the study said, was the increased number 
ofpeople living in expensive and insecure private rental properties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jul/20/private-rental-sector-poverty-housing-joseph-rowntree>
, with the number of people in poverty in private lets doubling in a decade to 
4.5 million.


“Failures in the housing market are a significant driver of poverty,” the 
study said. “This is primarily, but not entirely, due to costs.”

The number of all rental eviction has risen by 60% over five years to 37,000 
annually, it said, with a particularly steep recent rise in private evictions. 
Over the same period mortgage repossessions have fallen from 23,000 to 3,300.

Among those in the bottom 20% of the income bracket who live in private rented 
homes, 73% pay more than a third of their income in rent, the report said, 
compared with 50% of social renters and 28% of owner occupiers who do so.


The number of private renters living in poverty has doubled over the past 
decade, the data showed, meaning there are now as many private renters in 
poverty as social renters.
Housing arrangements graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-06T18:29:34/embed.html>
Cuts to benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/02/nick-clegg-george-osborne-cut-welfare-poorest-boost-tory-popularity>
 were also identified as a factor in poverty. “Increasingly, the social 
security system does not cover the full cost of essentials for those on low 
incomes, such as rent and council tax,” the report said.

This was likely to get worse with the reduction in the overall benefit cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/03/reduced-benefit-cap-families-dwp>
, the authors said, with 112,000 families expected to experience a reduction in 
income because of the cap, up from the current 20,000.

The rent gap: what is the local housing allowance?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/dec/07/rent-gap-local-housing-allowance>
The report also found significant regional differences, with high rental costs 
seemingly playing a role in this. London and south-east England, where housing 
costs have risen in recent years, has the highest poverty rate at 27%, 6% above 
the UK average.

Any overall increase in poverty levels has been held off in part by record 
employment levels, the report noted, with the figure of 1.4 million children 
living in workless households being the lowest recorded.

But much more needed to be done, said Helen Barnard, the head of analysis at 
the JRF. “The UK economy is not working for low-income families,” she said. 
“The economy has been growing since 2010 but during this time high rents, low 
wages and cuts to working-age benefits mean that many families, including 
working households, have actually seen their risk of poverty grow.

“As it negotiates Brexit, it is vital that the government does not allow its 
focus to slip from the domestic concerns that make a huge difference to people 
who are just about managing. This report shows that people on low incomes 
cannot rely on economic growth and rising employment alone to improve their 
financial prospects.”

A spokeswoman for the Department for Work and Pensions said: “Since 2010, the 
number of people living in poverty has fallen by 300,000, but we know there’s 
more to do. We’re increasing the national living wage and taking millions of 
people out of income tax, to make sure it always pays to be in work.”

However, Debbie Abrahams, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said the 
report showed “the true impact of six wasted years of Tory austerity, with 7.4 
million people in poverty in working households”.

 She added: “This government has no plan to tackle stagnant wages and rising 
insecurity, choosing instead to make the poorest pay for their economic 
mismanagement.”
 