
In the context of the tweedy, mannered vibe of Chanel’s Paris show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/08/chanel-in-paris-lagerfeld-revisits-coco-fashion-week>
, singer Willow Smith’s appearance on the Frow was a stylistic U-turn. She was 
a vision of futuristic nowness: pierced septum, robed cape, electric-blue 
Egyptian eyeliner and a catsuit that, if civilian space programmes did fashion 
lines, would work nicely in Nasa’s collection for next season. She basically 
looked like a badass superhero. The announcement that the 15-year-old daughter 
of Will Smith would be thenew ambassador 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BCsmYzJPNjU/?hl=en> for the fashion house seemed 
like a cheeky, Largerfeld-like nod to the old maxim of “out with the old, in 
with the new, babes”.

It also made total sense. Like her brother Jaden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/05/jaden-smith-skirt-gender-stereotypes-louis-vuitton-ad>
, she has been nothing but fashion forward since shewhipped her hair  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ymKLymvwD2U>back and forth at the tender age 
of nine. Experimenting with pastel-pink and platinum hair colours and shades of 
eye shadows in aubergine, she has lived out a life under the spotlight like a 
refined aesthete. Instead of scandalising the web with her TMZ-ish exploits, 
she has done her teen metamorphosis thing with a subtle grace, expressing 
herself via herInstagram <https://www.instagram.com/gweelos/>: a thing of 
beauty that, frankly, should be in the running to win the Turner prize.

Announcing her new role with the hard-not-to-love hashtag #BLACKGIRLMAGIC 
<https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/blackgirlmagic/>, her appointment has 
also highlighted the continued steps toward a more diverse fashion industry. 
It’s a small but significant move forward.
 