
It’s tempting to imagine this richly hued mise-en-scene captioned with the 
words: “Mr Hiddleston and Ms Taylor Swift welcome you to their tasteful 
bedroom.” The text might then go on to say something like: “The dynamic power 
couple, shown here locking eyes after signing their nondisclosure agreement, 
are enjoying some time away from their busy careers, in their palatial Lake 
Como mansion.” But that would be cruel, and sadly an inventive bit of fan 
fiction,since Hiddleswift have apparently split 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/taylor-swift-tom-hiddleston-break-up-hiddleswift-song>
.


Instead, this photo is from the new Gucci Cruise 2017 men’s tailoring 
campaign. Hiddleston is shown wearing a pair ofslipper shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/12/boudoir-chic-change-in-fashion-slouchy-glamour-bed-relaxation-style>
, a bat-shaped bow tie and a suit cut with razor-sharp elegance. The star here, 
though, is the Afghan hound (Tom is always the bridesmaid, never the bride), 
the most elegant, showboaty of dog breeds, whose long-limbed, oval-shaped faces 
made them a fashion and advert favourite in the 70s. Which is perfect for 
Alessandro Michele, Gucci’s creative director, a man who has single-handedly 
changed the definition of vintage from “an old miniskirt that smells like moth 
balls and Werther’s Originals” to “something actually really cool”.

In that spirit, the location is the former home of Tony Duquette. A set 
designer for MGM in Hollywood’s golden age, Duquette made costumes for Fred 
Astaire and Vincent Minnelli films as well dressing the duke and duchess of 
Windsor. It’s all very new Gucci. Michele’s mother was an assistant to a movie 
executive and, as he told theNew Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/19/guccis-renaissance-man> this 
month: “I love Hollywood and cinema.”

As for Hiddleston, who always seems as if he’s been beamed into the modern 
world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/09/hiddleston-swift-t-shirt-slogans-make-feelings-loud-and-clear>
 by a malfunctioning teleporter, he looks entirely at home in his time-warped 
idyll.
 