
It was meant to be Kanye’s night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/kanye-west-new-album-the-life-of-pablo-launch>
 – what with simultaneously releasing a new album and a collection worn by 
models includingNaomi Campbell 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/fashion/naomi-campbell> and Veronica Webb. But, as 
he should know by now, when the Kardashian-Jenners are involved, upstaging 
comes as standard. See the backstage group shot on Thursday night of Kanye 
flanked by seven of the clan, plus Khloe’s ex, Lamar Odon. Sure, a mixture of 
dryclean-only ivory, diamonds and endangered-looking fur on Kim, Kourtney, 
Kendall, Kylie, Khloe, Kris andCaitlyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/02/caitlyn-jenner-vanity-fair-cover-kim-kardashian-unites-acceptance-transgender-issues>
 is a route-one way to rich people dressing, but it’s guaranteed to work. See 
also: Cruella de Vil, Zsa Zsa Gabor and Liberace.

And, when it is multiplied by seven of the most-watched celebrities of right 
now, all in custom-made designs created by both Kanye and Balmain’sOlivier 
Rousteing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/20/kardashian-couture-balmain-buzz-olivier-rousteing-fashion-social-media-star>
, the old-school combo of fur coat and diamonds looks totally alpha, totally 
2016 – and, with Khloe and Kris both wearing tonal spandex, totally Kardashian. 
Here’s the modern version of a Gainsborough family portrait, complete with 
symbols of wealth, including hip-hop mogul kneeling at their feet, ready to be 
beamed around the world.

Of course, that pose is a bit of a humblebrag. Kanye – as he would be the 
first to admit – is no fool. He masterminded being upstaged, in fact, 
co-designing those outfits, namechecking Rousteing in his speech and 
consciously downplaying his own look, with baseball cap, long-sleeve tee and 
jeans, so he looks more like a fan photobombing the picture than a 
multimillionaire creator of the best album in the world that we all know he is. 
The detail that gives the biggest clue he’s still in control? Kylie’sbeanie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/16/why-2015-is-the-year-of-the-pom-pom-beanie>
. The outfit might be pure Kardashian but that styling detail comes from the 
Kanye school of fashion.
 