
People in Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> are bracing 
themselves for price rises on goods and services following the government’s 
unexpected announcement that it will cut subsidies on fuel and electricity.

On Friday, petrol and diesel prices rose by almost 30% after a late-night 
pronouncement by the government indicated that subsidies would be partly 
removed. Electricity prices in Sudan are subject to progressive increases, 
depending on household consumption.


Where two Niles meet: a view of life in Sudan – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/feb/16/sudan-where-two-niles-meet-blue-white-khartoum-in-pictures>
 The subsidy withdrawals are having widespread knock-on effects on the prices 
of other goods and services dependent on fuel and electricity for production. 
Public transport costs have risen commensurately with fuel prices, while 
traders are preparing for price hikes across the board.

“The Sudanese people are finished,” said Mohammed Osman, a taxi driver in the 
capital, Khartoum. “All the prices are going up. Only God knows how we will 
survive this.”

The austerity measures are a bitter blow to the people of Sudan, who are 
already struggling to cope withdouble-digit inflation 
<https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2016/cr16324.pdf> and the effects of 
US sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/sudanundersanctions-young-people-describe-life-on-the-blacklist>
. The unpopular reforms also rekindle memories of thedeadly protests of 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/27/sudanese-protesters-attacked-march-fuel-subsidies>
, when thousands took to the streets to oppose similar price increases.

Over the past few days, security forces have confiscated the entire print run 
of several newspapers 
<https://www.alaraby.co.uk/english/news/2016/11/6/sudan-confiscates-opposition-newspapers-after-fuel-subsidies-cut-report>
 and arrested several members of the opposition who spoke out against the 
measures, in what many believe are efforts to contain public protests.

The subsidy cuts were announced as part of a programme designed to deal with 
the country’s widening fiscal deficit and deepening foreign currency crisis. 
With thesecession of South Sudan in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/10/south-sudan-celebrates-independence>
, the government lost most of its oil fields and its biggest source of 
government revenue and foreign exchange. Efforts to develop other industries, 
including gold mining, have failed to fill the void left by the lost 
petrodollars.

While the gradual discontinuation of subsidies is recommended 
<https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2016/cr16324.pdf> as part of a 
macroeconomic stabilisation package proposed by the International Monetary 
Fund, experts said the reforms were poorly implemented and failed to address 
the root causes of the crisis.

“The removal of subsidies is an economically sound move, but it should have 
been done in a different way,” said Abda al-Mahdi, an economist and former 
state minister of finance. “If you are going to implement austerity measures 
that will affect the average Sudanese person, you should have started with 
reducing your own spending.”

Alongside the subsidy cuts, the government announced it would raise salaries 
of government workers by 20%, a move that many believe will widen income 
disparity in a country wherehalf of the population 
<http://www.sd.undp.org/content/sudan/en/home/countryinfo.html> already lives 
below the poverty line.

Several opposition parties criticised the government for continuing to spend 
on its bloated security apparatus and bureaucracy, while failing to direct more 
funds towards much needed social services.

“They chose only to lift the subsidies, leaving other major items untouched – 
for example, the majority of the budget is still directed to the war,” said 
Omer al-Digair, chairman of the Sudanese Congress Party.

Al-Digair, whose party forms part of the broad opposition coalition Sudan 
Call, also condemned the timing of the austerity measures, which he said should 
have been implemented in coordination with opposition parties as part of an 
ongoing national dialogue aimed at bringing about political and economic change.

Sudan repression continues after Omar al-Bashir election win, says rights group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/29/sudan-repression-omar-al-bashir-presidential-election-human-rights-watch>
 Amid an ongoing crackdown by security forces on members of the opposition, 
Al-Digair was arrested <http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article60782> this 
week. More than 20 members of the Sudanese Congress Party have now been 
detained, according to a source within the party.

The government has not responded to repeated requests for comment.

Many fear that the subsidy cuts risk accelerating inflationary pressures and 
pushing the population deeper into poverty.

“You have to show the people that the subsidy will come back to them in the 
form of free education or health, but this hasn’t been done,” said Al-Mahdi.

In the absence of a comprehensive social safety net, the Sudanese will resort 
to their own coping strategies.

“People will reduce consumption of essential items and completely stop buying 
secondary goods, like yoghurt or soft drinks,” said Salah, a shopkeeper in a 
residential area of Khartoum, who didn’t want to give his full name for fear of 
being rounded up by security forces.

 “I can’t afford to miss a single day of work,” the 24-year-old explained. 
This is another reason why he won’t take to the street to protest against the 
subsidy cuts. Salah, who has no savings and must feed a family of eight, earns 
only about £200 a month.

Although small-scale demonstrations have been reported 
<http://sudantribune.com/spip.php?article60777> in several towns across Sudan, 
many Sudanese appear reluctant to risk their lives on the streets for something 
they feel powerless to change.
 