
Sudan’s answer to The Apprentice and Dragon’s Den, Mashrouy, is inspiring 
entrepreneurship among young people. Ideas pitched by contestants include a 
machine to minimise the dangers of mercury in gold extraction, software to 
detect breast tissue abnormalities andmanufacturing products using water 
hyacinths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/feb/16/sudan-mashrouy-competition-winner-water-hyacinths-enterprise-video>
. Meet some of the contestantsvying for the top prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/16/mashrouy-sudan-dragons-den-meets-the-apprentice-tv-show-young-ambition>
.



“I’ll put order in the big brothel that is congress,” says activist and sex 
worker Angela Villón, who is running in Peru’s elections in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/08/peru-sex-worker-angela-villon-campaign-trail-ill-put-order-in-the-big-brothel-that-is-congress>
. She hopes to fight trafficking and the sexual exploitation of underage girls, 
and says: “I earned a masters on the street, a doctorate of experience. No one 
needs to tell me what it’s like to be poor.”

Elsewhere on the site

 * Zika forest: birthplace of virus that has spread fear across the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/13/zika-uganda-world-most-dangerous-viruses-malaria>
 * Sex and the citizenry: the global laws that leave women in limbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/11/sex-citizenry-malaysian-law-women-children-limbo-nationality-citizenship>
 * European leaders told to keep aid for poor people, not hosting refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/16/european-leaders-aid-poor-people-hosting-refugees-security-poverty>
 * Magic, militias and rare redemption: reintegrating CAR’s child soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/12/magic-militias-and-rare-redemption-reintegrating-cars-child-soldiers>
 * Eight years on, Kenya still failing women raped in election violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/15/kenya-failing-women-raped-election-sexual-violence>
Opinion

What could possibly be wrong with promoting prosperit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/04/what-could-possibly-be-wrong-with-promoting-prosperity>
y, asks Jonathan Glennie. The UK is right to champion economic expansion in 
poor countries, he says, but there must be no return to the bad old days of 
growth first, development later.

From football to property and beyond, inequality is the mother of all crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/08/football-property-prices-beyond-inequality-mother-of-all-crises-tax-lilianne-ploumen>
, writes Lilianne Ploumen. Whether it’s a star player your club could never 
afford or a dream home you’ll never have, inequality touches us all.

Multimedia

For many survivors of last year’s devastating earthquake in Nepal, recovery 
has been frustratingly slow.Follow one family in rural Nepal from dusk to dawn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/feb/11/dusk-to-dawn-nepals-water-crisis-adds-heartache-to-earthquake-video>
 as they deal with the impacts of the quake.

Where two Niles meet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/feb/16/sudan-where-two-niles-meet-blue-white-khartoum-in-pictures>
: in Sudan’s bustling capital, Khartoum, which sits at the confluence of the 
Blue and White Niles, traders sell sim cards on the busy streets while herdsmen 
tend sheep nearby.


After nearly 40 years of on-off war in Afghanistan, mental illness is 
widespread, but facilities to help patients are few. We reveal life insideAlemi 
neuro-psychiatric hospital in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/feb/05/my-liver-is-bleeding-life-inside-an-afghan-psychiatric-hospital-in-pictures>
.

Ana Carolina Cáceres, from Brazil, was diagnosed with microcephaly at birth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/feb/09/living-with-microcephaly-drives-me-achieve-goals-brazil-video>
. Doctors said she might not even reach adulthood. Now 24, she has graduated 
from college and shares what life with the condition is like.

Take part

NGOs and civil society groups are under threat in parts of the world from 
moves by governments to interfere in campaigns and aid efforts. If you are 
affected, we’d like to hear from you.Fill out our form, anonymously if you 
wish, to help us cover this issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/15/are-you-affected-by-crackdowns-on-civil-society-in-your-country>
.

What you said

On ‘I paid the price, I own your son’: Indian brides fight back in anti-dowry 
films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/03/india-anti-dowry-films-i-paid-the-price-i-own-your-son-brides-fight-back#comment-67947182>
,spunatham wrote:

We need to go a long way towards completely eradicating dowry, even in 
so-called progressive urban households. Dowry is a complex issue that involves 
changing attitudes, implementing sex education in schools, and truly empowering 
women. Education is no doubt the first step towards this, and hopefully our 
government will go beyond these generic, but important, promotional aspects and 
implement the scheme with actual teeth in the form of a clear agenda and 
adequate resources.


Highlight from the blogosphere

Ban Ki-moon’s report on the world humanitarian summit is worth a read 
<http://www.odi.org/comment/10324-whs-world-humanitarian-summit-un-agenda-humanity>
, says the Overseas Development Institute.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>,@LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 