
At first, a social media campaign calling on Sudanese people to participate in 
a stay-at-home strike seemed doomed to fail: only aquarter 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.P2> of the population have 
access to the internet. And looking back at Sudan’s history, political 
mobilisation had occurred through unions, not social media. But, somehow, it 
worked.

On 27 November, the capital awoke to half-empty streets as many businesses and 
schools in Khartoumremained closed 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/11/strike-fuel-subsidies-quietens-khartoum-streets-161127162001189.html>
. Another stay-at-home strike, coupled with a boycott of government 
transactions, followedon 19 December 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-38364197>. By then, what had begun as a 
protest against subsidy cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/10/sudan-steeled-sharp-price-rises-state-cuts-fuel-electricity-subsidies>
 had morphed into a movement advocating for broader change.

Lack of money forces closure of 11 UN health clinics in Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/10/lack-of-money-forces-closure-of-11-un-united-nations-health-clinics-in-sudan>
Members of the ruling party denied 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/insidestory/2016/11/civil-disobedience-work-sudan-161130180708687.html>
 widespread participation in the civil disobedience campaign. But in a sign of 
growing unease, President Omar al-Bashirchallenged 
<http://www.africanews.com/2016/12/12/sudan-s-bashir-vows-to-crackdown-on-anti-government-protesters/>
 the activists “to come out on to the streets”, vowing that “this regime will 
not be overthrown by keyboards”. The government didn’t respond to the 
Guardian’s repeated requests for comment.

The civil disobedience campaign is the biggest show of public dissent since 
September 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/27/sudanese-protesters-attacked-march-fuel-subsidies>
, when security forces crushed street protests that some thought would force 
Bashir, who took power in a 1989 military coup, to step down.

“People went to the street, they protested – and they were killed,” said one 
young activist who helped to organise the demonstrations as part of a movement 
calledSudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> Change Now. “But the 
regime did not fall. To me, it was a shock,” added the activist, who didn’t 
want to be named for fear of being targeted.

According to rights groups 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/press-releases/2013/10/sudan-escalates-mass-arrests-activists-amid-protest-crackdown/>
, 200 people died when security forces opened fire on demonstrators (the 
governmentput the death toll at around 80 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article48705>), while hundreds of 
dissidents were reportedly arrested.

With fear of a repeat of the 2013 violence still hanging over the capital, 
activists say the non-confrontational nature of the campaign was key in drawing 
widespread support.

“You will not be arrested for posting on social media,” said Amna Osman, 23, a 
psychology student and one of many political activists who quickly latched on 
to the social media campaign. Osman was among those detained in September 2013.

The call for civil disobedience came just weeks after the official conclusion 
of a government-led national dialogue, highlighting public disenchantment with 
a process that promised far-reaching reforms in the aftermath of the 2013 
protests, but failed to bring about genuine change.

A final document summarising the outcome of the dialogue, produced in October 
and seen by the Guardian, outlined a series of recommendations and 
constitutional amendments to be implemented by a new government that 
incorporates other parties.

But even as the ruling National Congress Party (NCP) declared 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article60479> the successful completion 
of the dialogue, security forces continued to tighten their grip on the media 
and the opposition.

More than 20 members of the Sudanese Congress party were arrested in November 
<http://www.acjps.org/17-members-of-the-political-opposition-sudanese-congress-party-scp-currently-detained-incommunicado/>
. The same month, at leastfour independent newspapers 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article60979> had one or more of their 
editions confiscated, while the independent Al-Tayar newspaper was shut down 
for three days in December.

Most of Sudan’s major opposition parties boycotted the dialogue, claiming the 
ruling party wasn’t willing to make genuine concessions, such as curtailing the 
power of the presidency and the sprawling national security apparatus.

Crowdfunding medicine via Facebook is a lifesaver for sick children in Sudan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/12/crowdfunding-medicine-via-facebook-is-a-lifesaver-for-sick-children-in-sudan>
“What we are getting is more of the same,” said Ghazi Salahuddin Atabani, who 
leads the Reform Now Movement, an opposition party that has been part of the 
national dialogue. “We will see the same bloated kind of government, intended 
not to deliver goods to the people, but to incorporate as many parties as 
possible under the wing of the NCP.” He said every request by his party to hold 
a political rally had been denied in 2016.

In light of the narrowing political space, many say civil disobedience is the 
only viable channel through which to demand change. However, despite the 
initial success of social media in mobilising some segments of society, 
activists fear the movement could soon fizzle out.

“There cannot be a hashtag revolution in Sudan,” said Mohammed Naji, a young 
doctor and activist in Khartoum. “If there is no clear plan for the people, by 
a body they know, organising them and leading them to change, I doubt that this 
movement will continue.”

In weighing the campaign’s chances of success, Naji points to Sudan’s 1964 and 
1985 revolutions, when professional and student unions took the lead in 
rallying the population to demand regime change. Back then, unions wielded vast 
influence over society, organising shutdowns and public demonstrations that 
paralysed the country, eventually prompting the military to step in and call 
for fresh elections.

When Bashir took power in 1989, the unions were dismantled or placed under the 
control of the ruling party, smothering what was once a vibrant civil society.

“The regime [knows] that if there is danger for them, it will be from the 
professional organisations because history says that,” said Naji.

Yet there are signs that professional sectors are beginning to organise again, 
albeit in an informal way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fsudan-social-media-drive-for-civil-dissent-boosts-hopes-of-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd8fada7dbce72350206b9ada284a513eab48645%2F0_193_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sudan's%20social%20media%20campaign%20of%20civil%20dissent%20boosts%20hopes%20of%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fsudan-social-media-drive-for-civil-dissent-boosts-hopes-of-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sudan%27s%20social%20media%20campaign%20of%20civil%20dissent%20boosts%20hopes%20of%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fsudan-social-media-drive-for-civil-dissent-boosts-hopes-of-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd8fada7dbce72350206b9ada284a513eab48645%2F0_193_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
 President Omar al-Bashir attends the new legislative session at the parliament 
in Khartoum in October 2016. Photograph: Ebrahim Hamid/Anadolu/Getty Images 
Recently, Naji helped to mobilise doctors across Sudan to demand more 
resources for the public healthcare sector. Using social media, the Central 
Committee for Doctors organised a series of strikes in October and November. 
More than 100 doctors were reportedly arrested, but eventually the government 
released the detainees and agreed to address their grievances. The doctors’ 
initiative prompted other professionals to follow suit and served as a catalyst 
for the 27 November call for civil disobedience.

“We saw it as a victory,” said Naji. But much more would need to be done to 
bring about meaningful change, not least mobilising Sudan’s rural population 
and uniting Sudan’s disjointed opposition to build a political platform for the 
way forward. Only then, Naji believes, would people be willing to take to the 
streets once again.

 “If we get to the street without organisation, without having a clear plan, I 
think we will lose,” said Naji at the end of 2016. “We have been patient for 27 
years. We can be patient for a few more months.”

• Simona Foltyn’s reporting from Sudan was funded by The Investigative Fund at 
the Nation Institute <http://www.theinvestigativefund.org/>
 