
I don’t remember a time we didn’t have video games in the house.

I grew up in Gregory, Michigan, a small town in the middle of nowhere; a town 
that literally borders Hell. That’s Hell, Michigan. I wish I was kidding. My 
dad was a second shift supervisor at a General Motors plant in Detroit. He 
always wanted to have the latest expensive things; we owned an early home PC 
and he’d bring home these floppy discs filled with games – they would trade 
them around at his office. My mom worked as a secretary and later a substitute 
teacher and a city postal carrier – she learned how to program at college. She 
made sure we all had access to the computer, even though my sister and I were 
super little and there were six of us fighting to use it.

We owned an Atari when I was a toddler and a Nintendo Entertainment System by 
the time I was six. I had four older brothers – the eldest a decade older than 
me – so I didn’t get to touch the consoles much. But that all changed when we 
got a SuperNintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> 
Entertainment System in 1992.

After the prototype PlayStation: six more obscure games consoles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/07/prototype-nintendo-playstation-obscure-games-consoles-snes-cd>
We were given it for Christmas right before my 11th birthday. By that time, my 
two oldest brothers had moved out and then the third brother got a summer job. 
This left me in the position of second player to my youngest brother. The Snes 
was purchased for him (of all the girls I was friends with in late elementary 
and early middle school, none of them had a console in the house unless they 
also had a brother) but this time, by default, it was for me too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsuper-nintendo-and-me-growing-up-recession-and-role-playing-adventures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59823ccb12aff64919b2395ea0c7cd62850bfbff%2F0_122_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Super%20Nintendo%20and%20me%3A%20growing%20up%2C%20recession%20and%20role-playing%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsuper-nintendo-and-me-growing-up-recession-and-role-playing-adventures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Super%20Nintendo%20and%20me%3A%20growing%20up%2C%20recession%20and%20role-playing%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsuper-nintendo-and-me-growing-up-recession-and-role-playing-adventures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59823ccb12aff64919b2395ea0c7cd62850bfbff%2F0_122_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 A child playing Donkey Kong Country on the American version of the Super 
Nintendo Entertainment System. Photograph: Alamy 
I was at the right age for it. Born in 1981, I fell through the cracks of the 
big generational distinctions. I am not Gen X, I am not a millennial. I am the 
Goonies and Sixteen Candles and The Breakfast Club and The Gremlins and Back to 
the Future. I grew up with a rotary phone, a VCR, the very first CD player, the 
first DVD player. My introduction to the internet was in a physical science 
class in 1994, trying to send an email to a university about some chemistry 
term. This was the era of Telnet and dial-up. It was the tipping point into the 
digital age.

The Snes sat right in that weird middle ground between the past and the 
future. It couldn’t easily handle 3D graphics like later consoles, but the 
pixel art worlds envisaged at the time contained the same sprawling stories and 
immersive experiences that modern games are built around.

We’d never before had so much control over a story as we did in on that 
console with its grand role-playing adventures. We’d played simple arcade games 
on the Atari, but they were generally too hard for younger kids; the games on 
the Nes were nearly impossible for us too. But by the time the Snes came along, 
we were old enough and confident enough to go all in – and we could experience 
them with our friends. The games finally had proper save functions too, 
allowing us to store progress without having to write down a special code, 
which was how it worked with the Nes (and it wasn’t easy for a kid who could 
barely write).

So in the summer of 1993, my brother, sister and I saved up every cent of our 
raspberry-picking money to buy Secret of Mana, the new role-playing game from 
Squaresoft, creator of the legendary Final Fantasy series. It was, like, $60, 
which was a fortune for a bunch of kids at the time. I remember opening the 
package after setting up the Snes on the “big TV” in the family room, which was 
usually forbidden by my parents. We studied the game manual together and then 
we started our epic journey. My brother played as the Mana Sword hero and I 
played as Purim, a young girl determined to rescue her boyfriend Dyluck from a 
witch, and Gnome, a powerful earth spirit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsuper-nintendo-and-me-growing-up-recession-and-role-playing-adventures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f844c016549293d1dc119f802fdd81df5ce922%2F71_48_664_398%2F664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Super%20Nintendo%20and%20me%3A%20growing%20up%2C%20recession%20and%20role-playing%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsuper-nintendo-and-me-growing-up-recession-and-role-playing-adventures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Super%20Nintendo%20and%20me%3A%20growing%20up%2C%20recession%20and%20role-playing%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsuper-nintendo-and-me-growing-up-recession-and-role-playing-adventures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f844c016549293d1dc119f802fdd81df5ce922%2F71_48_664_398%2F664.jpg>
 Secret of Mana was one of the great Snes role-playing adventures. It was 
ported to smartphones in 2014 Photograph: Nintendo 
We spent every second we could playing that game. We played it until we beat 
it, and then we started again. It was the first time we had ever been sucked 
into a world that took us far away from our own. If we’d had access to the 
early online fan fiction community (where people wrote and shared their own 
stories based around games, movies and TV shows) or if there had been something 
like Pottermore for Secret of Mana – we would have spent the rest of our waking 
hours interacting there. We had never seen anything like this game; we cared 
about the characters, they were real people to us, and we needed to bring 
stability and peace to their sad world.

It feels weird to describe this simple, pixelated landscape in the same way 
someone would describe a hyper realistic endlessly exploratory game environment 
from today. But in 1993, this place, where I fought monsters in real time with 
my brother, where we got to save a world while flying on a dragon – it was like 
I was really there and my actions mattered. When Dyluck was taken by the witch, 
when the town of Pandora was struck mute, even when I had to save Santa – which 
is REALLY a thing in the game – everything mattered.

What was going on culturally and historically in the years before this? The 
Berlin wall came down. The first Gulf War had just ended. I grew up with 
nuclear bomb drills, the red scare, the end of the cold war. My parents lived 
through the recession in the 1980s … and then here was the VERY FIRST real 
digital escapism for children where they were in control of a world that needed 
saving. Secret of Mana and the games like it were products of the culture we 
lived in. They were a mirror to the joy and terror we experienced as we grew 
older. There are parallels to the types of media kids are gravitating toward 
today – video games fill a need for us all.

With their elaborate stories, multi-gendered characters, astonishing musical 
scores, and countless hours of gameplay, the Super Nintendo role-playing games 
certainly reflected a need in me. I was a 12-year-old girl from the Midwest, 
feeling, but not understanding, the effects of the auto industry collapsing in 
Detroit, the economic uncertainty of my parents and friends’ parents, the 
shrinking of the world through satellite TV and globalisation. Yet with Secret 
of Mana, I had this one place where I was in control.

Even now, many years later, I feel all of these things when I turn on that 
game. I am transported back to the summer of 1993, when I got to know my 
brother and sister so well. The world feels just as real, even though I am 
looking at it through adult eyes – eyes that have witnessed the first school 
shootings, the homegrown terrorist attacks in Oklahoma City, the bombings and 
destruction of the World Trade Center, the wars that claimed the lives of kids 
I grew up with, the illness and death of friends and family.

My brother, sister and I still play Secret of Mana together when we are all in 
one place. It is much harder now that we are parents ourselves, living at 
opposite ends of the country. Our current playthrough has taken years instead 
of a few hours – 10 years to be exact. But we will complete it.

And that story – about a child who must save the world with nothing but his 
sword and his friends – still speaks to the kid inside of me.

Rebekah Saltsman is cofounder of indie studio Finji. She is currently working 
onOverland <http://overland-game.com/> and Night in the Woods 
<http://www.nightinthewoods.com/>.
 