
The Coalition has announced significant changes 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/Policy-Topics/SuperannuationAndRetirement/Superannuation-Reforms>
 to its superannuation policy, ending aninternal fight between moderates and 
conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/22/superannuation-changes-turnbull-ponders-next-step-amid-backbench-threats>
.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, said the changes 
should address every qualm Labor had with the package, so there was no reason 
it shouldn’t pass parliament.

The Liberal senator Eric Abetz said the reformed package was “a win for 
principle and common sense”.

Labor forces inquiry into George Brandis's actions after legal advice row – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/sep/15/pauline-hansons-speech-draws-cross-party-criticism-politics-live>
The changes to the package will save the budget $180m over four years, and 
$670m over 10 years.

The government will no longer introduce a lifetime non-concessional 
contributions cap of $500,000, backdated to 2007. Instead, it will allow people 
to make annual non-concessional contributions worth up to $100,000 until their 
super balance reaches $1.6m.

People under 65 will still be able to “bring forward” three years’ worth of 
non-concessional contributions in recognition of the fact that such 
contributions are often made in lump sums. The vast bulk of lump sum payments 
are typically less than $200,000, the government says.

Individuals with a super balance of more than $1.6m will no longer be eligible 
to make non-concessional (after tax) contributions from 1 July 2017. This limit 
will be tied and indexed to the transfer balance cap.

“These measures mean that with their annual concessional contributions, 
Australians will be able to contribute $125,000 each year and, if taking 
advantage of the non-concessional “bring forward,” up to $325,000 in any one 
year until such times as they reach $1.6m,” Morrison said.

The government’s decision to replace the lifetime $500,000 non-concessional 
cap with a reduced annual cap will cost the budget $400m over four years, and 
$2.2bn over 10.

To fully offset the cost of the total changes, the government says it can no 
longer proceed with the harmonisation of contribution rules for people aged 65 
to 74.

“While the government remains supportive of the increase flexibility delivered 
by this measure, it can no longer be supported as part of this package, without 
a net cost to the budget,” Morrison said.

People aged 65 to 74 who satisfy the work test will still be able to make 
additional contributions to their super accounts.

The start date for the government’s proposed catch-up concessional super 
contributions will be deferred by 12 months to 1 July 2018, providing a saving 
over the forward estimates of $400m.

“Labor has no excuse whatsoever not to immediately … subject to their normal 
process, support this,” Morrison said. “It removes every impediment that Labor 
mentioned.”

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, said the government had 
backflipped on its policy, given it had promised before the election that the 
package was ironclad.

Labor would would not just wave it through but would take its time to 
scrutinise the package, he added.

The Institute of Public Affairs, a free market thinktank that led the charge 
against the government’s original super package, is still critical of the 
policy.

“The Turnbull government should be congratulated for dumping its retrospective 
and unworkable $500,000 lifetime non-concessional contributions cap,” Brett 
Hogan, the IPA’s director of research, said.

 “However, limits on what can be transferred into a retirement account remain, 
as does the proposed objective that superannuation exists only to ‘substitute 
or supplement the age pension.’

 “Overall, the Turnbull government’s superannuation policy remains 
ill-thought-out, and built on a platform of higher taxes,” he said.

Industry Super Australia has welcomed the compromise package, saying it will 
impede high wealth individuals from contributing extremely large amounts into 
super to take advantage of the low or no tax environment.

“These are evolutionary, not revolutionary changes,” David Whiteley, chief 
executive of Industry Super Australia, said.

Coalition and Labor 'largely agree' on superannuation changes, says thinktank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/04/coalition-and-labor-largely-agree-on-superannuation-changes-says-thinktank>
“We would hope all MPs will now give careful consideration to these changes so 
the reforms can start to make their way through the parliament.”

George Christensen, the federal member for Dawson and conservative 
backbencher, said he was very happy with the reformed package.

“The changes that have been made completely remove any concern that I had 
about the superannuation reform package,” he said.

“The doing away of the $500,000 non-concessional lifetime cap goes even 
further that than I would have thought. I would have been happy with a $1m 
non-concessional cap.

“Doing away with it is one step better, I suppose that does away also with all 
the retrospectivity concerns that people had.”
 