
SuperGroup is making Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba>, The Wire actor, the face of a 
new premium range of clothing, following a difficult few months.

Unveiling a new strategy, the company behind the fashion brand Superdry said 
the star of Luther would be designing the new line alongside the brand’s 
founder and design director, James Holder.

The premium range will be available online and in shops from autumn/winter 
2015 when the chief executive, Euan Sutherland, said he hoped Elba’s profile 
would help relaunch the Superdry brand in the US, where it had a difficult 
start.



Sutherland said Superdry still appealed to the 18- to 24-year-old market but 
many shoppers had “grown up with the brand” and Elba, 42, would appeal to that 
older generation as well.

“He epitomises what we are: British, grounded and cool,” said Sutherland, the 
former boss of the Co-operative Group.

SuperGroup <https://www.theguardian.com/business/supergroup> has bought back 
exclusive rights to distribute the Superdry brand in the US, Canada and Mexico 
for £22.3m, ending a 30-year licence deal with a US partner. The business 
currently has just 15 stores and last year made a £5m loss on £20m of sales.

“Idris Elba is a big man in the US and he will automatically reposition 
Superdry in people’s minds,” said Sutherland. The company hoped to eradicate 
losses in the US subsidiary over the next two years, he said, potentially 
closing a few unprofitable stores, before opening new ones and increasing 
online sales.

Sutherland said SuperGroup was now looking forward to “sustainable long-term 
growth” after a period of what he called “unfortunate announcements” in which 
it was forced to issue a profit warning and lost two key staff members.

The company surprised the City last month by revealing that its finance chief, 
Shaun Wills, had been forced to quit after being declared bankrupt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/25/supergroup-finance-director-quits-after-bankrupcty>
.

It was the second senior departure in a fortnight, after the company announced 
on 12 February that itschief operating officer, Susanne Given, was leaving 
immediately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/feb/12/supergroup-chief-operating-officer-in-unexpected-departure>
 to “explore other opportunities”.

Shares in SuperGroup rose 6% to 991p as it promised to start handing cash to 
shareholders, with an interim dividend in its next financial year. The company 
also confirmed that it expects to meet its full-year profit target of £60-£65m.

The brand, known for its heavily logoed T-shirts, expects to open a handful 
more stores in the UK and will focus on expanding in mainland Europe in the 
year ahead. Eleven more stores will open in Germany, taking the total to 30, 
and the company is also looking to expand in Austria, Poland, Spain and Italy 
in the next five years.

The company has appointed Penny Hughes as a nonexecutive director. Hughes, 
currently a nonexecutive director of Morrisons and Royal Bank of Scotland, will 
start on 1 April.
 