
In the latest attempt from a big city to move away from car hegemony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/09/car-free-city-oslo-helsinki-copenhagen>
, Barcelona has ambitious plans. Currently faced with excessive pollution and 
noise levels, the city has come up witha new mobility plan 
<http://mobilitat.ajuntament.barcelona.cat/en/> to reduce traffic by 21%. And 
it comes with something extra: freeing up nearly 60% of streets currently used 
by cars to turn them into so-called “citizen spaces”. The plan is based around 
the idea ofsuperilles (superblocks) – mini neighbourhoods around which traffic 
will flow, and in which spaces will be repurposed to “fill our city with life”, 
as its tagline says.

This plan will start in the famous gridded neighbourhood of Eixample. That 
revolutionary design,engineered by Ildefons Cerdà in the late 19th century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/01/story-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation>
, had at its core the idea that the city should breathe and – for both 
ideological and public health reasons – planned for the population to be spread 
out equally, as well as providing green spaces within each block. Reality and 
urban development have, however, got the best of it, and as the grid lines 
became choked with cars, the city’s pollution and noise levels have 
skyrocketed. What was once a design to make Barcelona healthier, now has to be 
dramatically rethought for the same reasons.

Story of cities #13: Barcelona's unloved planner invents science of 
'urbanisation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/01/story-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation>
According to several studies, air pollution alone causes 3,500 premature 
deaths a year 
<http://www.scielosp.org/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0213-91112009000400006>
 in Barcelona’s metropolitan area (with a population of 3.2 million), as well 
as having severe effects on local ecosystems and agriculture. Barcelona and the 
35 municipalities in its surrounding area have persistently failed to meet 
EU-established air quality targets.

A study from the local Environmental Epidemiology Agency 
<http://elpais.com/diario/2007/09/20/catalunya/1190250452_850215.html> 
determined that 1,200 deaths could be prevented in the city yearly just by 
reaching EU-mandated levels for nitrogen dioxide levels (this would mean a 
five-month rise in life expectancy). Add to that an estimated 18,700 fewer 
asthma attacks, 12,100 fewer cases of acute bronchitis and 600 fewer 
cardiovascular-related hospitalisations, and the problem becomes apparent for a 
city with a population of 1.6 million. Traffic is also the first cause for 
noise pollution in the city; 61% of its residents live with noise levels higher 
than those deemed healthy by legislation.

The council also cites road accidents (9,095 last year, 27 of which were fatal 
<http://news.newsdirectory2.com/increase-traffic-accidents-in-the-city-of-barcelona-in-2015-but-down-more-severe-accidents/>
), sedentary lifestyles (one in five kids in Barcelona are overweight or at 
risk of reaching that state), and the lack of green spaces as reasons driving 
the plan. The city has only 6.6 sq metres of green space per inhabitant (with 
the figures standing at just 1.85 in Eixample and 3.15 in Gràcia), closer to 
Tokyo’s three than to London’s 27, or Amsterdam’s staggering 87.5. The World 
Health Organisation suggests every city should have at least 9 sq metres per 
capita.

Barcelona’s new plan consists of creating big superilles through a series of 
gradual interventions that will repurpose existing infrastructure, starting 
with traffic management through to changing road signs and bus routes. 
Superblocks will be smaller than neighbourhoods, but bigger than actual blocks. 
This will first be applied toEixample neighbourhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/01/story-cities-13-eixample-barcelona-ildefons-cerda-planner-urbanisation>
 and others like Sant Martí, which largely follows the same grid pattern.

In Eixample, a superblock will consist of nine existing blocks of the grid. 
Car, scooter, lorry and bus traffic will then be restricted to just the roads 
in the superblock perimeters, and they will only be allowed in the streets in 
between if they are residents or providing local businesses, and at a greatly 
reduced speed of 10km/h (typically the speed limit across the city is 50km/h, 
and 30km/h in specific areas).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsuperblocks-rescue-barcelona-spain-plan-give-streets-back-residents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab836414cd9f9c59e01705167f4324b31e8d3f6c%2F594_856_8684_4648%2F8684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Superblocks%20to%20the%20rescue%3A%20Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20plan%20to%20give%20streets%20back%20to%20residents&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsuperblocks-rescue-barcelona-spain-plan-give-streets-back-residents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Superblocks%20to%20the%20rescue%3A%20Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20plan%20to%20give%20streets%20back%20to%20residents&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsuperblocks-rescue-barcelona-spain-plan-give-streets-back-residents%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab836414cd9f9c59e01705167f4324b31e8d3f6c%2F594_856_8684_4648%2F8684.jpg>
 Black routes allow public transport and cars at 50km/h, while green routes 
only allow private vehicles at 10km/h to prioritise pedestrians and cycling. 
Illustration: BCNecologia 
The objectives are ambitious; by implementing these strategies at once, the 
city wants to reduce car use by 21% over the next two years and increase 
mobility by foot, bike and public transport. Superblocks will be complemented 
by the introduction of 300km of new cycling lanes (there are currently around 
100km), as well as an orthogonal bus network that has already been put in 
place, whereby buses only navigate a series of main thoroughfares. This will 
ensure, says Salvador Rueda, director of the city’s urban ecology agency and 
one of the drivers of the superblocks idea, that “anyone will be less than 300 
metres from a bus stop at any time – and average waiting times will be of five 
minutes anywhere in the city [current averages stand at 14]”. In addition, “it 
would be an equitable network in which one could go from any point A to point B 
with just one transfer in 95% of the cases. Like in a game of Battleship”.

Our objective is for Barcelona to be a city in which to live
Janet Sanz 
“It’s no surprise that this concept was born here,” said mobility city 
councillor Mercedes Vidal in the public presentation of the plan this month. 
“In a city as dense as ours, it’s all the more necessary to re-conquer spaces.” 
If all goes as planned, around seven of the 13.8 million sq metres now 
dedicated to motorised traffic will be freed up.

Private vehicles account for just 20% of total movements in the city today and 
yet they occupy 60% of roads. “We need to win the street back,” says Janet 
Sanz, city councillor for ecology, urbanism and mobility, who emphasised the 
need to encourage social cohesion, coexistence and human exchanges. Recently,
she remembered <https://twitter.com/janetsanz/status/727778445053276160> the 
spirit ofJane Jacobs and her activism for the right to the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/04/jane-jacobs-100th-birthday-saskia-sassen>
 on the 100th anniversary of the writer and urbanist’s birth: “She proposed 
giving the street back to the neighbours. Today we work for that objective.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsuperblocks-rescue-barcelona-spain-plan-give-streets-back-residents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa77097a309d4ff398378e43487957ec8f81737c%2F0_117_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Superblocks%20to%20the%20rescue%3A%20Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20plan%20to%20give%20streets%20back%20to%20residents&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsuperblocks-rescue-barcelona-spain-plan-give-streets-back-residents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Superblocks%20to%20the%20rescue%3A%20Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20plan%20to%20give%20streets%20back%20to%20residents&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsuperblocks-rescue-barcelona-spain-plan-give-streets-back-residents%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa77097a309d4ff398378e43487957ec8f81737c%2F0_117_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 A pedestrian-friendly street in the Gràcia neighbourhood. Photograph: 
BCNecologia 
“This plan sums up the essence of urban ecology,” Sanz adds. “Our objective is 
for Barcelona to be a city in which to live. Also, as a Mediterranean city, its 
residents spend a long time on the streets – those streets need to be second 
homes, or extensions of one’s residence, at all times … Public spaces need to 
be spaces to play, where green is not an anecdote – where the neighbourhood’s 
history and local life have a presence.”

“We want these public spaces to be areas where one can exercise all citizen 
rights: exchange, expression and participation, culture and knowledge, the 
right to leisure,” Rueda says.

The entire process is being conducted in nine areas at a different pace, 
through what Sanz called “tactical urbanism” – a gradual trial and error method 
of sorts, with initial measures such as changing road signs – and with an 
initial budget of €10m (£7.9m). Now it is time to “go from theory to action”, 
she says.

The superblocks idea was first outlined in 1987, after noise mapping revealed 
that levels were too high, and the first superblock was tested in 2003 in 
Gràcia. Many experiments, like car-free days, have also been conducted in 
districts like Sant Martí, which will act as the main guinea pig for 
superblocks. Its city councillor, Josep Maria Montaner, says it has been done 
in close consultation with groups of neighbours “and it will continue to be so. 
Neighbours need to experiment it and try the new spaces, little by little – and 
we hope many of the ideas for how to use them will come from them”.

End of the car age: how cities are outgrowing the automobile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
Rueda says superblocks go back to Cerdà’s philosophy and take it to the next 
level, to the modern world, by making it live with and for the ecosystem. “We 
have, as a base [for the plan], Cerdà’s Eixample, which was undermined by 
greed. What was green in the plan was slowly overtaken and built on. And then, 
when cars arrived, they slowly overtook more and more space ... We want to 
reclaim those green spaces and that can only be done through a drastic mobility 
change.”

An Eixample superblock of about 400 x 400 metres, Rueda says, would be 
inhabited by between 5,000 and 6,000 people. That is “the same as many small 
towns. Everything we need to consider to face the challenges of this turn of a 
century – construction, economy, water, residues, metabolisms, social cohesion 
– should be captured in these superblocks.”

“Every superblock is like a small city with its own character,” the plan 
suggests. “Imagine what could be done. An Eixample intersection is as big as a 
Gràcia square,” says Rueda, and he highlights that this new city structure will 
free up 160 intersections. “I’m already fantasising with 
neighbourhood-organised inflatable swimming pools in the summer,” he jokes.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

Guardian Cities is a member of the Habitat III Journalism Project. Read more 
about the project here <http://citiscope.org/journalism-project>



 