
More than 70% of migrants travelling overland through north Africa to Europe 
have become victims of human trafficking, organ trafficking and exploitation 
along the way, according to the UN’sInternational Organisation for Migration 
(IOM). <http://unitedkingdom.iom.int/>

The IOM’s surveys of migrants arriving in Europe by boat reveal that nearly 
three-quarters of those interviewed show strong indicators of having been 
trafficked or exploited for profit by criminals at some point on their journey.

Nearly half of all those questioned (49%) reported being held in a location 
against their will, often for ransom. The majority of these cases occurred in 
Libya.

Half of migrants said they had worked without pay, with many being threatened 
with weapons by an employer or labour broker. Others said that forced labour 
was the only way of being freed from captivity or securing a place on a boat to 
Europe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Ffreeing-girls-trafficked-to-italy-for-sex-from-nigeria-you-will-not-be-a-slave-for-ever-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freeing%20girls%20trafficked%20to%20Italy%20for%20sex%3A%20'You%20will%20not%20be%20a%20slave%20for%20ever'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Ffreeing-girls-trafficked-to-italy-for-sex-from-nigeria-you-will-not-be-a-slave-for-ever-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freeing%20girls%20trafficked%20to%20Italy%20for%20sex%3A%20%27You%20will%20not%20be%20a%20slave%20for%20ever%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Ffreeing-girls-trafficked-to-italy-for-sex-from-nigeria-you-will-not-be-a-slave-for-ever-video&media=>
Freeing girls trafficked to Italy for sex: ‘You will not be a slave for ever’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/aug/08/freeing-girls-trafficked-to-italy-for-sex-from-nigeria-you-will-not-be-a-slave-for-ever-video>
The surveys also revealed an emerging trend of organ and blood trafficking: 6% 
of all respondents reported that they had experience of someone being forced to 
give blood against their will or while captive, or of organs being used as 
payment for parts of the journey.

According to the surveys, men are more likely to have fallen victim to human 
trafficking than women, although the IOM did not ask specific questions about 
forced prostitution or trafficking for sexual exploitation.

The surveys also show that the longer someone is in transit, the more 
vulnerable they are to being exploited or trafficked, with migrants who spent 
six months or more journeying to Europe three times more likely to have fallen 
prey to criminal exploitation than those who were in transit countries for less 
than two weeks.

The IOM spent 10 months gathering data from more than 9,000 migrants 
<http://migration.iom.int/docs/Analysis_-_Flow_Monitoring_and_Human_Trafficking_Surveys_in_the_Mediterranean_and_Beyond_-_6%20_October_2016.pdf>
 (pdf – NB, this shows data for just three months) on the central and eastern 
Mediterranean routes. As well as collecting information on the prevalence of 
forced labour and organ trafficking, the surveys also asked about marriage, and 
forced marriage, while in transit. Fewer than 1.5% of respondents said they had 
received an offer of marriage in exchange for money along the route.


On the eastern Mediterranean route – where migrants travel overland via Turkey 
and Greece – 14% of migrants reported signs of human trafficking and 
exploitation. About 6% reported being held against their will, 7% said they 
worked without pay. As many as 4% said they were forced into work against their 
will, most of these instances occurring in Turkey. Incidents of organ and blood 
trafficking were reported in Turkey, Greece, Albania, Macedonia and Serbia.

The IOM said its surveys are the first attempt to quantify the prevalence, 
scale and frequency of labour and other forms of human trafficking on the major 
migrant routes.

“What these surveys show is that human trafficking networks are becoming 
brutal and efficient at exploiting and making profit from the vulnerability of 
migrants,” says Simona Moscarelli, anti-trafficking expert at the IOM.

 “There is still very little real recognition of the scale of this business or 
just how much money is being made from the misery and labour of people fleeing 
war or poverty.”

Kevin Hyland, the UK’s independent anti-slavery commissioner, said that the 
surveys provide further evidence that the migration crisis is being used by 
human trafficking networks to target and exploit the most vulnerable.


“There is a need for urgent action to protect these people,” he says. “I 
believe that a key focus for the UK and other governments must include 
collaborating with partners to prioritise safeguarding against the risks of 
modern slavery as part of the response to the migration and refugee crisis.”
 