
Sussan Ley <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley> secured 
finance “several months” before she bought a $795,000 apartment on a 
taxpayer-funded trip to the Gold Coast in what has been characterised as a 
spur-of-the-moment decision.

The health minister remains under significant pressure after revelations she 
charged taxpayers almost $4,000 for a trip to the Gold Coast in 2015 during 
which shebought a luxury apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
.

She maintained she had “not planned nor anticipated” buying the apartment 
during the trip, but on Sunday sheissued a public apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/08/sussan-ley-apologises-over-gold-coast-luxury-apartment-scandal>
, admitting she made an “error of judgment” in billing taxpayers for the trip.

Sussan Ley bought $795,000 flat on impulse on taxpayer-funded trip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
She said she had spent “the past 48 hours” examining her travel records and 
had discovered a few other problems with her entitlements.

“I have spoken to the prime minister and he agrees that this claim does not 
meet the high standards he expects of ministers,” she said in her statement on 
Sunday.

“Tomorrow I will ask the Department of Finance to invoice me for the costs for 
the car and travel allowance claimed on Saturday 9 May 2015, including the 
relevant penalty applied to erroneous claims.

“My examination of my travel records has also brought to my attention two 
other claims for accommodation on the Gold Coast in 2014 and 2015 where I 
should have stayed and claimed in Brisbane, as well as a single one-way flight 
from Coolangatta to Canberra in June 2015.

“I will also ask the Department of Finance to invoice me the costs of these 
claims, as well as the relevant penalty.”

A spokesman told Guardian Australia Ley secured finance “several months” 
before she purchased the $795,000 investment property in 2015.

The finance approval was not linked to a particular address, type of property 
or location, the spokesman said.

“No documents are required to bid at an auction in Queensland so no documents 
were taken and she registered within half an hour before it started,” he said. 
“She made no phone call to the agent and she did not know the identity of the 
owner of the property, who was not present at the auction.

“Ms Ley was not in Queensland for the settlement of the property, which was 
handled by a Albury-based solicitor.”

The spokesman said Ley’s Gold Coast apartment was “her first and only property 
investment”.

Ley’s register of interests lists one residential property and the investment 
property on the Gold Coast 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/~/media/03%20Senators%20and%20Members/32%20Members/Register/45p/KN/LeyS_45P.pdf>
. Ley’s husband also owns two investment properties, according to the register.

Under Queensland law, there is no “cooling-off period” 
<https://www.qld.gov.au/law/housing-and-neighbours/buying-and-selling-a-property/buying-a-home/ways-to-buy-your-home/buying-at-auction/>
 for buying at an auction. If you are the successful bidder at an auction, you 
have to settle the contract even if the house doesn’t pass inspections, you 
change your mind or you can’t afford it.

On Monday the education minister, Simon Birmingham, defended Ley, saying her 
portfolios necessarily involved a lot of travel and meetings.

“It’s important to realise that Sussan is the Minister for Health, the 
Minister for Ageing, the Minister for Sport and represents an electorate the 
size of New Zealand,” Birmingham said. “She spent around 250 days on the road 
last year, and of course, that means a lot of travel to a lot of different 
destinations.”

Birmingham said many individuals did not want meetings to be made public, 
especially patients discussing healthcare concerns.

Ley had “outlined very clearly” that her claims were within the entitlements 
rules, Birmingham said.

Ley said on Sunday that in the interests of transparency she would ask the 
Department of Finance to review all her ministerial travel to the Gold Coast.

Tony Abbott's travel bankrolled by Spectator magazine and Liberal party donor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/tony-abbotts-travel-bankrolled-by-spectator-magazine-and-liberal-party-donor>
Labor’s health spokeswoman, Catherine King, said on Sunday that Malcolm 
Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> had no 
choice but to sack Ley from his frontbench. “Repaying the taxpayer does not 
erase the fact that Ley has breached the rules, and Turnbull must act,” King 
said.

“Sussan Ley will not only repay travel for the Gold Coast trip in which she 
claims she spontaneously purchased an apartment, she will also repay travel on 
three other occasions.

“If Malcolm Turnbull he is willing to turn a blind eye on this type of 
conduct, it shows exactly what type of leader he really is.”
 