
Sussan Ley has resigned as health minister and the government will set up an 
independent parliamentary expenses authority,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> announced on 
Friday.

At a press conference in Sydney, Turnbull thanked Ley for her service and said 
he thought she had made the “right judgment” in choosing to resign.

Ley stood aside as health minister on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 pending an investigation into her claims for taxpayer-funded travel, including 
what she called an “error of judgment” in charging for a trip to the Gold Coast 
in which she boughta $795,000 apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
.

In a statement on Friday Ley said she was still “confident” that she had 
followed the rules “not just regarding entitlements but most importantly the 
ministerial code of conduct”.

But Ley said she chose to quit because “ongoing media coverage of politicians’ 
entitlements has been a diversion” from the government’s agenda.

Politicians should prove travel is good value and job-related, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/politicians-should-prove-travel-is-good-value-and-job-related-says-report>
Ley accepted “community annoyance, even anger, with politicians’ entitlements 
demands a response”.

No details were provided by Turnbull or Ley about the outcome of the 
investigation, only that Ley had resigned after “extensive discussions with the 
secretary” of the department of prime minister and cabinet.

Acting opposition leader, Penny Wong, said Ley had done what Turnbull was “too 
weak” to do, implying he should have sacked her. Wong criticised him for 
promising a “strong investigation” then refusing to say what it had concluded.

Turnbull said the expenses system had to reflect that politicians were 
“dealing with other people’s money” and were “fiduciaries for the people of 
Australia”.

“The Australian people are entitled to see that we are spending it wisely, 
appropriately, in accordance with the rules, but also in a manner that gets 
value for money.”

Turnbull said the new proposed parliamentary expenses body would have 
responsibility for compliance, reporting, monitoring and adjudicating all 
claims by MPs, senators and ministers, to ensure they are within the rules.

Politicians would be able to get a ruling from the body whether proposed 
expenses were within the rules.

“The body will be governed by an independent board, which will include a 
person experienced in auditing, in audit matters, a person with wide experience 
in remuneration matters, the president, for the time being, of the remuneration 
tribunal, a former judicial officer and a former MP,” he said.

Bronwyn Bishop blames 'socialists' for criticising Sussan Ley over expenses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/bronwyn-bishop-blames-socialists-for-criticising-sussan-ley-over-expenses>
Turnbull said the system that manages entitlements “will be modernised to 
allow monthly disclosure of parliamentarians’ expenses in an accessible ... 
searchable format”.

Turnbull said improved transparency would prevent improper spending. He blamed 
“antiquated” IT for the difficulty of the current system, including use of 
paper forms to make claims and disclosures published as “big PDF” files.

The prime minister said the United Kingdom’s expense reporting system provided 
a model for reforms.

The reforms come on top of the announcement on Tuesday by acting special 
minister of state, Kelly O’Dwyer, thatthe Turnbull government would implement 
all 36 recommendations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/parliamentary-expenses-government-to-clarify-what-official-business-means>
 fromlast year’s review of the expenses system 
<https://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/independent-parliamentary-entitlements-system-review-feb-2016.pdf>
, including clarifying what constitutes “official business”.

Turnbull said the special minister of state would develop the reform proposal 
in consultation with major and smaller parties.

Wong said Labor was “up for reform of parliamentarians’ work expenses”. Bill 
Shorten spoke to Turnbull on Friday and gave in-principle support for the 
announced changes.

Wong said the government had “sat on” the Conde report on parliamentary 
entitlements for more than 300 days.

The Greens have also 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/crossbenchers-pledge-to-reform-expenses-as-sussan-ley-scandal-widens>
 called for a national anti-corruption body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/crossbenchers-pledge-to-reform-expenses-as-sussan-ley-scandal-widens>
 with a function to audit and advise on parliamentary expense, which it 
reiterated on Friday.

Turnbull foreshadowed a reshuffle or new appointment to the health portfolio 
next week and said Arthur Sinodinos would continue acting as health minister in 
the meantime.

In addition to the trip on which she bought an apartment, Ley also twice 
charged taxpayers to attend New Year’s Eve events hosted by a businesswoman that
Guardian Australia revealed was multimillionaire Sarina Russo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-used-taxpayer-money-for-gold-coast-events-with-multi-millionaire>
, a donor to the Liberal National Party.

Ley was largely politically friendless throughout the week, with only 
education minister Simon Birmingham offering lukewarm support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 and former speaker, Bronwyn Bishop, who herself quit over an expense scandal,
blaming “socialists” for Ley’s demise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/bronwyn-bishop-blames-socialists-for-criticising-sussan-ley-over-expenses>
.

Sussan Ley bought $795,000 flat on impulse on taxpayer-funded trip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
The expenses scandal widened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/crossbenchers-pledge-to-reform-expenses-as-sussan-ley-scandal-widens>
 with revelations Ley had charged for a trip on which she inspected another 
Gold Coast properties andtaken chartered flights between capital cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/mps-havent-sought-to-defraud-says-minister-as-travel-claims-scandal-widens>
. Four Coalition ministers had charged to attend the prime minister’s 2015 New 
Year’s Eve party and some including foreign minister Julie Bishop charged for 
sports events.

No other ministers or MPs stood aside, all maintaining their travel claims 
were within the rules.

Trade minister Steven Ciobo defended politicians charging taxpayers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/people-expect-politicians-to-claim-expenses-for-sporting-events-says-steven-ciobo>
 to attend major sports events, declaring they are work-related expenses 
because they allow businesses and other organisations to “showcase themselves”.
 