
Sussan Ley <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley> has stood 
aside without pay pending an investigation into her claims for taxpayer-funded 
travel.

In a statement on Monday the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, said the health 
minister had agreed to stand aside while the secretary of the Department of 
Prime Minister and Cabinet investigated her travel claims.

At a media conference in Albury, Ley said she was “very confident” the 
investigation would show she had not broken travel entitlement rules.

She said her decision to pay back funds relating to four claims for Gold Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> travel and 
accommodation did not amount to an admission she had broken the rules.

The decision to step aside had been “mutually agreed” with the prime minister, 
she said.

On Sunday Ley apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/08/sussan-ley-apologises-over-gold-coast-luxury-apartment-scandal>
 for what she called an “error of judgement” in charging taxpayers for a trip 
to the Gold Coast in which she boughta $795,000 apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
.

On Monday she explained the circumstances of the purchase, revealing that she 
had taken a Comcar to her Gold Coast hotel, then to the auction two minutes 
away.

She said “in hindsight” she should have taken the Comcar only to the hotel not 
the auction.

The trip brought to light extensive taxpayer-funded travel to the Gold Coast 
by the health minister, including 37 nights’ accommodation since 2013 and 27 
flights in and out of the Gold Coast over the same period.

Sussan Ley secured property finance months before apartment purchase
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-secured-property-finance-months-before-apartment-purchase>
Ley explained that two trips she claimed over New Year’s Eve in 2013 and 2014 
were “at the invitation of a prominent Queensland businesswoman” to discuss the 
Coalition’s agenda for education and training.

She said the 2013 trip was “for a business lunch” and the 2014 trip was to 
attend the businesswoman’s “annual New Year’s Eve event”.

“In 2013 I claimed flights and taxis to get to the lunch but, as I was on 
annual leave from the next day, I didn’t claim accommodation.

“Similarly, in 2014, I did not claim accommodation as I stayed privately. On 1 
January 2015, I travelled to a sporting function in Sydney as the minister for 
sport.”

Ley said she would provide her diary to the investigations but would not 
release it to the media on a “fishing expedition”.

In his statement Turnbull said: “The secretary will thoroughly investigate the 
travel claims and the minister has assured me that she will promptly provide 
all information and assistance sought by the secretary for the purpose of this 
investigation.

“Australians expect the government to deal with these serious matters very 
thoroughly and in accordance with the statement of ministerial standards.

“I expect the highest standards from my ministers in all aspects of their 
conduct, and especially the expenditure of public money.”

Arthur Sinodinos will act as minister for health, aged care and sport while 
the investigation is carried out.

Acting Labor leader, Penny Wong, labelled Turnbull’s response weak, noting that
Ley had already conceded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/08/sussan-ley-apologises-over-gold-coast-luxury-apartment-scandal>
 the claim for travel on the occasion she bought the apartment had not met 
ministerial standards.

“Instead of doing the right thing and moving to remove Ms Ley from his 
frontbench, to sack her from the cabinet, we have a prime minister who, yet 
again, goes for the weak option.”

Wong said Ley should release “sufficient details to confirm any assertion a 
trip was taken for public purposes”.

Before the announcement the shadow health minister, Catherine King, told Radio 
National on Monday that reports indicated the travel cost taxpayers $40,000.


“Of course you want people to represent the country and to travel around, but 
that many trips to the Gold Coast over what is a relatively short period of 
time does seem quite high,” she said.

King questioned why Ley had twice travelled to the Gold Coast on New Year’s 
Eve, describing it as “unusual” to have official business on that day.

Sussan Ley apologises over Gold Coast luxury apartment scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/08/sussan-ley-apologises-over-gold-coast-luxury-apartment-scandal>
Ley travelled from Sydney to Brisbane on 9 May 2015, where she announced at 
Wesley hospital $1.3bn in funding to list new medicines on the pharmaceutical 
benefits scheme.


She travelled to Main Beach on the Gold Coast the same day and bought a rental 
property 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/~/media/03%20Senators%20and%20Members/32%20Members/Register/44p/LO/LeyS_44P.pdf>
. She and her partner then stayed the night, billing taxpayers $370 as travel 
allowance.

On Monday Guardian Australia reported that Ley had secured finance months 
before buying the apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-secured-property-finance-months-before-apartment-purchase>
.

At the media conference, Ley said she had gained pre-approval to buy an 
investment property and had bought the Gold Coast apartment because it “fit the 
bill”. Ley repeated her claim she had “not planned nor anticipated” buying the 
apartment during the trip.

She said she had learned the property was on the market only 12 hours before 
the auction, after the travel had been arranged. Ley inspected the property 
just 10 minutes before the sale.

She said she had “no idea” who the vendor was. It has since been revealed the 
property was sold by the childcare operator Martin Corkery, one of theQueensland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> Liberal National 
party’s biggest individual donors in 2011.

Ley has asked the finance department to invoice her for the costs of the car 
and travel allowance for she claimed on Saturday, 9 May 2015, on the day she 
bought the luxury apartment.

She will also ask the department to invoice her the costs of two more nights’ 
accommodation and a one-way flight because after reviewing her claims she 
concluded she “should have stayed and claimed in Brisbane”.

On Monday the education minister, Simon Birmingham, defended Ley, telling 
Radio National he did not believe she had breached the ministerial code of 
conduct and extensive travel was a “clear part” of her responsibilities.
 