
The humble fruit sticker may seem an unlikely cause for environmental concern 
but removing it from produce could create huge savings in plastic, energy and 
CO2 emissions.


In response to consumer demand for less packaging, Dutch fruit and veg 
supplier Nature & More and Swedish supermarket ICA have joined forces to run a 
trial to replace sticky labels on organic avocados and sweet potatoes with a 
laser mark.

M&S are also using it on coconuts in the UK.

Dubbed “natural branding”, the technique uses a strong light to remove pigment 
from the skin of produce. The mark is invisible once skin is removed and 
doesn’t affect shelf life or eating quality.

“By using natural branding on all the organic avocados we would sell in one 
year we will save 200km (135 miles) of plastic 30cm wide. It’s small but I 
think it adds up,” says Peter Hagg, ICA business unit manager.


The laser technology also creates less than 1% of the carbon emissions needed 
to produce a sticker of similar size.

Stephane Merit, business development manager of the Spanish company behind the 
technology, Laser Food, says with millions of stickers used on food produce 
around the world everyday, the technology could make a “significant reduction 
in the amount of paper, ink, glue” being used as well as the cutting the energy 
used to produce and transport them.


Ethical shoppers

The sustainability saving is particularly important for organic shoppers, who 
now account for almost a fifth of all ICA’s fruit and veg sales, says Hagg. 
“Organic sales are driven by environmental awareness, like climate change and 
belief in health benefits. Younger shoppers also choose products depending on 
the environmental impact of the packaging. And we know that this will be very 
important in coming years,” he says.


Switching from plastic to cardboard is a bonus, but selling organic produce as 
loose is even better says Hagg. Yet under EU rules all items need to be marked 
hence the need for stickers if selling loose.


Related: How can we reverse the UK's falling recycling rates? Send in your 
questions for our live Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/live/2017/jan/05/recycling-rates-uk-declining>

“This is a solution that permanently marks the skin of the product, so it’s 
better from a sustainability perspective, but also avoids the problem of 
stickers falling off.”


Laser Food’s technology has been around for several years but has previously 
been used for marketing or branding, without being explicitly linked to 
sustainability.


“Up to now, no one has used this technique with the specific aim of cutting 
packaging. It was used for novelty – which is nice, but a gimmick at Easter or 
Christmas isn’t going to pay off,” says Michaël Wilde, sustainability and 
communications manager at Nature & More. “What we are saying is, by buying this 
product you’re saving plastic.”

 Photograph: Guardian 
The cost of a laser machine is considerable, but after that initial 
investment, Wilde says it is almost more cost-effective than stickers. “You 
have to invest in an extremely expensive machine, so it’s very much an 
investment for the future. This is something we believe more and more 
supermarkets will take on. It saves resources, CO2 and energy, so it does 
calculate.”


M&S lasered coconuts

While the ICA trial has begun with sweet potatoes and avocados, products where 
sticking labels to skin is challenging, the supermarket is already preparing to 
expand onto other products.

“The next step will be to use natural branding on edible skin products, such 
as apples or nectarines,” says Hagg. “If consumers react positively there is no 
limit. We are planning to try it with melons in summer, as there is a problem 
there at the moment with stickers attaching to the skin.”


Although ICA’s involvement is the largest retail trial to date, the technology 
has been used in various other European markets.

Last year UK supermarket M&S trialled it on oranges, saving several tonnes of 
packaging according to fruit technologist Andrew Mellonie, who supervised the 
project. However, citrus skin’s ability to “heal” itself meant the laser mark 
wasn’t as effective so the trial was suspended, but the retailer now uses it on 
coconuts and has plans to extend to other products.

The reaction of shoppers to laser-branded produce is one of the only concerns 
for Hagg and Wilde, but, they say, so far feedback on Swedish social media has 
been positive.


For Hagg, no matter how small the story, nowadays sustainability is “always 
good news” for consumers and he is hopeful that other supermarkets will follow 
ICA’s example.

“The calculations are that it costs the same, but sustainability for our 
consumers and ourselves is the biggest gain. I hope it will take off with more 
products and also non-organic. I can only imagine what a bigger retailer would 
be able to save. I really hope it spreads.”

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 