
Swimmers need to take responsibility for their own safety and stay out of 
dangerous water, theNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> government has 
said after 18 drowning deaths in the state in 10 days.

The emergency services minister, David Elliott, made the plea on Tuesday, a 
day after NSW’s latest water death.

“I’m appalled, like everybody else, at the amount of deaths which have 
occurred over the course of this holiday period,” Elliott said. “The appeal 
today is to take responsibility for your safety.”

The former family court judge Richard Gee, 83, died after being pulled 
unconscious from his backyard pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/family-court-judge-who-survived-bombing-drowns-in-backyard-pool>
 on Monday in the Sydney suburb of Belrose.

Gee is the 18th person to die from drowning or suspected drowning in NSW since 
Christmas Day, and atwo-year-old boy remains in intensive care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/02/toddler-pulled-unconscious-from-pond-at-sydney-house>
 after being pulled from a fish pond at a Sydney home on Monday.

NSW: beachgoers urged to be careful after 14 drownings since Christmas Day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/31/nsw-beachgoers-urged-to-be-careful-after-14-drownings-since-christmas-day>
“If you don’t know that your fence is childproof, fix it,” Elliott said. “If 
you don’t know that a river is going to be running a current underneath it, 
don’t go into it. If you don’t know that a surf is safe, don’t enter the surf.

“The appeal today is to make sure that you take responsibility for your own 
safety and the safety of your friends.”

Paramedics echoed Elliott’s plea, saying they had responded to 225 drownings 
or near-drownings in the past two months.

“Nobody intends for these tragedies to happen, but paramedics sadly see time 
and again they do,” a NSW Ambulance inspector, John Brotherhood, said on 
Tuesday.

“Kids will be kids, so it’s about being vigilant – knowing where your child is 
and keeping an eye on them at all times, and maintaining safety around pools.”

Elliott would not confirm whether the government would conduct an advertising 
campaign to raise awareness but he strongly urged people to learn first aid and 
learn how to swim.

He said he was horrified some people chose to live in NSW but still didn’t 
know how to swim.

“Government can’t be at every creek. Government can’t be on every river bank. 
Government can’t be at every beach. Government can’t be in every backyard pool. 
That’s why we’ve got to work collaboratively with the community,” he said.

Drowning deaths over the holiday period in NSW

25 December


 * A 27-year-old man dies in the Wattamolla lagoon at Royal national park, 
south of Sydney. 
26 December


 * Geoffrey Blackadder, 60, dies trying to rescue young relatives from rip at 
Wooli beach on the north coast. 
 * A man, 56, drowns at Merry beach at Kioloa on south coast. 
 * A 59-year-old man dies from a suspected cardiac arrest near the entrance of 
the Evans river on the north coast. 
 * A 27-year-old man dies at Kangaroo valley in the Shoalhaven region during a 
Boxing Day swim at a picnic ground. 
 * A two-year-old girl dies in hospital after being pulled unconscious from a 
backyard swimming pool with her brother.

27 December


 * A man’s body is found in swimming baths at The Entrance on central coast 
after he suffered suspected heart attack.

 * A 25-year-old man’s body is recovered in Greendale in western Sydney after 
he went missing while swimming on Boxing Day.

28 December


 * A 64-year-old man from Kyogle is pulled from the water at Belongil Beach, 
Byron Bay.

29 December


 * A two-year-old boy dies in hospital one week after he and his twin sister 
were pulled unconscious from a backyard swimming pool.

30 December


 * A body is recovered, believed to belong to 42-year-old Peter 
Abd-El-Kaddous, who went missing while swimming in the Murrumbidgee river at 
Wagga Wagga. 
 * A 46-year-old man dies while swimming at Yamba on north coast. 
 * A body, believed to be 14-year-old Tui Gallaher, missing for three days, is 
found at Sydney’s Maroubra beach. 
 * A Pakistani man, 27, dies after being pulled from a waterhole at Mermaid 
Pools in Sydney’s south. 
 * A man, believed to be in his 70s, dies after being pulled from Lady 
Robinsons beach in Sydney’s south.

1 January


 * A two-year-old girl dies after being found unconscious in a backyard pool 
in Macquarie Fields, Sydney. 
2 January


 * A body, believed to be that of a 44-year-old man, is found in Lake 
Eucumbene in the Snowy Mountains.

3 January


 * Former family court judge Richard Gee, 83, is found in his backyard pool in 
Belrose, Sydney.
 