
The first major exhibition of artworks by Myuran Sukumaran, who was executed 
by Indonesia for heroin smuggling, is to be held during next year’sSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> festival.

Myuran Sukumaran’s death-row paintings cry out against a monstrous inhumanity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/apr/28/bali-nine-myuran-sukumaran-paintings-death-penalty>
Sukumaran, one of a group known as the Bali Nine, took up painting during his 
time in Kerobokan prison and his artworks became a very public part of the 
campaign for clemency. He was killed by a firing squad in April 2015 alongside 
fellow Australian Andrew Chan, four Nigerians, a Brazilian and an Indonesian. 
All had beenconvicted of drug crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/bali-nine-who-are-the-nine-people-being-executed-by-indonesia>
.

The Australian artist Ben Quilty, Sukumaran’s friend and mentor and the 
co-curator of the exhibition, which will be held at Campbelltown arts centre in 
January, said he hoped the show would reignite public debate about human rights 
for prisoners.


“[Sukumaran] really deeply wanted the abolition of the death penalty 
worldwide,” Quilty said. “No one deserves to be shot in the chest ever, for 
anything. And he wanted that message spread as widely as he could.”


More than 100 of Sukumaran’s works will be shown at the western Sydney centre. 
The exhibition also features commissioned pieces by seven other Australian 
artists alongside Sukumaran’s work, including Matthew Sleeth, Abdul-Rahman 
Abdullah, Megan Cope, and Jagath Dheerasekara, who have all responded to the 
issues of the death penalty, justice and human rights.

During the exhibition period, the arts centre will also stage three symposiums 
focusing on human rights and capital punishment.

Sukumaran used art “as a visual language to communicate his humanity” during 
his time in incarceration, said Quilty, including instructing his lawyers on 
how to carry his paintings out of the prison to best display them to waiting 
press. “He was engineering his own message about the death penalty. He was 
humanising himself and his friends who were executed that night.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fsydney-festival-to-exhibit-paintings-by-myuran-sukumaran-of-bali-nine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f06805f9c365f5a54d38e49f24c33246fe98acc%2F0_0_1935_2271%2F1935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20festival%20to%20exhibit%20paintings%20by%20Myuran%20Sukumaran%20of%20Bali%20Nine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fsydney-festival-to-exhibit-paintings-by-myuran-sukumaran-of-bali-nine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20festival%20to%20exhibit%20paintings%20by%20Myuran%20Sukumaran%20of%20Bali%20Nine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fsydney-festival-to-exhibit-paintings-by-myuran-sukumaran-of-bali-nine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f06805f9c365f5a54d38e49f24c33246fe98acc%2F0_0_1935_2271%2F1935.jpg>
 A self-portrait by Myuran Sukumaran 
Quilty believes drug abuse, recidivism rates among offenders, and the 
retributive model of justice need to be debated in Australia and abroad.

“The uncomfortable truth is that a huge proportion of the population deals 
drugs, uses drugs, and quite often the dealer and the user are the same person.”

Quilty said that over the past decade Sukumaran had become “a beautiful, 
compassionate, caring 31-year-old man who looked out for his family, who worked 
really hard”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fsydney-festival-to-exhibit-paintings-by-myuran-sukumaran-of-bali-nine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29c554590467190fe29131449ed27db8ca832fd7%2F0_39_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20festival%20to%20exhibit%20paintings%20by%20Myuran%20Sukumaran%20of%20Bali%20Nine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fsydney-festival-to-exhibit-paintings-by-myuran-sukumaran-of-bali-nine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20festival%20to%20exhibit%20paintings%20by%20Myuran%20Sukumaran%20of%20Bali%20Nine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fsydney-festival-to-exhibit-paintings-by-myuran-sukumaran-of-bali-nine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29c554590467190fe29131449ed27db8ca832fd7%2F0_39_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Myuran Sukumaran, right, with Andrew Chan in 2006. Photograph: Jewel 
Samad/AFP/Getty Images 
“Taking away someone’s liberty is very different to taking away someone’s 
dignity, and if you destroy someone’s dignity then you can expect insanely high 
recidivism rates,” Quilty said. “It’s as simple as that. And we don’t seem to 
learn. We haven’t learnt from when we were locking people up in rough-hewn 
sandstone prisons on the shores of Sydney. And we still do it, we still treat 
people really badly when they’re in prison. We’re trying to punish them rather 
than rehabilitate them.”


Sukumaran was arrested in 2005 and was sentenced to death in 2006. “Myuran 
wasn’t the first and will not be the last to do something so self-indulgent and 
dangerous, and he went on to become a great young man and left an amazing 
legacy,” Quilty said.

• Myuran Sukumaran: Another Day in Paradise will open on 13 January as part of 
the2017 Sydney festival <http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/info/>
 