
Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> celebrated the end 
of 2016 with 120 tonnes of fireworks and a tribute to three of the year’s most 
high-profile celebrity deaths.

David Bowie, Prince, and Gene Wilder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gene-wilder> were celebrated in the 12-minute 
midnight display, which also drew inspiration from a 3D paper sculpture of the 
city that recreated Sydney landmarks with native flowers.

Thousands of rockets were launched from seven barges on the harbour, and 2,400 
special lighting effects were used, with the Sydney harbour bridge itself 
turned into a “pyrotechnic focal point”.

New Year's Eve around the world - live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live/2016/dec/31/new-years-eve-around-the-world-2016-2017-live>
The City of Sydney was prepared for crowds of up to 1.5 million on the 
foreshore or watching from boats in the harbour, making it one of the largest 
fireworks displays in the world.

An additional one billion people were expected to watch from home via live 
broadcasts on television and social media.

According to research done for the City of Sydney, up to 46% of spectators on 
the harbour travel from overseas to see the event, which is worth $130m to the 
economy in New South Wales.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsydney-new-years-eve-celebrations-honour-bowie-prince-and-wilder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5563585622583f06c1a7ab3fee49553291339800%2F0_227_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20New%20Year's%20Eve%20celebrations%20honour%20Bowie%2C%20Prince%20and%20Wilder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsydney-new-years-eve-celebrations-honour-bowie-prince-and-wilder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20New%20Year%27s%20Eve%20celebrations%20honour%20Bowie%2C%20Prince%20and%20Wilder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsydney-new-years-eve-celebrations-honour-bowie-prince-and-wilder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5563585622583f06c1a7ab3fee49553291339800%2F0_227_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Sydney celebrates New Year’s Eve 2016. Photograph: Don Arnold\City of 
Sydney/Getty Images 
Sydney’s lord mayor, Clover Moore, said the theme recognised the number of 
entertainment icons lost in 2016 and the close relationship that Bowie, in 
particular, had with the city.

“Sydney is especially significant for David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>, who called Elizabeth Bay home 
for a decade from the early 80s, filming music videos and recording an album 
here,” Moore said.

How David Bowie's Let's Dance brought Australia's Indigenous issues to the 
world stage | Stan Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/12/how-david-bowies-lets-dance-shone-a-light-on-australias-indigenous-issues>
“Prince performed in Australia many times and his Sydney opera house concert 
was one of his last. And I know children and adults everywhere will delight in 
the colourful Willy Wonka moment during the midnight fireworks.”

Fireworks director Fortunato Foti, who has been responsible for the city’s New 
Year’s Eve fireworks since 1997, said this year’s show had required them to 
develop new techniques to deliver new effects.

The more recent deaths of Carrie Fisher, George Michael and Debbie Reynolds 
occurred after the program was finalised, the organisers said.

In Melbourne, 13.5 tonnes of fireworks were detonated over an 8sq km area, 
lighting up the entire city.

Lord Mayor Robert Doyle said the display was designed to be visible from 
anywhere in the city. The display cost $3m, of which $2.5m was spent on 
security. About 500,000 people were expected to head into the city to hear live 
music at four different sites.

“We’re always a bit nervous, as I say every year, you don’t often throw a 
party for 500,000 of your best friends, but when they come over you better be 
ready and we are,” Doyletold the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-31/new-year's-eve-fireworks-to-draw-millions-to-cities/8155400>
.

Crowd numbers in Brisbane were expected to meet last year’s figures of 
120,000, with an additional 50,000 expected at Surfers Paradise.
 