
“You cannot live without it - but you have to leave it behind the door of your 
house, otherwise it will take you completely, it will destroy you, it will eat 
you”. That’s how the Polish baritoneMariusz Kwiecien 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KjGbu1OK9h0> describes the experience 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b05s355n> of preparing and singing the title 
role in his compatriotKarol Szymanowski’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/15/karol-szymanowsky-piotr-anderszewski>
 opera – for many, his masterpiece –Król Roger 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IyU8_QYryZo> (King Roger), which opens in its 
astonishingly belated premiere production at Covent Garden on 1 May 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/krol-roger-by-kasper-holten?gclid=COmt5fLZlsUCFarKtAodQBUAXA>
. Better late than never.

First staged in 1926 in Warsaw, King Roger 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eIHZbtQ-mG4> is a piece that conjures a 
soundworld, a drama and musical vision that is rooted in the 
hyper-expressivities of early 20th century modernism, but it’s also a 
dangerously intoxicating music drama such that onlySzymanowski  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LIWgw5Q-JSg>could have written.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F29%2Fszymanowski-krol-roger-roh-dangerously-intoxicating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430306315467%2Fee7b3252-a3de-4811-b643-1c8a3a8e38d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Szymanowski's%20'dangerously%20intoxicating'%20King%20Roger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F29%2Fszymanowski-krol-roger-roh-dangerously-intoxicating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Szymanowski%27s%20%27dangerously%20intoxicating%27%20King%20Roger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F29%2Fszymanowski-krol-roger-roh-dangerously-intoxicating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430306315467%2Fee7b3252-a3de-4811-b643-1c8a3a8e38d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Dangerously intoxicating’ - The Mariinsky Opera Company’s production of Król 
Roger at the Edinburgh International Festival in 2008. Photograph: Murdo Macleod
The drama is an outward struggle between ideologies, between conservatism and 
sensuality, between Christian orthodoxy and pagan abandon – represented, 
respectively, by the church and the character of the shepherd, who introduces a 
world of temptation and pantheistic seduction into King Roger’s court. But it’s 
really about the inner desires and conflicts of the King’s psyche and soul. He 
is tempted by the Shepherd andthe bacchanal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D2eudDOmXio> he inspires in the opera’s second 
act, but he is torn by his sense of duty and public persona, although he 
reaches - perhaps - a kind of acceptance of both sides of his character at the 
end of the opera. (That’s a moot point; in any case, it’s that inner world that
Kasper Holten’s production 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/news/creator-and-destroyer-chaos-vs-control-in-szymanowskis-krol-roger>
, which Antonio Pappano will conduct, attempts to find a way to realise on the 
Covent Garden stage.)

It’s been suggested the character of Roger embodies Szymanowski’s own internal 
and external struggles. At ease with his homosexuality, he was nonetheless 
living in a conservative culture in which it simply wasn’t acknowledged let 
alone accepted. He was a person who dreamt a world of sheermusical dazzle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LFExkkNdVCc> and orchestral sumptuousness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uRqtkaQUeyU> that out-emotionates (which isn’t 
even a word, but seems appropriate for Szymanowski’s music…) and out-exoticizes 
evenScriabin’s <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5GEwho6Dbnc> musical 
imaginarium (as Kwieicen also said: “composing this kind of music you have to 
be on drugs, or a little bit crazy”), yet he was also a master compositional 
craftsman, who created these musical and dramatic opiates with absolute 
precision and consummate care.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F29%2Fszymanowski-krol-roger-roh-dangerously-intoxicating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430306125235%2F662eb7c7-24e6-47e7-9993-2869a4b7de1d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Szymanowski's%20'dangerously%20intoxicating'%20King%20Roger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F29%2Fszymanowski-krol-roger-roh-dangerously-intoxicating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Szymanowski%27s%20%27dangerously%20intoxicating%27%20King%20Roger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F29%2Fszymanowski-krol-roger-roh-dangerously-intoxicating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430306125235%2F662eb7c7-24e6-47e7-9993-2869a4b7de1d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kasper Holten rehearsing King Roger for the Royal Opera House’s premiere 
production of the opera. Photograph: BILL COOPER/ROH 
At the end of the opera <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IyU8_QYryZo>, Roger 
is suddenly alone, and he sings a hymn to the sun, music of coruscating power. 
It’s an image that’s open to a multitude of interpretations: has Roger awakened 
from a dream? Has he decided to reject the Shepherd’s ideology of pleasure? Or 
has he accepted a new life, a new kind of freedom released by the Shepherd’s 
“land of eternal ecstasy”? Szymanowski’s music, some of the most definitively 
powerful of the early 20th century, suggests an expressive certainty in its 
blinding blaze of colour, but opens a Pandora’s box of dramatic possibilities. 
But however you interpret it, there is surely a sense of Roger being at last 
“strong enough for freedom”, as Nietzsche would have put it; someone who stands 
in “splendid isolation”, as Szymanowski himself wrote in the English title he 
gave one of his essays written during the composition of the opera.

What’s certain, too, is that the three acts of King Roger contain some of the 
most ecstatic music ever written for the opera house. And as an operatic 
proposition, King Roger is an evening of unique concentration and attraction. I 
think it’s the perfect opera for anyone who hasn’t yet been to the opera house 
in the flesh: it lasts just 80 minutes, yet it should be a musical and dramatic 
spectacle of truly hyper-intense, super-operatic emotions, and with Kwiecien, 
you’ll get to hear arguably the finest exponent of the role anywhere in the 
world. Take your operatic chance to hear King Roger and follow the conflict 
that all of us must face between head and heart, between pleasure and 
rationality, between Dionysus and Apollo.

• There are six performances at Covent Garden 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/krol-roger-by-kasper-holten?gclid=COmt5fLZlsUCFarKtAodQBUAXA>
 from 1 to 19 May 2016, the performance on16 May will be live-streamed 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/news/krol-roger-to-be-live-streamed-on-16-may-2015>. 
Szymanowski’s King Roger is also coming to Australia forSydney festival 2017 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/>
 