
Ahead of a high court ruling on the case of a parent who was fined after 
taking his children on holiday during term time 
<http://www.jmppartnership.com/school-fines-parents-must-decide/>, a travel 
money provider claims tour operators are “holding parents to ransom” by 
doubling the costs of family holidays during the summer break.


Businessman John Platt will learn tomorrow (13 May) the outcome of his ongoing 
dispute with Isle of Wight Council, which took him to court in October 2015 
after failing to pay a £120 fine for taking his children out of school for a 
family holiday to Disneyworld Florida. Althoughthe fine was overturned in the 
magistrates court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/16/father-overturns-120-fine-taking-daughter-term-time-holiday>
, the council has appealed to the high court, challenging the decision and 
seeking clarification on the law.

The dispute over term-time holidays has been an ongoing issue since September 
2013, when, under new rules for English state schools, taking a child out of 
school was no longer a discretionary decision for the head teacher, but 
something parents could do only in exceptional circumstances. The change has 
been unpopular with many parents, who point to the sharp increase in costs for 
flights and packages booked during school holiday dates.

Guardian Travel has previously highlighted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/feb/04/taking-kids-out-of-school-before-end-of-term>
 this disparity, comparing prices from 11 major travel firms before and after 
the end of term. We found price increases of up to 99% on package trips.

This week, travel money company FairFX conducted its own investigation into 
prices, comparing 79 package holidays from three operators, Thomson, First 
Choice and Thomas Cook. It found the cost of holidays rose on average by 35%, 
with the biggest hike being an 115% increase in the cost of a Thomas Cook 
package to Mallorca from London and a 104% increase in a First Choice holiday 
to the Costa del Sol, flying from Birmingham.

A spokesperson for Thomas Cook said: “Customer demand is always really high 
during the school holidays, which can unfortunately lead to an increase in 
costs for families. This is particularly true for a destination like Mallorca, 
which is more popular than ever this year.”


The government has been petitioned several times on this issue. The latest, 
launched this week <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/129698> by a 
parent from Nottingham, has collected over 130,000 signatures in a matter of 
days.

Although the government has remained steadfast on the issue – it was raised in 
parliament last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/26/ban-on-term-time-holidays-is-blatantly-unfair-says-tory-mp>
following the last petition on the subject – many parents continue to protest 
and break the rules, withthousands of them fined £60 each year. Figures from 
2014/15, released under the Freedom of Information Act, show 50,414 fines were 
issued to parents 98 local education authorities.

Platt remains unrepentant: while waiting for the high court appeal, he was 
fined a second time – for taking his family to Lapland in term time earlier 
this year. “I made the decision to go and we had a spectacular time. I have no 
regrets and I would do it again,” he told theIsle of Wight County Press 
<http://www.iwcp.co.uk/news/news/isle-of-wight-businessman-jon-platt-in-fresh-school-holiday-fine-fight-93896.aspx>
.

The Association of British Travel Agents and the Association of Independent 
Tour Operators have both called on the government to stagger school holidays by 
region to help alleviate the pressure of peak time demand. This is also 
supported by travel companies like Thomas Cook, which says this approach 
already works well in many parts of Europe.

Ian Strafford-Taylor, CEO of FairFX agrees: “With a father potentially facing 
a fine for taking his daughter on holiday during term time, it seems parents 
are being held to ransom by travel operators when it comes to summer holidays. 
A week in the sun allows families to spend precious time together, but when 
parents face paying double the original price, this experience comes under 
threat.”
 