
Weekend Sunrise newsreader Talitha Cummins is taking legal action against 
Channel Seven <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel-7>, after she was told 
she could not return to her job following maternity leave.

Cummins went on leave shortly before the birth of her son, Oliver, fully 
expecting to return to her newsreading role with the program. It was a view 
that appeared to be shared by the show’s co-hosts.

On her last day before maternity leave, Weekend Sunrise ran a segment in which 
the show’s hosts expressed their best wishes for Cummins.

Co-host Monique Wright appeared to be under the impression that Cummins was 
returning. “We can’t wait for you to come back, it becomes very real now when 
you finish work,” she said.

Co-host Andrew O’Keefe similarly appeared to believe Cummins would return. 
“And make sure you come back and have another baby, because that cake looks 
fantastic,” O’Keefe said.

But News Corp has reported Cummins received a phone call from Seven News boss 
Craig McPherson nine weeks after the birth of her son, telling her she was no 
longer under contract.

Cummins was reportedly offered another job, as an early morning weekday 
newsreader, which was not feasible, given the recent birth and her partner’s 
job as a personal trainer.

She has lodged a general protections application in the Fair Work Commission, 
alleging Channel Seven’s decision constituted an adverse action.

Seven West CEO Tim Worner 'filled with shame' over workplace affair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/20/seven-west-ceo-tim-worner-filled-with-shame-over-workplace-affair>
Australia’s fair work laws protect an employee’s right to return to the same 
job 
<https://www.fairwork.gov.au/leave/maternity-and-parental-leave/returning-to-work-from-parental-leave>
 after a period of paid parental leave.

Channel Seven did not respond to a request to comment on Monday. 

It is understood the matter will go to conciliation before the commission 
later this month.

Last year Cummins opened up about her struggle with alcoholism on ABC’s 
Australian Story. 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-10/talitha-cummins-shares-her-struggle-with-alcohol-addiction/7868812>

Seven West Media last month found itself in controversy after a former 
executive assistant, Amber Harrison, 
<https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=https-3A__www.theguardian.com_media_2016_dec_20_seven-2Dwest-2Dceo-2Dtim-2Dworner-2Dfilled-2Dwith-2Dshame-2Dover-2Dworkplace-2Daffair&d=DQMFaQ&c=ptMoEJ5oTofwe4L9tBtGCQ&r=ZRm2XwhewrM1EFKhCSrxP4D5f1w9AeAz1-lbHjtao38&m=-5iTvieBpRhJc2-al0CxPbtQcw8ODLKKw9Hmd4KUm2Q&s=EsLT4x0mQ6L81OdIUEMDkKsJz2q2tUfWoNsp8kRzG58&e=>
 made allegations about her treatment by the network in the wake of an affair 
with chief executive Tim Worner. The broadcaster made a confidential settlement 
with Harrison, with payments made to her as part of the terms.

 