
The Australian Taxation Office will crack down on drivers for Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> and other ride-sharing services 
by obtaining and data-matching bank payments they have received.


The ATO will request information on all payments made from companies such as 
Uber orLyft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lyft> to drivers, hoping to 
identify an estimated 60,000 individuals over the 2016-17 and 2017-18 financial 
years.

The records will be “electronically matched” with the ATO’s own information 
and data holdings to identify those who are not complying with their tax 
obligations.

A current ATO guidance 
<https://www.ato.gov.au/Business/GST/In-detail/Managing-GST-in-your-business/General-guides/Providing-taxi-travel-services-through-ride-sourcing-and-your-tax-obligations/+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=au>
 says Uber drivers are considered taxi travel providers and are required to 
charge GST on each trip, declare their income on tax returns, apply for an ABN 
and lodge business activity statements.

Uber should get subsidies to help it adapt for wheelchairs, Victorian inquiry 
told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/uber-should-get-subsidies-to-help-it-adapt-for-wheelchairs-victorian-inquiry-told>
Banks will be asked to provide account names and numbers, BSBs and the dates 
and amounts of payments received by drivers as the ATO attempts to “ensure that 
taxpayers are correctly meeting their taxation obligations”.

However, the ATO’s advice has been challenged in court by Uber, with the 
companytelling a Senate inquiry 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/committees/commsen/b56c040c-ca7a-4787-9db9-c07c9d5f5f6e/toc_pdf/Economics%20References%20Committee_2015_11_18_4008_Official.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf#search=%22committees/commsen/b56c040c-ca7a-4787-9db9-c07c9d5f5f6e/0000%22>
 in November last year they did not consider their employees taxi providers.

“We do not agree with the ATO’s guidance, which they agree is an uncertain 
area of the law, and we are working to have this matter resolved by the federal 
court,” said Uber’s director of public policy, Brad Kitschke.

“Participating in a ride-sharing activity is no different than having someone 
come and mow your lawn on weekends ... The tax office has essentially applied a 
1999 law to a brand new business model.”

The ATO notes that “taxpayers often challenge the commissioner’s view but this 
does not affect our continued administration of the GST law. Similarly, current 
legal proceedings do also not change the commissioner’s view on our published 
guidance”.


“The ATO’s view does not involve new law or policy,” their guidance reads. 

The ATO also currently advises 
<https://www.ato.gov.au/Business/GST/In-detail/Managing-GST-in-your-business/General-guides/The-sharing-economy-and-tax/+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=au>
 that those renting out property through sharing economy sites such as Airbnb 
are required to keep records of their income and declare it on tax returns.

However, Airbnb users are not obliged to pay GST and the requirements for 
ride-sharing providers do not apply to non-commercial car pooling and vehicles 
that are not cars.


A report from a Senate inquiry into corporate tax avoidance 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Economics/Corporate_Tax_Avoidance/Report%20part%202/c02>
 noted that “the nature of the digital economy provides opportunities for 
aggressive tax minimisation by multinationals such as Google, Microsoft, Uber 
and Airbnb”.

“Uber and Airbnb, based in Ireland and the Netherlands respectively, provide a 
platform for the exchange of services between Australians in Australia; yet the 
financial transactions associated with these services are undertaken in 
offshore jurisdictions,” it read.

Liberal National senator Matthew Canavan said in the same Senate inquiry 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/committees/commsen/aa68d895-38dc-4165-bce7-2082c796519b/toc_pdf/Economics%20References%20Committee_2015_04_09_3370_Official.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf#search=%22committees/commsen/aa68d895-38dc-4165-bce7-2082c796519b/0000%22>
 that if companies like Uber “are not subject to the same tax, GST and 
corporate tax as Australian entities, there is potentially a competitive 
disadvantage to Australian-based companies who are reporting income to the ATO 
and paying GST”.

The ATO has not indicated how non-compliant drivers will be penalised, or when 
those who have been identified will be notified.

The ATO and Uber have been contacted for comment.
 