
Sir Dave Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> has 
been asked to appear before the culture media and sport select committee as 
part of its inquiry into how cycling has handled anti-doping issues and the use 
of therapeutic use exemptions.

Sir Dave Brailsford: My handling of Team Sky bag affair threw petrol on fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/dave-brailsford-team-sky-bag-bradley-wiggins>
The Team Sky principal is likely to be asked about Sir Bradley Wiggins being 
granted three TUEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-former-rider-looks-suspicious>
 to take the powerful anti-inflammatory drug triamcinolone to deal with a 
pollen allergy that aggravates his long-standing asthma condition.

The five-times Olympic champion was given injections of triamcinolone shortly 
before the 2011 and 2012 editions of the Tour de France and the 2013 Giro 
d’Italia.

He received widespread criticism for using triamcinolone after a group of 
Russian computer hackers known as the Fancy Bears published private medical 
data in September but denied any wrongdoing and insisted he was not trying to 
gain an “unfair advantage”.

The CMS committee chairman, Damian Collins, told the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/sport/mps-to-quiz-brailsford-over-doping-2w9ngxrdl>
: “Sir Dave Brailsford has been one of the most senior figures in British 
cycling over the last 10 years and we thought it important to speak to him as 
part of our inquiry into how the sport has handled anti-doping issues and the 
ethics around TUEs. We are now talking to Team Sky about a date when he can 
come and speak to us.”

Brailsford is also likely to face questions about a mystery delivery of a 
medical package toTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> in 
France in June 2011, shortly before Wiggins secured his first TUE.

MPs are also set to interview the British Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> chairman, Bob Howden, and the head 
of the governing body’s ethics commission, George Gilbert, at a hearing, where 
the World Anti-Doping Agency president, Sir Craig Reedie, will give evidence, 
on 19 December.

“We have fixed December 19 for a session where we will hear from Craig Reedie 
and representatives of the British Cycling governing body,” Collins said.
 