
The cocksure Bradley Wiggins, the one whose enigmatic personality and supreme 
sporting talent had made him one of Britain’s best loved sportsmen, was gone. 
In his place was one nervously trying to remember “lines to take” in response 
to a series of soft questions from an interviewer who – perhaps understandably 
after another tumultuous week in Westminster – had his mind on other things.

Indeed, things were neatly wrapped up in enough time for Andrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> to slip in a couple of questions 
about politics and fashion, from which we learned that Wiggins thinks Jeremy 
Corbyn is a “lovely fella” but believes Theresa May has done a decent job as 
prime minister.

Bradley Wiggins’ former doctor questions use of banned steroid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-former-doctor-questions-use-banned-steroid>
To be honest, this bit was more illuminating than the rest of the interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/bradley-wiggins-andrew-marr-unfair-advantage>
, which invited more questions than it answered in dealing with the trio of 
therapeutic use exemptions granted to Wiggins in 2011, 2012 and 2013 to allow 
him to take the powerful corticosteroid triamcinolone, for legitimate medical 
reasons before his biggest races of the season. Yet even with Marr failing to 
follow up on the questions he asked but did not always appear fully to 
understand, the performance of the first British man to win the Tour de France 
was often uncomfortable.

“This was to cure a medical condition. This wasn’t about trying to find a way 
to gain an unfair advantage; this was about putting myself back on a level 
playing field in order to compete at the highest level,” Wiggins said, 
explaining why he had received an injection for 40mg of triamcinolone just 
before his triumphant 2012 Tour.

He said he had “really struggled” with respiratory problems in the run-up to 
the 2012 Tour one of the high points even among so many in that golden summer 
for British sport. But he did not really explain how that tallied with the 
account he gave in 2012 in his autobiography.

Then, Wiggins said: “I’d done all the work, I was fine-tuned. I was ready to 
go. My body was in good shape. I’m in the form of my life. I was only ill once 
or twice with minor colds, and I barely lost a day’s training from it.”

From Team Sky and Sir Dave Brailsford there has been nothing but the sound of 
wagons circling

Nor did he really manage to explain the contradiction between the “no needles” 
rhetoric espoused in the same book and the fact he received injections of a 
powerful drug just before the biggest races of his life; nor the fact that he 
has never discussed the TUEs in any of his books or since. His contention that 
he believed questions on needles to refer exclusively to doping is similarly 
hard to countenance.

Surely the reason Wiggins is struggling to explain Team Sky’s strategy with 
regard to using TUEs is because he cannot. It is what it is – that at the same 
time as reaping the PR benefits of a “zero tolerance” approach to doping Team 
Sky was secretly pushing the limits of the rules as they stand. Perhaps SirDave 
Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> and Team Sky 
find it easy to reconcile the two. For others on the outside it cannot help but 
appear that an ethical Rubicon has been crossed.

Yet, as the spotlight falls on Wiggins to explain himself – and to do so in an 
open press conference or a long-form interview rather than over five minutes on 
a Sunday morning politics show – it is important to remember that apparatus 
behind him. The 36-year-old cyclist, who just several short weeks ago looked as 
though he would retire on the highest of highs afterwinning gold in the Rio 
Velodrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/team-gb-bradley-wiggins-olympic-gold-mens-team-pursuit-australia>
, has at least finally broken cover.

From Team Sky and Brailsford, the man described by David Walsh as the 
“conductor of the orchestra” in his 2013 book Inside Team Sky, there has been 
nothing but the sound of wagons circling. Appearing on BBC Radio 5 Live’s 
Sportsweek on Sunday, the British Olympic Association’s vice-chairman, Hugh 
Robertson, repeatedly made the point that it was vital not to conflatethe Fancy 
Bears leak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-and-bradley-wiggins-targeted-in-wada-hacking-scandal>
 with the Russian state sponsored doping scandal uncovered by Professor Richard 
McLaren.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20did%20not%20seek%20an%20unfair%20advantage%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20on%20banned%20substances%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20did%20not%20seek%20an%20unfair%20advantage%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20on%20banned%20substances%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video&media=>
‘I did not seek an unfair advantage’, says Bradley Wiggins on banned substances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/25/unfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video>
He is right. But that does not mean it is not valid both to castigate Russia 
and to concede also that there is an issue with the transparency of the TUE 
process.

Large swaths of the sporting world accepted there were serious questions to be 
asked of the TUE process long before the Fancy Bears did their stuff. That 
there are now dates, names and individuals attached to those questions makes 
them more, not less, urgent.

We are surely sophisticated enough to be mindful of the trick the Fancy Bears, 
almost certainly connected to the Russian state in some way for all the 
denials, are trying to pull in bringing together the two separate issues while 
also acknowledging that the grey area of TUEs is a legitimate topic for debate.

Instead the UCI, Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> and 
others are in danger of exuding the very same arrogance as that displayed by 
those they previously insisted they were protecting sport against. Trust us, 
they say, and move right along.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fteam-sky-bradley-wiggins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15a765bea2db7c242e09432caa3a12679d41f4c%2F0_87_4566_2740%2F4566.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20Sky%20have%20much%20to%20explain%20after%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20meets%20Andrew%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fteam-sky-bradley-wiggins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20Sky%20have%20much%20to%20explain%20after%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20meets%20Andrew%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fteam-sky-bradley-wiggins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15a765bea2db7c242e09432caa3a12679d41f4c%2F0_87_4566_2740%2F4566.jpg>
 Dave Brailsford and Team Sky have delivered little clarity on their approach 
to TUEs. Photograph: Eric Gaillard / Reuters/Reuters 
Team Sky’s earlier decision to employ Geert Leinders, the controversial 
Belgian doctor later banned for life for his earlier work with Rabobank, and 
the Jonathan Tiernen-Locke episode, where the rider was banned for blood doping 
before joining Sky but questions were asked over whether they could have been 
more inquisitive before signing him, were explained away as aberrations.

Bradley Wiggins tells Andrew Marr ‘I did not seek an unfair advantage’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/bradley-wiggins-andrew-marr-unfair-advantage>
Perhaps the fact they have not yet tried to explain their approach to this 
saga beyond a cursory statement is also simple. Because it is what it is. Team 
Sky may not have broken any rules. But arguably what they have done is in some 
ways worse – promising to act one way and then appearing to act another.

According to Richard Moore in Mastermind: How Dave Brailsford Reinvented the 
Wheel, one of the tomes the much-lauded team principal turned to in October 
2012 as he tried to work out what to do about the fallout from the Lance 
Armstrong scandal was a business book called The Seven Signs of Ethical 
Collapse by Marianne Jennings. According to Moore, Brailsford was on the brink 
of resignation as he wrestled with the fact that several of those employed by 
Team Sky were tainted by their Armstrong links. In the end, of course, he 
resolved to carry on and double down on the “zero tolerance” approach.

Of the Jennings book Brailsford says: “A great book written about corporations 
that fail to maintain their ethical standards. You read it and go ‘Yes. It fits 
beautifully in terms of applying the lessons to any organisation.’ It contains 
lots of learnings. But most of all it is about clarity. If you want to perform 
in any walk of life, you need clarity.” Of that there has been precious little 
of late.
 