
Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> have signed the Dutch 
prospect Danny van Poppel from Trek Factory Racing for next season on a 
two-year contract.

Ivan Basso given all-clear to race again after testicular cancer operation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/basso-racing-all-clear-cancer-operation>
Van Poppel won the 12th stage of the Vuelta a España 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/03/chris-froome-vuelta-a-espana-crash>
 as well as two stages of the Tour de Wallonie this season and will join Team 
Sky’s Classics group. The 22-year-old sprinter from Utrecht made history in 
2013 when he became the youngest rider to compete in the Tour de France since 
the second world war.

“We are very excited to have signed Danny. He burst on to the scene at an 
early age and is one of the youngest riders to have ever started the Tour de 
France,” the Team Sky manager, SirDave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford>, said. “At 22 he’s still 
young and this change in environment will allow him to continue his 
development.”
Team Sky (@TeamSky) 
We're pleased to confirm sprinter @Dannyvanpoppel 
<https://twitter.com/Dannyvanpoppel> as signing No. 4! Read more - 
http://t.co/Iz51iPMgCM <http://t.co/Iz51iPMgCM> #TeamSky2016 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/TeamSky2016?src=hash> https://t.co/y0tZHzi7ON 
<https://t.co/y0tZHzi7ON>
 <https://twitter.com/TeamSky/status/647349637251141632> September 25, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/TeamSky/status/647349637251141632> 
“I am about to complete my third year as a professional and feel ready to take 
my career to the next stage,” said Van Poppel. “I grabbed the opportunity to 
join Team Sky with both hands. With the knowledge and support they are able to 
offer, I believe I can grow, improve my performances, and support some of the 
world’s best riders on the very biggest stage.”
 