
Team Sky has reiterated its “100% commitment” to clean competition as UK 
Anti-Doping investigators metBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> at the home of the national 
governing body – which it shares with Sky – following allegations of wrongdoing 
in the sport.

Two Ukad officials travelled on Friday to the National Cycling Centre in 
Manchester, known as the ‘medal factory’ and the place where the successes of 
the past three Olympic Games were made. Ukad would not comment further to 
“protect the integrity of the investigation” but Sky said in a statement that 
they had informed BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> of 
an allegation of wrongdoing reported in the Daily Mail and asked them to 
contact UK Anti-Doping, which would appear to have led to the visit.

“It has been a challenging few weeks for the team. Given some of the recent 
headlines we wanted to set out the facts,” read a statement. “Team Sky was 
recently contacted by the Daily Mail regarding an allegation of wrongdoing 
which we strongly refute. We informed British Cycling of the allegation and 
asked them to contact UK Anti-Doping (Ukad). We understand that Ukad are 
currently investigating this as you would expect.

“Some newspapers this morning have reported that Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> and British Cycling were ‘raided’ 
by Ukad yesterday [Friday]. This was not the case. Ukad have confirmed they 
attended a meeting with British Cycling at the Velodrome in Manchester with 
their full cooperation.

What was in package taken to Bradley Wiggins’s doctor and what was it for?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/package-bradley-wiggins-doctor-2011-criterium-du-dauphine>
“We welcome this investigation as we are confident there has been no 
wrongdoing. We take these issues seriously and we will cooperate fully with 
Ukad. We hope it can be completed as thoroughly and quickly as possible.

“In the meantime we hope that you will understand why we cannot comment on the 
specifics of the allegations or the details of the process. Team Sky abide by 
the rules. We are committed to clean competition and we want you to know that 
we 100% stand by that.”

The initial Ukad announcement came as the Daily Mail reported 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/sportsnews/article-3825849/UK-Anti-Doping-investigate-Sir-Bradley-Wiggins-Team-Sky.html>
 the anti-doping authority is investigating Team Sky and Sir Bradley Wiggins 
over the contents of a medical package,allegedly delivered to Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-ukad-investigate-wrongdoing-allegations>
 in France on 12 June 2011. The newspaper reported that Ukad is looking at what 
that contained.

It is understood that Wiggins and his representatives have received no 
notification from Ukad and believe the 36-year-old is not a subject of the 
investigation.

The five-times Olympic champion, who became Britain’s first Tour de France 
winner in 2012, said on Saturday: “I welcome this investigation.” Team Sky are 
“confident there has been no wrongdoing” and had asked British Cycling to 
contact Ukad. British Cycling said it is “cooperating fully”.

There is no timescale for Ukad investigations and the British doping body did 
not go into any detail about the allegations and mentioned no names. But 
concerns on Thursday were raised about the availability of the controversial 
and powerful painkiller Tramadol among the Great Britain team at the 2012 Road 
World Championships. Tramadol is on the World Anti-Doping Agency’s monitoring 
list, with concerns over its side effects.

Former Team Sky rider: Wiggins’ TUE during 2012 Tour ‘looks suspicious’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-former-rider-looks-suspicious>
Sir Dave Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> 
combined his role as British Cycling performance director and Team Sky 
principal until April 2014, when he quit the national governing body.

Brailsford oversaw the British team that won eight gold medals at the 2008 
Beijing Olympics and the 2012 Games in London. Brailsford now concentrates on 
Team Sky, which was established with a zero tolerance to doping mantra.

Britain won six gold medals at the Rio Olympics in August, despite 
Brailsford’s successor Shane Sutton leaving his role in April under 
discrimination allegationswhich are subject of an independent review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/british-cycling-criticises-three-woman-panel-sexism-shane-sutton>
.

Many riders and staff members have had, and some continue to have, dual roles 
with British Cycling and Team Sky.

The partnership was cleared of any conflict over UK Sport funding in March 
2011 after a year-long review carried out by Deloitte.

Now British Cycling and Team Sky are under further scrutiny.

Team Sky and Brailsford have tried to ascertain the events of June 2011, 
gathering written statements from staff present at the time and documentation 
to piece together the events. The evidence was for British Cycling and Ukad.

The logistics surrounding a cycling team are complex and packages are 
regularly transported. Determining the contents of the specific package will be 
central to the investigation, which could take some time.

The Daily Mail reported on Thursday that while British Cycling did not 
identify the substance in the package, the national governing body indicated it 
did not contain triamcinolone.

According to documents leaked by the hacker group Fancy Bears, Wiggins had a 
therapeutic use exemption (TUE) for triamcinolone acetonide – a synthetic 
corticosteroid – which was effective from 29 June 2011. Any use of a banned 
substance requires an active TUE.

Wiggins won the Dauphiné Libéré stage race - now known as the Critérium du 
Dauphiné – on the day the package was reportedly delivered, completing victory 
in the eight-day event after the final stage to La Toussuire.

Looking for a good news story in cycling? How about the success of Wiggle High5
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/100-tours-100-tales/2016/oct/08/cycling-wiggle-high5-team-world-championships>
It was Wiggins’s biggest road success to date and he was one of the favourites 
for the 2011 Tour de France, only to sustain a fractured collarbone on stage 
seven. He became the first British winner of the Tour a year later.

Wiggins and Team Sky have strenuously denied any wrongdoing since it emerged 
that the five-times Olympic champion has received six TUEs during his career, 
insisting each time the exemptions were medically necessary due to asthma and 
pollen allergies.

Wiggins used the powerful anti-inflammatory drug triamcinolone – a substance 
which has a history of abuse in cycling – on the eve of the 2011 and 2012 Tours 
and 2013 Giro d’Italia.

Three TUEs – to take the drug to deal with a pollen allergy that aggravates 
his long-standing asthma condition - were approved by the UCI, cycling’s world 
governing body, and there is no suggestion that Wiggins or the team have broken 
any rules.

Jonathan Tiernan-Locke, who was sacked by Team Sky in 2014 and served a 
two-year ban for an anti-doping infringement, told the BBC on Thursday that the 
controversial and powerful painkiller Tramadol“was offered freely around” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-former-rider-looks-suspicious>
 the British team during the 2012 Road World Championships.

The team doctor from the event denies the claim, sources within British 
Cycling said.
 