
The image of Chris Froome on foot running up Mont Ventoux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/14/chris-froome-forced-run-up-mountain-stage-12-tour-de-france-video>
 will define this race but tactically the sight that sums it up is of a knot of 
cyclists in black clustered around the yellow jersey. It is six years since 
Dave Brailsford’s Team Sky made a hesitant debut at the 2010 Tour de France, 
but since then they have become the Tour squad par excellence, taking three 
yellow jerseys in four years with a fourth on the way.

Tour de France: stage 20 – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/23/tour-de-france-stage-20-live>
Just how critical team support is in the Tour was thrown into stark relief 
when the race wentdownhill on slippery roads in the Alps and Froome crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/tour-de-france-2016-romain-bardet-chris-froome>
. The helicopter images showed those black jerseys all round him, with Geraint 
Thomas handing over his bike. With the Sky team car well behind the lead group, 
had Froome been alone the Tour could have been lost as the leader’s bike was 
unusable. Instead it was Thomas joking that he thought it might be his turn to 
run.

One of Froome’s most telling comments during the Tour was: “If I was riding 
for a small team it would be very different.” The machine that isTeam Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> has the largest budget in 
professional cycling but their former sports director Sean Yates says that 
having the cash is only the starting point. “They’ve got the budget but they’ve 
got someone clever running the show. Other teams have big budgets and don’t 
perform.”

Yates recalls that initially at Sky there was a period of experimentation, of 
“thinking outside the box”, followed by a decision to focus on doing the simple 
things properly. “They initiated warming down, which is obvious but no one 
[before] could be arsed to do it, post-race eating protocols, weighing the 
riders, checking their urine for dehydration. They did those things properly, 
not just every three days. Because they were a new team no one would say: ‘Sod 
that, I’m not doing it.’ They didn’t have to battle with the old ways.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fteam-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf0ea2702d44e8943cb9bddfa99e866da47bd379%2F0_113_4978_2987%2F4978.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20Sky%20show%20power%20of%20the%20pack%20is%20key%20to%20Tour%20de%20France%20dominance%20%7C%20William%20Fotheringham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fteam-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20Sky%20show%20power%20of%20the%20pack%20is%20key%20to%20Tour%20de%20France%20dominance%20%7C%20William%20Fotheringham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fteam-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf0ea2702d44e8943cb9bddfa99e866da47bd379%2F0_113_4978_2987%2F4978.jpg>
 ‘The image ofChris Froome on foot running up Mont Ventoux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/14/chris-froome-forced-run-up-mountain-stage-12-tour-de-france-video>
 will define this race’ Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
“We’ve learned quickly,” says Thomas, the only member of Sky’s first Tour team 
to be alongside with Froome six years later. “When you have a system that works 
you build confidence and people come and buy into it.”

Recruitment is key, so too is team selection, and Thomas says: “The big 
difference this year is having [an] extra climber. In the past, we’ve never had 
five guys who can stay there in the end on their day. I had a mechanical [on 
the Culoz stage] and lost the group, [but] we still had Wout Poels and Sergio 
Henao. Mikel Landa was on a bad day, Mikel Nieve had a bad day, but that’s why 
we brought so many climbers.” He adds this caveat: “Froome still has to ride 
his bike and get up the hills by himself.”

Sky’s tactics on the climbs are obvious: set a pace that means rivals cannot 
attack, as practised in the past by teams such as Miguel Indurain’s Banesto and 
Lance Armstrong’s US Postal. They have fine-tuned it, however. “They’ve got the 
luxury of being able to rest guys for particular stages,” says Yates. “You 
would see guys sitting up in the Pyrenees. They trace the workload on Training 
Peaks – software used with power meters –, see who is where, how hard the guys 
are trying, then they can rest one guy or another.”

Yates also believes Sky have reached the place achieved by Banesto and US 
Postal, where their experience makes them hard to wrong-foot.The crosswind 
stage to Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/13/peter-sagan-wins-tour-de-france-stage-11-chris-froome-break>
 was one example of this, the other Froome’s crash, and Thomas’s speed of 
reaction and lack of panic. “You encounter different scenarios during the races 
and overcome them, which gives you confidence. When you are new to it, the 
whole thing is nerve-racking.”

It took the Team Sky physiologist Tim Kerrison 18 months to learn the ropes, 
but in 2011 he put his initial model in place: figuring out the power outputs 
needed at certain key points in the Tour and training the riders to hit those 
levels. A key revelation was that the traditional cycling practice of racing as 
“preparation” rather than training was counterproductive; racing could be 
easier than training and the time might be better spent at home or on camp.

Other innovations included altitude training camps, using races to practise 
controlling a peloton while holding a leader’s jersey and rehearsing post‑race 
protocols such as warming down and replenishing protein stores. The coaching 
model has been refined and early on the communication model across the team was 
tightened up. It is hard to imagine a Sky leader coming to a Tour after feeling 
below par for many weeks, as FDJ’s Thibaut Pinot did, and blaming illness on 
training in poor weather. That Sky rider would be training somewhere warm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fteam-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd777d1ea2f8bef7effb4e4f66595dfbfae7d697f%2F0_298_4956_2974%2F4956.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Team%20Sky%20show%20power%20of%20the%20pack%20is%20key%20to%20Tour%20de%20France%20dominance%20%7C%20William%20Fotheringham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fteam-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Team%20Sky%20show%20power%20of%20the%20pack%20is%20key%20to%20Tour%20de%20France%20dominance%20%7C%20William%20Fotheringham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fteam-sky-tour-de-france-dominance-chris-froome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd777d1ea2f8bef7effb4e4f66595dfbfae7d697f%2F0_298_4956_2974%2F4956.jpg>
 FDJ’s Thibaut Pinot arrived at the Tour having felt below par for many weeks 
and blamed his illness on training in poor weather. Photograph: Jeff 
Pachoud/AFP/Getty Images 
Brailsford’s strength has been finding the right people, such as sports 
director Nicolas Portal, and crucially he has learned from his mistakes. The 
dispute between Bradley Wiggins and Froome over leadership in 2012 has not been 
repeated. Mark Cavendish figured in the 2012 Tour team but after tensions 
around him there have been no more sprinters. “I think one of the big 
differences with our team is that all eight team-mates of mine are focused on 
one goal. If you look at other teams, they’ve got a sprinter, they’ve got two 
GC riders, they’re trying to put guys in the break for stage [wins],” Froome 
said last week.

There have been mistakes en route. Brailsford’s policy of zero-tolerance on 
hiring staff with doping records has backfired at times. There have been failed 
experiments in recruitment. The single-minded focus on winning the Tour means 
there has been no room for developing talent, which is why the Yates brothers, 
Adam and Simon, are riding for an Australian team. For a squad founded to 
inspire cyclists within Britain, that has always seemed like an anomaly.

It would be stretching the facts to say Team Sky are well liked. They polarise 
opinion, to say the least. Sean Yates remains an enthusiast; other directors 
could be heard muttering in frustration after the Mont Ventoux stage of the 
Tour. “The Tour isn’t a popularity contest,” Yates says with a smile. “But if 
it was, the chances are that Sky would adapt and win it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20France%3A%20Jon%20Izaguirre%20wins%20final%20mountain%20stage%20to%20Morzine%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20France%3A%20Jon%20Izaguirre%20wins%20final%20mountain%20stage%20to%20Morzine%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Ftour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video&media=>
Tour de France: Jon Izaguirre wins final mountain stage to Morzine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-jon-izaguirre-wins-mountain-stage-video> 