
Sir Dave Brailsford <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> is 
targeting success across the board having announced Team Sky’s full 2016 squad. 
The two-time Tour de France winner Chris Froome will again lead the team with 
the highest-profile addition coming in the shape of the 2104 world road race 
champion, Michal Kwiatkowski.

The Polish rider will join from Etixx- Quick Step at the turn of the year as 
Michal Golas, Benat Intxausti, Mikel Landa, Gianni Moscon, Alex Peters andDanny 
van Poppel have also been confirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/25/team-sky-sign-danny-van-poppel-trek>
 as new Team Sky personnel.

With recruits on board and six current riders being released, Brailsford wants 
a strong year from his squad.

“Today I am announcing the full Team Sky line up for 2016,” he said. “It’s a 
strong team, led byChris Froome <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome>
, that will ensure we can be even more competitive in all the major races, from 
Grand Tours to Classics.

“We have recruited some of the best young talent from around the world in 
Michal Kwiatkowski and Mikel Landa for example. At the same time we have been 
able to keep the nucleus of this year’s successful team together by re-signing 
riders of the calibre of Vasil Kiryienka, the new time-trial world champion.”

Brailsford also praised the six Britons who will form an important part of the 
team for 2016 onwards - with Peters joining Froome, Andrew Fenn, Geraint 
Thomas, Nicolas Roache and Luke Rowe as a nucleus for the team.

“Cycling is a global sport and Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> will always look to recruit the 
best riders from around the world,” added Brailsford.

“But we remain a British team with a strong British core. I’m pleased that the 
five British riders who were such a big part of this year’s successful Tour de 
France team will all be riding for us again in 2016 along with the new signing, 
Alex Peters.

“Britain has become a cycling nation over the last decade. We want more and 
more people to love the bike and Team Sky will continue to play its part in 
this cycling revolution.”
 