
The founders of LinkedIn <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/linkedin> and 
eBay are donating a combined $20m (£16.4m) to fund academic research aimed at 
ensuring the safety of artificial intelligences.

LinkedIn’s founder Reid Hoffman and the Omidyar network, the philanthropic 
investment firm set up byeBay <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay> 
founder Pierre Omidyar, are donating $10m each to the Ethics and Governance of 
Artificial Intelligence Fund, which will distribute money to researchers 
working on the tough ethical problems raised by AI.

“There’s an urgency to ensure that AI benefits society and minimises harm,” 
said Hoffman. “AI decision-making can influence many aspects of our world – 
education, transportation, healthcare, criminal justice and the economy – yet 
data and code behind those decisions can be largely invisible.”

The specific research areas the fund will focus on aren’t fixed, but the 
possibilities include ethical design – “how do we build and design technologies 
that consider ethical frameworks and moral values as central features of 
technological innovation?” – and accountability in AI – “what kinds of controls 
do we need to minimise AI’s potential harm to society and maximise its 
benefits?”

The Knight Foundation is also contributing $5m to the fund, and the William 
and Flora Hewlett Foundation and Raptor Group founder Jim Pallotta are giving 
$1m each. The founding academic institutions for the initiative will be the MIT 
Media Lab and Harvard University’s Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society.

Alberto Ibargüen, president of Knight Foundation, said: “artificial 
intelligence agents will impact our lives in every society on Earth. Technology 
and commerce will see to that. Since even algorithms have parents and those 
parents have values that they instil in their algorithmic progeny, we want to 
influence the outcome by ensuring ethical behaviour, and governance that 
includes the interests of the diverse communities that will be affected.”

The fund is one of many new bodies aimed at shaping the future of AI in a 
positive – or, at least, thoughtful – direction. ThePartnership on AI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/28/google-facebook-amazon-ibm-microsoft-partnership-on-ai-tech-firms>
, a collaborative effort involving Google, Facebook, Amazon, IBM and Microsoft, 
was launched in September 2016 to “establish AI best practices” but has yet to 
do anything publicly other than announce its own creation; the Elon Musk-backed 
OpenAI project,announced in December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/12/artificial-intelligence-elon-musk-backs-open-project-to-benefit-humanity>
, was more directly aimed at “advancing digital intelligence in the way that is 
most likely to benefit humanity as a whole”. It haspublished research to that 
effect <https://openai.com/blog/> fairly consistently in the year since it was 
established.
 