
Ted Baker has reported a jump in sales and profit, saying it had overcome 
“challenging” trading conditions on Britain’s high street in the first half of 
the year.

The upmarket British fashion brand, which does not advertise, said on Tuesday 
that pre-tax profit increased by a fifth to £21.5m in the 28 weeks to 13 
August, while revenue was up 14.4% to £259.5m.

“Ted Baker continues to perform well across all distribution channels despite 
challenging trading conditions across our markets,” said Ray Kelvin, the 
brand’s founder and chief executive.

The clothing and accessories retailer said revenue rose 8.5% in its UK and 
Europe division, to £131.2m, “despite tough trading conditions and recent 
events in northern Europe”.


Investors responded positively to the results, with shares in the company up 
5%.

Reaction to its new autumn/winter collection had been pleasing, the company 
said, but “external factors” in markets including the US meant trading 
continued to be difficult.

The consumer backdrop was also challenging in Asia, but the company said it 
was positive about the long-term opportunities in the region.

It added: “While the group has had a good start to the financial year, our 
results for the full year will, as always, be dependent on the second half 
trading period. Underpinned by the strength of the Ted Baker brand, our 
business model and balanced distribution channels, we remain confident of 
delivering continued growth and development.”

Profit was boosted in the first half of the year by a £1.2m foreign currency 
gain on its overseas earnings resulting from thesharp fall in the value of the 
pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/qa-falling-pound-rising-markets>
 since theBrexit vote <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> on 
23 June.


The British Retail Consortium warned on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/retailers-warn-weak-pound-blows-consumer-confidence-british-retail-consortium>
 that a weak pound was likely to drive up companies’ import costs.

Ted Baker said sales over the first half were helped by investment in news 
stores and online performance, with internet sales up almost 30% at £29.7m. The 
company has 470 stores, concessions and outlets worldwide, with 186 in the UK.

George Salmon, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said the results were 
encouraging. “Any aspirational fashion brand that can consistently grow sales 
across five continents without advertising is doing something right.

“This is the company’s first update since Brexit, and is a strong showing in 
tougher trading conditions. The second half of the year is more important to 
Ted Baker than the first; nonetheless, the news that sales growth remains 
robust provides reassurance that the group can continue to thrive, even in 
challenging times.”
 