


It is widely recognised that, if the transformations outlined in the 
sustainable development goals 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld> (SDGs) 
are to be achieved, respecting, protecting and fulfilling the human rights of 
women and girls – including their sexual and reproductive rights – will be 
essential.

However, there is a significant barrier to this that frequently goes 
unmentioned: the role of some religious institutions and conservative religious 
ideologies.

Sexual health gets little attention in a crisis, with devastating results | 
Tewodros Melesse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/sexual-health-little-attention-crisis-devastating-results-reproductive-healthcare-world-humanitarian-summit>
For example, until about a month ago, the US Department of Health and Human 
Services provided$10m (£6.8m) a year 
<http://www.bustle.com/articles/141134-obamas-2017-budget-takes-a-realistic-approach-to-sex-education-but-it-will-struggle-to-pass>
 in grants for abstinence-based education, an approach informed directly by 
Christian ideology and initiated by President Ronald Reagan. Over the past 25 
years, the US government has spent more than $1.5bn supporting this approach, 
despite the fact that there isno research 
<http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/2016/02/18/president-obama-cuts-funding-for-all-abstinence-only-sex-education/>
 to demonstrate it achieves sustainable positive results.

On the contrary, mounting evidence supports the value of comprehensive 
sexuality education (CSE) in advancing young people’s sexual and reproductive 
health, as well as their rights. A recentUnesco review 
<http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002357/235707e.pdf> of 87 CSE 
programmes, including 29 in poorer countries, found many positive outcomes for 
adolescents.

Lack of access to contraception and safe abortion is a global crisis marked by 
a tension between ideology and evidence. In Latin America, theimpact of the 
Zika virus 
<http://globalhealth.thelancet.com/2016/02/16/what-solution-isnt-parallel-zika-and-hiv-viruses-women>
 means ideology holds sway: women are advised to “avoid pregnancy”, but there 
has been no corresponding provision of easy access to affordable and acceptable 
modern contraception and no repealing of laws that criminalise abortion. In 
Namibia, a disproportionate number of girls and young women contract HIV; 
instead of addressing the root causes, authorities tell women living with HIV 
that they should not have children. In some cases this has been enforced through
coerced sterilisation 
<http://www.cnn.com/2012/07/30/world/africa/namibia-forced-sterilization/>. 

Research from the Association for Women’s Rights in Development (Awid) details 
the many ways that religious fundamentalism undermines progress on sexual and 
reproductive health and rights (SRHR). The report,The Devil is in the Details 
<http://www.awid.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/final_web_the_devil_is_in_the_details.pdf>
 (pdf), points out that women’s bodies – and the bodies of people who don’t 
conform to norms of binary gender and heterosexuality – are often a major focus 
for religious fundamentalists. Curtailing women’s choices about their bodies 
and sex lives is a common denominator across different forms of fundamentalism.

In addition to struggles at local and national level, an ongoing battle 
persists in international human rights spaces. In March 2016, the UN Commission 
on the Status of Women agreed <http://www.un.org/press/en/2016/wom2077.doc.htm> 
by consensus to a resolution on women, girls and HIV. For many women’s rights 
activists, the resolution’s failure to call on governments to implement CSE as 
an important component of HIV prevention came as a disappointment. On the other 
hand, for the first time in several years, there was no reference to 
abstinence-only education.

'Stop making sex a taboo': young people speak out on family planning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/08/stop-making-sex-a-taboo-young-people-speak-out-on-family-planning>
These examples expose widespread tension between protecting women’s sexual and 
reproductive rights and implementing programmes that reflect religious norms. 
In the UN, these tensions are evident in the increasingly strong presence of 
religious fundamentalists – as some NGOs and member states, and the Holy See, 
articulate fundamentalist precepts as government policy, and tactically portray 
demands for SRHR and gender equality as infringements on traditional values.

Such a fraught dynamic hampers sustainable development. Research from Awid 
notes the difficulty in challenging an “us” versus “them” agenda. “It can be 
difficult,” they note, “to question or challenge community leaders or national 
leaders when they define how things are supposed to be done on the basis that 
it is ‘our culture.’”

 Weak health infrastructure and capacity create fertile ground for religious 
fundamentalism. Awid notes that where states have stopped providing services 
such as healthcare and schooling, fundamentalists have stepped into the breach. 
For this, “they reap rewards: the loyalty of the populations they serve and 
access to new channels to spread ideology”.One analysis of Pepfar 
<http://tcs.sagepub.com/content/32/2/53>, a far-reaching US government 
programme of foreign aid for HIV programming, found that “where social services 
have assumed the form of chronic emergency relief … religious organisations 
have come to play an increasingly prominent role.”

The analysis added: “In the context of an ongoing public health crisis, Pepfar 
has institutionalised the social authority of the Pentecostal and charismatic 
churches.”

Awid urges development actors to move away from programming that minimises 
state responsibility for providing services and social safety nets. At the same 
time, they stress the importance of prioritising progressive local partners, to 
avoid giving resources or legitimacy to religious fundamentalists who curtail 
women’s rights.

Feminist organisations coming together to mark International Day of Action for 
Women’s Health <http://www.may28.org/> on Saturday do so with a sense of 
urgency. The spread of Zika and its impact on pregnant women and their 
children, and thedisproportionate impact of HIV on girls and young women in 
eastern and southern Africa 
<http://csis.org/files/publication/150410_Fleischman_HIVAdolescentGirls_Web.pdf>
 (pdf), shows the need to act now. Collective action will be vital to advancing 
gender justice and sustainable development.

• Susana T Fried is a global health justice partnership fellow at Yale 
University and was previously senior gender adviser at theUN Development 
Programme <http://www.undp.org/>
 