
Relegated to the bottom of the festive booze hierarchy, beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer> tends to gets a bad rap at 
Christmas. Unfairly so, because seasonal beers can be so much more than cans of 
lager that accumulate dust at parties while everyone guzzles eggnog. Belgian 
breweries have been turning out unabashedly sweet, spicy winter ales for 
centuries, and now everyone else, from craft breweries to supermarkets, has 
followed suit.


While anything that tastes like the boozy run-off from Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> pudding is welcome at my 
dinner table, the best festive beers should also have a sense of occasion about 
them. Or at least the potential for pantomime drama, whether that comes from 
tapping a mini-keg without it detonating, or attempting to mull a bottle of 
cherry beer (from experience these are activities best attempted before, not 
after, drinking an 11% stout).

Here are some of the best traditional – and not so traditional – Christmas 
beers to enjoy this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ften-of-the-best-christmas-beers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c09d66df87a65cae48a4b6aea2828d0d24d3031%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20of%20the%20best%20Christmas%20beers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ften-of-the-best-christmas-beers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20of%20the%20best%20Christmas%20beers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ften-of-the-best-christmas-beers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c09d66df87a65cae48a4b6aea2828d0d24d3031%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Greenwich ale, Santa’s Little Helper, Cuvée de Noel, Tsjeeses 2015 and plum 
pudding porter. 
Plum pudding porter, Wiper and True

(£4.65 for 500ml, hopburnsblack.co.uk 
<https://shop.hopburnsblack.co.uk/products/wipertrueplumpuddingporter65500ml>)

With a name like plum pudding porter, this generous beer could have rolled 
straight out of a Dickens novel. It radiates ripe, stone fruit – plums and 
apricots – and Christmas spice. In the glass, it’s a thick, almost 
impenetrable, Christmas pudding brown, with sugary marzipan and spice on the 
nose. Juicy and fruity and dark, but with a porter’s roasted malty backbone of 
coffee and bitter chocolate.


Santa’s Little Helper, Mikkeller

(£12.50 for 750ml, branches of BrewDog and BottleDog shops)

The innovative Danish brewer’s modern take on a Belgian Christmas ale has all 
the booziness you’d expect of a strong Belgian beer, without being sickly 
sweet. Glowing golden amber in the glass, it smells like warmed fruit and 
berries, and tastes like caramel, with a hint of astringency that could come 
from the coriander seeds it’s brewed with. Because it is so full-bodied, the 
rich, candied orange peel taste lingers and lingers – this would be amazing 
paired with dark chocolate and dried fruit.


Cuvée de Noel, St Feuillien

(€3.29 (£2.77) for 330ml, belgianbeerz.com 
<http://www.belgianbeerz.com/products/st-feuillien-cuvee-de-noel-33cl?variant=423805557>
)

One to enjoy after Midnight Mass, this abbey-style beer (which effectively 
means it’s brewed by monks but doesn’t fulfil the strict criteria needed to be 
considered a Trappist beer) is a Christmas classic. Boasting a strong, 
brandy-like nose, with a slightly sour note, it tastes rich and sweet and has a 
musty, barrel-aged depth. Brewed with liquorice, there’s also a very subtle 
undercurrent of salt and aniseed.


Port-barrel-aged Greenwich ale, Meantime for Marks and Spencer

(£5.50 for 750ml, branches of Marks and Spencer)

Meantime’s broody dark ale promises all the fun of popping a champagne cork 
without the price tag and with a (potentially) milder hangover. Served in a 
wine bottle with a cork, it smells like dark chocolate and woodsmoke, but 
tastes like juicy berries. There is a whiff of port from the barrel-ageing 
process, but not enough to make it taste heavy or winey – it’s more like 
molten, fizzy, dark cherry chocolate.


Tsjeeses 2015, De Struise Brouwers

(£4.75 for 330ml, Beer Gonzo 
<http://www.beergonzo.co.uk/buy/beer/de-struise-brouwers-tsjeeses-p2434>)

A mischievous little beer that packs an extraordinary – 10% ABV kind of 
extraordinary – punch. It’s thick, dense and orange in look and taste; slightly 
floral on the nose, with some botanicals. It also has a juicy, mango mouthfeel 
(so, one for fans of strong IPA) and sticky toffee notes that give way to 
citrus bitterness at the end – think candied orange peel. This is a beer that 
ages really well, and the 2015 is delicious at the moment. Look out for the 
2016 early next year and stash it in the cellar if you’ve got the self-control.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ften-of-the-best-christmas-beers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cab23183c4bf088100a7031c7b526bf90a6e472%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20of%20the%20best%20Christmas%20beers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ften-of-the-best-christmas-beers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20of%20the%20best%20Christmas%20beers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ften-of-the-best-christmas-beers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cab23183c4bf088100a7031c7b526bf90a6e472%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Black Christmas, St Bernardus Christmas ale, Shepherd Neame Christmas ale, 
Southwold Christmas ale and Glühkriek. 
Christmas ale, Shepherd Neame


(£20 for 5x500ml, Shepherd Neame)

One for real ale enthusiasts. British hops lend this beer an earthy body 
that’s a welcome break from the sweet fruitiness of a lot of Christmas beer. 
There is a little spiciness and a touch of sweet candy and raisin, but nothing 
overpowering – and nothing you’d object to if you drank it by the pint, or used 
it to wash down roast potatoes.


Southwold Christmas ale, Adnams for Marks and Spencer

(£2.20 for 500ml or £20 for a 5-litre keg, Marks and Spencer 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/southwold-christmas-ale-case-of-20/p/p60077061?OmnitureRedirect=christmas+ale&pdpredirect>
)

Adnams ale is usually evocative of summers spent at its seaside brewery and 
warm afternoons eating fish and chips on the shore. But its Christmas ale – 
available, to my intense delight, in a DIY keg – is its wintry, fireside twin. 
Pouring a mahogany brown, this is a festive beer for drinkers who want to get 
as far away from nutmeg and dried cherry flavours as possible: it is toasty, 
caramel and toffee-ish, with all the depth of the brewery’s distinctive yeast.


Black Christmas, Weird Beard

(£2.55 for 330ml, Beer Gonzo 
<http://www.beergonzo.co.uk/buy/beer/weird-beard-brew-co-black-christmas-p2649?r=%2fsearch%3fq%3dBlack%2520Christmas%26u%3d1>
)

Fabulously bitter, this cranberry stout is a great refresher to enjoy at the 
end of a long night of sweet wine and port. It pours jet black with a thick 
head and smells like coffee, nuts, chocolates and vanilla. So far, so stout, 
which means that the taste – almost burned, like cocoa nibs and espresso – is a 
welcome surprise. This beer is not as creamy as you might expect and any 
sweetness comes from the tart cranberries it has been brewed with.

Christmas ale, St Bernardus

(£4.50 for 330ml, Beer Gonzo 
<http://www.beergonzo.co.uk/buy/beer/st-bernardus-brouwerij-st-bernardus-christmas-ale-p776?r=%2fsearch%3fq%3dSt.%2520Bernardus%2520Christmas%2520Ale%26u%3d1>
)

 With its soft banana and herb notes, this offering from the famous St 
Bernardus brewery in Belgium is one for fans of wheat beers. It is punchy and 
strong at 10% ABV. Factor in the cloves and Christmas spices it is laced with 
and this will keep you positively toasty this winter.

Glühkriek, Liefmans

(£7.75 for 750ml, Beer Gonzo 
<http://www.beergonzo.co.uk/buy/beer/liefmans-gl%C3%BChkriek-p731>)

Mulled beer sounds like the kind of bad idea you might have at the end of a 
raucous Christmas party. In fact, this warmable cherry beer is an absolute 
world-beater. Heat it gently, as you would wine and it gives off the most 
overwhelming rich cherry, spice and marzipan aroma. Like mulled wine it tastes 
best glugged from a mug – all sweet fruit and cinnamon, nutmeg and cloves, but 
with none of the spice detritus to deal with at the end. Don’t try to drink 
this cold, and it’s probably best not try mulling any other beers you have 
lying around.


Follow Liz Dodd on Twitter @liz_dodd <https://twitter.com/liz_dodd>
 