
More than 120,000 people, most of them children, are at risk of starving to 
death next year in areas of Nigeria affected by theBoko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> insurgency, the United Nations 
is warning.

Intense fighting in parts of Nigeria, Chad, Niger and Cameroon has left more 
than 2 million people displaced, farmers unable to harvest their crops and aid 
groups unable to reach isolated communities. One small state inNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> has more displaced people than the 
entire refugee influx that arrived in Europe last year.

A Guardian correspondent saw dozens of skeletal babies at a makeshift camp in 
the regional centre Maiduguri. Many had plastic nodules stuck to their skull, 
to allow the nurses to attach them to a drip. Many children are so thin their 
scalp is the only place where a visible vein can be found.

And yet despite these appalling scenes, Maiduguri is among the best served 
places in a region the size of Belgium. Much of the area is still insecure 
because of the war withBoko Haram <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram>
, and countless thousands have not made it to population centres where some 
degree of care is available.

Orla Fagan, a Nigeria-based spokesperson for UN’s Office for the Coordination 
of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA), said: “You’re looking at over 120,000 deaths 
next year if you can’t get aid to them – and they’re mostly children. If we 
can’t reach people with food and nutritional assistance there will be deaths.”

Kevin Watkins, chief executive of Save the Children, said following a recent 
trip that the entire region was “teetering on the brink”.

“We know in areas that we can get to that there are severe and acute 
malnutrition rates,” Watkins said. But beyond that, he said, “there are pockets 
that are probably far worse than the areas that we are dealing with. And the 
estimates are that there are probably 400,000 children who are in a condition 
of very severe malnutrition.”

He said unless emergency measures were taken, 200 children would die every day 
over the next year. A crucial meeting is planned for Abuja next Friday (2 
December) at which aid agencies will try to agree a plan of action.


“And yet despite this background, this is a completely hidden emergency,” 
Watkins said. “The international community hasn’t responded on any scale at 
all.”

Nigerian clashes cast doubt on claim that Boko Haram is on its knees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/nigerian-clashes-doubt-boko-haram-technically-defeated>
Boko Haram, a jihadi group, has lost ground in the past year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/nigerian-clashes-doubt-boko-haram-technically-defeated>
 but its insurgency has left large areas of farmland inaccessible and many 
roads unnavigable by aid convoys. The situation has been compounded by a lack 
of international support: UN funding for the Nigerian crisis is 61% or $297m 
short of its target.

Kashim Shettima, the governor of Borno, the Nigerian state that has borne the 
brunt of the insurgency, said the farming that usually sustains locals had 
collapsed. “Most of our communities have not been able to till their soils for 
the past four years,” Shettima told the Guardian. “It’s just unimaginable; 80% 
of the people [in Borno] were denied access to their farms by Boko Haram.”


As a result, at least 55,000 people in north-east Nigeria are in a famine-like 
condition, Fagan says. According to UN classifications, these people are at the 
fifth and worst stage of food insecurity.

A further 1.8 million people are at the fourth phase, which is defined as a 
crisis, while 6.1 million are at the third phase, which constitutes an 
emergency. UNOCHA expects both figures to rise to 2 million and 8.3 million 
respectively within the next year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdisplaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13afaab8952d6e5806511a384fd4c1637e62022a%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tens%20of%20thousands%20of%20children%20at%20risk%20of%20starvation%20in%20Nigeria%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdisplaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tens%20of%20thousands%20of%20children%20at%20risk%20of%20starvation%20in%20Nigeria%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdisplaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13afaab8952d6e5806511a384fd4c1637e62022a%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A doctor checks a malnourished child at a camp in Yola. Photograph: Sunday 
Alamba/AP 
“It’s the biggest crisis on the continent and it’s being ignored,” said Fagan. 
“What’s happening in Aleppo is horrendous, but it’s equally bad in north-east 
Nigeria – it’s just a different context.”

Widespread unemployment among displaced people has led to starvation even in 
places with access to aid.

In Maiduguri, which has been overwhelmed by more than 600,000 displaced 
people, the Guardian visited malnutrition clinics run by Médecins Sans 
Frontières. Most patients were the children of unemployed displaced people who 
had been unable to provide them with enough food.

At a nearby camp for 3,000 displaced people, its leader, Bulama Modusalim, 
said he had lost count of the number of residents who had died of starvation. 
“Hunger is killing us,” he said, holding up a dangerously thin toddler. “People 
are dying of hunger every day.”

The child’s mother, Hauwa Nana, 35, said one of her five children had starved 
to death since they fled to Maiduguri and she feared her toddler would be next. 
“I can only feed them once a day,” she said.

In Monguno, an isolated town accessible to journalists only by helicopter, aid 
groups said the situation was just as dire.

“The people here totally depend on aid,” said Mathieu Kinde, project manager 
for Alima, the first non-governmental organisation to reach the town after it 
was freed from Boko Haram control. “The host community can’t farm their land 
because if they go, they sometimes get killed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdisplaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fa004befbdfb0759310c206a91b11ab9c030e80%2F0_375_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tens%20of%20thousands%20of%20children%20at%20risk%20of%20starvation%20in%20Nigeria%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdisplaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tens%20of%20thousands%20of%20children%20at%20risk%20of%20starvation%20in%20Nigeria%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fdisplaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fa004befbdfb0759310c206a91b11ab9c030e80%2F0_375_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A mother feeds her malnourished child at clinic run by Médecins Sans 
Frontières in Maiduguri. Photograph: Sunday Alamba/AP 
Officials and aid workers warn that if the situation continues it could foment 
extremism in the area and migration flows farther afield. “A hungry young man 
is easily susceptible to the manias of religious demagogues like [Boko Haram 
founder] Mohammed Yusuf and [leader of the insurgents] Abubakar Shekau,” said 
Shettima.

The insurgency has created huge migration flows within Nigeria and Toby 
Lanzer, the UN assistant secretary general and regional humanitarian 
coordinator forthe Sahel, warned that many of displaced people may eventually 
try to reach Europe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fnigeria-on-the-brink-of-famine-children-are-dying-from-starvation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigeria%20on%20the%20brink%20of%20famine%3A%20'Children%20are%20dying%20from%20starvation'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fnigeria-on-the-brink-of-famine-children-are-dying-from-starvation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigeria%20on%20the%20brink%20of%20famine%3A%20%27Children%20are%20dying%20from%20starvation%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fnigeria-on-the-brink-of-famine-children-are-dying-from-starvation-video&media=>
Nigeria on the brink of famine: ‘Children are dying from starvation’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/14/nigeria-on-the-brink-of-famine-children-are-dying-from-starvation-video>
“You’ve been totally focused on people arriving [in Europe] because of 
problems in Syria and Afghanistan,” he said. “But over the course of the next 
five years, I can predict – and I’d be willing to bet a month’s salary – that 
the proportion of people who will arrive in Europe from Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon 
and via Niger will grow substantially.”
 