
A travel agency has reported a surge in holiday bookings outside of school 
holidays following thehigh court ruling in favour of a father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/13/high-court-father-fine-term-time-holiday-jon-platt>
 who took his daughter on holiday in term time.

Online travel agency sunshine.co.uk <https://www.sunshine.co.uk/> revealed an 
88% increase in the number of family holiday bookings (classed as two adults 
and one or more child between the ages of five and 16) during school term time 
the weekend after the ruling, compared with the previous weekend. There was 
also a 32% decline in bookings during July and August. An analysis of the 
bookings showed that the first week of July or the last week of September were 
the most popular weeks for parents to take their children out of school.

Cheapflights.co.uk <http://www.cheapflights.co.uk/> also found a difference 
when it compared searches between noon on Friday 13 May (the court ruling 
having come just after noon on that day) and midnight on Monday 17 May with the 
same time the previous weekend. Searches for flights to Lanzarote andMálaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/25/malaga-holiday-guide-spain-best-hotels-bars-restaurants>
 during the spring term (departing between 4 June and 12 July) were up 50% and 
21% respectively while autumn term-time searches increased by 32% and 50%. At 
the same time, searches to both destinations for the school summer holidays 
fell.

Some see the high court ruling as opening the way for parents to take their 
children out of school so long as they have a good attendance record. The 
decision has prompted the Department for Education to look again at policy with 
regard to term-time absences. The case has generated huge interest and is 
likely to give rise to similar challenges. The Guardian’s report on the court 
ruling drew nearly 3,000 comments from readers,including many teachers and 
governors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/13/should-parents-take-their-children-on-holiday-during-term-time>
 questioning the wisdom of the law.
 