
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> hopes to deliver better 
than expected annual profits after higher sales of food, clothes and toys in 
the UK resulted in a strong Christmas performance.

Dave Lewis, the chief executive of Tesco, said the group had taken a 
“significant step on in the turnaround of the business” as he revealed a 
slightly better than expected 0.7% rise in sales at established UK stores in 
the six weeks to 7 January.

However, Tesco’s shares dropped by 2.3%, making it the biggest faller on the 
FTSE 100 in early morning trading, as the retailer’s international performance 
disappointed. The company said underlying sales rose by just 0.7% in Europe in 
the three months to 26 November, hit by a heavily competitive environment in 
Poland. Sales in Asia were also well below expectations after a slowdown in 
Thailand following the death of the king.

Related: Record Christmas at Sainsbury’s 'shows logic of Argos takeover' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/sainsburys-record-sales-christmas-week-morrisons-argos-sales>

In the UK, Lewis said Tesco had improved customer service and ranges, helping 
to boost sales of party food by 24%, premium wine by 20% and Free From 
specialist allergy-free foods by 18%.

Britain’s biggest food retailer said it had achieved the sales growth despite 
deciding not to repeat last year’s loyalty card promotion, which it said had 
hit performance by 0.8%. Sales of the group’s F&F clothing range rose 4.3%.

Richard Lim, the chief executive of consultancy Retail Economics, said Tesco’s 
turnaround continued to gather momentum. “Its laser-like focus on the core UK 
food business through deeper price investment and further asset disposals has 
halted the loss of market share against the smaller but faster growing 
discounters,” he said.

Unlike rival Sainsbury’s, Tesco said its growth was underpinned by strong food 
sales, which rose by 2% in the UK over the 19 weeks to 7 January despite price 
deflation of just under 1%, a slight slowdown from earlier in the year.


Lewis said “inflationary pressure is there in many categories.” But he said 
Tesco would be “working shoulder to shoulder to mitigate the impact of the 
falling pound”.

He said it was on track to meet its promised target of £1.2bn of operating 
profit this year “and maybe slightly more”, as the sales rise had been achieved 
alongside improvements in efficiency.


Tesco won back market share in the UK for the first quarterly period in five 
years before Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/tesco-increases-grocery-market-share-sales-rise>
 as shoppers responded to price cuts and investment in customer service.

Underlying sales in the UK rose by 1.8% – towards the top end of analysts’ 
expectations of between 1.25% and 2% growth for the three months to 26 November.

That was a step up in pace from the 0.9% rise reported for the three months to 
the end of August – the retailer’s third quarter of growth in a row. It also 
came after a strong Christmas for Tesco last year.

Almost all the leading listed supermarket groups have had a good festive 
season – Sainsbury’shad a record Christmas week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/sainsburys-record-sales-christmas-week-morrisons-argos-sales>
, reporting its first sales growth since March, while Morrisons reported its
best Christmas performance in seven years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/morrisons-enjoys-some-remarkable-christmas-cheer>
, with sales up 2.9%.

On Thursday, Waitrose reported that sales rose by 2.8% at established stores 
in the six weeks to 31 December boosted by 4.8% growth at its convenience 
stores. Performance was also enhanced by a 4.9% rise in sales at Waitrose’s 
growing number of in-store cafes, restaurants, wine and snack bars.

Asda, the UK’s third biggest supermarket chain, is expected to have had a 
trickier trading period. Its performance will not become clear until its parent 
group, Walmart, reports next month.
 