
The chief executive of Tesco has fired a fresh warning shot at multinational 
consumer brand owners, such as Marmite’s parent companyUnilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/unilever>, by asking them not to push 
currency-related price hikes on to British shoppers.

In his first comments since last month’s “Marmitegate” stand-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
, Dave Lewis said consumers should not be asked to pay “inflated prices” due to 
fluctuations in currencies, such as the post-referendum slump in the pound.



“I spent 28 years working in a multinational and there are always elements of 
currency volatility in businesses like that,” said Lewis, who joinedTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> from Unilever two years ago. “When 
there is devaluation, what multinationals do is they present sales at constant 
and current exchange rates and the City understands.

“The only thing we would ask is that companies in that position don’t ask UK 
customers to pay inflated prices in order that their reporting currency is 
maintained. They don’t do that to countries outside of the UK.”

The Marmite row is the first sign of the true cost of Brexit for food producers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/17/marmite-is-the-first-sign-of-cost-of-brexit-for-food-producers>
The Marmite dispute resulted in gaps on Tesco’s shelves after the UK’s largest 
supermarket chain refused to accept price increases of about 10% on household 
brands ranging from Marmite to Persil and Flora in order to accommodate the 
falling price of sterling. The stand-off was resolved quickly, although neither 
side has disclosed the terms of the peace deal.

Sainsbury’s chief executive Mike Coupe has also argued that major suppliers 
should 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/sainsburys-prices-first-half-sales-fall>
 take the hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/sainsburys-prices-first-half-sales-fall>
 resulting from the falling value of the pound, as many were far more 
profitable than the retailers they served. Since the Brexit vote, suppliers 
have been demanding higher prices, withBirds Eye fish fingers and Walkers 
crisps among the high-profile examples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/06/birds-eye-walkers-supermarkets-price-rise-brexit-vote-pound>
.

Lewis said it was a multinational’s right to try to push through a price 
increase but it was also Tesco’s right to say “we will no longer stock them if 
they do so without a justified reason”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftescos-chief-warns-global-brands-weak-pound-marmitegate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf98635f8f3b47b88f2f8351bd37f41faaac52a2%2F0_132_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20chief%20warns%20brands%20not%20to%20make%20UK%20shoppers%20pay%20for%20weak%20pound&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftescos-chief-warns-global-brands-weak-pound-marmitegate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20chief%20warns%20brands%20not%20to%20make%20UK%20shoppers%20pay%20for%20weak%20pound&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftescos-chief-warns-global-brands-weak-pound-marmitegate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf98635f8f3b47b88f2f8351bd37f41faaac52a2%2F0_132_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Tesco CEO Dave Lewis. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
Tesco was not “naive” to inflationary pressures in the marketplace, Lewis 
said, but with a large commodities team sourcing ingredients for its own brand 
food business, it had a lot of insight with which to negotiate supplier deals. 
“Where a cost is real and justified, we will sit down [with a supplier] and 
discuss how we can offset it,” he said.

Official figures 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/inflationandpriceindices/bulletins/producerpriceinflation/oct2016>
 this week fanned fears that the weak pound was raising costs for British 
businesses and would soon be felt by consumers. The price of materials and 
fuels for manufacturers rose 12.2% in the year to October 2016, the biggest 
increase for five years. There were also signs they had started to pass some of 
those higher costs to customers as factory gate prices rose 2.1% on the year, 
the biggest increase for more than four years.

Lewis said Tesco was already seeing inflation in certain categories, singling 
out pork, with the currency impact being felt “commodity by commodity, product 
by product”.

After five years of declines, Tesco has started to win back market share in 
the UK as shoppers respond to price cuts and investment in customer service. 
According to the most recent data from Kantar Worldpanel, sales rose by 2.2% in 
the 12 weeks to 6 November, up from1.3% reported last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/tesco-increases-grocery-market-share-sales-rise>
, making it the only one of the big four chains to record growth.

Toblerone gets more gappy, but its fans are not happy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gets-more-gappy-but-its-fans-are-not-happy>
Lewis is leading the turnaround of the grocer, which faced the biggest crisis 
in its history in 2014 when a whistleblower alerted him to an accounting 
scandal that revealedprofits had been artificially inflated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/02/tesco-faces-150m-claim-from-shareholders-to-recoup-losses>
. Following a Serious Fraud Office investigation,three former Tesco executives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/tesco-trial-date-executives-accounting-court>
 will face trial on fraud charges next year.

His comments came as Tesco’s senior management briefed reporters from its new 
headquarters in Welwyn Garden City in Hertfordshire on its three-year plan to 
rebuild profits.

In the wake of the accounting scandal, Lewis closed its previous head office 
in nearby Cheshunt in favour of the new campus, where buildings have names such 
as Smile and Pear, and where top executives hot desk.

At last month’s half-year update, Lewis set a target that by 2020 it would 
earn between 3.5p and 4p 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/tesco-supermarket-sales-rise-profits-tumble>
 of operating profit for every £1 customers spend. The group currently makes 
2.2p in the pound. To get there, however, the grocer needs to slash a further 
£1.5bn from its cost base by making its stores and distribution network more 
efficient.

Tesco plans to unlock cash tied up in its large store estate by selling the 
“air rights” above stores in prime locations. Finance director Alan Stewart 
said an initial 28 stores has been identified for projects that could lead to 
developers building flats over stores and excess car park space turned into new 
residential or business premises.

The chain also plans tie-ins with Sir Philip Green’s Arcadia group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/tesco-to-open-dozens-more-arcadia-fashion-concessions-stores>
, potentially opening dozens more concessions for its Dorothy Perkins, Burton, 
Evans and Wallis chains inside its supermarkets.
 