
A pick-up in sales at supermarket giant Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has been overshadowed by the 
£5.9bn hole that has opened up in its pension fund.

Tesco said that since February its pension deficit had ballooned from £3.2bn 
to £5.9bn due to the collapse in bond yields after Britain voted to leave the 
European Union. Its finance director Alan Stewart said it did not have to 
increase its contributions to the scheme but pensions experts suggested the 
problem could hinder the resumption of dividend payments to investors.

The grocer’s shares jumped nearly 10% after chief executive Dave Lewis told 
the City that sales at UK stores had risen 0.9% in the three months to the end 
of August – the retailer’s third quarter of growth in a row. “These results 
indicate a business moving out of crisis to one that’s showing real confidence 
in its recovery,” he said, pointing to like-for-like sales growth across the 
group.

Pre-tax profits for the six months to the end of August were down 28% at £71m 
but underlying earnings, excluding one-off items, jumped by 60% to £596m. The 
retailer is expected to make full year profits of £1.2bn. The shares closed up 
18.4p at 207.1p.

With the business now “extremely stable” Lewis said it was time to “step it 
up”, setting out a three year plan to rebuild profits whichcollapsed to a 
£6.4bn annual loss in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/22/tesco-suffers-record-64bn-loss>
.

He set a target that by 2020 it would earn between 3.5p and 4p of operating 
profit for every £1 customers spend. The group currently makes 2.2p in the £1. 
To get there, however, Lewis said the grocer would need to slash a further 
£1.5bn from its cost by making its stores and distribution network more 
efficient.

Tesco faces £150m claim from shareholders to recoup losses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/02/tesco-faces-150m-claim-from-shareholders-to-recoup-losses>
Lewis has already made savings of £500m but he insisted the new programme was 
not about cutting jobs in stores, where the number of staff serving customers 
has actually increased by 12,000 over the past two years.

Instead, the former Unilever executive has axed thousands of head office and 
store management roles and while there would be some “trimming”, this time, he 
said it was “about changing the way we do business”. Tesco said about £550m of 
the savings would come from making its store operations efficient, looking at 
areas such as opening hours and re-stocking shelves during the day rather than 
at night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftesco-supermarket-sales-rise-profits-tumble%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff89781f041e73697609b489f9a38c1be735afe39%2F717_0_1565_1956%2F1565.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20sales%20overshadowed%20by%20%C2%A35.9bn%20pension%20hole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftesco-supermarket-sales-rise-profits-tumble%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20sales%20overshadowed%20by%20%C2%A35.9bn%20pension%20hole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftesco-supermarket-sales-rise-profits-tumble%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff89781f041e73697609b489f9a38c1be735afe39%2F717_0_1565_1956%2F1565.jpg>
 Tesco’s chief executive, Dave Lewis, says the retailer has stabilised despite 
tough trading conditions. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
Surging pension deficits have been highlighted by other big British firms, 
includingJohn Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/john-lewis-profits-fall-nearly-15-percent>
, Primark owner ABF and the AA.

Tesco’s deficit calculation is based on an accounting measure but next year 
the scheme will undergo a triennial pension valuation, which Richard Farr, 
managing director at LincolnPensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>, argues could lead to its trustees 
asking for more than the £270m per year they already receive to fund the 
scheme. “It is likely that just when Dave Lewis wants to recommence dividends 
that trustees will certainly want to increase their own demands,” said Farr.

Stewart said it was too early to talk about reinstating payments to 
shareholders with the last dividend paid in the second half of its 2014-15 
financial year.

Lewis joined Tesco two years ago and almost immediately was engulfed in the 
biggest crisis in the company’s history when a whistleblower alerted him to an 
accounting scandal. Tesco suspended four executives when it discoveredits 
profits had been artificially inflated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/02/tesco-faces-150m-claim-from-shareholders-to-recoup-losses>
, and the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) launched an investigation into the company.

To revive sales Lewis focused on lower prices, improving customer service and 
making sure its shelves are full. He also revamped its budget ranges with anew 
range of own-label “farm” brands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/21/tesco-revamps-own-label-range-fight-discounters-aldi-lidl>
 to counterAldi  <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi>and Lidl. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> 

The shake up has seen lapsed customers return to its stores with even its more 
than 200 out-of-town hypermarkets, which Lewis’s predecessor Philip Clarke 
stopped short of calling white elephants, enjoying better sales.

Shore Capital analyst Clive Black said some “understandable excitement” had 
been generated by Lewis’s new plan to boost profits but the company’s £18bn 
debt pile, which includes the pension deficit and £7.7bn of store lease 
commitments, was an issue: “That progress is being made at the operating level 
is undeniable and commendable ... but you cannot ignore the company’s level of 
indebtedness.”


 