
Unilever <https://www.theguardian.com/business/unilever> has resolved its 
dispute with Tesco and says well-known brands including Marmite and Ben & 
Jerry’s will be back on the shelves.

It emerged on Wednesday that Tesco was running short of stock of a range of 
household brands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
 from Marmite to Comfort fabric conditioner after a row with its major supplier.


The consumer brands company halted deliveries to Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> after the supermarket refused to 
stump up across-the-board price rises of about 10% for its range of brands.

However, after both companies’ share prices fell on Thursday and Unilever was 
criticised for blaming the attempt to increase prices on the fall in the value 
of the pound, a deal was reached late in the afternoon.

The food and household goods supplier said: “Unilever is pleased to confirm 
that the supply situation with Tesco in the UK and Ireland has now been 
successfully resolved.

Little sympathy for Unilever in town where Marmite is made
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/little-sympathy-unilever-in-town-burton-upon-trent-marmite-is-made>
“We have been working together closely to reach this resolution and ensure our 
much-loved brands are once again fully available. For all those that missed us, 
thanks for all the love.”

A spokesperson for Tesco said: “We always put our customers first and we are 
pleased this has been resolved to our satisfaction.”

The statement appears to suggest the two sides reached a compromise, although 
neither Tesco nor Unilever would confirm any details of their talks.

The quick resolution of the row is good news for Tesco’s boss, Dave Lewis, who 
previously held a senior role at Unilever. Tesco shares slid 3% and Unilever 
shares dropped 3.4% as City investors were alarmed at pictures of empty shelves 
appearing on social media.

But analysts said the public spat had worked out well for the supermarket, as 
tabloid newspapers widely portrayed Tesco as a people’s champion on low prices.

“When was the last time you saw articles about Tesco as the shoppers’ 
champion?” said Dave McCarthy, a food retail analyst at HSBC.

Bruno Monteyne, an analyst at Bernstein Research, said the publicity around 
the spat was probably helpful to both Tesco and Unilever as it would help 
explain probable price rises to shoppers.

“Tesco recognises that Unilever’s costs have gone up – there is no doubt about 
it – but they wanted to argue a little bit. The government doesn’t really want 
to publicise the negative impact of Brexit. Now Tesco can say ‘look how we 
fought for you’,” he said.

Despite the swift resolution of the Marmite standoff, UK consumers have been 
told to brace themselves for price rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/british-shoppers-told-to-expect-price-rises-after-steep-fall-in-pound>
. Other negotiations may be less public, but it’s understood that a number of 
suppliers have approached supermarkets asking for cost increases to be covered.

Monteyne predicts that food prices will rise by about 3% over time as the 
impact of the falling value of the pound is reflected on supermarket shelves.

Pinar Hosafci, a senior food analyst at Euromonitor International, said: 
“Brexit has been a trigger that started this and it is likely that other 
companies, which are reporting in euros, including the likes of Nestlé and 
Ferrero, will follow suit. This move could be more detrimental to Tesco than 
Unilever, which owns a number of power brands that are either leading or at 
best ranking in the second place.”

The British Retail Consortium <http://brc.org.uk/> said shops would be doing 
their best to hold down prices for customers, but that the impact of the 
falling pound would eventually work its way through to shelf prices.

Helen Dickinson, chief executive of the BRC, said: “Retailers are firmly on 
the side of consumers in negotiating with suppliers and improving efficiencies 
in the supply chain to control the inflationary pressure that is building 
through the devaluation of the pound.

“However, years of falling shop prices and higher costs have left limited 
scope for retailers to continue absorbing this pressure, and everyone in the 
supply chain will need to play their part in maintaining low prices for 
consumers.”

Unilever is one of Britain’s biggest suppliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/brand-power-favours-unilever-in-row-over-uk-produced-marmite>
 of branded food and household goods and claims its products are found in 98% 
of UK households. Its brands also include Dove, Hellmann’s, Magnum, Persil, 
Vaseline and PG Tips.

Unilever v Tesco: list of brands affected in price row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/unilever-tesco-list-brands-affected-price-row>
The company had blamed the pound’s fall against the euro and the dollar since 
the Brexit vote, which pushes up the cost of imports, for the 10% price rise 
demand. However, this attracted criticism asmost of its products are made in 
the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/unilever-tesco-list-brands-affected-price-row>
.

Earlier on Thursday Graeme Pitkethly, Unilever’s chief financial officer, said 
price increases to offset rising costs were a normal part of doing business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/unilever-finance-director-graeme-pitkethly-defends-company-tesco-price-row-marmite>
. “We are taking price increases in the UK. That is a normal devaluation-led 
cycle,” he said.

The big supermarkets are likely to fight particularly hard to prevent price 
rises as they are battling to stop consumers taking their trade to discounters 
Aldi and Lidl, which sell more own-brand goods.


Downing Street declined to comment on how retailers and suppliers should 
respond to the fall in sterling. A spokesman for Theresa May said: “It is a 
decision for companies how they market and sell their products … It is a 
commercial decision.”
 