
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has increased its share of 
the grocery market for the first time in five years, with a revamp of the 
supermarket’s own brand range helping drive sales of fresh produce.

Sales rose by 1.3% in the three months to 9 October, with Tesco the only big 
four chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/oberver-view-power-of-big-supermarkets>
 to see an increase,according to industry data 
<http://www.kantarworldpanel.com/global/News/Tesco-wins-market-share-for-first-time-in-five-years>
 from Kantar Worldpanel. Tesco’s market share grew from 28.1% to 28.2% year on 
year, while Sainsbury’s, Morrisons and Asda all saw slight declines in their 
slices of the market.


Fraser McKevitt, the head of retail and consumer insight at Kantar Worldpanel, 
said: “Foods including ready meals and produce have been among the fastest 
growing areas at Tesco, helped by its ‘farm brands’, but also its standard own 
label lines.”


He said Tesco had attracted an additional 228,000 shoppers to achieve its 
first year-on-year market share gain since 2011. Sales growth was strongest 
among family shoppers, while trading improved at its larger supermarket and 
Extra stores.

Sales dropped at Sainsbury’s, Morrisons and Asda as deflation continued to 
squeeze the market over the three-month period.


“While the threat of rising prices is on a lot of minds at the moment, we’ve 
seen the 27th consecutive period of grocery price deflation, albeit at a slower 
rate,” McKevitt said.

“The price of everyday groceries fell by 0.8% compared with a year ago and in 
contrast to the -1.1% reported last month, with deflation particularly 
noticeable among pork, crisps and poultry products.”


Speaking at a conference on Tuesday, James Walton of industry trade body IGD 
said there had been a mutedeffect on food prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/uk-inflation-rises-near-two-year-high-consumer-price-index>
 from the fall in the value of the pound, as manufacturers tried to offset cost 
increases by substituting ingredients and had currency hedges in place.

Grocery price rises have yet to reach the shop floor, as commodity prices 
remain low and the major chains try to limit the impact on customers as they
face off against 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/apr/02/aldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets>
 discounters Aldi and Lidl.

The two German chains increased sales by 11.4% and 8.4% respectively, although 
this was their slowest pace of growth for some time.

Lidl, which lost its UK chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/lidl-uk-md-ronny-gottschlich-leaves->
 last month, had its slowest rate of growth for at least four years. It was a 
particularly marked slowdown fromsales growth of 9.5% reported by Kantar in 
September.
 