
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is to deepen its 
relationship with Sir Philip Green’s Arcadia group, potentially opening dozens 
more concessions for its Dorothy Perkins, Burton, Evans and Wallis chains in 
supermarkets.

The two companies first partnered up about a year ago when Tesco put 14 
Arcadia group concessions in five stores including Chesterfield, Woolwich in 
south London and Culverhouse Cross in Cardiff.

A further four stores will host about six more Arcadia concessions by the end 
of the year as part of the supermarket’s efforts to find a profitable use for 
spare space in large stores.Supermarkets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets> are trying to downsize as 
shoppers switch to buying goods such as TVs and microwaves online.

Tesco told analysts attending a presentation at the group’s Welwyn Garden City 
headquarters on Wednesday that the Arcadia tie-up was part of plans to have at 
least 26 concessions by the end of this year, including a handful of Holland & 
Barrett outlets. Tesco then hopes to open up to 35 more concessions a year, 
although it is not clear how many of those would be Arcadia brands.

Tesco makes gains as Aldi and Lidl growth hits five-year low
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/tesco-aldi-lidl-growth-five-year-low>
The new avenue of expansion comes as a boon for Arcadia, which lost dozens of 
concessions with the closure of BHS, the department store chain once owned by 
Greenthat collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/frank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs>
 in controversial circumstances this spring.

The group has also been closing smaller high street stores as the whole 
fashion market struggles to cope with the switch to online shopping and a wave 
of unseasonal weather conditions over the past two years.

Green said the Tesco concessions were “hopefully something we can grow”.

He said the two companies had decided to expand their relationship after a 
good response from shoppers. “Customers like it and obviously Tesco has got 
great footfall [of shoppers]. It works for everybody,” he said.

Bruno Monteyne, an analyst at Bernstein Research, said Tesco had indicated 
that the 26 concessions would generate nearly £4m in rental income a year for 
the retailer. If Tesco opens 35 more concessions a year over the next five 
years that could bring in as much as £40m a year.


Aside from Arcadia and Holland & Barrett, Tesco has also experimented with 
hosting Claire’s Accessories, Pavers and Sock Shop in various stores.
 