
Aldi and Lidl have sunk to their slowest growth rate since 2011 as Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> almost doubled its pace of 
expansion.

The UK’s biggest supermarket gained market share for the second month in a row 
as sales rose by 2.2% in the 12 weeks to 6 November, up from1.3% reported last 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/tesco-increases-grocery-market-share-sales-rise>
, making it the only one of the big four chains in growth, according to the 
latest data from Kantar Worldpanel. Tesco increased market share to 28.2%, up 
from 27.9% a year ago.

Aldi and Lidl <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> continued to be the 
fastest expanding grocers in the market. But their growth slid to 11.4% and 
8.4% respectively, according to Kantar. Some analysts believe sales in the 
chains’ established stores are flat or even down on last year.

Tesco Bank cyber-thieves stole £2.5m from 9,000 people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m> 
Fraser McKevitt, head of retail and consumer insight at Kantar, said the 
discounters were being hit as they were now up against very strong rates of 
growth a year ago, while Tesco’s resurgence had made life more difficult.

He said Tesco was selling bigger volumes of fresh meat and produce after 
cutting prices and introducing itscheaper own-label Farm Brands ranges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/21/tesco-revamps-own-label-range-fight-discounters-aldi-lidl>
. Its premium Tesco Finest range also increased by 6% over the period.

UK discounter Iceland, which had previously been under pressure from the rise 
of its German rivals, has alsofound a way to fight back more effectively 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/12/iceland-malcolm-walker-upmarket-food-to-fight-discounters>
. Its sales were up 8.3% as increased seafood ranges and tie-ups with Slimming 
World and Pizza Express paid off.

Meanwhile, action by Tesco, Asda, Morrisons and Sainsbury’s to cut prices has 
drawn the discounters into the price war. “Aldi and Lidl haven’t let their 
price differential [to the major supermarket chains] slip and so they have been 
cutting prices which has slowed their growth down,” said McKevitt.

The price war prompted yet another month of deflation, with prices across the 
market down an average 0.5%. However that is the slowest pace of deflation 
since October 2014. and McKevitt said: “We’re likely to see inflation in 
December.”

Mike Watkins, UK head of retailer and business insight at analysis firm 
Nielsen, which also found thatAldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> 
and Lidl had slipped to its slowest pace of growth since 2011, said grocers had 
yet to see any impact from Brexit.

“Shoppers are still spending freely and we’ve seen a return of sustainable 
growth in the volume of items people are buying, helped by industry-wide price 
cuts,” he said.
 