
Tesco has been in the spotlight for the wrong reasons recently, with a cyber 
attack on its banking business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m> 
and a row with major supplier Unilever over pricing. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>

But back with its core supermarket business, and analysts are turning more 
positive. Despite the prospect of rival Asda cutting prices ahead of Christmas, 
analyst David Mccarthy at HSBC believesTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is now well poised to cope.

He has upgraded his recommendation on Tesco from hold to buy with a 260p price 
target, helping push its shares 4.75p higher to 203.2p. Mccarthy said:

When we downgraded Tesco to hold [in July] we were clear this was due to a 
concern that Asda might undertake a major price repositioning. We were also 
clear that we saw Tesco as the long-term winner and we stand by our previous 
analysis on its significant underlying economic advantages. We still expect 
Asda to get more aggressive on price (what else can it do?) but the pace of the 
Tesco recovery is increasing, meaning it is better able to cope with whatever 
Asda does.

The Capital Markets Day on 16 November is likely to focus on long-term 
potential and to give more detail on how Tesco expects to deliver a 3.5-4% 
operating margin...The core business is already on its way to a 4% margin and 
eliminating poor performances in on-line and general merchandise should move it 
forward.

[The recovery is] gathering pace: Volumes, cash sales and market share are all 
improving. At the same time, the company is keeping a tight control on costs to 
ensure the high contribution margin of extra sales falls through to the bottom 
line, allowing further investment in price. This momentum gives Tesco firepower 
to defend against Asda or to fund its own pricing initiatives.

Tesco should be highly cash generative by 2020, with a UK operating margin of 
around 4%. At this point, we expect the industry will be back to equilibrium, 
with Tesco having proved the long-term winner.
 