
Cordelia Fine is an optimistic writer. In her two earlier books of popular 
neuroscience (A Mind of Its Own and Delusions of Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/11/delusions-gender-sex-cordelia-fine>
), the psychologist established a reputation for exemplary clarity on complex 
topics, pleasing wit, feminist principle – and beneath it all, the animating 
faith that people can be improved through knowledge.Testosterone Rex starts 
with a quote from Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’sWe Should All Be Feminists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/17/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-extract-we-should-all-be-feminists>
 that establishes the Fine approach perfectly: “But in addition to being angry, 
I am also hopeful, because I believe deeply in the ability of humans to make 
and remake themselves for the better.”

“Testosterone Rex”, Fine’s target, is the name she gives to “that familiar, 
plausible, pervasive and powerful story of sex and society”, which holds that 
inequality of the sexes is natural, not cultural. After all, testosterone makes 
men tall, hairy and deep-voiced; it makes a certain superficial sense to 
imagine it also produces other characteristics we think of as masculine, such 
as leadership, violence and horniness. For example,neuroscientist Simon 
Baron-Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2003/apr/17/research.highereducation> 
(the Alien to Fine’s Ripley in the dispute over brain sex) calls the hormone 
“that special substance”, and credits it with inducing all manner of adaptive 
qualities in those creatures fortunate enough to produce large amounts of it. T 
is the king.

This is an explanation that’s really a justification. If Baron-Cohen was 
correct that hormones make the man or woman, and we are what we secrete, then 
efforts to end male dominance would be futile at best and possibly downright 
harmful. But this, of course, assumes that “Testosterone Rex” is fact when, as 
Fine compellingly argues, it’s actually fiction. It’s a powerful fiction that 
shapes our society and our bodies in profound ways, yes – but it’s still a 
fiction, and one that in no way deserves to be enthroned in our understanding 
of ourselves.

Here’s one example Fine offers of Testosterone Rex mangling the way we think 
about sex. In the 1940s, biologistAngus Bateman 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bateman's_principle> conducted a series of 
experiments on fruit flies that appeared to show conclusively that competition 
between males for “fertile female vessels” was the driving force of evolution. 
The hypothesis goes something like this: laying eggs is a more substantial 
physical investment than producing sperm. Therefore, to maximise reproductive 
success, females should be selective and cautious while males should be 
promiscuous and competitive; therefore, women are domestic and monogamous, 
while men are thrusting away both in the public sphere and in as many beds 
as possible.
 Exemplary clarity … Cordelia Fine 
It’s elegant, it’s intuitive, and it’s wrong. Bateman’s experiments were 
biased by design and by his unexplained exclusion of data that, when included 
in a recent reanalysis, actually showed that males and females both produced 
more offspring when they had more mates. But there are limits to promiscuity as 
a strategy: taking into account female fertility, a man has more chance of 
being hit by a meteor than fathering 100 children with 100 different women in a 
year. The player who says it’s in his genes is missing a vital part of the 
story.

Fine is a sure guide to the science, building up complexity without 
sacrificing clarity. By the time she’s finished, any lingering confidence that 
hormones exert a simple dose-response influence on our behaviour is thoroughly 
done for. Instead, testosterone works in intimate concert with relationship 
structures – a blow to its dignified reputation as the singular, commanding 
“male hormone”. Even something as incontrovertibly binary as our male and 
female genitals is shown to be part of a complex cultural system. As Fine says, 
“it’s the genitalia – and the gender socialisation this kicks off – that 
provides the most obvious indirect developmental system route by which 
biological sex affects human brains”.

Being male or female won't make you into your society’s version of a man or a 
woman. There's no 'male' or 'female' brain

In other words, being male or female isn’t enough to make you into your 
society’s version of a man or a woman. There is no “male brain” or “female 
brain”. But as soon as your maleness or femaleness is recognised, other people 
start to treat you in ways that form you into a man or a woman, with the 
support of toys, books, role models and a million other subtle nudges. To then 
pretend, as the story of Testosterone Rex does, that outcomes such as the wage 
gap or rape are the unavoidable manifestations of our nature is to sorely 
misunderstand our species.

We could remake ourselves. But we have not done so thus far, and it’s hard not 
to wonder whether optimistic rationalism is really a strong enough prescription 
against the entrenched interest in keeping women down and men up. Fine wonders 
the same as she gets to her conclusion: “maybe it’s time to be less polite and 
more disruptive; like the first- and second-wave feminists”. In addition to 
being hopeful, Fine is also angry. We should all be angry.Testosterone Rex is a 
debunking rumble that ought to inspire a roar.

• Testosterone Rex: Unmaking the Myths of Our Gendered Minds is published by 
Icon. To order a copy for £12.74 (RRP £14.99)go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/testosterone-rex.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 