
Yeee-ha! Make way for the return of ripped-up, rough-tough, bad-guy gen-u-ine 
one hundred per cent original Levi’s! You’ve seen the commercials, you’ve 
hummed the tune, you’ve bought the record, you’ve run the retailers right out 
of stock of those cool, classic, red-tab 501s ...


The relaunch of the good old five-pocket Levi Strauss denim jean (Pedigree: 
San Franciso 1850, poor man’s workwear) has been such a barnstorming success 
that it’s even taken the parent company by surprise. Not to mention the nice 
lucrative spin-offs that have unexpectedly lined other people’s pockets, given 
a dead pop star a mammoth hit and turned a male model into a proto-celebrity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3710df52b991d5cfa3b59d95310bddf8de27b979%2F44_108_2099_2912%2F2099.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20relaunch%20of%20Levi's%20501%20jeans%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%20April%201986&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20relaunch%20of%20Levi%27s%20501%20jeans%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%20April%201986&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3710df52b991d5cfa3b59d95310bddf8de27b979%2F44_108_2099_2912%2F2099.jpg>
 A pair of Levi’s 501 jeans. Photograph: The Guardian 
So many Levi 501s have been sold this spring that John Hart, managing director 
of Levis UK, is now in the position of blaming the faint-hearted for their lack 
of supplies. ‘We’d told the trade back in October what we were about to do - 
and some people didn’t believe it would work, and didn’t put in their orders 
early enough. They’re the ones complaining now. But to be honest, the demand 
has been higher than anyone expected - we could have planned to ship a lot more 
501s, but the project was a huge risk after years when the denim business has 
not been buoyant.’


It has all been done by advertising and marketing people who have divined the 
value of a product that comes with ready-made credibility in a new youth market 
that demands authentic, status-enhancing properties in the clothes it buys. 
They are canny, these young consumers. For a while, in the early seventies, 
their elder brothers and sisters were taken in by jeans manufacturers tinkering 
around with shapes and fabrics and then trying on that ‘designer’ jean thing. 
Then everyone got cynical and thought that if they were going to pay those 
prices they might as well buy real designer clothes.Jeans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/jeans> had become unfashionable by 
attempting to be too fashionable; they had lost their essential jeansiness and 
what the young ones want is the real thing.


The Levi’s advertising strategy was conceived by the team at Bartle Bogle 
Hegarty, who knew that, among the cognoscenti, 501s have remained pure, the 
ultimate. Tim Lindsay, director at the agency, says: ‘The brand’s heritage is a 
vital marketing tool. Levi’s 501s have stayed more or less unchanged since 1873 
and are associated with the Fifties period in America that has gone down as the 
classic property of youth culture - James Dean, Marlon Brando, great cars, 
great music. ‘Besides those particulars there are the layers of association 
from cowboy to sixties peace and love to gang dirt and violence and urban gay 
pride. Hot property if only you can exploit it in the right way.

Styling the ads has been a question of playing on all the correct mythologies. 
One TV commercial shows a boy rocking around in his 501s and getting into the 
bath to shrink them, to the strains of what sounds like Marvin Gaye’s 
Grapevine. The other has a model called Nick Kamen, fetchingly Elvis-like, 
stripping off to his boxers in a launderette, to something that could be Sam 
Cooke singing Wonderful World, which, as all record bores know, got to number 
27 in the charts in 1960.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95b5d9cacd18c7c88beb3b0035b5054034611747%2F0_0_1440_864%2F1440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20relaunch%20of%20Levi's%20501%20jeans%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%20April%201986&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20relaunch%20of%20Levi%27s%20501%20jeans%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%20April%201986&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95b5d9cacd18c7c88beb3b0035b5054034611747%2F0_0_1440_864%2F1440.jpg>
 Levi’s 501 commercial with Nick Kamen (Laundrette, 1985). 
The tracks of course were counterfeit - but that didn’t matter to the target 
market of 16 and 20s who started asking for ‘that Levi’s song’ in record shops. 
They’d never heard of Sam Cooke but that didn’t bother RCA either, the lucky 
owners of the Cooke back catalogue, so they re-released it forthwith, copyline: 
‘The original version of the song featured in the Levi’s 501 commercial.’

So it happens that Sam Cooke is at No. 2 with a record cover that displays a 
photo of the Levi’s boy in the bath. Marvin Gaye is up for the same sort of 
treatment next week, when Motown will re-release Grapevine, embellished with 
the Levi’s logo. Meanwhile, Nick Camen, the launderette Elvis, is basking in 
the glory of being this month’s Face cover boy. The Levi’s gloss, it seems, can 
even do its bit for magazine sales.

Meanwhile, the Levis campaign has proved beneficial to the denim market as a 
whole - Lee jeans, for instance, report a 40 per cent increase in demand 
without their having done anything to attract it. Other designers, too, have 
been producing denim lines - notably Katharine Hamnett, whose jeans, bustiers, 
shorts and jackets, trimmed with diamante, give nice well-off girls the chance 
to sleaze with the Rockers - metaphorically speaking, of course. In a more 
ladylike, down-home county girl vein is the return of chambray, lightweight, 
pale blue cotton that complements the Western look.


How to square all this apparent casualness with the accompanying fashion swing 
back to conservative styles? The answer lies in the fact that denim, in the 
minds of the young, is no longer associated with notions of ‘freedom,’ as their 
parents saw it in the Sixties. Rediscovering Levi 501s and the posing 
possibilities of denim is just another chance to dress up and assume a 
character based in nostalgia for what one never experienced. In the Eighties, 
denim is aspirational, and that, of course, is the business advertising people 
know best.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57b90a699facb6c128c8796c85c3e3da1004c116%2F0_0_2181_1308%2F2181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20relaunch%20of%20Levi's%20501%20jeans%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%20April%201986&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20relaunch%20of%20Levi%27s%20501%20jeans%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%20April%201986&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flevi-jeans-501-relaunch-1986%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57b90a699facb6c128c8796c85c3e3da1004c116%2F0_0_2181_1308%2F2181.jpg>
 The Guardian, 10 April 1986. 
This is an edited extract. Read the full article. 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/06/levis_10_April_1986.jpg> 
 