
He was the UN troubleshooter tasked with galvanising the world’s response to 
theEbola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> epidemic and led the fight 
against cholera in Haiti, just as he did earlier against global pandemic flu. 
So on paper, David Nabarro may seem the ideal candidate to become the world’s 
most powerful doctor.

In practice, the Briton faces a stiff contest, with five other candidates also 
vying to take over from Margaret Chan in May 2017 as head of theWorld Health 
Organisation <https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation>, the 
troubled UN body much criticised for its slow response to the 2014 Ebola 
outbreak. The job has always in the past been decided between governments 
trading political alliances behind closed doors. But this time, with the WHO’s 
credibility still on the line, Nabarro and his allies think his CV may be the 
right one.

“I’m actually a doer who delivers,” Nabarro in an interview with the Guardian. 
“And a doer who is not scared of being accountable at all times. And I think 
that is known.”

Who's WHO? Six candidates named for next World Health Organisation chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/23/world-health-organisation-director-general-six-candidates>
Nabarro, sitting in the London office of the chief medical officer, Prof Dame 
Sally Davies, has the support of the UK government.Davies says Nabarro is 
uniquely well-qualified and that will be recognised at a time when the WHO 
badly needs the best possible leader.

“I think he’s likely to get it because he’s the best candidate, and at the end 
of the day I’m hopeful that the politics will fall aside and the best person 
will come through,” she says.

Davies, who has the British seat on the WHO’s executive board, points to an 
editorial 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)00105-7/abstract>
 she co-authored with other board members in the Lancet in January, describing 
the criteria for nomination as DG. They include high-level public health and 
international health experience, excellent communication, leadership skills and 
commitment. Quite simply, she says, Nabarro has all of them.

This is not about favouring the UK. “In fact, David might not always do what I 
would want because he is independent and thoughtful in his own way,” she says. 
“It is about having a strong leader for the WHO who understands the changing 
global architecture and the needs of low- and middle-income countries, 
particularly around two things – emergency response and the SDGs [sustainable 
development goals] – and can work effectively with ministers and prime 
ministers.”

Above all, Davies and others are concerned that the reforms of the WHO, in 
which Nabarro has already been centrally involved, should be implemented to 
make the institution stronger and fit for purpose as the world’s bulwark 
against devastating outbreaks of infectious diseases, as well as malnutrition 
and chronic diseases caused by obesity and changing lifestyles.

The future of the WHO was in question after its failure to spot and close down 
Ebola early enough in westAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, 
which led to a global crisis. All the reports written in the aftermath said 
that if it were to survive, the organisation needed stronger and more focused 
leadership in emergencies.

Nabarro led the UN response to bolster the WHO as the envoy of the outgoing UN 
secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, and afterwards chaired the advisory committee 
on reform that Chan set up. A lot of excellent innovations have strengthened 
the organisation in the past year or two, but it is not yet in good enough 
shape, he says.

“The new health emergencies programme that we advised on and that’s being 
implemented, which is a cross-organisation programme with single cadre of 
staff, single budget, single performance standards, clear lines of 
responsibility, is being built up,” he says.

“But it also needs to be properly financed – and at the moment it’s not. And 
so we need to get the money, improve performance, get more money, improve 
performance more. It’s about a five-year project and I personally would like to 
be moving more quickly on that because we never know when the next outbreak is 
going to come. We had a bit of a scare this year with yellow fever and I want 
to be sure that this is done quickly.”

The WHO needs to be one unified organisation. Ebola exposed the fracture lines 
between the regions, with Africa failing to communicate with the Geneva HQ. 
Davies says all staff have to be appointed on merit, not as a political favour 
to governments, and they must not be advocates for any specific interest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworld-health-organisation-who-briton-ebola-haiti-worlds-most-powerful-doctor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafd9a740f6d72ba3b8010808d3177c807bd2e021%2F0_139_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Briton%20vying%20to%20become%20the%20world's%20most%20powerful%20doctor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworld-health-organisation-who-briton-ebola-haiti-worlds-most-powerful-doctor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Briton%20vying%20to%20become%20the%20world%27s%20most%20powerful%20doctor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworld-health-organisation-who-briton-ebola-haiti-worlds-most-powerful-doctor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafd9a740f6d72ba3b8010808d3177c807bd2e021%2F0_139_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Health workers prepare to enter the house of a person suspected to have died 
of Ebola on the outskirts of Freetown, Sierra Leone. Photograph: Michael Duff/AP
Nabarro agrees there must be no more fiefdoms. “Part of that is ensuring that 
all staff are appointed on merit. Part of it is about ensuring they are not 
just pursuing money for their own interests and part of it is ensuring that 
they find the organisation something that they believe in and are prepared to 
work for it as an entire organisation,” he says.

It’s a culture change but it also depends on having enough money, so that WHO 
staff do not think they have to bargain with governments, organisations or 
special interest groups to raise it.

The WHO’s finances are a difficult issue. The amount given by governments for 
general purposes has steadily declined. The coffers have been topped up by 
voluntary donations from specific governments or organisations, such as the 
Gates Foundation, that are tied to particular projects. The UK is the third 
biggest donor, says Davies, and some of the money is for priorities that are 
agreed with the WHO, but, she says: “I think I would like to see, personally, 
an increase in the subscription, so that there is less voluntary funding and 
more that is just routine and under the absolute direction of the DG.”

Nabarro’s solution is for the organisation to become what he calls 
“catalytic”. It does not have the money to do everything that is needed. There 
are many health organisations as well as healthcare systems in every country. 
The WHO can lead and encourage them to do what is needed, like the conductor of 
an orchestra, rather than doing it itself.

Chan has been was a technocrat, maintaining that her role was to carry out the 
bidding of member states, while Norwegian former prime minister Gro Harlem 
Brundtland was criticised when she held the job for telling countries in no 
uncertain terms what they should do. Nabarro, who once worked for Brundtland 
when she was DG, diplomatically says he is a bit of each of these leaders but 
also his own person, able to court consensus on issues such as anti-tobacco 
treaties while taking tough decisions if necessary in emergencies.

Whether that pleases the voting governments will be seen at the end of 
January, when the six will be reduced to a shortlist of three, and then in May 
when the puff of white smoke goes up at the WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Assembly in Geneva.
 