
Ondřej Švadlena’s open-world driving game 
<https://forums.tigsource.com/index.php?topic=43705.0> doesn’t look like any 
other. The cars are old and beat up, there are no timers or cheering crowds, 
and the California sun is nowhere to be seen. Instead, a brown murkiness hangs 
over the entire world, lending it an eerie and oppressive quality. This is a 
driving game inspired, not by long pleasure drives along some Pacific highway, 
but by a childhood spent living in and eventually fleeing the Soviet bloc.

In 1984, at the age of six, Švadlena almost snitched on his own parents to the 
secret police. He had come home from kindergarten and asked his mother if she 
would hang out the Soviet flag for Labour Day – a “tradition” enforced by the 
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia. “When she told me she would not, I told her 
I would have to report that to my kindergarten educators because they asked us 
to,” Švadlena says. There’s no telling what would have happened to his parents 
if he had.

It was the final straw. It came after months of the StB (Státní bezpečnost, 
translates to: State security) pressuring Švadlena’s stepfather to become an 
informant for them. “He worked as a waiter in a Prague restaurant where many 
artists with anti-regime sentiments would meet,” Švadlena says, “and the secret 
police agents wanted him to spy on those artists and report the info gathered.” 
His mother had been anxious since the events of the Prague Spring in 1968, 
which persuaded her to not only learn Russian as a second language, as was 
obligatory for Czech citizens under the Soviet regime, but also French and 
Italian should she need to flee the country. Her preparations paid off on the 
day she realised the state had turned her own son against her. The family had 
to escape.

It was at this time that Švadlena would learn to associate travel with 
survival. “In the summer of that year, 1984, I was sent to a clandestine Boy 
Scout camp for three weeks,” Švadlena says. “The goal was for me to gain some 
leg muscles so I wouldn’t start whining when walking long distances.” No one 
except Švadlena’s aunt was allowed to know about his family’s plans, not even 
his biological father. “In a society where you were never sure which of your 
friends were working together with the secret police, it was advisable to 
remain cautious,” Švadlena says. “And in a society where once you escaped, the 
secret police would interrogate all members of your family, it was better for 
them to know nothing [so they could] avoid being persecuted for complicity.” 
Švadlena remembers that while they were packing for their “holiday” to 
Yugoslavia, a cop turned up at the door of his family’s home, wanting to make 
sure they weren’t packing too much.

Soon after, the three family members fled to Austria via Yugoslavia, and then 
had to wait six months for the Canadian consul to arrange their immigration to 
Quebec. During this delay, Švadlena encountered frictions that would teach him 
about unprovoked hostility: “I remember the Austrian parents were demanding 
that their kids would have priority with seats on the school bus. So Austrian 
kids would sit while we foreign kids had to stand.” The eventual move to Canada 
was liberating but not final: the family had to chase after the jobs that 
Švadlena’s mother could get, which meant frequently skipping between towns, 
schools, and homes. Then, with the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1991, her job as 
a writer and speaker in the Czechoslovak section of Radio Canada International 
closed. The family then moved back to Europe, this time to Germany, where 
Švadlena would attend his ninth school in as many years.

Now 38-years-old and still living in Germany, Švadlena is spending his time 
steadily tweaking his driving survival game. It takes place in the deep of 
night with the player being chased by aggressive and unrelenting pursuers who 
attempt to crash your vehicle, then attack you with weapons. Švadlena is paying 
special attention to achieving an accurate simulation of car physics. He wants 
every bump in the road to be felt in the car’s suspension, giving each drive an 
unpredictability, as if the road itself is a threat to the player’s life. It’s 
a passion that was first ignited in 1999 when Švadlena played the racing game 
Driver. “It had a nice implementation of the car-chase elements from 70s films, 
which I loved,” he says, “but I was annoyed by the way it cheated on the 
physics—the cop cars being much heavier and having incredible acceleration and 
top speed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdriving-game-escape-secret-police-communist-czechoslovakia-i1980s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba4f7e77b2f8698acafdeeebb415f769ec2cf20d%2F50_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20who%20made%20a%20video%20game%20inspired%20by%20escaping%20the%20secret%20police&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdriving-game-escape-secret-police-communist-czechoslovakia-i1980s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20who%20made%20a%20video%20game%20inspired%20by%20escaping%20the%20secret%20police&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdriving-game-escape-secret-police-communist-czechoslovakia-i1980s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba4f7e77b2f8698acafdeeebb415f769ec2cf20d%2F50_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 The game is utterly dark and bleak, the way ahead lit only by the weak 
headlights. Photograph: Ondřej Švadlena 
Those thoughts were buried until 2011, when Švadlena played Test Drive 
Unlimited 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2011/feb/14/test-drive-unlimited-2-review>
, and was very disappointed by the car physics, which he calls “atrocious”. It 
was then that he decided to make his own driving game. He downloaded Unity 3D, 
checked out its car tutorial project, and started to learn how to manipulate C# 
scripts. “By the end of 2011, I had made a trailer that I posted on 
turboduck.net, at that time a forum for Test Drive Unlimited fans, and the 
feedback being overly positive felt reassuring,” Švadlena says. “I also sent a 
playable test scene, where you could drive around in a dark landscape to my 
French producer, and he suggested we apply for the [French] national centre of 
cinematography multimedia grant, which we got.”

With the 10,000 euros, Švadlena and his producer hired a studio to help build 
a small prototype, but it was a failure as “the AI was catastrophic”. The issue 
came from the studio grabbing 9,000 euros for itself while spending 500 euros 
on a 21-year-old student who hated working on the project to do the 
programming. “The result was a fucking joke and I had an emotional breakdown,” 
Švadlena says. “To top it all, I was told that my goal is way too ambitious and 
technically not possible to achieve.” But Švadlena has a history of fighting 
against the odds and succeeding, especially when it comes to his art. This 
wouldn’t stop him.

Švadlena’s first conflict around his art came at kindergarten age. His teacher 
called in his father to show him that Švadlena had drawn a “brown-coloured mess 
on paper and had said it was shit.” To this, Švadlena says his father replied, 
“Yes, that is an accurate depiction of a piece of shit,“ before taking his boy 
home. The next conflict was more internal. Švadlena quit his classical guitar 
lessons as he hated them, which encouraged his stepfather to teach him some of 
the chords for Hotel California, afterwards leaving him to learn the rest and 
to improvise beyond that. “Learning something my way, by myself, would become 
an attitude in the future,” Švadlena says. Then in 1996, Švadlena and two other 
classmates published a school magazine with an illustrated front cover of the 
school principal in a compromising position with the janitor. “After a slightly 
awkward internal trial, I was expelled from school but was still allowed to 
take the final exams. Which I passed,” Švadlena says.

Not long after this, Švadlena’s aunt, who knew a professor at the academy of 
art, architecture, and design in Prague, encouraged him to take the entrance 
exams. He was accepted for the famed Animation course along with Jitka Petrová, 
who is now a children’s book illustrator, and Jakub Dvorský,the founder and 
director of video game studio Amanita Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/07/amanita-design-czech-studio-games-samorost-machinarium>
. The course was taught by a legend of Czech animation, Jiří Barta, who 
Švadlena would have his biggest and most important artistic conflict with.

The problem arose in 1998 when Švadlena got his hands on 3D animation software 
and fell in love. “It seemed to me to be the perfect technique for the kind of 
worlds I was trying to create,” Švadlena says. However, Barta came from the 
Czech animation scene of the 1960s, and wanted students to continue its legacy 
with puppetry, stop-motion, and hand-drawn techniques. Barta thought 3D 
animation looked plastic and tacky and had nothing to teach Švadlena with it. 
“Being a very stubborn guy, I just kept on going my own path, and looking back, 
I probably wanted to prove him wrong. That in fact 3D animation could feel very 
organic and gritty,” Švadlena says. “I was one of the first students that 
worked using 3D animation and had to learn everything by myself, mostly without 
internet access, because there was no one to teach me.”

After graduating, Švadlena went on to produce a number of animated shorts, 
firstly under Avion Postproduction in Prague, but later as a solo artist 
starting with the 2006 music videoTrik 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wuQR1JAIcUc>, then Sanitkasan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qFhKA-yT0Q> (2007), which was inspired by the 
doppler effect of an ambulance’s siren, and would form the basis of his 
approach to game design. He took the sound of the siren and let a world evolve 
organically around it, creating a free-form animation that, rather than tell a 
story, delivers emotions through visuals and sound. “I wanted to distance 
myself from the things I was told while studying animation, the need for a 
story, narration, and delivering a message,” Švadlena says “My working process 
involves a lot of daydreaming moments where I see and hear moods with symbolic 
elements.” His next animation, MRDRCHAIN, premiered at the Clermont-Ferrand 
International Short Film Festival, the biggest of its kind, where it won the 
Canal+ Award. It was also selected for more than 40 film festivals and won a 
couple more awards for Švadlena along the way.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F80706397&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F80706397> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F80706397&media=>
It was after an exhausting six years of production on his most ambitious 
animation, Time Rodent, that Švadlena saw a fresh opportunity in video games. 
He saw film critic Roger Ebert dismissing the medium as non-art, he saw the 
push to appeal to non-gamers, and the larger impact of video games on culture 
and society. So he returned to the driving sim he had started and failed back 
in 2011. “I began to see the possibility of building immersive worlds where the 
players would be allowed to absorb the atmosphere at their own pace—that made 
much more sense to me,” he says.

At first, it branched off from the world of Time Rodent, letting players 
explore and understand it a little more. But then the game took on its own 
identity so that the only remaining connection now is that it takes place in a 
world with no direct sunlight and one of its central themes is our dependency 
on energy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-T6mLqViq7I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-T6mLqViq7I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-T6mLqViq7I&media=>
With little programming knowledge, one of Švadlena’s biggest challenges has 
been working on the AI for his driving game. First, he learned how car chases 
were typically programmed in videogames, only to learn that it wouldn’t suit 
his needs. And so, “through observation and analysis of real-life driving 
behaviours, I slowly began implementing a system which is suitable for 
situations where you need to anticipate, like driving on the limit during car 
chases,” Švadlena says. Tweaking the AI has been a process of curiosity, 
experimentation, and patience, exploring the “endless outcomes of the way 
shock-absorber stiffness and length, stabiliser bar stiffness, car weight and 
centre of gravity and tyre properties act together resulting in substantial 
differences in the driving behaviour.” Sometimes, intuition would prove 
surprisingly effective, such as the time Švadlena got the idea to implement the 
PIT manoeuvre that enemies use to turn the player’s car, which he managed to 
get to work on the first iteration. For the car physics, Švadlena has used a 
custom car physics middleware which, after research and testing, “in my 
opinion, has the most convincing tyre friction model,” he says.

Švadlena is going to put out a tech demo next summer and hopes to have the 
game finished in the next two years. Windows and Mac are priority platforms, 
Linux and consoles are possibilities – “but that largely depends on how painful 
and costly it would be to port the game to those platforms,” he says. He’s also 
considering VR support.

The game still doesn’t have a title, but the videos Švadlena has released, 
with their dark, haunting images of estate cars duelling on endless highways, 
have provoked the interest of the specialist press. The idea of merging the 
driving and survival horror genres is so intriguing, and in some ways so 
obvious – all horror games are about escape. But perhaps it took someone who 
has had to make such a journey to understand and portray the fear and solitude 
of the open road.
 