
There has been a rise in the number of young people in the UK who are not in 
education, employment or training, known as Neets.

Official figures 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peoplenotinwork/unemployment/bulletins/youngpeoplenotineducationemploymentortrainingneet/nov2016>
 show an increase in the number of 16- to 24-year-olds classed as economically 
inactive over July to September, lifting the number of Neets to 857,000. That 
was an increase of 14,000 from the previous three months and up 3,000 from a 
year earlier.
ONS (@ONS) 
14,000 rise in the numbers of #NEETs 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NEETs?src=hash> in July-Sept 2016, compared with 
previous 3 monthshttps://t.co/1K0hFWezka <https://t.co/1K0hFWezka>
 <https://twitter.com/ONS/status/801721410636877824> November 24, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ONS/status/801721410636877824> 
The proportion of young people not in education, work or training edged up to 
11.9% from 11.7% in the previous quarter. It is still down significantly from 
16.9% five years ago but the change in trend in the latest quarter will fan 
fears that young people’s opportunities will suffer if Brexit uncertainty 
weakens the jobs market.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fuk-rise-neets-not-in-education-employment-or-training-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32cb1cdeae027f53cf83798dd4b96acecea4bc88%2F0_0_913_644%2F913.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%20rise%20in%20Neets%3A%20those%20not%20in%20education%2C%20employment%20or%20training&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fuk-rise-neets-not-in-education-employment-or-training-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%20rise%20in%20Neets%3A%20those%20not%20in%20education%2C%20employment%20or%20training&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fuk-rise-neets-not-in-education-employment-or-training-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32cb1cdeae027f53cf83798dd4b96acecea4bc88%2F0_0_913_644%2F913.jpg>
 Illustration: Office for National Statistics 
Marc Bolland, chairman of Movement to Work and a former chief executive of 
Marks & Spencer, said the increase in Neets was striking.“The announcement that 
the number of young people who are not in education, employment or training has 
risen by 14,000 to 857,000 is a clear call to employers that more needs to be 
done to support our young people,” he added.

Movement to Work was established three years ago as a voluntary collaboration 
of UK employers aimed at tackling youth unemployment and helping Neets to get 
training and work. It includes big name employers including M&S, the NHS, BT, 
WPP, and Tesco and more than 50,000 young people have taken part in the scheme.

The rise in Neets is a blow to government hopes of improving the UK’s woeful 
record on productivity growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/low-productivity-an-enduring-and-growing-drag-on-the-uk-economy>
, something the chancellor, Philip Hammond, placed at the centre of his autumn 
statement this week. Ministers havepledged to create 3m apprenticeships by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/20/3m-apprenticeships-david-cameron-welfare-cuts>
 to help tackle both youth unemployment and skills shortages. But critics say 
those plans are off track andrisk sacrificing the quality of training in favour 
of quantity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/uk-apprenticeships-plan-attacked-employer-groups>
.


Commenting on the latest Neet figures, Steve Hill at the Open University said 
the UK must “urgently consider more high-quality, work-based training options, 
which tailor skills provision to the world of work”.

“The UK has long suffered from the so-called productivity puzzle, which sees 
us lag behind our G7 counterparts in terms of output per worker. The Neets 
problem is another facet of the fact that the skills needs of businesses up and 
down the country are not being met, and is of course a tragedy for a generation 
of young people as well,” said Hill, external engagement director at the Open 
University.

The Office for National Statistics said nearly half, or 43%, of all young 
people in the UK who were Neet were looking for work and available for work and 
therefore classified as unemployed. The remainder were either not looking for 
work or not available for work and therefore classified as economically 
inactive. That category includes the long-term sick and those caring for 
children or other relatives.

In the latest quarter, the number of unemployed young people fell by 21,000 to 
369,000. But the number of economically inactive young people rose by 35,000 to 
489,000.

Labour market expert John Philpott noted the figures followed news last week 
of aslowdown in employment growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/uk-unemployment-falls-september-office-for-national-statistics>
.

“These latest figures for Neets provide a worrying sign that the recent 
slowdown in the overall pace of UK employment growth is hitting the youth job 
market relatively hard,” said Philpott, director of the consultancythe Jobs 
Economist <http://www.thejobseconomist.org/>.

“As the Neet figures confirm a large number of these jobless youths simply 
stopped looking for work rather than entering education or undertaking training 
as an alternative. If as these figures suggest the jobs tide is again turning 
against Britain’s youth, priority action is needed by government to ensure that 
Job Centres and providers of employment programmes are able to respond. We 
shouldn’t allow the policy fashion for helping ‘just about managing’ families 
to obscure the fact that many of our young people simply aren’t managing at 
all.”

Bolland said that one of the challenges of tackling Neets was that many of the 
most disadvantaged young people had disappeared off the radar altogether.

He said: “We are not waiting for them, we are actively looking around 
communities for people that we can reach out to. People need to be found, 
they’re not always registered.” Movement to Work is helped by charitable 
organisations, including the Prince’s Trust, to identify possible candidates.
 