
After the stripe, the plaid or check is the easiest pattern to weave, 
something our earliest ancestors discovered for themselves as soon as their 
various cultures had attained the technological level of the loom. Costume 
historians have logged plaids, sometimes muted and discreet, sometimes joyously 
garish, in sources as disparate as an early Japanese print and a primitive 
Sienese painting.

The non-expert would be forgiven, however, for assuming, along with the rest 
of the world, that the plaid was uniquely invented in the mist-bound, granite 
fastnesses of the Scottish Highlands some time before the Emperor Hadrian took 
to wall-building. Indeed, there are some overly refined souls who hold that the 
kilted tartan in attack formation was the reason why he did and thank God for 
Latin aesthetic sensibility. In fact, as many historians have been at recent 
pains to prove, the tartaning ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> was the first major confidence trick 
in the resourceful history of tourism. And it set a pattern much emulated but 
rarely equalled. For a start, the chief copywriter, one Sir Walter Scott, was a 
cut above your average hack – and titled, too, with the good connections that 
always implies. His background briefings, copious and literate, created an 
irresistible mythic scenario and his personal stage-management of a Royal Visit 
to Edinburgh just after Waterloo was the archetype upon which all later well 
produced launch parties were to be based.


The celebrity endorsement campaign didn’t mess about either. There was, it 
must be conceded, a slightly slow start as the portly, flabby-kneed tail end of 
the Hanoverian line posed for portraits in Royal Stewart kilts and rosy 
flesh-coloured tights but Victoria changed all that. Once the campaign got a 
youthful, pretty and fecund sponsor, it got lift-off, too. For this sponsor was 
no mere cipher, content only to wear the gear, smile for the cameras, take the 
money and run. She had integrity. She really wore the stuff in private, and 
even had a special Balmoral tartan designed for the holidays and a particularly 
tasteful one in lavender and white just for herself and named Victoria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ftartan-fashion-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a5076955c0087323dea0feefca240a0bda9fc5%2F169_76_1725_2944%2F1725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20tartan%20myth%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2020%20September%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ftartan-fashion-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20tartan%20myth%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2020%20September%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ftartan-fashion-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a5076955c0087323dea0feefca240a0bda9fc5%2F169_76_1725_2944%2F1725.jpg>
 Sarah Jessica Parker, 2006. Photograph: Matt Baron//BEI / Rex Features 
In fact, the plaid never had the quasi-heraldic and clan-identification 
significance with which it was retrospectively invested. All that researchers 
have established is that a small cross check pattern, known colloquially as a 
“tartan”, was adapted for use in kilt, plaid (the shawl/cloak length of fabric 
worn against the cold) and hose around about 1660. Pattern tended to be 
employed for its decorative value and had no clan or family connotations. And 
it was peasant dress. The aristocrats demonstrated their status by wearing the 
latest court fashions from Edinburgh, London or Paris. It was only when the 
victorious Hanoverians banned the plaid after the battle of Culloden that it 
acquired a romantic glamour and political symbolism which the Jacobites were 
able to exploit. The concept of exclusivity, that a certain pattern could and 
should only be worn by a person entitled by blood or regiment to do so, was 
introduced when, in the late eighteenth century, tartans were designed as part 
of the new military uniforms for the Highland regiments. The earliest, like the 
42nd Regiment of Foot or Black Watch, survived the period of Caledonian 
romanticism as approved “clan” tartans with fictional pedigrees as long as one 
of Sir Walter’s tales.

The result, codified in various nineteenth century catalogues, all highly 
imaginative, has been the development of a slightly awed and inhibited attitude 
to tartan. Rather be seen in an old school tie you have no right to than a 
tartan which resonates not at all with your genes. In addition, the style of 
dress in which tartan was traditionally employed became the only style, thanks 
to Scottish Dance Societies, Highland Games and hairy-kneed Scottish regiments, 
in which it could be used. Thus it entered the area of national and fancy dress 
– an area with which fashion has only a nodding acquaintance.

Yet, Queen Victoria apart, fashion has, over the years, made several attempts 
to get on intimate terms with tartan. The latest is the most determined and is 
led, as usual by foreign designers whose domestic markets while buying all the 
romantic associations of l’Ecossais suffer from none of the awe. The French, 
for instance, wholeheartedly adore tartan and have always enjoyed using it both 
in traditional lace jabot and velvet jacket styles and unorthodox clashing 
layers of rich colour. The Italians, always likely to get over-excited, regard 
them with a slightly guilty fascination, unsure whether they are terribly 
dashing or merely vulgar. In their confusion they tend to make certain of the 
latter quality by recolouring inoffensive plaids in exuberant acid shades, 
mightily at war with one another. On an earlier outing (two or three years ago) 
these were inspirationally dubbed Garibaldi Tartans by the Guardian’s man 
(crouched) by the Milan catwalk, Frank Martin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ftartan-fashion-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d14a2f953cbb1ab94f44759137b30e0f05e303e%2F694_136_2792_1674%2F2792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20tartan%20myth%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2020%20September%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ftartan-fashion-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20tartan%20myth%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2020%20September%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ftartan-fashion-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d14a2f953cbb1ab94f44759137b30e0f05e303e%2F694_136_2792_1674%2F2792.jpg>
 Jamaica’s Usain Bolt at the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. Photograph: 
John Giles/PA 
The Japanese used to have a respectful attitude to the tartan, almost as 
mystical as that of the Brits, and loved the full King Over the Water fig. 
Recently their own designers, led by Issey Miyake, have been experimenting with 
and developing their own subtly coloured woven plaids which are softer and 
quieter than the Scottish-inspired ones currently filling the shops.

The Americans and the Canadians stuck with the rugged elements of tartan 
romanticisms, twinning bright plaids with denim, hide, corduroy or prickly 
tweed to reflect a great-outdoor, call-of-the-wild lifestyle. Fashion’s most 
successful exponent of the cultivated lumberjack look is Ralph Lauren whose 
roughwear collection is pure wood-cabin, frontiersman nostalgia.

Even the British are slowly developing a slightly less religious attitude to 
tartan. Many designers have used it in their collections for this winter 
although none have layered and clashed it in the way fashion editors, inspired 
by the Paris-based Japanese designers, Kenzo, are doing. After several winter 
(and summer) seasons of blending grey on black, navy on navy and brown on 
brown, all in plains or the discreetest of patterns, a riot of colour and 
pattern is acting on the fashion world like an adrenaline fix.


Most women, however colour hungry fashion’s last few seasons have left them, 
will respond in a more restrained manner, mixing the new tartans in with the 
old dark and plains. Just as long as they remain uninhibited by the great 
tartan myth and its attendant pressure towards fancy dress, they’ll check out 
fine.
 