
Is it wrong to care whether a celebrity is pregnant or not?
Charlotte, by email

Wrong? Not exactly. But I do think it might be time to look at how, exactly, 
female celebrities are covered in the press, because there is a striking gap 
between the feminist progress we see in the real world and the retrograde 
fairytale storyline in the celebrity press.

Jennifer Aniston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-aniston> recently 
made her contribution to the most overused modern genre, the open letter, 
writing oneabout the recent speculation that she might be pregnant 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/for-the-record_us_57855586e4b03fc3ee4e626f>
: “If I am some kind of symbol to some people out there, then clearly I am an 
example of the lens through which we, as a society, view our mothers, 
daughters, sisters, wives, female friends and colleagues,” she wrote.

Aniston is right in that. Since her divorce from Brad Pitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt> – an event that will doubtless be 
studied by future history GCSE students as one of the defining moments of the 
21st century – she has become a female symbol of some sort. As a single woman, 
she was pitied by the tabloids and her dating life was depicted as a tragic 
substitute for marriage. (By contrast, the similarly aged, similarly divorced 
and similarly datingGeorge Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> was depicted as a merry 
bachelor living the life of Riley.) After Aniston married a man – Justin, who 
will always be known to me as Louis Theroux’s cousin – the tabloids were 
momentarily flummoxed: how else to condescend to an extremely successful, 
wealthy, talented and obviously happy woman? Ah yes, of course – by speculating 
whether or not she was pregnant.

I think of the celebrity press as the worst kind of nosy neighbour, the one 
you meet every year at your parents’ Boxing Day drinks. Basically, I’m thinking 
of Una and Geoffrey Alconbury fromBridget Jones’s Diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridget-jones-diary>. As with Una and 
Geoffrey, in the celebrity media’s eyes, a woman has never quite done enough to 
stop the questions. If she’s single, when is she getting a boyfriend? If she’s 
got a boyfriend, when is she getting married? If she’s married, when is she 
having a baby? If she’s had a baby, when is she having another? And another? 
And another?

As Aniston writes, the insinuation is that a woman is incomplete without 
creating a nuclear family. PoorGwen Stefani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gwenstefani>, having recently divorced Gavin 
Rossdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/04/gwen-stefani-gavin-rossdale-file-for-divorce>
, with whom she has three children, has been on the cover of one particular US 
magazine this year claiming that she’s pregnant with twin girls. Spoiler! She’s 
not. She’s just dating some country-and-western dude. But the fact that she’s 
in a relationship and not producing any babies has driven the celebrity media 
so wild that they’re hallucinating sonograms.

Some columnists criticised Aniston, saying that she brings such speculation on 
herself by appearing in movies about motherhood and occasionally doing fashion 
shoots. By all means, if you can make that argument without your head 
exploding, carry on, although what the connection is between a woman posing for 
a photo and her uterus being the object of non-stop speculation remains, I must 
confess, a mystery to me.

It’s easy to be a snarky columnist and make fun of Aniston – and Emma Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-watson>, Lena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham>, and any other female 
celebrity who occasionally engages in feminist issues but doesn’t always live 
the life of a radical feminist. But their gestures and words matter to a 
demographic a lot more important than jaded journalists: teenage girls. More to 
the point, what Aniston says on this issue is damn right, and if we’re now 
going to say that any woman who has posed inVogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/07/vogue-happy-100th-birthday-magazine-exhibition>
, made a movie about motherhood or once dared to go out in a crop top isn’t 
allowed to speak about feminism, well, we might as well all give up, because 
the demand for purity is the opposite of making actual progress.

So, is it wrong to care whether a celebrity is pregnant? Look, it’s nice news 
when someone you’re interested in is expecting a baby. But is it wrong to 
think, by extension, that a woman – whether it’s your best friend, the prime 
minister or an A-list celebrity – is incomplete without having a baby? Yes, it 
is. Sorry, Una and Geoffrey.

You’ve written before about the stylishness of certain sports, but what about 
if you don’t care about sport at all? Is that a bar to fashionability?
Marcus, by email

Excellent question! Given that there is, I have vaguely noticed, quite a lot 
of sport around this summer, it seems time for my long-planned discussion, 
which can be summed up as: “What to wear when you don’t give a damn about 
sport.”

Perhaps you live with someone who quite likes sport. Maybe they’re even 
involved with sport for a living. Thus, it is likely you’ve realised that in 
order to see them at all this summer you will have to get used to sitting on 
the sofa while they stare at a TV screen showing people doing things with balls 
all day, every weekend. To dress for this exciting prospect, comfort is key, 
because this is an endurance issue. I counsel elasticated waistbands and loose 
cuts (eating is a good way to cope with the boredom). Definitely no jeans (too 
sweaty), but cotton trousers or dresses are fine. I recommend loose necklines, 
so you can duck your head into your shirt during the extra boring stretches and 
nip down for a little nap. And finally, bring your phone, as it’s the only 
human interaction you’ll get here. Good luck, stout-hearted ones.
 