
During the 1950s, a group of painters gathered around the Cornish harbour town 
of St Ives, among which were some of the leading modern artists of their time. 
They represented Britain's contribution to an international search for an art 
that respected modernism's abstract values and was suited to the postwar, 
post-Holocaust world.Alan Davie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/07/alan-davie>, Terry Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/03/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
,Patrick Heron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/mar/22/guardianobituaries.michaelmcnay>, 
Roger Hilton, Peter Lanyon,William Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/mar/02/william-scott-painter-domestic-masterpieces>
 and Bryan Wynter explored the sensitive zone between representation and 
abstraction: testing the expressive potential of the material of paint itself, 
and of the mark and gesture, while retaining semblances of subject matter, 
external references or imagery. Similar explorations and experiments were being 
conducted elsewhere by a host of artists includingJackson Pollock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/jan/27/jackson-pollock-equal-to-grand-masters>
 andMark Rothko <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rothko> in the US, 
Jean Dubuffet <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/oct/01/artsfeatures1> 
in France andAlberto Burri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jan/15/alberto-burri-form-matter-review>
 in Italy. This important British contribution has largely been written out of 
the histories. Even in Britain it has too often been considered in parochial 
terms.

Accounts of the artists of St Ives not only tend to focus on their use 
of landscape and nature as a source, but to present it as a kind of unwitting 
inevitability due to their location. A new exhibition, however, sets out 
to view the art of St Ives from the other end of the telescope; to position it 
not in relation to where it was made but to what was made, how it was made and 
to its relationship with art made elsewhere in the same era.

The repeated association of the "art of St Ives" with the town itself was most 
famously seen in the Tate gallery's great 1985 survey,St Ives: Twenty Five 
Years ofPainting <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/painting>, Sculpture 
and Pottery. The exhibition's catalogue included a personal memoir by the 
architect David Lewis, a member of the St Ives artistic community, which begins 
and ends with landscape: "So the landscape was the common factor for all of us, 
a presence of perpetual power which in its transitoriness reminds us of our own 
… any pathway we followed, over moors, or down the shafts of mines, or along 
the corridors of gales, led only to oneself."
 William Scott’s The Harbour, 1952. Courtesy of Tate St Ives 
While Lewis highlighted the ways in which artists found in landscape a symbol 
for that which they wished to express in their work, the rest of the catalogue 
emphasised local events rather than offering a broader perspective or context. 
Such localism has been a dominant and debilitating aspect of accounts of the 
art of St Ives from the 1950s to the present. The first book dedicated to the 
subject was Denys Val Baker'sBritain's Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Colony by the Sea (1959). Its 
cover sports a photograph of Peter Lanyon looking across the harbour with 
a palette and brushes in his hand as if poised to paint the picturesque scene, 
even though he was by then a successful abstract painter. The book's blurb 
typifies most writing on St Ives art: "This is not a book of art criticism. 
It is a book about St Ives and the surrounding districts of West Cornwall and 
the art colony that has developed there."

In contrast, the leading art historian and critic Charles Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/sep/28/charles-harrison-obituary>
 proposed that one should not assume that the place of St Ives necessarily 
played a determining role in the art that was made there. Artistic 
developments, he suggested, might equally have been determined by external 
factors that could help explain the visual parallels between work such as 
Lanyon'sThermal and that of artists such as Willem de Kooning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/nov/21/willem-dekooning-mylifeinart-art>
. The new exhibition takes up Harrison's call for a non-localised appraisal of 
St Ives. It presents the works of the major St Ives artists in conjunction with 
those by contemporaries who engaged with common technical and ethical issues. 
Harrison argued that the key technical issue for the artists was 
the reformulation of painting and pictorial space in the wake of cubism. Others 
might explain it in terms of the crisis of modern art following the rise of 
fascism and the erosion of the optimism of prewar movements. As the critic 
Lawrence Alloway wrote, the postwar generation of artists "could neither start 
again, nor stay as it was, as if nothing had happened"; it was a generation 
"torn by conflicts of prewar formality and postwar directness".

For Harrison, St Ives had provided a safe haven where the values of 
international modernism might be protected: "Under the cultural conditions that 
prevailed not simply in England but in Europe during the war and its aftermath 
– conditions characterised by themes of patriotism, nationalism, xenophobia, 
insularity and by that peculiar fascinated angst which was expressed in Graham 
Sutherland's work and then in Francis Bacon's – an unadulterated modernist 
culture could only continue in rustication."

In that way, the critic set the art of St Ives apart from the neoromanticism 
of Henry Moore and Sutherland that had become the dominant form of modern art 
in 1940s Britain, and aligned it with the high modernism ofTheo van Doesburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jan/23/theo-van-doesburg-avant-garde-tate>
 andPiet Mondrian <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/piet-mondrian>. 
Certainly, a defining characteristic of postwar St Ives art is that it had a 
direct link to the utopian ideals of the international modern movement of the 
1930s. The whole St Ives phenomenon had been started by the migration there, at 
the beginning of the war, of Hepworth,Ben Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ben-nicholson> and Naum Gabo. Gabo's 
sculptureSpiral Theme influenced a number of painters and the presence of these 
veterans of the prewar international modern movement shaped the thinking of the 
artists of 1950s St Ives. With them came the culture of Circle, the 1937 
publication that surveyed the international constructivist movement in 
painting, sculpture and architecture, from the suprematism of Kazimir Malevich 
in pre-revolutionary Russia to its own moment when, in the age of fascism, 
London became briefly the capital of abstract art.
 Peter Lanyon’s Thermal, 1960. Courtesy of Tate St Ives 
Of equal importance is that, as well as the culture of 30s utopianism, the art 
of St Ives tapped into a tradition of primitivism, specifically of a kind of 
ruralist revival of the handmade and of craft. The untutored painter Alfred 
Wallis and the potter Bernard Leach were not just neighbours to the artists of 
St Ives, they were talismanic embodiments of values at the heart of those 
artists' practice. Leach's pots and such paintings as Wallis'sHouses at St Ives 
represented a timeless, non‑metropolitan culture – a kind of authenticity that 
contrasted with the knowing sophistication of mainstream culture.

Heron dubbed those artists who developed their careers after the war the 
"middle generation", meaning they were in the middle between the prewar 
modernists and younger painters who would be fundamentally influenced by the 
American abstract expressionists. It was a number of years after this middle 
generation returned from the war that distinctive and powerful works of art 
began to emerge. Around 1953, out of the rich mix of constructivism, 
primitivism and direct experiences of war, emerged ground-breaking works of art 
in which thickly applied, irregular areas of paint became expressive vehicles 
in themselves. These works could take their place alongside pieces from 
continental Europe and America that were variously labelled "abstract 
expressionism", "action painting", Tachisme, Art Informel, Art Brut and so on.

The history of St Ives can be written as an account of the many artists and 
their associates who came and went in that small town and its surrounding 
country: who knew whom, who drank where, who showed at this gallery or that. Or 
it can be based on judgments of quality and relevance in relation to the best 
art of its time. For a long time, such was the power of one historical account 
that it was difficult to position British – or, even mainland European – art 
alongside American art without inviting predictable assumptions and accusations 
of influence. As the art historian Serge Guilbaut commented in 1990: "Since the 
'triumph' of American painting in the 1960s, it has been difficult to discuss 
anything in the art culture of the 1950s but abstract expressionism." Heron 
was one of the first to identify the "cultural imperialism" of American 
critics' accounts of art history after the second world war. It is unfortunate 
that his critical values were so close to the same formalism that came to 
dominate accounts of the abstract expressionism that he could only argue his 
case through rather ambitious claims for British artists' precedence over the 
Americans.

A better argument would be to say that there were other matters at play 
and that formalist critiques served to obscure much of the underlying meanings 
of postwar painting. Among the influences on the art were issues of place, 
primitivism, craft, myth and nature. These timeless qualities were embraced by 
artists seeking reassurance and solidity having witnessed the depths to 
which human beings could sink.
 Patrick Heron's Long Table with Fruit, 1949. Courtesy of Tate St Ives 
The new exhibition sets out not simply to demonstrate that the artists of 
St Ives were pursuing a line of inquiry that they shared with artists 
elsewhere, but to try to reclaim some of these hidden values and issues. That 
an artist chose to live and make art in St Ives, and that their art drew in 
some way on their environment, is not irrelevant to this international view of 
postwar art. Artists such as Lanyon, Heron and Hilton are not important simply 
because their work relates formally to international contemporaries; nor are 
they also-rans because they retained an allegiance to subject matter. That 
allegiance is part of their international significance. The art made in 
Cornwall in the 1950s was specific to that place and time, and was an important 
part of longer and wider artistic developments to which that place was itself 
significant.

Ironically, however, the most internationally prominent work of St Ives art 
was by a sculptor of the older generation. In the early 1960s, Barbara Hepworth 
had returned to some of her earlier ideas. She realised that the ideals of the 
1930s still had value. It was, after all, veterans of the ideological battles 
of the 1930s who founded the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and other 
peace organisations. Hepworth returned to her totemicSingle Form idea for 
a monument to Dag Hammarskjöld, secretary general at the United Nations, to 
stand outside the UN's Manhattan headquarters. The UN was an organisation that 
better embodied the success of Hepworth's youthful political ideals than any 
other.Single Form was unveiled in New York in June 1964; later that summer 
Lanyon was killed, marking for many the end of St Ives as a centre for the 
production of modernist art.
 