
We might not yet be able to teleport from one side of the world to the other, 
but the future of technologically enhanced holidays is closer than we think. In 
fact, in some ways it is already here, as cutting edge cruise ships move well 
beyond traditional deck chairs and cocktails to bring you the holiday of the 
future.

What if your travels to exotic places also coincided with a thrilling taste of 
what might be to come thanks to robotic barmen, the latest in technological 
entertainment, and views of the ocean that are visible even from inside the 
ship?

These inventions are not just the latest technology to be used at sea: it’s 
the latest technology there is. We spoke to some of the innovators at Royal 
Caribbean about just how they bring this future cruise experience to life.

What’s more is that you can experience all this from your backyard, with the 
all-new Quantum Class ship, Ovation of the Seas, calling Australia home this 
summer.

Multi-sensory experience
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-cruising-but-not-as-you-know-it%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-future-is-now-how-smart-ships-are-revolutionising-cruising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3f55a3ae002ede46b40d986d3af37cb638d348%2F0_36_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20is%20now%3A%20How%20smart%20ships%20are%20revolutionising%20cruising&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-cruising-but-not-as-you-know-it%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-future-is-now-how-smart-ships-are-revolutionising-cruising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20is%20now%3A%20How%20smart%20ships%20are%20revolutionising%20cruising&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-cruising-but-not-as-you-know-it%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-future-is-now-how-smart-ships-are-revolutionising-cruising%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3f55a3ae002ede46b40d986d3af37cb638d348%2F0_36_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 270 degrees at TWO70 on Quantum Class Ships Photograph: Roy Riley / 
sbw-photo/Supplied by Royal Caribbean 
As its name implies, the Two70 venue features views of 270 degrees. At the 
flick of a switch, the windows are transformed into gigantic video screens, 
and, combined with six Roboscreens, the result is a spectacular, wraparound, 
multi-sensory experience for guests that will make them feel part of the show.

Nick Weir, Vice President of Entertainment, Royal Caribbean International, 
says: “There is no theatre anywhere in the world like it.

“This is a room the likes of which no one has ever built anywhere, on land or 
on sea.”

When Marie Belzil, Multimedia Director at the Moment Factory, was approached 
to work on the Two70 venue she could hardly contain her excitement.

“When we saw all the technology that was in it, we thought, oh my goodness, 
what an amazing playground for us!

“I first got really excited about Roboscreens, obviously, thinking about 
developing content that would react to the movement of the robot.”

The robotics don’t end with techno-visual displays. At the Bionic Bar, on 
Quantum Class ships, robot bar staff powered by Makr Shakr can muddle, stir, 
shake and strain drinks with the best of them.

It’s really all about technology, comfort and simplicity.”
Patrik Dahlgren, former VP Royal Caribbean 
Rooms with a different view

One onboard advance that has the potential to revolutionise the cruise 
experience for all passengers is the virtual balcony – a balcony you can have 
when you don’t have a balcony.

By cleverly adapting high definition screens and layering the vision with 
graphics and sound, Royal Caribbean has been able to deliver the feel of an 
outside stateroom to interior staterooms in the centre of the ship.

“Even when you are right up next to the screen, it looks like you could reach 
right through,” says Bill Martin, former Vice President, Chief Information 
Officer at Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd.

“We use these extraordinarily high-speed, high definition cameras, 
strategically positioned around the ship, to feed that signal and then we 
overlay the graphics of the actual balcony infrastructure if you will – the 
railing, the floor, the glass that would be on the railing.”

One IT Project Manager at Royal Caribbean International says it’s technology 
that has to be seen to be believed: “It’s something that a lot of people just 
can’t understand when you explain it to them. You have to actually experience 
it. It’s very cool!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-cruising-but-not-as-you-know-it%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-future-is-now-how-smart-ships-are-revolutionising-cruising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31ea9f5d211f2637dcceef9945397648650a69f8%2F0_83_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20is%20now%3A%20How%20smart%20ships%20are%20revolutionising%20cruising&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-cruising-but-not-as-you-know-it%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-future-is-now-how-smart-ships-are-revolutionising-cruising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20is%20now%3A%20How%20smart%20ships%20are%20revolutionising%20cruising&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Froyal-caribbean-cruising-but-not-as-you-know-it%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-future-is-now-how-smart-ships-are-revolutionising-cruising%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31ea9f5d211f2637dcceef9945397648650a69f8%2F0_83_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Spectacular entertainment onboard Ovation of the Seas Photograph: Roy Riley / 
sbw-photo/Supplied by Royal Caribbean 
Caring for the planet

And it is not only cruisers benefitting from technological advances onboard. 
Royal Caribbean’s ships are more environmentally friendly than ever.

On Ovation of the Seas, for example, computer modelling has been used to 
reduce the ship’s energy consumption by configuring the hull and engine in the 
most efficient way possible. Incandescent bulbs are no longer used onboard, and 
motion sensors dim hallway lighting when not in use, reducing power usage.

Back to the future

Patrik Dahlgren was formerly Vice President, Royal Caribbean Cruises, Fleet 
Optimization, and when talking aboutQuantum Class technology he says that for 
those who step onboard, they really are stepping into the future.

“This is the future of cruising, the future of using all the technology we 
have; the technology in entertainment, technology on the bridge, technology in 
the safety field… it’s really all about technology, comfort and simplicity,” 
Dahlgren says.
 