
Now that foreign holidays are so greatly curtailed, bathing is likely to 
assume a much greater popularity than has hitherto been the case. The sea is 
always with us, and consequently we have preferred mountains, lakes, or 
forests. Now that we are driven perforce to the sea we are likely to appreciate 
more what is to foreigners one of the greatest attractions of this country.

It is our neglect of this great advantage which has caused us also to neglect 
the business of bathing dresses. There was a time when feminine modesty 
demanded that a bathing dress should be unspeakably ugly. Only then was bathing 
considered a suitable diversion for the well-brought-up young lady. 
Well-brought-up young ladies have changed, but their bathing dresses have not 
changed very much with them. Generally speaking, the Englishwoman has a 
suitable dress for every kind of amusement, but as far as bathing goes nothing 
is too slipshod, nothing too greatly lacking in taste.

There is the other extreme, of course. It includes a parasol, a box of face 
powder, and a glass of Dubonnet, to revive one from the exhausting process of 
not getting wet. It should be possible, however, to strike a mean, and to look 
as well in the water as on the land.

Material counts for a good deal in a bathing dress, and it should not be too 
thin. If it is to be cotton, twills, poplins, thick crêpes, or cotton tricot 
are best. But better than any of these are woollen and silken materials. Heavy 
silk is expensive but it makes an admirable garment, pleasant to feel and 
having nothing of the drowned look of most bathing dresses when they come out 
of the water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fswimwear-bathing-dress-1916-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10448a97b5c661fbed1d21b1ed9ac0cc54fb9934%2F0_351_2826_1724%2F2826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20latest%20in%20stylish%20bathing%20dresses%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2031%20July%201916&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fswimwear-bathing-dress-1916-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20latest%20in%20stylish%20bathing%20dresses%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2031%20July%201916&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fswimwear-bathing-dress-1916-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10448a97b5c661fbed1d21b1ed9ac0cc54fb9934%2F0_351_2826_1724%2F2826.jpg>
 Modelling the latest bathing costumes, 1925. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty 
Images 
The Colour Question.
Colour is also an important consideration, since it changes so much in the 
water. For grown-ups there are few shades so becoming as a dead black or blue. 
Dead black satin looks well both in and out of the water, and thick 
crêpe-de-Chine is also becoming. Failing these, black poplin is charming, and 
certain kinds of taffetas do not lose their crispness even in the sea. On 
coming out of the water a bathing dress should keep a certain crispness – this 
is almost impossible except with taffetas or thicker woollen stuffs, – or it 
should go into really becoming folds as does crêpe-de-Chine. Of thicker 
materials, some good swimmers have a tight-fitting, woollen, knitted bathing 
suit. This has a firmness and consistency which is rather comfortable. Other 
people use very thin, fine cloth, dull in texture, with cut, not hemmed, edges. 
In dead black this looks very well against a white skin.

Really good swimmers cannot, of course, do much with petticoats, however 
short. Their substitutes – frills rather like those on a clown’s trousers – are 
not usually very satisfactory when they are wet. A skirt is nevertheless very 
pretty, and need not hamper the moderate swimmer, while for the mere splasher 
it is rather a boon. An inoffensive skirt can be managed by wearing a tunic to 
the knees over a very short pair of knickers – rather on the principle of the 
little boy’s smock and knickers. Or it may be all joined up together, though 
this arrangement is not so good for drying and pressing. Tunics are being made 
this year reaching to just above the knees and folded in two or three wide 
box-pleats to give them spring. They are finished off with a sailor collar – 
white piqué, white taffetas, and white flannel come in here very usefully 
according to the material chosen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fswimwear-bathing-dress-1916-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d27cdaaa7dce31ef1945fe3fa1401e0e1cf3a99%2F0_0_4120_2776%2F4120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20latest%20in%20stylish%20bathing%20dresses%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2031%20July%201916&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fswimwear-bathing-dress-1916-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20latest%20in%20stylish%20bathing%20dresses%3A%20fashion%20archive%2C%2031%20July%201916&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fswimwear-bathing-dress-1916-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d27cdaaa7dce31ef1945fe3fa1401e0e1cf3a99%2F0_0_4120_2776%2F4120.jpg>
 Swimmers on a bathing hut, about 1900. Photograph: Roger-Viollet/Rex Features 
Head and Heels.
The cap should be chosen with the greatest care to pick up the suit. Generally 
speaking the Phrygian caps that come over the ears keep the water out better 
than anything. Whatever style is preferred the cap should be in the brightest 
colours, and almost any colour can be chosen, since the rubber does not change 
much in the water.

Shoes and stockings provide a difficult question. Certainly it is much more 
comfortable to bathe without either. Foreigners, on the other hand, do not 
understand our custom in this respect, and a number of English people are 
conforming to the foreign fashion. If they are worn, it should be made quite 
certain that there is no hiatus between the short knicker and the stocking. 
Sandals look as pretty as anything, especially if they are bound round the 
ankle criss-cross fashion.

For children the prettiest possible suits are little woven costumes, quite 
tight-fitting, very short, and in very bright colours. It is also possible to 
get charming little suits in dark blue or black picked up with lines of some 
bright colour. Children, in distinction to grown-ups, almost always look pretty 
in the water, and the tight-fitting suit prevents anything of their prettiness 
being lost.
 