
There are many reasons why it took a long time for the British to fall in love 
with theTour de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>. Before 
the era of mass travel, the Tour was more remote and a more impenetrably Gallic 
ritual than it is today. With the tragic exception ofTom Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jul/14/archive-1967-simpson-death-tour-de-france>
, no British cyclist could compete to the necessary level. Though Simpson and
Beryl Burton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/13/tour-de-france-beryl-burton> 
were world champions in the 1960s, cycling remained less popular than it is 
today. And the Tour was not regularly televised in Britain until the 1980s. 
Then, in the 1990s, just as it gained a mass audience here, cycling trashed its 
own credibility with a series of drugs scandals that culminated inLance 
Armstrong’s <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lance-armstrong> seven tainted 
wins.

Ten years after Armstrong’s last fraudulent win, the memory of those 
self-inflicted wounds to professional cycling has not completely disappeared. 
Even today, with cyclists allowed to compete again after drugs bans, it is hard 
to have absolute confidence in what one is seeing.Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> road race tactics can also be 
obscure to the uninitiated. But the combination of a tighter drugs regime, the 
inherent magnificence of a compelling contest conducted against the backdrop of 
superb French scenery and, above all, British cyclists’ extraordinary 
breakthrough in the event have combined to make the Tour increasingly 
irresistible to British audiences.

Bradley Wiggins’s <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> win in 
the 2012 Tour was undoubtedly the pivotal moment. His personality and his 
achievement opened the door through which Chris Froome has now gone even 
further. On Sunday, surrounded as ever by his formidable Sky team, Froome
cruised into Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/24/la-course-2016-by-le-tour-de-france-live>
to claim his third winner’s yellow jersey in the past four years. Yet the 2016 
Tour has been as harrowingly hard as ever, with Froome reduced to running up 
part of one stageafter a crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/14/chris-froome-mont-ventoux-tour-de-france-2016>
 and with heavy rain in the Pyrenees and Alps reducing some descents to skid 
pans that unseated many riders,Froome included 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/tour-de-france-2016-romain-bardet-chris-froome>
.

Nevertheless, the list of cyclists who have won the Tour de France three times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/27/tour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-new-heroes-three-times-winner-cycling>
 is a list of the sport’s deities (with Armstrong in the role of cycling’s 
Lucifer). The sport, not just Britain, is lucky to have him. Froome’s dignity 
and politeness make him a role model for clean cycling in a sport that needed 
one.

Violent events like the ones discussed in today’s other editorial  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/24/guardian-view-munich-shooting-europe-hold-nerve>
put sport in its place. This year’s Tour began with an act of remembrance on 
the Normandy beaches for the sacrifices of 1944. By the time the tour reached 
Paris, three weeks later, it had had to pause for reflection three more times. 
So relentless have events been in those three weeks that the cyclists were also 
called upon to mark the attacks in Nice, Würzburg and, before Saturday’s last 
Alpine stage of the race, Munich. In each case, the day’s racing only began 
after a minute’s silence, as the cyclists paused, heads bowed, at the starting 
line.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fguardian-view-chris-froome-tour-de-france-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8049871a5c5021ea8944316aa3f90852326bd1f5%2F0_203_3650_2190%2F3650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20view%20on%20Chris%20Froome%3A%20clean%20cycling%E2%80%99s%20calm%20champion%20%7C%20Editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fguardian-view-chris-froome-tour-de-france-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20view%20on%20Chris%20Froome%3A%20clean%20cycling%E2%80%99s%20calm%20champion%20%7C%20Editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fguardian-view-chris-froome-tour-de-france-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8049871a5c5021ea8944316aa3f90852326bd1f5%2F0_203_3650_2190%2F3650.jpg>
 Mark Cavendish of Great Britain (right) and fellow riders observe a minute’s 
silence at a war memorial at Utah Beach, Sainte-Marie-du-Mont, after stage one 
of the Tour de France 2016. Photograph: Bryn Lennon/Getty Images 
In an interconnected world, when violent events occur, sport’s secondary place 
in the scheme of things is inescapably reinforced. That is especially true when 
the event affects the national sporting event of a country suffering such a 
trauma as France experiencedon Bastille Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/14/several-killed-after-lorry-drives-into-crowd-in-nice-reports>
. Gestures of respect by sports stars before they begin to compete can 
sometimes seem a bit empty. But it is better that some acknowledgment is given 
than none. Sport can no longer pretend, as it used to, that it inhabits its own 
planet. One of Froome’s many gifts to the sport he commands is that he 
understands that.
 