
I know plenty of feminists whose guilty pleasure is reading the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>.


Walk up behind them in their lunch break and say “boo!” and they’ll be 
frantically trying to minimise their browser, hiding the sidebar of shame. Yes, 
they were reading about Karl Stefanovic looking downcast while stepping out 
with his mum; or about the side boob of some celebrity so far down the alphabet 
the letters have run out.

But, they might argue, after spending the morning wading through a 1,400-page 
document on carbon trading, surely there’s something harmless about taking a 
five-minute mental break to see which reality TV celeb you’ve never heard of is 
dating which random Instagrammer you’ve also never heard of.

It’s the equivalent of a micro sleep. Or taking a nonmedicinal tranquilliser.

It’s fine. Of course it’s fine – more entertainment than journalism, the 
digital version of a supermarket tabloid.

Clementine Ford: ‘There’s something really toxic with the way men bond in 
Australia’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/australia-books-blog/2016/sep/28/clementine-ford-theres-something-really-toxic-with-the-way-men-bond-in-australia>
It’s fine, until one day you realise that to read it – even to hate-read it – 
is to be complicit in a tawdry enterprise that is taking us all backwards at a 
time we need to be stepping up.

To be fair, this weekend’s Daily Mail Australia story about Channel Seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel-7> television host Sam Armytage 
wearing granny underwear didn’t set out to demean and humiliateme. It only set 
out to demean and humiliate Armytage, and Armytage alone.

How else would you explain taking a photo of her on the street, from behind, 
without her consent, and plastering the results on the internet: “Sam Armytage 
dares to bare with her giant granny panties showing visible line in Sydney”. 
(Firstly, she didn’t “dare to bare” anything. She was wearing a dress over her 
underpants. That is why they are called underpants.)

It was one of those stories where the shame spreads from the subject to the 
reader; one of those pieces that make you feel your humanity has been reduced 
just by reading it – that you have taken part in online shaming, bullying 
someone because they were wearing … underpants? (Lovely, comfortable, 
full-brief underpants that most people wear, that look good under clothes.) I 
read it and felt gross, like I’d been part of some feral, leering mob.

Armytage has told Buzzfeed Australia that the matter is now with her lawyers 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/ginarushton/people-are-pissed-off-after-a-tv-host-was-shamed-for-wearing>
. I hope this means they won’t continue shaming every semi-famous woman who 
wears normal underwear to the shops.

But the whole tawdry exercise speaks to a wider issue. There has been much 
talk in the past few weeks of ideas that seemed unacceptable a few short months 
ago slowly being normalised.

In an essay for the New York Times Magazine, Teju Cole wrote about the days 
following Donald Trump’s US election win 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/magazine/a-time-for-refusal.html>: “All 
around were the unmistakable signs of normalisation in progress. So many were 
falling into line without being pushed. It was happening at tremendous speed, 
like a contagion.”

Normalisation is a choice. When you are part of the chain of production that 
enables a story like Armytage’s undies to even exist – when you commission, 
write, click, consume – you are normalising cyberbullying, stalking, sexism and 
just all-round general creepiness.

We have to call this stuff out now, more loudly than ever – even if we’re at 
risk of repeating ourselves or sounding angry or shrill.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-daily-mails-pathetic-pants-shaming-stunt-on-sam-armytage-demeans-us-all%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feea429151a0ac93c13decf6ae7749f2e9ed67f8e%2F0_0_2204_3000%2F2204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Daily%20Mail's%20pathetic%20pants-shaming%20stunt%20on%20Sam%20Armytage%20demeans%20us%20all%20%7C%20Brigid%20Delaney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-daily-mails-pathetic-pants-shaming-stunt-on-sam-armytage-demeans-us-all%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Daily%20Mail%27s%20pathetic%20pants-shaming%20stunt%20on%20Sam%20Armytage%20demeans%20us%20all%20%7C%20Brigid%20Delaney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-daily-mails-pathetic-pants-shaming-stunt-on-sam-armytage-demeans-us-all%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feea429151a0ac93c13decf6ae7749f2e9ed67f8e%2F0_0_2204_3000%2F2204.jpg>
 ‘I stand before you as a doormat ... Oh, I mean, as a female entertainer.’: 
Madonna speaks at the Billboard Women in Music event on 9 December. Photograph: 
Nicholas Hunt/(Credit too long, see caption) 
Madonna’s doing it. At the Billboard awards last week 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/events/women-in-music/7617021/madonna-billboard-women-in-music-2016-speech>
, the global superstar let it rip from the podium: “I stand before you as a 
doormat ... Oh, I mean, as a female entertainer,” she began.

“Thank you for acknowledging my ability to continue my career for 34 years in 
the face of blatant sexism and misogyny and constant bullying and relentless 
abuse,”Madonna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> said.

“If you’re a girl, you have to play the game. You’re allowed to be pretty and 
cute and sexy. But don’t act too smart. Don’t have an opinion that’s out of 
line with the status quo. You are allowed to be objectified by men and dress 
like a slut, but don’t own your sluttiness. And do not, I repeat do not, share 
your own sexual fantasies with the world.

“Be what men want you to be, but more importantly, be what women feel 
comfortable with you being around other men. And finally, do not age. Because 
to age is a sin. You will be criticised and vilified and you will definitely 
not be played on the radio.”

We’re not living in a post-racist, post-feminist age – we’re in some other 
place, the “12th century perhaps”, asnovelist Margaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/15/margaret-atwood-interview-english-pen-pinter-prize>
 said in October.

She described feminism like this: “First wave, the vote. Second wave, the 
image. Now it’s about violence and rape and death: we’ve got down to the 
nitty-gritty.”

There’s nothing new about a granny pants story – but there is something new 
about the world it arrives in. We need to push back against sexism, against 
misogyny, against bullying. We need to push back against creepy, invasive 
tabloid stories. We need to stop the normalisation of ideas we should find 
abhorrent. We need to make like Madonna, and draw and hold the line.
 