
“The Simpsons is television,” the critic Matt Zoller Seitz observed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/07/the-simpsons-greatest-tv-show-of-all-time>
, and he’s right. In many ways, it’s a more accurate portrait of the fluid, 
heterogeneous United States than any novel, film or play could hope to be. At 
more than 600 episodes and 28 seasons, the scope of the show has been huge and 
over two weeks, the cable network FXX will air every episode of the show 
back-to-back-to-back, ending on 7 December. We’ve picked the 25 best episodes 
of its lengthy run for your consideration.

The concentration of incredible writing talent in the show’s golden years 
means that a lot of these are from the same few seasons in the 1990s, but they 
remain remarkably timely, quotable, and uncomfortably accurate in their 
portrayal of the huge swath of America that gets lost in the cracks in so much 
coastal culture.

1. Homer the Heretic


Season four, episode three, written by George Meyer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65539b2e0fdb9d863560f646e200d645c36fcf7c%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65539b2e0fdb9d863560f646e200d645c36fcf7c%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 God visits Homer in a dream to tell him it’s cool with him if Homer stays home 
from church to watch football. Photograph: Fox 
Homer skips church, giving him the time to make his patented space-age moon 
waffles (ingredients: caramels, waffle batter, liquid smoke), win a call-in 
radio contest, and watch the Three Stooges, all while his family is freezing in 
church listening to Rev Lovejoy read a passage from “The Lamentations of 
Jeremiah, long version”.


Homer’s brief atheism ends after a brush with death and a rescue led by Ned 
Flanders, among others. It’s one of the few full scripts by George Meyer, lead 
rewrite guy for the show’s classic years, and it’s arguably his best: funny, 
adroit, with a core of surprising seriousness about religion. And a cameo by 
God himself, who, by the way, has five fingers to the rest of Simpsonworld’s 
four.

2. Marge vs the Monorail 

Season four, episode 12, written by Conan O’Brien
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbddca4ea1a70bec4fe9cc8b675c3dc96feb094a9%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbddca4ea1a70bec4fe9cc8b675c3dc96feb094a9%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 Lyle Lanley and Lisa. Photograph: Fox 
As with everything Simpsonian, Marge vs the Monorail is a heartfelt character 
study – this time of Marge, whose stick-in-the-mudness saves the town from a 
huckster, Lyle Lanley (played, as were all the show’s hucksters during its 
glory days, by Phil Hartman), who sells the town a bunch of empty promises 
about new jobs and great infrastructure projects and delivers a dangerously 
unstable monorail system. Lanley is one of the show’s great one-off characters, 
a charmer who knows how to pander to Lisa’s vanity, Homer’s laziness and, 
unsuccessfully, Marge’s community spirit.

The script by Conan O’Brien is filled with great gags, notably Homer’s 
early-episode noodling to the tune of the theme from The Flintstones: “Simpson 
– Homer Simpson! He’s the greatest guy in his-to-ry. From the town of 
Springfield, he’s about to hit a chestnut tree. Aaaah!”

3. Much Apu About Nothing

Season seven, episode 23, written by David S Cohen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ba68c1d630644a96e225c5a40c42843a7d791a2%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ba68c1d630644a96e225c5a40c42843a7d791a2%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 ‘Who needs the infinite compassion of Ganesha when I’ve got Tom Cruise and 
Nicole Kidman staring at me from Entertainment Weekly with their dead eyes?’ 
Photograph: Fox 
Hank Azaria’s portrayal of Apu Nahasapeemapetilon has drawn criticism as the 
series has outlived the conventions that gave birth to it, but if the 
accusations of lazy racial humor ever go to trial, Exhibit A for the defense 
will be Much Apu About Nothing. The episode is a heartfelt ode to the American 
immigrant that’s peerless. After a bear menaces – well, wanders around – 
Evergreen Terrace, corrupt Mayor Quimby raises taxes to pay for an unnecessary 
bear patrol, and then decides to blame immigrants for the tax hike and holds a 
referendum on whether they ought to be deported.

The referendum passes and Apu, who is in the country illegally, has to 
scramble for his citizenship. Homer, having repented of his vote to deport his 
buddy, gives him disastrously bad advice on how to pass his citizenship test.

Taken one way, it’s a harsh poke at people who reflexively blame their woes on 
immigrants and refuse to learn their own history. Taken another, it’s pure 
Americana. Or both.

4. Homer’s Enemy

Season eight, episode 23, written by John Swartzwelder
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F505711af65aa3096bdafb7148c7e73aa22378eec%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F505711af65aa3096bdafb7148c7e73aa22378eec%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 I can’t stress enough how much Frank Grimes likes to be called ‘Grimey’. 
Photograph: Fox 
Homer’s surprisingly various life is the subject of more than a few throwaway 
gags throughout the series – at one point Marge lists all his various careers; 
at another, all the times he’s been arrested – but one character is utterly 
vexed by his good fortune – namely, Frank Grimes, or “Grimey”, as he likes to 
be called.

Grimes, played by Hank Azaria, has had to fight for everything he’s ever had. 
Homer’s ability to coast through life, therefore, seems like a personal insult. 
Things just get better from there, for Homer, at least.

The episode is written by John Swartzwelder, one of the show’s longest-running 
writers and such a recluse that one theory holds that he doesn’t exist at all. 
A fellow Simpsons writer, Dan Greaney, disagreed in a 2001 New York Times 
feature on the show by the critic AO Scott: “Write this down,” Greaney 
demanded: “John Swartzwelder is the best writer in the world today in any 
medium.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0580d0a7f31deb88ae4c3c58e47fefd9adb75b57%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Simpsons%20Thanksgiving%20marathon%3A%20the%2025%20best%20episodes%20to%20gorge%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-simpsons-25-best-episodes-guide-thanksgiving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0580d0a7f31deb88ae4c3c58e47fefd9adb75b57%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 Principal Skinner: This dessert is exquisite. What do you call it?
Mrs Krabappel: Applesauce. Photograph: Fox 
5. Grade School Confidential

Season 8, episode 19, written by Rachel Pulido

When exactly the writers give themselves permission to more or less totally 
abandon the family of the title is a matter for much scholarly debate, but 
arguably the two richest non-Simpsons characters during the series’ most 
fertile period are Edna Krabappel and Seymour Skinner.

The hard-bitten teacher and the naive principal are a perfect match for each 
other, comically and romantically, and as their relationship blossoms before a 
horrified Bart, the show finds odd pathos among two embittered public servants 
who suddenly realize amid their self-pity that they actually have each other.

6. You Only Move Twice

Season 8, episode 2, written by John Swartzwelder

Homer gets a new job in a town far away from the madness of Springfield, 
working for an innovative company in a planned community where Lisa is 
stimulated, Bart is included at school, and Marge is pampered. It turns out 
none of the family wants any of those things, or at least not enough to want to 
lose the ability to complain about not having them. It’s a lovely journey of 
self-discovery, punctuated by hints – then clear warnings – then explicit 
demonstrations of something Homer probably should have picked up on: Homer’s 
new boss, Hank Scorpio (an excellent Albert Brooks), is a mad scientist bent on 
world domination.

7. Lisa the Vegetarian

Season 7, episode 5, written by David S Cohen

Lisa is devastated when she visits the petting zoo and realizes that the food 
on her plate and the animal in the zoo are one and the same. Homer couldn’t 
care less about where his meals come from but he loves his daughter, even when 
she goes much too far and ruins his barbecue. It sounds serious, but it also 
has some of the show’s best gags, notably a Meat Council propaganda film the 
students watch to dispel wild rumors vegetarians might be spreading.

8. In Marge We Trust

Season 8, episode 22, written by Donick Cary

As the series goes on, The Simpsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons> develops something its 
writers call “plot drift”, in which its various plots and subplots become 
increasingly disconnected from each other and themselves. There may be no purer 
expression of plot drift than In Marge We Trust, in which Marge accidentally 
usurps the blasé Rev Lovejoy’s pastoral role in the Springfield church 
community, and Homer seeks the answer to one of life’s great mysteries: why is 
his head pictured on a box of Japanese soap?

9. Lisa the Iconoclast

Season 7, episode 16, written by Jonathan Collier

Lisa discovers that the town’s founder, Jebediah Springfield, was in fact a 
bloodthirsty pirate named Hans Sprungfeld, and she sets about showing the 
townspeople the error of their ways. There are a lot of good Homer-and-Lisa 
episodes in the Simpsons canon, but this one is particularly cromulent: the 
father-daughter team, so often at odds, finds itself united against the world, 
Homer because he loves his daughter and there’s lots of stuff he doesn’t 
understand, Lisa because she loves her dad and thinks she’s knows better than 
everyone.

What's the greatest TV show of all time? Easy. The Simpsons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/07/the-simpsons-greatest-tv-show-of-all-time>
10. Bart Gets an F

Season 2, episode 1, written by David M Stern

There’s a lot of unexpectedly gut-wrenching stuff with Bart in The Simpsons, 
and in this, the earliest episode on the list, perhaps the saddest moment is 
his breakdown in front of his teacher Mrs Krabappel. “I tried this time! I 
really tried!” he sobs, having failed her class by a single point. “This is as 
good as I could do but I still failed!” The episode has a great turn from 
Marcia Wallace as Edna Krabappel, too, as the embittered but 
not-quite-heartless teacher most of us had somewhere along the way.

11. A Milhouse Divided

Season 8, episode 6, written by Steve Tompkins

One of the funniest half-hours of The Simpsons is also one of the bleakest: 
Kirk and Luann Van Houten, Milhouse’s parents, call it quits after years of 
marriage. The consequences are predictable: Kirk loses his job at the cracker 
factory, Luann starts dating an American Gladiator, and Milhouse begins to lash 
out.


Unusually for the time, the show doesn’t end with the Van Houtens getting back 
together – Kirk does his best to win his wife back, but she’s sick of him. 
Instead, it’s the Simpsons themselves, shaken by the dissolution of a marriage 
so close to them, who find closure.

12. Homer the Great


Season 6, episode 12, written by John Swartzwelder

It turns out Lenny and Carl are in a secret club very much like the 
Freemasons, from which they get special perks. Homer wants in, of course – and 
when he joins, he discovers that the club, called the Stonecutters, are 
basically the Illuminati, with a catchy theme song into the bargain: “Who 
controls the British Crown? Who keeps the metric system down? We do! We do!”


13. I Love Lisa

Season 4, episode 15, written by Al Jean and Mike Reiss

Lisa discovers something we all discover sooner or later: sometimes someone 
loves you and you don’t love them back. In this case it’s the dim but wonderful 
Ralph Wiggum, to whom no one but Lisa is kind enough to give a card on 
Valentine’s Day. Lisa eventually has to shut Ralph down, and the moment is 
captured on video: “Watch this, Lise,” Bart says while watching the replay. 
“You can actually pinpoint the second when his heart rips in half.”

14. Deep Space Homer


Season 5, episode 15, written by David Mirkin

Nasa discovers a problem: its astronauts aren’t relatable enough. Homer picks 
the right moment to call the administration to complain about its “boring space 
launches”, and he’s been feeling down anyway – he was due to win Employee of 
the Month, which his union contract guarantees him at least once “regardless of 
incompetence, gross obesity or rank odor”, but the plant gave the prize away to 
an inanimate carbon rod. Homer makes it into space, where he nearly wrecks 
everything, but don’t worry – the rod saves the day.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm78gYyTrG7Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm78gYyTrG7Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm78gYyTrG7Y&media=>
15. El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Homer


Season 8, episode 9, written by Ken Keeler

Homer’s quest to be the toughest guy at the chilli-eating contest leads him to 
consume Guatemalan insanity peppers. The peppers send him on a vision quest to 
learn who his soul mate is. Is it Marge, or someone else? The psychedelic 
sequence, with surprisingly non-invasive guest star Johnny Cash as Homer’s 
familiar, gives the show some of its most beautiful animation to date. And the 
reconciliation between Homer and Marge at the end is genuinely moving.

16. Flaming Moe’s


Season 3, episode 10, written by Robert Cohen

Homer gives Moe a drink recipe that makes Moe’s bar the hottest spot in town … 
and Moe takes all the credit. There are amazing moments throughout this one, 
notably the Cheers-esque title sequence mid-episode, but the standout has to be 
Bart calling Moe’s and asking Moe to ask around for a Hugh Jass … who answers 
the phone.

Hugh: Hello, this is Hugh Jass. 

Bart: Uh, hi. 

Hugh: Who’s this? 

Bart: Bart Simpson. 

Hugh: What can I do for you, Bart? 

Bart: Uh, look. I’ll level with you, mister. This is a crank call that sorta 
backfired, and I’d like to bail out right now.

Hugh: All right, better luck next time. (He hangs up) What a nice young man.

17. Sideshow Bob Roberts


Season 6, episode 5, written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein

Sideshow Bob calls Birch Barlow, a character legally distinct from Rush 
Limbaugh, to complain about his treatment in prison and ends up running for 
mayor against six-term winner “Diamond Joe” Quimby, a notoriously corrupt 
politician pilloried by Barlow as “an illiterate, tax-cheating, wife-swapping, 
pot-smoking spendocrat”. Americans, as anyone who’s been watching the news 
knows, remain terminally curious about the devil they don’t know.

18. Mr Plow


Season 4, episode 9, written by Jon Vitti

Homer and Barney start competing snowplow services, Homer after he’s tricked 
into buying a plow with the insurance money he collected after totaling his 
car, Barney after asking Homer how he became a success. Barney’s service trumps 
Homer’s, not least because Linda Ronstadt agrees to star in an ad for the 
service. (“We’ve been looking for a project to do together for a while,” Barney 
explains.) Homer and Barney eventually reconcile, proclaiming that not even God 
can stop them now.

19. Mother Simpson

Season 7, episode 8, written by Richard Appel

Homer’s mom Mona (Glenn Close), whom his dad always told him had died, 
mysteriously shows up again, and under circumstances that cause Bart and Lisa 
to suspect that she might be a con artist. The truth is more complicated, as is 
Mona’s relationship with Grampa Abe Simpson. The family has to unite to save 
Mona from the same forces that have kept her away for so long; it’s a funny 
episode, but it may have the saddest ending of any single show in the series.

20. Bart the Fink

Season 7, episode 15, teleplay by John Swartzwelder and story by Bob Kushell

Bart writes a check to his hero, Krusty the Clown, in the hopes of getting the 
signature off the back, only to discover Krusty has signed with a stamp for his 
Cayman Islands holding corporation. Upset, he goes to the bank to complain … 
and sees Krusty hunted down for tax fraud, whereupon the embattled entertainer 
fakes his own death.

The episode’s combination of bizarre hijinks, celebrity parody and scattershot 
humor is perfectly Simpsonian, from the Lionel Barrymore-style banker who 
“can’t discuss that client’s secret, illegal accounts” to Handsome Pete, the 
bizarre little man who dances for nickels at Sea Captain Horatio McCallister’s 
shanty.

21. Homer vs the 18th Amendment

Season 8, episode 18, written by John Swartzwelder

Ah, Prohibition. When Springfield outlaws alcohol after the spectacle of a 
drunken Bart shocks the populace at a St Patrick’s Day parade, Homer decides to 
take matters into his own hands and start a distillery and a distribution 
network. It is, even Marge admits, the most inventive Homer has ever been, and 
his operation outside the law gives him the jump on the actual Duff brewery, 
who decide to try non-alcoholic beer.

22. Treehouse of Horror VII

Season 8, episode 1, written by Ken Keeler, Dan Greaney and David S Cohen

It’s hard to pick one Treehouse of Horror, but this year, one stands out: 
season 8’s electoral extravaganza, or as TV news anchor Kent Brockman calls it, 
“Campaign ’96: America Flips a Coin.”

The episode is probably best remembered for its memetic best line – “Don’t 
blame me, I voted for Kodos,” a riff on the “voted for Bush” bumper stickers 
that a bitter half of America plastered to their cars. But there’s other good 
stuff here, too, like Bart’s less-evil-than-advertised twin, and Lisa’s 
accidental creation of a tiny world, which she visits in shrunken form.

23. 22 Short Films About Springfield

Season 7, episode 21, written by Appel, David S Cohen, Collier, Jennifer 
Crittenden, Greg Daniels, Brent Forrester, Greaney, Rachel Pulido, Steve 
Tompkins, Weinstein, Oakley, and Groening

It’s another episode that starts off as a parody and goes somewhere wholly 
original: mimicking the checkerboard structure of mid-1990s arthouse hits like 
Pulp Fiction, Short Cuts and of course 32 Short Films About Glenn Gould. The 
episode features 22 one-minute stories by 11 writers, notably a 
Spanish-language-only look into Bumblebee Man’s home life, and an exchange 
between Skinner and Superintendent Chalmers about whether or not Skinner’s 
house is on fire. (It is.)

24. Trash of the Titans

Season 9, episode 22, written by Ian Maxtone-Graham

Steve Martin guest-stars as Ray Patterson, the sanitation commissioner Homer 
decides to oust using good old-fashioned dirty tricks politicking and insults. 
Homer’s reasons for doing literally everything in this episode are terrible – 
he insults the town’s garbage collectors for no reason, runs against Patterson 
entirely because he doesn’t want to apologize, and when he wins, doubles down 
on all his crazy promises so he won’t have to back off on them, either.

25. Clown in the Dumps


Season 26, episode 1, written by Joel H Cohen

A touching 2014 episode with the show’s trademark wry take on a serious 
subject, in this case, the death of an elderly parent. Like most men, Krusty 
worries he’s disappointed his father; like most people, he takes a while to 
comes to terms with it and with ageing. It’s also worth including for the 
unbelievably beautiful two-minute long “couch gag” intro sequence by legendary 
arthouse animator Don Hertzfeldt, who shares with us visions of The Sampsans in 
its [you know what, you do the math] season in the year 10,535.

 