
“Why are you here?”


In 40C heat and 100% humidity, I am as drenched as if I had plunged, fully 
clothed, into the vast river Solimões that runs alongside theMayoruna 
<http://www.everyculture.com/South-America/Mayoruna.html> village of Marajaì, 
not far from Tefé in the centre of Brazilian Amazonia. I lick the sweat 
dripping off my upper lip.

When I was given Petru Popescu’s book Amazon Beaming 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03cw97v> in 1994, I never imagined the 
journey it would take me on 20 years later. But here I am, in March 2014, 
standing before the headman of Marajaì; half of the inhabitants of the village, 
all crammed into his hut, are gazing at me expectantly.

“Why are you here?”

I am here because I have never been to the Amazon, never seen the rainforest. 
I am here because of the book I have decided to adapt. But I am not at all sure 
what my hospitable hosts have to tell me or what I want to find out. What I do 
know is that I am desperately thirsty. I glance around in vain for something to 
drink. A fifth of the world’s fresh water is here in the Amazon, I tell myself; 
surely someone will get me something.

In the urgent silence of this collective gaze, however, I cannot delay my 
answer. So I clear my throat. I am here because of a story, I say. And then I 
find myself plunging into an entire retelling of Amazon Beaming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2033b19143eb8c207065012a9bfeec7acc13de4%2F0_266_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Encounter%3A%20Simon%20McBurney%20on%20an%20Amazonian%20voyage%20that%20exploded%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Encounter%3A%20Simon%20McBurney%20on%20an%20Amazonian%20voyage%20that%20exploded%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2033b19143eb8c207065012a9bfeec7acc13de4%2F0_266_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Simon McBurney in The Encounter at the Edinburgh international festival in 
2015. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
It is the story of a journey and an encounter, a chronicle of photographer 
Loren McIntyre 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1991-11-08/news/vw-965_1_loren-mcintyre>’s journey 
to the Javari valley in the remote heart of the vast Amazon basin in 1969 and 
his encounter with the Mayoruna people, otherwise known as the Matsés. The 
consequence of this encounter was to confront him with notions that overturned 
everything he thought he knew about the world. So unsettled was he that for 20 
years he told very few people about the experience, until he met the Romanian 
author Popescu on a river trip up the Amazon in the late 1980s.

McIntyre was a fantastic character, Popescu tells me when I manage, finally, 
to track him down after several years of toying with the idea of making this 
story into something. Popescu, in his mid-60s, now lives in LA but we meet in 
Paris. His own story, of life underCeausescu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolae-ceausescu> and his flight to the 
west, is a remarkable one too. I ask him about McIntyre.

“He was charismatic?”

“Oh yes. But in a sort of subtle, moderate way that was not apparent right 
from the beginning. He was not always making big gestures. He was always taking 
pictures – hiding if you like. He was used to being on his own. And remember, 
on this trip he was really, really alone … So how will you show his journey?”

“With a microphone and headphones.”

“Microphones?”

The Encounter at Edinburgh festival review – an aural adventure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/09/the-encounter-edinburgh-festival-review-simon-mcburney>
“I thought the only way to represent the most biodiverse place on the planet 
was to make people imagine. And McIntyre’s journey is as much an inner one as a 
somatic experience. Perhaps what happened to him internally was even more 
attritional than his physical hardships.”

“And the headphones?”

“I want people to experience being both alone and together simultaneously …”

He looks at me askance.

Just as I feel now, here in Marajaì. Children are running in and out of the 
headman’s hut, paying no attention. I feel utterly alone in the midst of a busy 
community. Everyone is watching intently. I keep going with McIntyre’s journey. 
I explain how McIntyre, after making contact with hunters who appear at his 
camp on the edge of the river, follows them deep into the forest only to 
discover he has no way of returning. He does not speak their language nor they 
his.

When we think of a journey, we think of distance. But hidden within the word 
is another meaning. That of time. For the word journey derives from the Latin
diurnum, which itself originates from dies, meaning day. It’s an appropriate 
revelation, because this tale is as much about time as it is about distance. 
McIntyre’s adamantine grasp of time is exploded when, as a consequence of what 
he experienced, he was convinced that he had left his own time behind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50a25786feabe324224efe9ef1777f8948bb66a5%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Encounter%3A%20Simon%20McBurney%20on%20an%20Amazonian%20voyage%20that%20exploded%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Encounter%3A%20Simon%20McBurney%20on%20an%20Amazonian%20voyage%20that%20exploded%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50a25786feabe324224efe9ef1777f8948bb66a5%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Lourival and Doña Joaquina, Simon McBurney’s hosts in Marajaí, listening to 
his recordings. Photograph: Chloe Courtney 
“Our sense of time is an arrow, moving in a pitiless, irreversible, horizontal 
motion towards oblivion, but in truth we don’t really know what time is,” says
Marcus du Sautoy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marcus-du-sautoy>, a 
professor of science and mathematics at Oxford University, whom I meet in 
rehearsal for the show.

The main feature of time, by western definition, is its passage. But for the 
Mayoruna, McIntyre tells Popescu, time is at once mobile and static. It moved 
with man, stopped with him, advanced and retreated with him. It is not the 
implacable judge, condemning man to a tragically brief life. Time is a shelter, 
an escape into safety and regeneration, a repository whose chief function is 
not piling up the past, intact yet dead, but rather keeping it alive and 
available. And, in the face of violent encroachment on their land by white 
settlers, that past assisted them with an alternative to a menacing present.

But, as McIntyre discovered, it was not only his notions of time that were 
challenged, but also those of distance – crucially the distance between one 
person and another – for these ideas were communicated to him in a startling 
way. Wordlessly. In one extraordinary act of communication, the concept of a 
“separate self”, so precious to our contemporary sense of identity, is 
undermined to the point that it becomes, for McIntyre, utterly illusory. One 
self, one so-called individual consciousness, he discovered, can be more 
connected to another in ways he had never imagined, ways we are blind to in 
“our” world. A world which paradoxically supposedly connects us, through 
technology, more than at any time in history.

“We are going to the beginning,” he is told, or rather believes he is told, 
because this phrase is communicated without words.

“What beginning?”

“The beginning. Are you coming with us?”

With no way of returning to his camp or contacting others, McIntyre has no 
option but to follow his “captors” on this journey to “the beginning”. It leads 
to a ritual that will take him and his hosts across a barrier into another 
time. That of “the beginning”, when there are no white people, no settlers; to 
the beginning of the Mayoruna people, to ensure their survival. His return from 
this experience forms the end of the story I am telling.

In Marajaì, as I conclude by explaining that this book has led me here because 
I wish to tell it to other people in a theatre, I realise I have been speaking 
for more than an hour. I am met with silence. Time passes. Whatever else is 
happening I know that my thirst is real. The headman, Lourival, clears his 
throat.

“We are moved by what you told us. Moved by the story of this man who was 
lost. Thank you.”

Without my asking, someone places a bottle of water in my hand. And then he 
replies to my story with a story of his own. Which also takes considerable 
time. And we listen. And the vice-headman also speaks. At length. And we 
listen. And others speak. It takes time to connect. And these people are 
determined we should do so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4478dde9aa6a712deaa5e9447276b6bd1657948%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Encounter%3A%20Simon%20McBurney%20on%20an%20Amazonian%20voyage%20that%20exploded%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Encounter%3A%20Simon%20McBurney%20on%20an%20Amazonian%20voyage%20that%20exploded%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-encounter-simon-mcburney-barbican-amazon-beaming-petru-popescu-loren-mcintyre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4478dde9aa6a712deaa5e9447276b6bd1657948%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘When we think of a journey we think of distance. But hidden within the word 
is another meaning’ … Simon McBurney. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian
My stay in Marajaì reinforces my belief that the questions that challenged 
McIntyre are radical and urgent in the self-centred times we live in. It is 
essential to grasp that we are deeply interconnected, inseparable, just as we 
are inseparable from nature. We are part of the ecosystem wherever we are, 
however urban and removed we feel, and we cannot escape it, just as we cannot 
escape the planet. Living on this planet together, our ability to listen to 
each other is, perhaps, essential for our collective survival. These things are 
essential and urgent because, in order to survive, we need to acknowledge that 
there is another way of seeing the world and our place in it.

Before we leave, after our days staying with the villagers, Lourival holds me 
by the hand.

“It is important you came here. And when you are retelling your story to your 
people, you can tell them that we, the Mayoruna, exist too.”

 * Complicite’s production of The Encounter 
<http://www.complicite.org/live-stream.php> will be streamed live on 
theguardian.com on 1 March at 7.30pm. The show is created using binaural sound 
technology, so please wear headphones to watch it. 
 * The Encounter is at the Barbican 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=18001>, London, 12 
February to 6 March and atHome <http://homemcr.org/production/the-encounter/>, 
Manchester, 16-19 March. 
 * This is an expanded version of the foreword from The Encounter: Amazon 
Beaming by Petru Popescu <http://pushkinpress.com/book/the-encounter/> (Pushkin 
Press).

 * This event also forms part of the program for Sydney festival 2017 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/> 
 