
Despite owning no rooms, AirBnb is the world’s largest accommodation provider. 
Facebook has no journalists but is a bigger news site than any other 
publication and Uber transports more than a million people a day despite owning 
barely any vehicles.

If business in today’s world has a standard parable, it’s a small digital 
David slaying a global Goliath. Businesses that once relied upon economies of 
scale to shore up their market position are now watching upstart start-ups tear 
down their business models with striking speed.

What has made these disruptors so effective is agility, and the ability to 
tweak business practices or even pivot entire strategies almost overnight. 
PayPal, for instance, was founded to offer cryptography services to users of 
the now-forgotten Palm Pilot device. And online shopping behemoth Amazon began 
as a bookseller but is now the world’s single biggest provider of cloud 
computing services.

Of course, cloud services like Amazon’s are a fundamental part of the 
technology giving savvy businesses the agility to react quickly to market 
conditions and grow rapidly. That flexible network also frees firms up to 
innovate—experimentation is much easier when it is cheap and quick to try new 
things.

In comparison, legacy firms still heavily reliant upon traditional data 
centres face serious obstacles when trying to do the same. Without the cloud, 
increasing digital capacity or capability means large up-front capital 
expenditure and hardware procurement waits that can stretch from weeks to 
months.

A recent report by global market intelligence firm IDC, ‘The Network of the 
Future’, described the network of the past as monolithic and inflexible, while 
the networks needed to thrive today must be dynamic, programmable and able to 
meet workloads wherever they may be. Cloud service offerings, along with 
practices such as software-defined networking and network function 
virtualisation, mean any digital business can now scale virtually 
instantaneously.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-extremes-of-disruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5263f23fae3047517c56eca8d92c17a8465acaa2%2F0_112_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20extremes%20of%20disruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-extremes-of-disruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20extremes%20of%20disruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Foptus-business-smart-future%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-extremes-of-disruption%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5263f23fae3047517c56eca8d92c17a8465acaa2%2F0_112_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
 Photograph: Rawpixel/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
According to IDC, more than half of all Australian have adopted a hybrid cloud 
architecture, giving them rapid response abilities. What is more difficult, 
though, is determining the direction to grow. While it is relatively easy for a 
start-up with a handful of employees to reinvent itself to match emerging 
market conditions, the same cannot be said of large businesses.

Singtel Cloud Business Vice President Sandip Gupta says established businesses 
hoping to avoid being disrupted have two main strategies.

“The first is to go ahead and try a total transformation, but that is a long 
journey and it will generally take multiple years for them to show results,” he 
says. “A much better approach, in my view, is to spin off some resources and 
create an innovation lab, where you can cocoon the innovation mentality and 
then bring its creations back into the larger business.”

Banking behemoth Commonwealth Bank has more than 45,000 employees and 1100 
branches but has led much of the Australian financial sector when it comes to 
launching innovative products. Examples include the Kaching mobile payment 
system in 2011 and cardless cash withdrawals from ATMs in 2014, which both 
garnered enormous popularity.

One of the keys to Commonwealth’s agility has been the creation of innovation 
labs designed to incubate original ideas. In Sydney, for instance, a small team 
harnesses everything from virtual reality to robotics in its search to prompt 
new ideas, which are then prototyped and tested as rapidly as possible.

Culture is often the biggest impediment to doing things in a new way, but 
culture can be an accelerator as well,”
Sandip Gupta, Singtel Cloud Business Vice President 
Gupta says creating a space where the culture is geared toward innovation is 
vital. “Culture is often the biggest impediment to doing things in a new way, 
but culture can be an accelerator as well,” he says.

“This is why many innovation labs are being set up in places where an 
innovation ecosystem exists, like Silicon Valley or Israel. But setting up your 
initiative over there is not the only option; you can also transplant people 
with the right mindset.”

Of course, the rest of a business’ staff are the ones who will help implement 
the products of innovative thinking, and ensuring they are securely on board 
and prepared for changes in direction is also vital.

“Change is hard,” Gupta says. “It’s a balance of excitement and anxiety. 
People sweat and people complain but if you show people where the destination 
is, they’ll figure it out.”

Our networked life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/optus-business-smart-future/2016/nov/17/our-networked-life>
“I expect my team to spend 60% of their time in their functional role and the 
other 40% in other roles. An engineer has to know what happens in pre-sales, 
and someone in operations should understand the customer-facing sales division, 
for instance. Thinking only of one’s assigned function limits thinking, 
learning and growth.”

With digital operations at the heart of the new business world, this is 
particularly important for IT staff. Almost all IT roles are expected to be 
substantially transformed within five years; ensuring your team has the skills 
for tomorrow’s digital environment is a paramount concern, meaning learning new 
skills and platforms should be a basic KPI.

And if setting up and staffing innovation labs and investing heavily in staff 
training raises concerns over short-term return on investment, the question to 
ask is simple: what would the cost be of watching your business model sink?

Instead, building an agile, creative culture and workforce will allow business 
to ride the wave of innovation cloud technology is unleashing.

Ready to be a smart disruptor? Learn more about innovation for Australian 
organisations here <https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/313916696;141715991;r>.
 