
Puglia has a rich food tradition, with distinct regional varieties, but one 
street food treat typical of its whole southern end is thebombetta pugliese, 
made from slices of pork wrapped around cheese, usually provolone, then roasted 
on a skewer over wood or charcoal. (Often the meat used is from pig crossed 
with wild boar, and it looks more like beef.) A bombetta can come with extra 
flavourings, such as mushrooms or sun-dried tomatoes.

The sights, shouts and smells of Syracuse’s Ortigia market, Sicily
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/21/ortigia-market-food-cheese-siracusa-sicily>
It’s thought that bombette pugliesi were born more than 40 years ago in a 
butcher’s shop, Macelleria Romanelli, in the town of Martina Franca in the 
Valle d’Itria, north-west of Brindisi. Since then, it has been served 
throughout the south of Puglia as a popular street food at carnivals and 
festivals, and straight from butcher’s shops that invested in their own 
charcoal oven. Today the town of Cisternino, about 10km away, is particularly 
famous for them. About 12 butcher’s shops have little restaurants serving 
bombette with rustic bread or in rolls. They have a few tables with gingham 
tablecloths outside, and wine comes in terracotta carafes – it’s all very 
rustic and charming.

But one of my favourite places for a good bombetta is Ristorante Pantagruel 
<https://en-gb.facebook.com/osteriabraceria.pantagruel/> in Ostuni. The setting 
is medieval and atmospheric. There’s a counter with all the meat on display and 
they bring the skewers to the table straight from the oven. Best of all is
Rosticceria L’Antico Borgo <http://www.rosticceria-lanticoborgo.it/> in 
Cisternino, which is so popular you need to book in advance, as it’s really 
popular. It’s a butcher’s shop too, and does four flavours of bombetta: try 
them withcardoncelli mushrooms. Owner Piero is larger than life, a proper 
character, and the food is delicious.

• Rob Claassen is the owner of new Puglian restaurant Ostuni 
<http://www.ostunirestaurant.co.uk/> in north London
 