
A few years ago a man – let’s call him Edward – went on a romantic minibreak 
with his girlfriend. They went to Paris. Poetically, it was the city of love. 
Practically, there was a Eurostar deal on at the time.

Edward and his girlfriend were in the early days of their relationship. They 
had met through university friends and the spark had been immediate: locked 
eyes across a dinner table; a shared interest in the same Netflix box sets and 
a mutual liking for the music ofFather John Misty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/father-john-misty>.

When they got to Paris they spent hours walking through the streets arm in arm 
talking about the things that couples do when the future seems infinite and 
hopeful. They spoke of children’s names and significant others and whether they 
did or didn’t like Marmite (Edward did; his girlfriend didn’t). And then they 
stumbled upon the historicPont des Arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2015/jun/02/paris-padlocks-lovepont-des-arts-bridge-removed-in-pictures>
.

In truth Edward had secretly planned for them to end up there. In his coat 
pocket he had a padlock purchased the week before from Robert Dyas on to which 
he had etched their initials on either side of a rudimentary love heart. He 
took the lock out and showed it to his girlfriend, explaining that he intended 
to fix it to the railings of the bridge. The lock would stand forever as a 
beautiful tribute to their lasting love.

The girlfriend was touched. They kissed. Edward clipped the lock on to the 
metal grate, where it jostled for space with several hundred other padlocks 
left by several hundred other loved-up couples and then he flung the key into 
the waters of the Seine. “It honestly felt like one of the most romantic things 
I’d ever done,” Edward says now. “It was so symbolic.”

The locks on the Pont des Arts were blamed for the collapse of the bridge’s 
parapets

Edward doesn’t want to give his real name because he’s a bit embarrassed. A 
few months after their trip to Paris, the couple broke up. It wasn’t anything 
particularly dramatic, he says, just a slow realisation that they weren’t meant 
to be together after all. The lock, however, remained firmly in place. Edward 
spent a lot of time thinking about that lock. It began to obsess him: the 
notion of it being permanently affixed to a bridge in Paris, its physical 
presence having outlasted the human relationship it was meant to represent.

“I kept imagining it there, almost like it was taunting me with how naive I’d 
been,” he explains. “It seemed so stupid, looking back.”

Then, last June, the Parisian authorities started to cut away the locks. There 
were now over a million of them and the weight had been blamed for the collapse 
of part of the bridge’s parapets. There was concern there might be further 
collapse. Forty-five tonnes of metal were removed – among them Edward’s 
heartfelt purchase from Robert Dyas.

In a somewhat unloving statement, the Paris health and safety officials 
stated: “The romantic gestures cause long-term heritage degradation and danger 
to visitors.”

As yet no one knows where the so-called “love locks” have been taken or what 
the city council intends to do with them. There are rumours of an auction or an 
art installation. Edward doesn’t particularly care. He is just relieved the 
lock has been removed – and with it an uncomfortable memory of love not working 
out in the way he’d hoped.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fthe-lock-of-love-padlocks-on-bridges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0db4d4891ad015aa8204f45435b9d0ddce537bb%2F0_192_3857_2315%2F3857.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20lock%20of%20love%3A%20padlocks%20on%20bridges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fthe-lock-of-love-padlocks-on-bridges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20lock%20of%20love%3A%20padlocks%20on%20bridges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fthe-lock-of-love-padlocks-on-bridges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0db4d4891ad015aa8204f45435b9d0ddce537bb%2F0_192_3857_2315%2F3857.jpg>
 Lock and load: last June Paris authorities began removing the locks on the 
ancient Pont des Arts. Photograph: Chesnot/Getty Images 
Over the past decade, love locks have sprung up in cities across the world, 
emblazoned with lovers’ initials, declarations of undying affection and 
sometimes even marriage proposals (one lock left on Brooklyn Bridge stated 
simply: “Carrina, will you marry me?” written in marker pen). In Canada they 
have appeared along the Wild Pacific Trail on Vancouver Island. In Australia 
they have been left on a fence overlooking Lake Hume in New South Wales. In Las 
Vegas they are left on the half-scale model of the Eiffel Tower at the Paris 
Hotel. In Taiwan they are hung in pairs on an overpass at the Fengyuan railway 
station in the belief that the magnetic fields generated by moving trains will 
imbue them with positive energy and make wishes come true. And at Gretna Green 
in Scotland, scene of runaway marriages through the ages, specially designed 
lightweight padlocks are available at £19.99. The gold- coloured lock can even 
be personalised with laser engraving.

“There’s no key,” the Gretna Green website 
<http://www.gretnagreen.com/bye-bye-paris-hello-gretna-green-a928> states in 
its product description. “These unique love locks lock one time only, meaning 
that once your love is locked, it is sealed for ever.”

Sealed, at least, until rust corrosion takes its natural course or the 
structure in question starts to collapse under the weight of the metal. It is 
not just Paris that feels the need to protect its heritage from such romantic 
impulsiveness. Some 5,000 locks left on the Ponte Vecchio in Florence were 
removed by city authorities because they were deemed to be ugly as well as 
denting the metal structure of the bridge. The same thing happened with 
Dublin’s Ha’penny Bridge in 2012. In New York a group of “lock pick” 
enthusiasts organised an expedition to remove the locks on Brooklyn Bridge in 
2013 and save them for a piece of public artwork before the authorities removed 
them – a week later, new locks had already sprung up in their place.

Love locks are divisive. Jonathan Jones, the Guardian art critic, has written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/jun/02/love-locks-removal-paris-rome-florence-stupidest-phoniest-time-to-stop>
 that the practice is “as stupid as climbing a mountain and leaving a crisp 
packet at the top, or seeking out the most unspoilt beach and stubbing out 
cigarettes in the sand. Seriously. This is not a romantic thing to do. It is a 
wanton and arrogant act of destruction. It is littering. It is an attack on the 
very beauty that people supposedly travel to Paris or Rome to see.”

Who doesn’t engage in magical thinking to ward off the terrifying spectres of 
separation and loss?

So where does our need to lock our initials on to a chunk of historic metal 
come from? According to some, it stems from an ancient Chinese tradition. 
Others believe it started in the Serbian town of Vrnjacka Banja during the 
First World War, when a local schoolteacher was left heartbroken after her army 
officer beau was sent away to fight in Greece and fell in love with a woman in 
Corfu. The story slipped into folklore and couples began leaving padlocks on 
the bridge where the teacher and the army officer used to meet.

Then in 2006 Italian author Federico Moccia wrote a cult novel entitled I Need 
You <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ho-voglia-di-te.html> about lovers fixing 
locks to a lamppost on a bridge in Rome – the idea was picked up by teenagers, 
then tourists and then, it seems, by the rest of the world. Moccia insisted in 
an interview with the Italian newspaperLa Repubblica that he did not regret his 
part in the phenomenon: “The padlocks are a symbol of love and something to be 
proud of. Tourists go to Ponte Milvio to see them, and I’m proud of that. In 
any case, better a padlock than graffiti disfiguring the walls.”

And as Edward discovered, there is a natural human impulse to give permanent 
shape to a mutable human emotion, as if by lending it a physical presence we 
can mitigate against love’s fragility. Are we seeking to protect ourselves 
against loneliness by leaving our mark both on a city and on someone else’s 
heart?

The author Olivia Laing, whose forthcoming book The Lonely City 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377447/> is a 
cultural history of loneliness, says that although love locks are 
“exceptionally irritating, I understand the sentiment. Love is such a 
vulnerable state: who doesn’t engage in magical thinking to ward off the 
terrifying spectres of separation and loss?”

And in some ways leaving a padlock on a bridge is no different from carving 
one’s initials in a tree: in a transient world there is the same impetus 
towards ownership (“I woz here”) and preservation (“I will be remembered”).

“It’s the triumph of hope over experience,” explains Ivan Ward, deputy 
director of the Freud Museum in London. “People like to express their love or 
make declarations of love, and locking a padlock and throwing away the key 
seems to be a straightforward symbol of fidelity and commitment. Forsaking all 
others. We want to be the ‘only one’ with the sexual partner as we wanted to be 
with the mother, and how much more certain can we be if we actually – ie 
symbolically – lock someone in? I suppose it is potentially less embarrassing 
than getting the name of your beloved tattooed across your bottom.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fthe-lock-of-love-padlocks-on-bridges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec60864013fbc93d5e3b7fb9154bf8df669b5553%2F439_146_2122_2592%2F2122.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20lock%20of%20love%3A%20padlocks%20on%20bridges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fthe-lock-of-love-padlocks-on-bridges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20lock%20of%20love%3A%20padlocks%20on%20bridges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fthe-lock-of-love-padlocks-on-bridges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec60864013fbc93d5e3b7fb9154bf8df669b5553%2F439_146_2122_2592%2F2122.jpg>
 Key to my heart: while the locks are being removed from some tourist 
attractions, other authorities are raising funds by creating special padlocks 
for lovers. Photograph: Allan Swart/Alamy 
True. And there is some base, primal appeal in the idea of being locked on to 
someone else in the midst of life’s uncertainty. In Padua, Italy, there is a 
historic custom of presenting St Valentine’s keys as romantic gestures each 
year in order to “unlock the giver’s heart”. The notion of leaving a lock on a 
bridge emphasises that element of danger: the risk of falling into a void 
unless one is anchored to something stable and lasting.

“Love can save us from that,” says Ward. “I presume that when couples do their 
love-lock ritual they feel really happy, but Freud, always the pessimist, 
usually finds some kind of anxiety lurking beneath the surface. And separation 
anxiety is one of the big ones.”

Now, as if to compound our separation anxiety, we’re even being separated from 
the idea of love locks themselves. Some cities, anxious about their 
environmental impact, have banned them altogether. After the Rialto Bridge was 
covered in padlocks fixed to the iron brackets and bars which helped keep the 
16th-century structure together, the city of Venice removed them and introduced 
a €3,000 fine for anyone with the temerity to add a new one. A campaign called 
Unlock Your Love produced leaflets stating: “Your love doesn’t need chains. 
Venice doesn’t need your garbage.”

In Chicago the authorities have been systematically cutting off padlocks to 
stop them falling off and hurting people when the city’s moveable bridges are 
lifted for boat traffic, while in Berlin leaving a love lock is now punishable 
by a fine after rust damage was noted on two of its bridges.

Yet the craze looks set to continue. Edinburgh’s Forth Road Bridge raised more 
than £10,000 in 2014 for the local lifeboat service after dedicating four 
panels for passersby who wanted to buy and fix their padlocks to the bridge. 
Moscow has introduced metal trees where couples can leave their locks. And 
these days you can even purchase a “virtual” love lock to express your feelings 
of intimacy and affection online.

It all comes too late for Edward, however. This Valentine’s Day he’s not 
planning any grand romantic gestures. He’s bought his girlfriend a card. Once 
she’s read it, he thinks it will probably go in the recycling bin.
 