
Chen Rong-yu died in two places at once. At 10pm on Tuesday, 31 January 2012, 
the 23-year-old took a seat in a corner of an internet cafe on the outskirts of 
New Taipei City, Taiwan. He lit a cigarette and logged on to an online video 
game. He played almost continuously for 23 hours, stopping occasionally only to 
rest his head on the table in front of his monitor and sleep for a little 
while. Each time that he woke he picked up his game where he had left off. 
Then, one time, he did not raise his head. It was nine hours before a member of 
the cafe’s staff tried to rouse the motionless man, in order to tell him that 
his time was up, only to find his body stiff and cold.

Chen died there in the Taiwanese cafe, with its peeling paint and cloying 
heat. And he died in Summoner’s Rift, a forest blanketed by perpetual gloom. 
Summoner’s Rift has the appearance of a remote, unvisited place, but each day 
it is frequented by hundreds of thousands of people, players of the online 
video gameLeague of Legends <http://na.leagueoflegends.com/>, arguably the most 
popular online video game in the world. Summoner’s Rift is the pitch on which 
they do battle.

Chen had died here many times before. He had been speared, incinerated, or 
otherwise obliterated by rivals as he scrambled through its thickets and across 
its river in an endlessly repeating game of territorial warfare.

Many games are metaphors for warfare. The team sports – football, hockey, 
rugby and so on – are rambling battles in which attackers and defenders, led by 
their captains, ebb and flow up and down the field in a clash of will and 
power. American football is a series of frantic first world war-style scrambles 
for territory measured in ten-yard increments. Tennis is a pistol duel: squint- 
ing shots lined up in the glare of a high-noon sun. Running races are breakneck 
chases between predator and prey. Boxing doesn’t even bother with the metaphor: 
it’s a plain old fistfight ending in blood and bruise.

So it is with League of Legends, a game in which two teams attempt to 
overwhelm one another. In warfare, real or symbolic, there are inevitable 
casualties. To date, Chen’s deaths in the virtual forest had been symbolic and 
temporary, like the toppling of a pawn from a chessboard, a griefless death, 
easily undone. That night, however, his virtual death was mirrored in reality. 
It was true and final.

When the paramedics lifted Chen from his chair, his rictus hands remained in 
place, as if clawed atop an invisible mouse and keyboard. Like the pulp 
detective thriller in which the lifeless hand points towards some crucial clue, 
Chen’s final pose appeared to incriminate his killer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bdaef1de9b7807bca3da1138a78219dfeb87cc6%2F0_455_4705_2822%2F4705.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sometimes%20fatal%20attraction%20of%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sometimes%20fatal%20attraction%20of%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bdaef1de9b7807bca3da1138a78219dfeb87cc6%2F0_455_4705_2822%2F4705.jpg>
 An internet cafe in China. Gamers often spend many hours glued to their 
screens. Photograph: Martin Puddy/Corbis 
Chen’s story is unusual, but not unique. On 13 July 2012, another young man, 
19-year-old Chuang Cheng-feng, was found dead in his chair at a different 
Taiwanese internet cafe. Chuang, a 5ft 5in tae kwon do champion, had settled 
down to play the online gameDiablo 3  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/06/diablo-3-review>after a 
friend he was supposed to meet failed to show up. He played the game to pass 
the time: 10 hours of uninterrupted questing. Then, mind hazed by the room’s 
thick cigarette smoke and eyes stinging from the monitor’s flicks and throbs, 
he decided to step outside for some fresh air.

Chuang stood, took three steps, then stumbled and collapsed, his mouth 
foaming. He too was pronounced dead at the scene.

There are others. In February 2011, a 30-year-old Chinese man died at an 
internet cafe on the outskirts of Beijing after playing an online game for 
three days straight. On 2 September 2012, a 48-year-old man named Liu died in 
Kaohsiung City following a seven-hour stint at the controller. His was the 
third game-related death of the year recorded in Taiwan.

In 2015, the deaths came sooner. On 1 January, a 38-year-old man was found 
dead at an internet cafe in Taipei, apparently after playing video games for 
five days straight. A week later, another: a 32-year-old man, known as Hsieh, 
entered a cafe in Kaohsiung on 6 January. Two days later, employees found him 
slumped on the desk at which he’d been playing an online game. He was 
pronounced dead on arrival at the hospital.

In May 2015, a man in Hefei, the largest city in the Anhui province of China, 
reportedly collapsed after playing a game for 14 days straight. When the 
paramedics arrived, one newspaper reported him as saying: “Leave me alone. Just 
put me back in my chair. I want to keep playing.”

The deaths aren’t limited to south-east Asia and they aren’t only contemporary.

In April 1982, an 18-year-old American man, Peter Burkowski, walked into Friar 
Tuck’s Game Room, a popular video-game arcade in Calumet City, Illinois. 
According to the arcade’s owner, Tom Blankly, Burkowski and a friend arrived at 
8.30pm and began playingBerzerk. Within 15 minutes, he’d posted his initials 
next to two high scores onBerzerk’s leaderboard. Then he took four steps 
towards an adjacent machine, dropped a quarter into its slot and collapsed, 
dead from a heart attack.

The next day, one newspaper headline read, “Video Game Death”, the earliest 
report of its kind. Similar incidents have continued through the years.

In July 2011, a young British player, Chris Staniforth, died from a blood clot 
after a prolonged session at his Xbox console. “When Chris got into a game he 
could play it for hours on end,” Staniforth’s father told reporters at the 
time. “He got sucked in playingHalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/12/halo-5-master-chief-microsoft-xbox>
online against people from all over the world. I’m not for one minute blaming 
the manufacturer of Xbox. It isn’t their fault that people use them for so 
long.”

Staniforth’s father absolved Microsoft, Xbox’s manufacturer, and Halo’s 
publisher, of blame for his son’s death. We are, he implied, each responsible 
for the way in which we spend our time. And yet, when Microsoft’s rival 
Nintendo launched its Wii console, it included a warning that would interrupt 
many of its games. It read: “Why not take a break?” and was accompanied by an 
illustration of an open window, wind blowing the curtains inwards, calling the 
player outside.

The death-by-video-game story occupies a peculiar place in the modern news 
cycle. We don’t read of “death by cinema”, “death by literature” or “death by 
crossword”, even though humans must surely have died while engaged in any one 
of these mostly inactive pursuits. But with video games, news of a fresh 
tragedy arrives, usually from Asia, with grim regularity. The circumstances are 
always similar: a young man found dead at his keyboard, seemingly killed by an 
unhealthy relationship with this sedentary hobby.

For video-game players, the news reports act as a cautionary tale, the kind of 
story mothers might tell their children to warn them off playing a handheld 
game beneath the sheets after lights out: “Look what might happen to you if you 
play a video game for too long.” For the newspapers, often staffed and read by 
a generation of people who grew up at a time when video games weren’t a fixture 
on the cultural landscape, these tales fortify a generational distrust of the 
newest (and therefore most treacherous) entertainment medium.

You could also die while sprawled on the sofa, chain-watching the latest 
television serial. You might also perish after a 400-page Tolstoy binge, or 
while you endureAbel Gance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76706/napoleon>’s nine-hour-long film 
Napoléon, or when caught up in an especially engaging cross-stitch pattern. 
People have been known to die during a 12-hour, blood-clotting, long-haul 
flight. Any activity that compels a human being to sit for hours on end without 
moving is, arguably, a mortal threat. In the 1982 Burkowski case, Mark Allen, 
Lake County’s deputy coroner, said, sensibly: “Peter could have died in a 
number of stressful situations. We once had a boy who had a heart attack while 
studying for an exam. It just happened that he died in front of a video game, 
but it’s also quite interesting.”

Nevertheless, video games appear to have a better hit-rate than film, 
literature, exams or any of the others. Video games, it seems, are something 
else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438779608024%2F7528441b-e7ea-431e-b0e6-9ae8314a9b16-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sometimes%20fatal%20attraction%20of%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sometimes%20fatal%20attraction%20of%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438779608024%2F7528441b-e7ea-431e-b0e6-9ae8314a9b16-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Simon Parkin, the author of Death By Video Game. Photograph: Phil Fisk/Observer
During my first year of university, my friends and I became partially 
nocturnal. We’d stay up late for the 9am lectures. We’d get up early for the 
9pm parties. The rest of our waking hours were, as with so many students, given 
over to lounging in reeking halls, eating cheap pizza and playing video games. 
My friend Alastair provided our gateway getaway:GoldenEye 007 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GoldenEye_007_(1997_video_game)>, the video-game 
adaptation of the 1995 James Bond film. Each night (which was, for our skewed 
body clocks, closer to day) we’d assemble in the front room of his shared 
apartment, pick teams and then sprint through ancient cave systems, creep 
through Russian military bunkers and teeter along cranes as we shot each other 
in a kind of armed-combat wide game. Most nights, at around two in the morning, 
someone would point out that it might be time to think about ordering some food 
in. We’d mournfully set down the controllers and head out to the local pizza 
takeaway.

“Er, guys, it looks like it might be shut,” said Ian, as we rounded the corner 
on one such night.

“Lucky Pizza is never shut,” said Clare.

“What time is it anyway?” I asked.

“Oh,” said Alastair. “It’s half past four in the morning. How did we not 
notice that?”

A few years later, I left my wife playing the video game Animal Crossing  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/jun/17/animal-crossing-new-leaf-video-game-review>
in our apartment one afternoon.

In Animal Crossing, you assume the role of an immigrant who moves into a 
village to build a new life. When you disembark from the train, you’re greeted 
by an officious raccoon, the local shop owner and landlord, Tom Nook, who 
offers you a small house to call your own. Once you’re settled in, you get to 
know the neighbours, write virtual letters, attend local festivals, fish, catch 
bugs, excavate fossils, buy clothes and, of course, service your virtual 
mortgage. The game follows the console’s internal clock and calendar: when it’s 
night in your world, it’s night inAnimal Crossing. The shops open at nine and 
close at six, and Christmas falls on 25 December.

Despite the fact that talking animals populate the game and despite the fact 
that your work is primarily to collect fossils and catch bugs for the local 
museum,Animal Crossing mimics life’s rhythms, domestic pressures and timetable.

When I returned home later that evening, the flat was dark except for the 
quivering light of the TV screen. My wife sat on the floor, exactly as I’d left 
her hours earlier.

“Is everything OK?” I asked.

She turned her head stiffly, eyes hooded, as if awakening from a coma.

“Woah,” she said. “I am cold and hungry.”

A friend of mine has coined a term for the unique way in which video games 
cause their players to become oblivious to time in this way: “chronoslip”. It’s 
not a new phenomenon. We speak of becoming “lost in a good book”, of “losing 
track of time”, of “pastimes” (or, originally and more explicitly, 
“passe-tymes”). The phenomenon is ancient.Tempus fugit, it turns out, 
especially while you’re having fun.

But with video games, these phrases don’t quite suffice. What book or movie 
could keep the average viewer’s attention for six uninterrupted hours? The 
titans of modern mainstream entertainment such as the Harry Potter films,Star 
Wars, Lord of the Rings, the Sopranos et al may boast expansive cumulative 
running or reading times, but they are broken into discrete, palatable chunks. 
With movies and TV series, we seem to reach our consumption limits sooner than 
with video games, into which we can descend for ceaseless hours.

Perhaps the difference is that games are active rather than passive media. 
They do not temporarily suppress our free will. Rather, they demand it. We step 
into a game world and emerge, hours later, with little sense of where the time 
has gone. Sometimes, the immersion is so complete that our bodies’ physical 
signals do not penetrate the unreality: we forget to eat, to shift position in 
our chair. Time becomes yoked, not to the ticking of the clock, but to the 
pattern of our interactions, the pleasing rhythms of cause and effect. In 
strategy games, time is divided into the number of seconds it takes to build a 
barracks, train a soldier or to mine the earth for resources. Seconds and 
minutes have no relevance here; time is calculated in units of action. By 
contrast, in a puzzle game time works like an egg timer: crack a level before 
your patience runs out and the timer is flipped; your store of patience is 
renewed.Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> achieve chronoslip 
because they replace the real world with a new one that moves to its own laws 
of physics and time.

This reality engages us totally and we synchronise with its tempo. Video 
games, from the simplest card game through to the most vividly rendered fantasy 
world, consume our attention. When we become lost in a book, we enter a state 
where the fabricated world and its characters seem so real and pressing that we 
lose all sense of time. Small wonder it’s so easy to lose oneself in a good 
game, where we become not only an eavesdropper or onlooker on a world, but an 
active participant in its action and drama. Video games go further than other 
fiction: they revolve around us and react to our every choice and input.

No, video games are not mere time-wasters. This label, so often and gleefully 
applied, implies a certain idleness on their part. Rather, they are 
time-killers: they destroy time. And they are accomplished killers, often 
leaving little trace of their handiwork; we remain oblivious to time’s passing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438779810912%2F0de61668-68a2-4ab2-bbd0-cd7d6915543d-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sometimes%20fatal%20attraction%20of%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sometimes%20fatal%20attraction%20of%20video%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fwho-killed-the-video-gamers-simon-parkin-taiwan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438779810912%2F0de61668-68a2-4ab2-bbd0-cd7d6915543d-680x1020.jpeg>
 Martin Amis, an early and unlikely video game addict. Photograph: Antonio 
Olmos/Observer 
Video games did not grow into the role of time-killer. They emerged, fully 
formed, fully capable. In his 1982 treatise on the emergent video game,Invasion 
of the Space Invaders 
<http://www.themillions.com/2012/02/the-arcades-project-martin-amis-guide-to-classic-video-games.html>
, Martin Amis explained his first encounter with the titular Japanese arcade 
game, a summer romance that blossomed in a bar in the south of France during 
the summer of 1979:

“Now I had played quite a few bar machines in my time. I had driven toy cars, 
toy airplanes, toy submarines; I had shot toy cowboys, toy tanks, toy sharks. 
But I knew instantly that this was something different, something special. 
Cinematic melodrama blazing on the screen, infinite firing capacity, the 
beautiful responsiveness of the defending turret, the sting and pow of the 
missiles, the background pulse of the quickening heartbeat… The bar closed at 
eleven o’clock that night. I was the last to leave, tired but content.”

Amis then describes the video-game player’s descent into obsession: “Your work 
starts to suffer. So does your health. So does your pocket. The lies increase 
in frequency and daring. Anyone who has ever tangled with a drink or drug 
problem will know how the interior monologue goes. ‘I think I’ve got this under 
control at last. It’s perfectly okay so long as you do it in moderation… ’

“The addict then indulges in a wild three-hour session. ‘I’m not going to 
touch that stuff again,’ he vows. Twenty minutes later, he is hunched once more 
over the screen, giving it all his back and shoulder, wincing, gloating, his 
eyes lit by a galaxy of strife.

“You think I exaggerate? I do but only slightly. After all, the 
obsession/addiction factor is central to the game’s success: you might even say 
that video-dependence is programmed into the computer.”

In Taiwan, there have been enough cafe deaths that the government is no longer 
content with issuing mere recommendations for players to, asScientific American 
puts it, “make this their last game”. Government officials have developed 
measures to help curtail the amount of time that people play games: a more 
forceful kind of intervention than Nintendo’s gentle reminder of the great 
outdoors.

According to the section chief for the economic development bureau of the 
Tainan city government, the police routinely carry out spot checks after 10pm 
on cafes to see whether there are any under-18s on the premises. During the 
summer holidays, the local government now runs a youth project that warns young 
people about the dangers of playing games for too long. The government is even 
in the process of drafting new regulations for internet cafes that will decree 
when and for how long teenagers will be allowed to play on the premises. 
Similar legislation is already in place in South Korea where, in 2011, after a 
spate of similar deaths, the government introduced the youth protection 
revision bill (sometimes known as the “Cinderella law”) which prohibits 
teenagers from playing online games in internet cafes after midnight.

Films are awarded certificates that dictate the age of those who are allowed 
to view them. But video games are perhaps the first entertainment medium in 
history to inspire legislation with regard to how long a person is able to 
interact with them before taking a break. Amis was right: games are somehow 
different. We consume a book, but a game consumes us. It leaves us reeling and 
bewildered, hungry and ghosted in the fug of chronoslip.

Since the 1970s, doctors have believed that it’s possible for a video game to 
trigger a heart attack in a person with a weak heart. In 1977, the cardiologist 
Robert S Eliot usedPong to replicate stressful situations for his cardiac 
patients at the University of Nebraska medical centre. He studied more than 
1,000 patients, monitoring the game’s effect on their heart rate and blood 
pressure.

We have had heart rate increases of 60 beats per minute and blood pressures as 
high as 220
Cardiologist Robert S Eliot 
“We have had heart-rate increases of 60 beats per minute and blood pressures 
as high as 220 within one minute of starting a computer game,” he said at the 
time. “It happens quite a lot but the patients have no awareness.”

If Chen Rong-yu’s death in that New Taipei cafe was a failing of 
self-discipline or some other non-biological defect, then it’s important to 
establish that his heart attack wasn’t due to a pre-existing medical condition.

I visit Dr Su Ta-chen, attending physician and clinical associate professor at 
the department of internal medicine at National Taiwan University Hospital 
(NTUH), who treated Chen. “It wasn’t reported, but last year Chen had a heart 
attack and was transferred to the hospital for evaluation,” Su tells me. 
“During his hospitalisation the checks included echocardiography, 24-hour 
electrocardiography, cardiac catheterisation, coronary angiography and cardiac 
electrophysiology.”

But the test results showed no signs that Chen had a heart problem that might 
lead to sudden death. The young man’s unexpected heart attack was something of 
a mystery. Chen refused the doctor’s recommendation to have a 
cardioverter-defibrillator fitted. Moreover, when he discovered that there was 
nothing wrong with his heart, he declined to have any more cardiovascular 
track- ing, which might have explained the attack. Three months later Chen was 
dead.

Su believes that there are multiple possible causes of death for Chen, as for 
the other people who have died while playing video games in internet cafes.

“Acute autonomic dysfunction is the first potential cause of death,” he says. 
“Video games can generate a great deal of tension in the human body. The 
player’s blood pressure and heart rate rise. If this excessive tension is 
maintained for more then 10 hours, it can result in cardiac arrhythmia and 
sympathetic-parasympathetic imbalance, also called acute autonomic dysfunction.”
 Horror games such as Resident Evil maintain high levels of tension for the 
unfortunate gamer. 
Video games deal in tension and peril. This is true of most fiction, in which 
conflict is necessary to create drama, but in most video games the player is 
the subject of the stress and conflict. The conflict is necessary for the sense 
of triumph, release and learning that comes when it’s overcome. “Even if the 
game is not especially stressful in this way, simply playing for such a long 
period of time can prove fatal,” says Su.

Another potential cause of Chen’s death, according to Su, is what doctors 
refer to as “economy-class syndrome”: “Many studies show that maintaining the 
same pose for hours at a time without moving your body, especially your legs, 
can cause deep vein thrombosis. Moreover, if you don’t drink and eat properly 
while in this position, your blood can become sticky, leading to a pulmonary 
embolism and sudden death.”

The final potential cause is linked to the cafes themselves, specifically 
their conditions. Taiwanese internet cafes typically have poor ventilation and 
offer players only a cramped space to play in. One recent study found that the 
air pollution index in internet cafes often exceeds safe levels. Most 
establishments have dedicated smoking zones on the premises, but while air 
conditioners cool the air temperature, they don’t improve its quality.

Taiwan is a humid country. Relative humidity usually remains at 60-90%, 
conditions that help fungi, bacteria and dust mites to flourish in a confined 
space, which in turn can stimulate asthma and other allergic syndromes. Severe 
air pollution can have a devastating impact on a human’s heart and blood 
vessels, increasing the possibility of blood clots, raising the heart rate and 
blood pressure, stiffening the arteries and having a negative impact on 
haemodynamics (blood flow).

None of this completely explains the apparent rise in these deaths, however. 
“It’s because more and more internet cafes are opening and the number of people 
taking up online gaming is increasing,” says Su. “The content of online gaming 
is improving and growing more attractive than ever. I believe that if cafe 
conditions don’t change, we are going to see more deaths.”

Chen’s death is a whodunnit of sorts. It’s not a crime that can be easily 
pinned on any one person or thing. There’s Taiwan’s local economy and 
infrastructure, which promote the extended use of internet cafes. There are the 
natural conditions of the country’s humid climate. There’s the lack of 
regulation with regard to how long people can use these cafes and, of course, 
there are the video games themselves, which promote prolonged engagement 
through their elegant, compelling design.

But there is another, more pressing, more interesting question that arches 
over all of these, one that is, perhaps, more relevant to the billions of 
people around the world who play video games and don’t wind up dead from doing 
so: whydunnit?

What is it about this medium that encourages some people to play games to the 
extremes of their physical wellbeing and beyond? Why do video games inspire 
such monumental acts of obsession? Is it something within the game’s reality 
that proves so appealing or is it external circumstances that push certain 
people to take refuge in a cosy unreality? Games offer conflict within safe 
bounds, so perhaps it is to do with the human desire to be heroic, to perform 
acts for which they might be remembered, a way to stave off death’s great 
whitewash. Or is it the competitiveness of the athlete: the desire to win and 
assert dominance over our peers and rivals? Or is it to do with friendship and 
community or showboating and braggadocio?

Video games offer the intrigue and joy of solvable mysteries. They also grant 
access to mysterious places in need of discovery. Through them, we have the 
opportunity to, like our ancestors, become explorers when Google satellites 
have mapped every inch of our own world, leaving few places where we can truly 
explore the unseen. Glory, justice, immortality; a chance to live over and 
again in order to perfect our path, a place in which change and growth in us 
are measured in the irrefutable high-score table. Video games offer all of this 
and more. The allures of the video game, and the ways in which it salves our 
internal problems and instincts, are myriad.

Is it so curious that a person might become forever lost in this rift between 
the real and the unreal?

Combat zone: gaming in Iraq

“Video games are the only viable entertainment we have here,” says Mohammad 
Abdulla, a 25-year-old network administrator for Baghdad’s main internet 
service provider. He’s been playing games since he was a teenager; a poster of 
Captain Price, a fictional British army officer from the video gameCall of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty>, hangs on his wall. 
“Other hobbies are just too dangerous because of terrorism. We don’t have 
clubs, so games are the only way to have some fun with friends and stay safe at 
home, where there is no risk of being killed by a suicide bomber. For many of 
us, video games are our only escape from these miseries.”

Some of the most popular video games in Iraq, as in the west, are 
military-themed shooters, in which the player assumes the role of a soldier and 
blasts through waves of virtual enemies. “Almost all of my friends play video 
games likeWorld of Tanks  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jan/15/world-of-tanks-review>[and] 
Battlefield 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2011/nov/04/battlefield-3-game-review>
,” says Abdulla. “In fact, we have some of the top- ranked players in the world 
here.”

This interest in military games stems from the local environment as much as, 
in the case of many western players, male vanity. “Growing up, my life was 
completely military-focused,” Abdulla says. “It is the way we are raised. For 
example, I was taught how to use an AK-47 when I was in elementary school.”

Many of these first-person shooters, often created with input from US military 
advisers – a handful of Navy Seals were punished for consulting on the 2012 
video gameMedal of Honor: Warfighter  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/nov/11/medal-of-honor-warfighter-review>
– are set against the backdrop of fictionalised conflicts, often within Middle 
Eastern countries. Some have entire sections set within Iraq, such as the 
Battlefield series. For Abdulla, playing these games in their real-world 
settings isn’t problematic.

“Any video game that’s set within Iraq and involves killing terrorists becomes 
instantly famous here,” he says. “Everyone wants to play it. We have been 
through so much because of terror. Shooting terrorists in a game is cathartic. 
We can have our revenge in some small way.” Omar M Alanseri, the owner of the 
Iraqi Games Centre, agrees: “Any game that has a level set in Iraq is popular. 
They always sell more copies than other games because they are related in some 
way to our lives.” The games have even established a kind of empathy for 
foreign gaming partners that Alanseri said he would not otherwise have. “I have 
learned a lot of things, like western world values, culture, lifestyle, and 
even the way that they think through video games.”

Abdulla believes that the friendships he has formed through online gaming have 
had a transformative effect on the way in which some people view his country. 
“Some people told me they were scared of Iraqis,” he says, “thinking that they 
are all terrorists. But in reality, we are victims. When they got to know me, 
they saw the truth and changed their minds about Iraqis. It removed the fear.”

Michael Moe, a 22-year-old Norwegian, is now one of Abdulla’s closest friends. 
The young men met online while playingBattlefield 3 and now speak on the phone 
or over Skype every few days. “I become worried about Mohammed if I do not hear 
from him for any more than two days,” says Moe. “I always check up on him when 
that happens.”

“I used to object about video games,” says Amna, Abdulla’s mother. “I wanted 
Mohammed to spend more time studying. But I’ve come to see the strange 
benefits. Video games have broadened his relationships outside of our borders 
and formed new bonds. He loves his gaming friends and, from what I can tell, 
they love him too.”

Death By Video Game by Simon Parkin is published by Profile on 13 August 
(£12.99).Click here to order a copy for £10.39 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316392/>
 