
It’s an unfortunate feature of working as both a novelist and a games designer 
that I end up sitting through a lot of panels, round-tables, conferences, 
discussions and other exercises in head-nodding where digital people try to get 
to grips with storytelling, or where story people try to understand the digital 
world.

Both these types of event have their aggravations. When digital people run 
workshops or colloquia or jams (there are infinite names for the basic 
principle of bringing people together in combination with coffee) about 
storytelling, they often seem not to notice that quite a lot of very clever 
people have been thinking very hard about stories for, oh, the past 3,000-4,000 
years. I’ve heard people suggest that maybe stories have a “pattern” or 
“structural ordering” that holds together their parts, without apparently 
realising that a lot of people have written about this, from Aristotle on.

And let’s not even get on to the people who say things like “data is a story”, 
“products are a story”, “your robo-vacuum cleaner has a story to tell you”. No 
it isn’t, no they’re not, and no – unless artificial intelligence has come on 
much faster than anticipated – it doesn’t.

But more aggravating even than this are the forums, summits, breakout sessions 
and seminars on “digital literature” run by exceedingly well-meaning arts 
people who can talk for hours about what the future might be for storytelling 
in this new technological age – whether we might produce hyperlinked or 
interactive or multi-stranded novels and poems – without apparently noticing 
that video games exist. And they don’t just exist! They’re the most lucrative, 
fastest-growing medium of our age. Your experimental technological literature 
is already here; it’s the noise you’re trying to get your children to turn down 
while you pen your thoughts about the future of location-based storytelling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fvideo-games-digital-storytelling-naomi-alderman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444129271070%2F86c28c1d-7f91-48b8-8d61-435245c42aac-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20first%20great%20works%20of%20digital%20literature%20are%20already%20being%20written&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fvideo-games-digital-storytelling-naomi-alderman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20first%20great%20works%20of%20digital%20literature%20are%20already%20being%20written&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fvideo-games-digital-storytelling-naomi-alderman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444129271070%2F86c28c1d-7f91-48b8-8d61-435245c42aac-1020x612.jpeg>
 Kentucky Route Zero: ‘dazzlingly surreal’. 
When I bring this up with arts and literary types, I often get the sort of “oh 
come, come” response that can only emerge from someone who has no familiarity 
whatsoever with what video games are, have been, and can be. “You can’t claim 
thatGrand Theft Auto <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grand-theft-auto> 
has literary merit,” they say. Maybe you can – plenty of people have – but no, 
I wouldn’t cite GTA as fascinating experimental literature any more than I’d 
cite robo-Godzilla-fighting blockbusterPacific Rim 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5guMumPFBag> as an example of avant-garde 
film-making (it’s fun though).

But are there video games experimenting with more interesting storytelling 
than any “digital literature” project I’ve seen? Yes, certainly. And if you 
want to think of yourself as well read, or well cultured, you need to engage 
with them.

To pick just 10 examples from recent years, it’s hard to imagine how you could 
opine on the future of literature without having played the brilliantly 
characterful and fourth-wall breakingPortal 
<https://archive.org/details/msdos_Portal_1986>, the sombre and engrossing 
Papers, Please 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/30/papers-please-wins-2014-gamecity-prize>
, or the dazzlingly surreal exploration of the American subconscious,Kentucky 
Route Zero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/04/-sp-kentucky-route-zero-review-best-game-of-2014>
. Are you interested in discussing experimental “read it in any order” 
literature? Then for goodness’ sake, play the mystery narratives ofHer Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/25/her-story-review-narrative-video-game>
 andGone Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/apr/26/gone-home-telling-everyday-stories>
 and the hilarious and unsettlingThe Stanley Parable 
<http://www.stanleyparable.com/>. If you want to talk about how writers can 
engage with politics, capitalism, or the environmental movement, you’ll be 
showing your ignorance if you haven’t playedOiligarchy 
<http://www.molleindustria.org/en/oiligarchy/>.

Being culturally educated about video games is as important as going to 
museums or learning about opera

Interested in how storytellers can engage with themes of mortality? You’ll want
Spider: The Secret of Bryce Manor <http://tigerstylegames.com/Spider/tsobm/>, 
or Jason Rohrer’s short, powerful gamePassage 
<http://hcsoftware.sourceforge.net/passage/index.html>, or the sublime Journey 
<http://thatgamecompany.com/games/journey/>. Each of these games could – and 
probably should – be taught in schools to inspire the next generation of 
creators.

The problem is that people who like science and technology, and people who 
like storytelling and the arts have typically been placed in different 
buildings since about the age of 16. We haven’t been taught how to admire each 
others’ work, to recognise excellence, or even to know that there is excellence 
in “the other culture”. There’s a kind of sullen arrogance on both sides, with 
some people in both camps simply denying that the other knows anything worth 
listening to. There is a kind of “worthy” arts professional who thinks that 
knowing nothing about games – like saying “I don’t even own a television!” – is 
a marker of intellectual superiority.

But we can’t afford that kind of thinking any more. Being culturally educated 
about video games is as important as going to museums or learning about opera.
Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> often manage to be both 
great art and an economic powerhouse; we’re doing ourselves and the next 
generation a disservice if we don’t take that seriously.
 