
Amazon may be set to bring its hi-tech till-free stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/amazon-go-stores-uk-trademark-us>
 to the UK afterregistering the Amazon Go brand name in the UK last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/amazon-go-stores-uk-trademark-us>
. At the test store near Amazon’s HQ in Seattle, an app tracks customers as 
they walk about, recording the items they pick up and take away. The store is 
currently only available to company staff, but will open to shoppers from next 
year. The cost of purchases will be automatically billed to their account.

The company has registered the Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Go trademark in the UK for an 
extensive list of potential uses, from technology, telecommunications and 
retail services to food and drink services and even pet food.

The retailer claims the Amazon Go store is “the world’s most advanced shopping 
technology” but other businesses are also trialling shop-assistant-free 
concepts. The Näraffär convenience store based in an isolated village in 
Sweden, for example, relies on a mobile app which lets residents access the 
store, scan their shopping and then pay via a monthly invoice. They’re part of 
a wave of new gadgetry which could dramatically change the way we shop:

Robot assistants

Some may argue that many stores have these already, but retailers are moving 
on, with a view to replacing staff with sophisticated software.

The American DIY chain Lowe’s is testing LoweBot, a customer service robot 
that speaks several languages, helps shoppers find items and provides 
information on products.First trialled as OSHbot two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/08/robot-shop-assistant>, it 
is currently being tested in 11 Lowe’s stores.

US electricals retailer Best Buy has Chloe, a robot that is a glorified 
grabber arm for CDs and DVDs, while Aldebaran Robotics, part of the Japanese 
telecoms firm Softbank, has created Pepper, a humanoid robot which has been 
deployed in some Nescafé stores in Japan.

Some US shopping centres are even adopting robotic security guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/robocop-robot-mall-security-guard-palo-alto-california>
 – a cross between a CCTV camera and a Dalek that can detect people who may be 
loitering in the wrong place and read car number plates in car parks. But it’s 
not all been straightforward: a robot guarding a shopping centre in California 
recently ran over a toddler after its navigational scanning systems failed to 
detect the small boy.

A virtual you

For many shoppers, buying clothes online is a very hit-and-miss affair. Sizes 
vary between outlets and getting the right fit means many clothing items are 
returned – which is bad for both the shopper and the shopkeeper. That could 
change thanks to new software that creates an accurate 3D model of the shopper, 
meaning it is possible to “try on” clothes.

Cambridge based startup Metail, which has raised $20m to date and is backed by 
Hong Kong clothing giant Tal, is setting the pace. The company’s technology can 
be plugged into retailers’ websites so customers can create what it calls “Me 
Models” as well as 3D images of the products on sale. Shoppers can then find 
out if a pair of tight jeans will give them a muffin top. Retailers will also 
be able to use customer data to suggest outfits, creating a “Netflix style” 
shopping experience.

Digital butlers

Doing the shopping may soon require nothing other than a shiny little box. 
Nearly all the major tech firms, including Amazon, Google, Apple and Facebook, 
aredeveloping digital home assistants that respond to voice commands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/04/google-home-launch-amazon-echo-voice-recognition-uk-living-rooms>
. As an online retailer, it’s not surprising that Amazon has ensured its Echo 
device is easy to shop with – thanks to the Alexa app, which lets you shout out 
a shopping list, to add to a virtual trolley, as you walk around the house.

Eventually these assistants should learn what you want and when you want it 
without commands. But these devices may be very shortlived – becausehome 
appliances like fridges, coffee machines and printers have already been 
developed that are linked to the internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/samsung-launches-smartthings-internet-of-things-hub>
 so they can automatically replenish themselves without any interaction with 
their owner.

Drone deliveries
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffuture-shopping-mannequins-drones-shop-leave-withjout-paying-amazon-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a588b2ed5f7c4ac563a97f29b0893f72a2bb24d%2F0_163_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20shopping%3A%20drones%2C%20digital%20mannequins%20and%20leaving%20without%20paying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffuture-shopping-mannequins-drones-shop-leave-withjout-paying-amazon-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20shopping%3A%20drones%2C%20digital%20mannequins%20and%20leaving%20without%20paying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffuture-shopping-mannequins-drones-shop-leave-withjout-paying-amazon-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a588b2ed5f7c4ac563a97f29b0893f72a2bb24d%2F0_163_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A delivery drone with a pizza box before a test flight in Auckland, New 
Zealand, earlier this year. Photograph: Reuters 
As retail sales increasingly transfer from the high street to the internet, 
one of the biggest problems for retailers is making deliveries. In busy cities 
where traffic congestion is a problem, one solution already being tested is 
usingdrones <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/drones-non-military>. In 
the summer,Amazon started working with the UK government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/amazon-to-test-drone-delivery-uk-government>
 to test the viability of delivering small parcels – which make up 90% of 
Amazon’s sales – by drone.

In the US, Mercedes-Benz is collaborating with drone startup Matternet on the 
“Vision Van”, where a vehicle’s roof doubles as a launch pad for drones capable 
of sorties of up to 12 miles. Google has alsoshown off a fixed-wing drone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/20/google-delivery-drone-project-wing>
 capable of carrying packages.

However, beyond the special testing privileges granted to Amazon, current UK 
legislation bans drones from being flown within 50 metres of a building or a 
person, or within 150 metres of a built-up area. Aircraft pilots have also 
expressed concern about the dangers posed by drones aftera number of 
near-misses in London and Manchester. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/09/two-near-misses-renew-fears-drones-major-air-accident-manchester-london>
 