
This is Cork's year as European Capital of Culture. With a budget of 15 
million euros, it has not been the most expensive of these festivals, but then 
nor has it been the most pretentious. Cork 2005's programme of 236 creative 
projects, many chosen by local people, include the Knitting Map, an attempt to 
beat the world knitting record by having relays of local people click-clacking 
away at a giant tapestry of Cork life. One for the Guinness Book of Records, no 
doubt, and very much in the spirit of a festival that might otherwise be a 
worthy, slightly dull and underfunded occasion.

When the baton passes on to Patras in Greece next year, what will Cork be left 
with? Daniel Libeskind's Eighteen Turns pavilion, originally designed for the 
Serpentine Gallery, will be on the move again. The city's opera house has been 
given a wash and brush up, while St Patrick's Street has been morphed into a 
damp Hibernian Ramblas, with fancy paving and whacky street lamps by the 
Catalan architect Beth Gali. And, of course, the Knitting Map will be there for 
all to wonder at.

Now, though, imagine walking across one of the small bridges spanning the 
River Lee and into the grounds of University College. Here you will find 
something very different. Here is Cork's real and enduring legacy from 2005, an 
art gallery at once gracious, intriguing, rigorous and well made, a thing of 
unexpected beauty, and surely a joy for a very long time to come. This is the 
new Lewis Glucksman Gallery, designed by O'Donnell and Tuomey and funded by the 
Wall Street financier whose name the building bears.

A truly mature building, it also happens to be one of the contenders for this 
year'sStirling prize <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/stirling-prize>. 
It is good to see a building by this thoughtful Dublin practice up there with 
the big guns of Norman Foster, Will Alsop and Zaha Hadid.

Sheila O'Donnell and John Tuomey are well known in Ireland. Since they set up 
in practice in 1988, having worked together in the febrile office of James 
Stirling and Michael Wilford in London, they have produced a family of 
beautifully resolved, yet never shouty, cultural and educational buildings, 
notably the National Centre for Film and Drama, Dublin; the Ranelagh 
Multi-denominational School, Dublin; and the Furniture College at Letterfrack. 
They have worked quietly on urban design projects for Dublin and Delft, and 
taught with distinction at Cambridge, Princeton, Harvard, Syracuse and 
University College, Dublin.

Both have been heavily influenced by the work of the late James Stirling and 
Aldo Rossi, Cuchulain-sized players on the European architectural scene in the 
1970s and 80s. Yet, while Tuomey worked on the design of Stirling's postmodern 
tour de force, the Staatsgalerie, Stuttgart (1984), here he has not sought to 
recreate the flamboyant or determinedly intellectual designs the big-hitting 
Englishman and the intellectual Italian were famous for. What they learned from 
these architectural greats of an earlier generation are intellectual rigour and 
an ability to plan ingeniously and well.

So, you approach the new Cork art gallery expecting to find a modest 
university building on a lawn sloping down to the river among mature trees, but 
find yourself caught up instead in a glorious architectural intrigue on a much 
bigger scale than seems possible. Instead of sprawling like a summer student 
with book and bottle across the Victorian Gothic campus, the gallery climbs up 
into the treescape in a sequence of dramatically cantilevered twists and turns, 
not quite the 18 of Daniel Libeskind's pavilion at Fotoa House - I think there 
are seven - but enough to keep you guessing where it might go next.

This is not to say the building is wilful or eccentric. It is not. It has been 
designed this way to keep the floor plan as tightly knit as possible, and to 
allow the three floors of galleries to face out with a variety of views across 
trees, winding river, the white-faced Gothic quad of the original university 
buildings designed here in the 1840s by Deane and Woodward (architects, with 
John Ruskin, of the University Museum, Oxford). The building occupies the site 
of what were two old and largely unused tennis courts, and not a single tree 
standing in this old garden has been so much as pollarded to make way for the 
newcomer; it weaves between them. In this sense alone, the Glucksman gallery 
feels as if it has always been here, even though it is brand new.

Inside, each of the three main galleries is a delight, offering, in the way 
that Jorgen Bo and Vilhelm Wohlert's Louisiana Museum of Modern Art does 
outside Copenhagen, a kind of architectural walk in the woods. The Glucksman is 
like Louisiana, but with the galleries stacked vertically rather than strolling 
across the landscape. A walkway rises up from the river and through the lower 
floors of the building into a high internal courtyard off which the galleries 
fan out. Here, in the very heart of the building, visitors are in touch with 
the landscape as much as the galleries themselves. On the fourth floor, a 
terrace opens like a ship's deck, leading us from curated artifice into 
manicured nature.

The floors of the building, part timber clad, part galvanised steel, part 
rough oak, have something of the look of wooden boats stacked up in a boatyard. 
Cork is a city on water, and by the sea, and boats are a part of its life. The 
image is certainly one the architects chose to play with as they gathered up 
and arranged the form of the building. Tuomey has said that one of the most 
beautiful things he has ever seen was the National Museum of Ireland's display, 
some 10 years ago, of a Viking ship in Dublin's Kildare Place. The ship was 
raised on stilts at an angle among the trees like some "celestial vessel 
straining over a stone terrain". Tuomey also says he loves the images evoked in 
Seamus Heaney's poem Lightenings viii, the one that reads:

   The annals say: when the monks of Clonmacnoise
    Here all at prayers inside the oratory
    A ship appeared above them in the air.
    The anchor dragged along behind so deep
    It hooked itself into the altar rails
    And then, as the big hull rocked to a standstill,
    A crewman shinned and grappled down the rope
    And struggled to release it. But in vain.
    "This man can't bear our life here and will drown,"
    The abbot said, "unless we help him." So
    They did, the freed ship sailed, and the man climbed back
    Out of the marvellous as he had known it.


This has been pointed out to me by Shane O'Toole, the Irish architect and 
critic, who talked of the sense of depth, permanence and memory O'Donnell and 
Tuomey invest in their work. So here is poetry into architecture, architecture 
into landscape and both fram ing art. The works on display will be 
contemporary, historic and changing, shown alongside University College's 
ethnographic and scientific collections. The galleries flow, doorless, into 
each other, so connections between arts and other disciplines may well be made. 
This is far more than just another European Capital of Culture-style art box.
 