
As bistros go, L’Ami Pierre, a low-key establishment on rue de la Main d’Or in 
the 11th arrondissement, is as Parisian as they come. Black-and-white 
photographs, vulgar cartoons and framed Charlie Hebdo covers hang on the walls. 
Steak knives and wine glasses sit neatly on small tables laid with white 
tablecloths. With the first round of diners still to arrive, half a dozen 
regulars stand against the silver-topped bar, drinking wine and debating the 
gentrification of their neighbourhood.

The restaurant could probably seat about 30 customers. On the night of 13 
November 2015, whenParis fell victim to a series of deadly attacks across the 
city <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> – including at busy 
restaurant La Belle Equipe, just five minutes’ walk away – it managed to 
squeeze in 80 as terrified people took shelter inside. Its owner, Robin 
Greiner, pulled down the metal shutters on the front, offered everyone a couple 
of rounds of wine on the house and refused to let anyone leave until 4am.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f661dc7b7a104703272f5b5ee74523e81242d2a%2F0_53_5015_3009%2F5015.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f661dc7b7a104703272f5b5ee74523e81242d2a%2F0_53_5015_3009%2F5015.jpg>
 L’Ami Pierre. Photograph: Camille Sauvayre 
Now, almost100 days on, though the memories of that night linger, Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> is back on its feet. But while locals 
are moving forward, visitors from other countries have been slower to return.

Favourite Paris bistros: readers’ travel tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/18/favourite-paris-bistro-restaurants-readers-travel-tips-france>
“We went back to normal because here, we don’t [normally] have many tourists,” 
says Greiner. “But we had a faithful Japanese clientele that would come because 
we’re featured in Japanese travel magazines. They disappeared overnight and 
they still haven’t returned.”

For businesses that do depend on tourists, it has been a difficult winter. 
November’s attacks took place predominantly across a multicultural, buzzing 
part of Paris: around the Canal Saint-Martin, rue de Charonne and boulevard 
Voltaire. The neighbourhood has a close-knit community of independent bars, 
restaurants and hotels, and is popular with younger visitors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8ffb2a03de9252b20a9f3a77aa90a5097b9e8e4%2F0_122_2128_1277%2F2128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8ffb2a03de9252b20a9f3a77aa90a5097b9e8e4%2F0_122_2128_1277%2F2128.jpg>
 Les Piaules hostel opened just two weeks after the attacks. Photograph: 
Arnault de Giron 
It’s chilling to imagine these streets falling eerily quiet but, in November 
and December, many of these businesses experienced a significant lull. It was 
into this climate that one of the city’s newest hostels,Les Piaules 
<http://www.lespiaules.com/>, was born. This trendy bolthole, with beds for 162 
people, opened last December on boulevard de Belleville – home to a hectic 
street market on Tuesdays and Fridays – barely two weeks after the attacks.

When the attacks happened, we lost 40-50% of our existing bookings overnight. 
Only since mid-January has it got better.
Elodie Moussié, owner, Hotel Providence 
On the ground floor of the 1930s art deco building is a DJ bar, on the top, a 
roof terrace with views of the Eiffel Tower, Sacré-Coeur and La Défense. “[At 
first], we worried for the people we knew,” says Louis Kerveillant, one of 
three young entrepreneurs who founded the hostel. A friend of his, he tells me, 
was among those killed at the Bataclan theatre that night. “For the first two 
weeks, I was in shock,” he says. “Even after three years [of preparation] and a 
lot of money, we weren’t thinking about the work.”

The team decided to go ahead with the opening regardless: “Our role as 
entrepreneurs and business owners is not to close shop,” says Kerveillant. But 
foreign visitors took a rather different view. In December, occupancy was just 
35%, in January it was 50% and only now has it risen to more than 60%.

“Guests said their governments were advising them not to come to Paris,” says 
Kerveillant. “This was frustrating.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2fca53b0b57661adaee75338d86c88629881160%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2fca53b0b57661adaee75338d86c88629881160%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 People continue to leave tributes to victims three months after the terrorist 
attacks in Paris.
 Photograph: Getty Images 
Another hotel that had a tough start is Hotel Providence 
<http://www.hotelprovidenceparis.com/en/> (90 rue René Boulanger), close to 
Place de la République, which opened last October. “When the attacks happened, 
we lost 40-50% of our existing bookings overnight,” says owner Elodie Moussié. 
“Only since mid-January has it got better.”

Maybe by March or April, things will be back to normal. But the real test will 
come in May and June
Céline Degrave, director, Le Comptoir Général 
Five hundred metres away, past streets still dotted with the odd soldier – 
Paris’s state of emergency, which was this week extended until late May, has 
prolonged the impact of the attacks on businesses – are two of the cafes that 
were targeted by gunmen last November.Cafe La Bonne Bière 
<http://www.cafebonnebiere.fr/>, on rue du Faubourg-du-Temple, and Casa Nostra 
(rue de la Fontaine-au-Roi) have both now reopened, but flowers and 
hand-decorated notes dedicated to the victims still line the street outside.

Inside La Bonne Bière, it’s difficult to imagine the events of that night. To 
a soundtrack consisting of French-language covers of classic rock tunes, people 
sit on the terrace drinking coffee and life continues as usual outside.

A group of US exchange students sit down for lunch, having come to the area to 
visit the République monument, which remains a memorial to those killed. They 
admit that they’ve been coming into the city centre less since the attacks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef5b43c4ec6d3d372461fb591975b8ddac0b2ad3%2F0_26_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef5b43c4ec6d3d372461fb591975b8ddac0b2ad3%2F0_26_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The Casa Nostra restaurant was targeted by terrorists in November. Photograph: 
AFP/Getty Images 
“I had a friend who came over for Christmas,” says Andrew Calder, 30, from 
California. “All her friends were saying, ‘don’t go – you’re crazy’. I had to 
really reassure her it was OK. It seems the perception is that it’s still a 
dangerous place to go.”

Top 10 caves à manger in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/02/top-10-caves-a-manger-paris-france>
Just around the corner is one of the area’s most popular venues: bar, club and 
restaurantLe Comptoir Général <http://www.lecomptoirgeneral.com/> (80 quai de 
Jemmapes). Some staff members went to help at the restaurants that were 
targeted by the attackers and psychological support had to be arranged for 
everyone that works there. “In the short term, we really had to face the 
question: how do we go on?” says Céline Degrave, one of its directors. “We are 
a place of entertainment. How do you [keep] your will to entertain after that?”

Degrave says customer numbers fell by almost half for over a month, and that 
when people did come, “they would not stay long”. Le Comptoir Général teamed up 
with other local businesses to start a campaign –Le Remontant  
<https://www.facebook.com/Le-Remontant-1541577266133341/>– to encourage people 
to go out in east Paris again, with bars, cafes and restaurants offering 
customers a special drink, shot, dessert or cocktail to be bought in the name 
of solidarity, with some of the proceeds going to the French Association of 
Victims of Terrorism (afvt.org <http://www.afvt.org/>).

“Maybe by March or April, things will be back to normal,” she says. “But the 
real test will come in May and June; these are [usually] strong months for bars 
and restaurants, with lots of long weekends, tourists and warm weather.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d3724ec12a1a5eb6ec99de8c5cdc3a3b86b3c9c%2F0_162_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d3724ec12a1a5eb6ec99de8c5cdc3a3b86b3c9c%2F0_162_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
 Le Comptoir Général is part of a campaign to encourage people to go out again 
in this part of Paris. 
While a bigger establishment like Le Comptoir can weather a storm, it is the 
smaller businesses, especially those that feed off the major tourist 
attractions, that have Degrave’s sympathies. “Visitor numbers to theMusée 
d’Orsay <http://www.musee-orsay.fr/en/> dropped by 40%,” she says. “I know a 
restaurant that [relied on these visitors] – none of the staff has been paid 
for three months.”

Top 10 breakfast spots in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/12/top-10-cafes-restaurants-for-breakfast-paris-france>
Saveurs and Co <https://fr-ca.facebook.com/Saveurs-And-Co-180559341956977/>, a 
small cafe on rue de Bellechasse between the Musée d’Orsay and theMusée Rodin 
<http://www.musee-rodin.fr/>, says the tourists just disappeared at the end of 
last year. “We’ve been open since 2008 and December is usually a good month for 
business,” says owner Stefan Rouillier. “But last year, it was very sad and 
very bad. During the Christmas holidays, there were no tourists: no Europeans, 
Australians, Americans. Even now there are less. We think tourists will come 
back fully in April.”

But financial impact aside, those who still work and live there want visitors 
to realise that the spirit of Paris has returned. The attacks undoubtedly shook 
Parisians – perhaps more than they would like to admit – but the city is, on 
the surface, back to normal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feba7413a13b9c04db86d015a1c768255784bb8ee%2F0_192_5064_3038%2F5064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20slow%20return%20to%20Paris%3A%20how%20tourism%20is%20taking%20time%20to%20recover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Freturn-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feba7413a13b9c04db86d015a1c768255784bb8ee%2F0_192_5064_3038%2F5064.jpg>
 It is hoped that tourists will return to Paris in their usual numbers this 
spring. Photograph: Getty Images/Brand X 
“What’s so important is that we didn’t change the way we live,” says 
Kerveillant. “The message we’re trying to impart is not that we’ll forget the 
attacks, but that life is going on.”

• Travel was provided by Eurostar, returns from £58, eurostar.com 
<http://www.eurostar.com/uk-en?from=gblon&to=frpar&gclid=COD5jtr-_soCFfQW0wodgPgGAQ&gclsrc=aw.ds&dclid=CMSwldr-_soCFQsaGAod6sQHFg>
. Accommodation was provided by Les Piaules, dorm beds from €25, doubles from 
€90, breakfast not included,lespiaules.com <http://www.lespiaules.com/>

Counting the cost 

Paris is the world’s third most popular city for tourists, after Bangkok and 
London. Researcher MKG puts the total cost of the attacks to its hoteliers at 
€146m. The Eiffel Tower had 6.91m visitors last year, down from 7.1m in 2014. 
Eurostar wouldn’t comment ahead of quarterly results, but Guardian Holidays 
<https://holidays.theguardian.com/>, which sells hotel and Eurostar packages, 
says sales are down 35% this year, compared with January 2015.
 