
Two years ago, not long after Patrizia Reggiani 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrizia_Reggiani> was released from prison, a 
camera crew from a trashy Italian TV show turned up unannounced at her Milan 
workplace. Reggiani had just spent 16 years inside after being convicted of 
arranging the murder, in March 1995, of her ex-husband Maurizio Gucci, the last 
of the Gucci family dynasty to run the luxury brand. The former socialite had 
always maintained her innocence – her best friend had set her up, she said – 
but the TV crew caught her in a reckless mood.

“Patrizia, why did you hire a hitman to kill Maurizio Gucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci>? Why didn’t you shoot him 
yourself?” badgered the reporter.

“My eyesight is not so good,” she lobbed back. “I didn’t want to miss.”

Understandably then, when I try to find her, Reggiani’s inner circle doesn’t 
seem keen to let her near another journalist. “She’s not here. She’s off work 
with a bad back,” says Alessandra Brunero, co-owner ofBozart 
<http://www.bozart.it/index.html>, a Milanese costume jewellery firm that has 
employed Reggiani as a “design consultant” since April 2014.

Sentenced to 26 years on appeal, Reggiani was required to find a job as a 
condition of her parole. She turned down her first offer of release in 2011, 
according to the Italian press, because the very idea of working horrified her. 
“I’ve never worked in my life and I don’t intend to start now,” she told her 
lawyer.

Bozart, with its Renaissance-style premises full of sparkling necklaces and 
chandeliers, was obviously an acceptable compromise. Brunero and her 
business-partner husband have now become Reggiani’s de facto minders, tasked 
with ensuring the 67-year-old sticks to her parole and quietly rebuilds her 
life as a regular citizen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc4f5cd9d7d815fbabb99fda61c3ff4af7d59b04%2F0_913_1232_739%2F1232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion's%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion%27s%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc4f5cd9d7d815fbabb99fda61c3ff4af7d59b04%2F0_913_1232_739%2F1232.jpg>
 ‘I am a very strong person. I survived all the years in captivity’: Reggiani 
in court in 1998. Photograph: EPA 
“Oh, mamma mia, it’s not easy,” says Brunero, a stylish 40-something. She 
invites me inside, and I get the impression she really needs to talk. “I cried 
after that TV interview. It was terrible,” she says, putting her head in her 
hands. “Naturally, Patrizia was only joking…”

Even before the impromptu “confession”, persuading Reggiani to remain low-key 
was a lost cause. One of her first acts of freedom was to go shopping onVia 
Monte Napoleone <http://www.viamontenapoleone.org/eng/home.php> – Milan’s Bond 
Street – decked out in gaudy jewels and movie-star sunglasses, with a large pet 
macaw perched on her shoulder. The paparazzi couldn’t believe their luck. Lady 
Gucci, as she used to be known, was back.

The gunning down of 46-year-old Maurizio Gucci one morning in the red-carpeted 
foyer of his office, and the subsequent murder trial, captivatedItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> in the late 1990s. It was sensational 
fin de siècle stuff. This was elegant Milan, not mob-riddled Naples, and 
execution-style killings of the city’s glamorous elite were unknown. Reggiani, 
dubbed the “Liz Taylor of luxury labels” in the 1970s and 80s, was an immediate 
suspect. She had openly threatened to kill Gucci after their split. But, 
without evidence, the crime went unsolved for nearly two years. A tip-off led 
to her arrest in 1997, along with four others, including the hitman.

I met Maurizio at a party and he fell madly in love with me. I was exciting 
and different

While the public loved it, the Gucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> company was less enthralled. After 
decades of infighting among the heirs of the founder Guccio Gucci, the brand 
was no longer under family control. Maurizio, a grandson of Guccio who’d ousted 
his relatives from the business to become CEO in 1992, had been forced to sell 
his stake 18 months before he died. Ownership was taken over by Bahrain- based 
investment bank Investcorp. The murder coincided with a thrilling revival of 
the brand’s image in the mid-1990s under new bossDomenico De Sole 
<http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/d/domenico_de_sole/index.html>
 and edgy young designerTom Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford>.

“The last thing Gucci wanted was a sordid scandal,” says Giusi Ferrè, a 
veteran Milan-based fashion writer and cultural critic with trademark spiky 
orange hair. “The company tried to ignore the whole drama and they wanted 
everyone else to ignore it, too.” The label’s continued rise over the past two 
decades has eclipsed memories of the murder even more. Gucci is currently on 
yet another high. Revenue is soaring, and androgynous new creative director
Alessandro Michele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/jun/20/from-pvc-to-jane-austen-guccis-menswear-hits-new-levels-of-eccentricity>
 recently turned Westminster Abbey into the most hallowed venue ever for his 
latest collection. Yet the amnesia is odd, because the saga has everything: 
glamour, greed, sex, death, betrayal, raging status anxiety. It probably says 
more about the primal allure of a name like Gucci than all the sales figures in 
the world.

After Reggiani was arrested, the media dubbed her Vedova Nera – the Black 
Widow – and touted all the stereotypical theories about her likely motives. She 
was jealous of Maurizio’s girlfriend, she wanted his money, she was bitter 
about his neglect, she was plain mad. If there is a grain of truth in any of 
these, there was also something deeper, too. “Everything Reggiani was stemmed 
from being a Gucci,” says Ferrè. “It was her whole identity, even as an 
ex-wife. She was furious with Maurizio for selling out.” Even after her release 
from prison, Reggiani couldn’t let go. She toldLa Repubblica 
<http://www.repubblica.it/> newspaper in 2014 that, now she was available 
again, she hoped to return to the company fold. “They need me,” she said. “I 
still feel like a Gucci – in fact, the most Gucci of them all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189b1c85c551059f62a0d8641934005409edf693%2F238_16_1076_1555%2F1076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion's%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion%27s%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189b1c85c551059f62a0d8641934005409edf693%2F238_16_1076_1555%2F1076.jpg>
 Maurizio Gucci was 46 when he was gunned down in the foyer of his office. 
Photograph: AP 
Bozart’s owners relent a week later and agree to introduce me to Reggiani at 
their offices. She appears in their grand sitting room wearing a short floral 
dress. She is tiny, barely 5ft tall, although her enormous hair, now reddish 
brown, and nude high heels give her extra height. “That’s a lovely dress,” I 
say to break the ice. “It’s Zara. I don’t earn enough at this place to buy 
proper clothes,” she replies, throwing a disgruntled look at her hovering 
employers.

We sit down on matching white sofas to espressos and iced water, and I ask her 
about life in Milan’sSan Vittore prison 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/San_Vittore_Prison>. “I think I am a very strong 
person because I survived all these years in captivity,” she says in the 
heavily accented English she picked up during her jet-setting days. “I slept a 
lot. I took care of my plants. I looked after Bambi, my pet ferret.” Bambi, she 
adds, was a special privilege negotiated by her lawyer, but the creature met a 
sticky end when a fellow inmate accidentally sat on him. “I don’t like to talk 
about this time at all,” she says, already keen to change the subject. “It is 
all a bad dream to me.” Reggiani won’t admit out loud that she was in prison, 
referring to her incarceration as “my stay at Vittore Residence.”

She relaxes more when we start to talk about the past. She was born in a small 
town outside Milan to a waitress and a much older man who made his fortune in 
trucking.

They were very rich, but not part of Milan’s high society. As a young woman 
she liked fine things – her father spoiled her with mink coats and fast cars – 
and she found her way on to the elite social circuit. “I met Maurizio at a 
party and he fell madly in love with me. I was exciting and different,” says 
Reggiani. The Guccis came from Florence so Maurizio also felt something of an 
outsider. “I didn’t think much of him at first. He was just the quiet boy whose 
teeth crossed over at the front.” Reggiani had other suitors, but the young 
Gucci chased her hard with all the riches at his disposal.

They married in 1972 when they were both around 24. The union caused a rift 
with Gucci’s father Rodolfo, one of Guccio Gucci’s sons, who disapproved of 
Reggiani’s background and, no doubt, her strong personality. Maurizio was an 
only child whose mother had died when he was five, and his father had always 
been overprotective.

“Maurizio felt free with me. We had fun, we were a team,” says Reggiani. 
Rodolfo softened after she gave birth to a daughter, Alessandra, and he could 
see that she “really loved Maurizio”. The elder Gucci bought the couple 
numerous properties, including a luxury penthouse in New York’s Olympic Tower. 
Early adopters of celebrity coupledom, the pair rode around Manhattan in a 
chauffeur-driven car with the personalised plate “Mauizia”. They hung out with 
Jackie Onassis and the Kennedy brood whenever they were all in town.

I was angry with Maurizio about many things. But losing the family business 
was stupid

“We were a beautiful couple and we had a beautiful life, of course,” says 
Reggiani, throwing her hands in the air and briefly leaving them there. “It 
still hurts to think about this.” She perks up when she remembers the lavish 
colour-themed parties she threw in the early 1980s – “one was all orange and 
yellow, including the food” – and the trips to private islands on their 64m 
wooden yacht,the Creole <http://yachtpals.com/largest-yacht-gucci-9102>, which 
Maurizio bought to mark the birth of their second daughter, Allegra. (Worth 
millions, it is still owned and sailed by the couple’s two daughters). Their 
charmed world also included a ski chalet in Saint Moritz, a holiday home in 
Acapulco and a farm in Connecticut.

It all started to unravel after the death of Rodolfo in 1983, Reggiani says, 
when Maurizio inherited his father’s 50% stake in Gucci. “Maurizio got crazy. 
Until then I was his chief adviser about all Gucci matters. But he wanted to be 
the best, and he stopped listening to me.” The Gucci brand had been losing 
prestige from over-licensing its famed double-G logo and from mass production 
of canvas bags. Maurizio had a plan to restore it to high-end glory by 
reverting to the exquisite craftsmanship the company was built upon.

He fought for years with his uncle and cousins, who jointly owned the other 
half of the firm, until he pulled off a plot to buy them out with the help of 
Investcorp. The couple’s marriage imploded along the way. Apparently weary of 
Reggiani’s constant “meddling”, one evening Maurizio packed an overnight bag 
and left. Meanwhile, the company lost millions under his control. Reggiani had 
been right, at least, that Maurizio was mismanaging business and not creating 
enough revenue to execute his grand ideas. His personal fortune was dwindling 
and he was forced to sell Gucci wholly to Investcorp for $120m in 1993.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3c0a9b793e36f320893586801f9a9f31f86adf7%2F0_108_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion's%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion%27s%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3c0a9b793e36f320893586801f9a9f31f86adf7%2F0_108_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 ‘We were a beautiful couple and we had a beautiful life’: Gucci and Reggiani 
in the 80s. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
“I was angry with Maurizio about many, many things at that time,” says 
Reggiani. “But above all, this. Losing the family business. It was stupid. It 
was a failure. I was filled with rage, but there was nothing I could do.” She 
turns her head and drops her voice so low I can hardly hear her. “He shouldn’t 
have done that to me.”

Giuseppe Onorato was sweeping away leaves inside the arched doorway of Via 
Palestro 20, the graceful building where Maurizio Gucci had his private office, 
at 8:30am on 27 March 1995. “It was a lovely spring morning, very quiet,” says 
Onorato, now 71, the former building doorman and the only person who witnessed 
what occurred next. “Mr Gucci arrived carrying some magazines and said good 
morning. Then I saw a hand. It was a beautiful, clean hand, and it was pointing 
a gun.”

The gun fired three shots at Gucci’s back as he went up the steps, and a 
fourth into his head as he collapsed. “I thought it was a joke. Then the 
shooter saw me. He lifted the gun again and fired two more times. ‘What a 
shame,’ I thought. ‘This is how I die.’”

Reggiani couldn’t bear the thought of another woman taking the power, status 
and money she ‘had earned’

Onorato can’t remember how he made it to the foyer’s steps after he’d been 
shot twice in the arm, but he was sitting there in a pool of blood when the
carabinieri arrived. “I was cradling Mr Gucci’s head. He died in my arms,” says 
the ex-doorman.

Speaking on the phone from Sardinia, where he has a small holiday house, 
Onorato still sounds incredulous that he survived. “I still have stabbing pains 
in my left arm, but every day for the past 21 years I’ve woken up thankful I’m 
alive.” The gunman vanished into Milan’s Monday morning rush hour. The 
aftermath wasn’t easy for the doorman.

As the only direct witness, Onorato was terrified that the killer would 
return. “I was a poor man, so I had to go back to work at Via Palestro 20 when 
I recovered. I had a panic attack every time an unfriendly looking stranger 
approached.”

After Reggiani’s conviction, the courts ordered her to pay Onorato 
compensation of the equivalent of roughly £142,000. He has yet to receive any 
of it, he says. Reggiani’s daughters, who are now in their late 30s and have 
always stuck by their mother (at least publicly), directly inherited Maurizio 
Gucci’s millions, as well as the yacht and properties in New York, Saint Moritz 
and Milan. Reggiani declared herselfnullatenente – the Italian word for 
bankrupt, meaning “a person who has nothing”.

“I’m not bitter,” says Onorato, “but I do wonder, if a rich person had been 
wounded in that doorway instead of me, whether they’d have been treated with 
more respect.” He has a point. When, for instance, Gucci’s lawyers proposed a 
divorce settlement to Reggiani of £2.5m plus £650,000 per year, she rejected it 
as “a mere bowl of lentils” and landed a better deal.

Onorato isn’t the only person whose life was turned upside down by the murder. 
Paola Franchi, now 61, had been Gucci’s live-in partner for five years before 
his death. The couple shared a palatial apartment on the city centre boulevard, 
Corso Venezia, along with Franchi’s 11-year-old son Charly, and had planned to 
marry. Tall and blonde, Franchi didn’t fare much better than Reggiani in the 
trial’s media coverage, which often portrayed her as a glamorous gold digger.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9062e1df9d1b5b89f0032107bd25b6fb6d4125%2F0_64_2040_1224%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion's%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion%27s%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9062e1df9d1b5b89f0032107bd25b6fb6d4125%2F0_64_2040_1224%2F2040.jpg>
 Hired hands: the hitman and getaway driver behind bars during the trial in 
1995. Photograph: Luca Bruno/AP 
“Oh, they always resort to these stupid types,” Franchi says. “Actually my 
previous husband, whom I left for Maurizio, was even richer, so it was all 
nonsense.” An interior designer turned artist, Franchi lives in a converted 
porcelain factory in Milan and spends half the year in Kenya. Her home is 
stuffed with books, paintings and exotic souvenirs. She’s chatty and quick to 
laugh, with a lightness of spirit that I wasn’t expecting.

During the trial it emerged that Reggiani had put pressure on her hired 
accomplices to carry out the murder quickly, before Franchi and Gucci’s 
wedding. Reggiani’s one-time best friend Pina Auriemma, who confessed to 
arranging the hitman, testified that Reggiani couldn’t bear the thought of 
another woman taking her place as Mrs Maurizio Gucci – and with it, the power, 
status and money that she “had earned”.

She also feared that her daughters could lose some or all of their inheritance 
if the couple had children. “Patrizia was stalking us,” says Franchi. “She 
still had spies in Maurizio’s circle and she knew all about our plans, his 
business dealings, everything. She called many times abusing him and 
threatening to kill him.”

If Gucci didn’t take Reggiani’s calls, she sent him diatribes on cassette 
tape, later played in court, saying he was “a monster” for neglecting her and 
their daughters, and warning that “the inferno for you is yet to come”.

“I begged him to hire a bodyguard,” says Franchi, “but he refused. He didn’t 
believe Patrizia would go through with her threat because of their girls.”

My family has cut off my financial support. I have nothing, I haven’t even met 
my two grandsons

Gucci and Franchi had crossed paths briefly in their youth on the 
Euro-rich-kid party circuit. They reconnected by chance when they were both 
reeling from unhappy marriages. “We fell in love immediately. Maurizio used to 
tell me” – Franchi starts to cry – “that we were two halves of the same apple.”

The day after the murder she received an eviction order from Reggiani to move 
out of the grand apartment she’d shared with Gucci. The notarised timestamp, 
Franchi noticed, showed the papers had been drawn up at 11am the previous day – 
less than three hours after Maurizio died. “In those days co-habiting couples 
had no legal protection. Charly and I were out, just like that.”

Franchi slowly began, as she puts it, “to build a different future”. But five 
years later she suffered another tragedy. While visiting his father over 
Christmas, her son Charly killed himself at the age of 16. “It was completely 
unexpected,” she says. “He was a happy, shining boy, greatly loved. We think it 
was a flash of teen madness.” Franchi has photos of Maurizio and Charly all 
over her house, but says they’re not there so she can dwell on her pain. “I 
like to have their faces around, to say hello. For a year after Charly died I 
felt a rage in my soul, but then I got on with life. I’m the kind of person who 
has to keep moving forward.” She poured her emotions into painting and writing, 
she says, and is also active in a charity for troubled or suicidal teens,
L’Amico Charly <http://www.amicocharly.it/index.php/amico-charly>, that her ex- 
husband set up in memory of their son.

When Franchi moved out of the Corso Venezia apartment, Reggiani moved in with 
her daughters. She lived there in luxury for the next two years, until one of 
her accomplices boasted about the murder to the wrong person. The man informed 
the police, who launched a sting operation to trick Reggiani and her four paid 
accomplices – her friend Pina Auriemma, a friend of Auriemma’s who set up the 
hitman, the hitman himself and the getaway driver – into discussing the crime 
on wiretapped phones. It succeeded. Among other evidence they found at 
Reggiani’s home was her Cartier diary, which had a one-word entry for the day 
of Gucci’s death: “Paradeisos” – the Greek word for paradise.

In court, Reggiani admitted she’d paid Auriemma around £200,000, but denied it 
was for the murder, claiming Auriemma had arranged the hit herself and was 
threatening to frame her if she didn’t pay. “But it was worth every lira,” 
Reggiani then added, confusingly, unable to help herself even then. All five 
involved in the murder plot were found guilty. Despite the Gucci company’s 
supposed indifference to the scandal, on the day of the verdict the Italian 
media reported that Gucci shops around the country hung silver handcuffs in 
their windows. (Gucci declined to make any comment at all for this article.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feebdd33058b7d0db5041052ec4358b2cea302431%2F0_2661_5792_5334%2F5792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion's%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gucci%20wife%20and%20the%20hitman%3A%20fashion%27s%20darkest%20tale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-gucci-wife-and-the-hitman-fashions-darkest-tale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feebdd33058b7d0db5041052ec4358b2cea302431%2F0_2661_5792_5334%2F5792.jpg>
 ‘I begged Maurizio to hire a bodyguard’: Paolo Franchi, who Gucci lived with 
for five years after leaving Reggiani. Photograph: Uli Weber for the Observer 
At Bozart, Brunero’s husband and co-owner Maurizio Manca gives me a tour of 
Reggiani’s new workplace. It seems almost too perfect for her. The jewellery 
the upmarket firm creates is designed to be big, ornate and dazzling. Manca, 
who is dressed all in black and has a mop of floppy grey hair, freely admits 
the 60-year-old company had its heyday in the 1980s when “there was corruption 
everywhere and the money was flowing”. Stars, including Madonna and Pamela 
Anderson, have worn Bozart’s designs which, best of all, supplied all the glitz 
worn byLinda Evans’s <http://www.lindaevansofficial.com/> character Krystle 
Carrington <http://carringtondynasty.wikia.com/wiki/Krystle_Carrington> on the 
set ofDynasty.

When she’s at work, Reggiani spends much of her day advising Bozart’s design 
team and reading fashion magazines. “She’s like our Michael Schumacher – she 
keeps on top of trends and test-drives our creations,” says Manca.

“I prefer Senna. He has much more class,” Reggiani says, emerging from her 
portrait shoot with theObserver photographer. There’s a pause while everyone 
remembers the unfortunate fates of both drivers, and the analogy is quickly 
dropped. Reggiani says she enjoys the job, but admits that she hasn’t found it 
easy to adjust to the modern workplace. “I don’t like computers. They are quite 
evil.” Manca points out, in her defence, that the fax machine was still 
cutting-edge technology when she went to prison. Still, he adds that they had 
to remove her computer from their internal network after she permanently 
deleted Bozart’s entire photo archive.

Nobody says it directly, but it seems clear a big reason for taking on 
Reggiani was to generate publicity and try to rekindle the firm’s edge of 
flashy danger. If so, it hasn’t been straightforward so far. When Reggiani 
first arrived she helped to design a collection of rainbow coloured jewellery 
and evening bags inspired by her pet macaw, Bo. Bozart held a launch in Milan 
in September 2014 and invited the fashion press. “Everybody came and it was a 
big success,” says Manca. “But it happened to be on the same day that Gucci was 
having a runway show up the street. The next day there was nothing at all in 
the newspapers about Patrizia’s collection.” Manca says the journalists later 
told him they’d been leaned on by “someone at Gucci” not to publish. While 
Gucci wouldn’t confirm or deny, an Italian fashion editor friend later doubts 
his claim. “The fashion corps probably just didn’t like the parrot designs,” he 
says.

All the same, Manca and Brunero appear to be genuinely fond of their employee. 
As the afternoon goes by, Reggiani gets tired and cracks in her bravado appear. 
She talks about how, by court order, she lives in a Milan townhouse with her 
89-year-old mother, who is still in good health. “Sometimes I wish I was back 
inside Vittore Residence because my mother is very difficult. She berates me 
every day for no reason.” Reggiani’s daughters Alessandra and Allegra, who were 
18 and 14 when she was arrested, are both married and now live in Switzerland. 
Unimaginably rich thanks to their father’s estate, they haven’t visited 
Reggiani much since her release.

It’s almost the stuff of Greek tragedy. “We are going through a bad time now,” 
says Reggiani. “They don’t understand me and have cut off my financial support. 
I have nothing, and I haven’t even met my two grandsons.” She says she has “no 
idea” what the future holds when her parole ends, possibly in a few months. She 
may continue to work at Bozart and says she’d like to travel when she’s allowed 
to leave the country again. She seems to have given up the idea of trying to 
find a job at Gucci, even if she hasn’t quite let go of the past. “If I could 
see Maurizio again I would tell him that I love him, because he is the person 
who has mattered most to me in my life.” I ask her what she thinks he’d say to 
her in reply, and she sounds a note of realism at last. “I think he’d say the 
feeling wasn’t mutual.”
 