
For those with seasonal sensitivities, allergy season can feel like it is 
never ending. Breakthroughs in research and new technologies are bringing 
relief to sufferers of seasonal allergic rhinitis, more commonly known as 
hayfever.

Looking for immediate relief?

If you’re looking for relief right now to get you through the day, you can’t 
go past one of the longer-acting antihistamine preparations that work over 12 
or 24-hour periods. These ‘second-generation’ antihistamines are usually 
non-drowsy so you can take them any time of the day, but always check the label 
to make sure.

You can also find relief in the form of steroid or cellulose sprays. Although 
these may take longer to work than normal decongestant nasal sprays, they are a 
good option for people suffering from blocked sinuses or a constantly running 
nose.

Corticosteroid sprays are used to reduce swelling and mucus in the nasal 
passage and work best when applied over a long period[1]. The steroids are said 
to be active only in the nasal cavity, with minimal impact on the general 
circulation.

There are also nasal puffers containing cellulose, a substance that occurs 
naturally in the cell walls of plants. When puffed into the nostril, the 
cellulose reacts with moisture in the nasal cavity to form a protective 
barrier. Research[2] has found it works on both adults and children, with 
limited side effects, but it’s advisable to check with your doctor.

Is hayfever a forever thing?

Until recently, there have been no ‘cures’ for seasonal allergies, but 
research is finding ways to give relief over a longer term through 
immunotherapy.

Immunotherapy or ‘desensitisation’ works by ‘switching off’ the natural 
allergic reaction through repeated, controlled doses of an allergen. The 
treatment is administered over months, or even years, by a clinical specialist 
who will first determine what allergens are causing the reaction then introduce 
small doses by means of injection, tablets (oral immunisation therapy or OIT) 
or drops under the tongue (sublingual immunisation therapy, or SLIT).

It may sound counter intuitive, but however it’s administered, immunotherapy 
has been found to be effective in treating seasonal rhinitis[3], so long as the 
specific allergen has been correctly identified in the patient.

Grin and wear it: new wearable devices from around the world

If you’re not too concerned about frightening small children or looking 
foolish, a wearable device might help you through the worst of the pollen 
season.

Face masks are becoming more effective, in response to a greater demand for 
protection against increasing pollution and pollen around the world. A quick 
internet search will find masks that adhere to your face (reducing the need for 
those annoying strings), through to ones that are disposable or washable and 
even some containing perfumes, rather like the medieval nosegay.

A less obvious solution is the Qu-Chi Acupressure Band 
<http://www.qu-chi.co.uk/>. Resembling a regular pressure bandage, it contains 
a marble situated to apply pressure to the LI-11 acupuncture point near the 
elbow. The band claims to be a natural and drug-free way to relieve the 
symptoms of hayfever and allergic rhinitis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftelfast-break-through-with-confidence%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fthe-future-in-hayfever-management%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd890008e8e4456466a5e120d49edd7dfd8f8cf5d%2F0_360_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20in%20hayfever%20management&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftelfast-break-through-with-confidence%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fthe-future-in-hayfever-management%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20in%20hayfever%20management&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftelfast-break-through-with-confidence%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fthe-future-in-hayfever-management%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd890008e8e4456466a5e120d49edd7dfd8f8cf5d%2F0_360_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 The ever-present honey bee in the Lavender - Provence France. Photograph: 
Alamy Stock Photo 
Further research is in the wind

As hayfever becomes more prevalent globally, so too are efforts to discover 
causes and improve management. Researchers have found that air concentrations 
of the highly allergenic ragweed pollen could quadruple in Europe by 2050 
because global warming is allowing the plant to grow in regions that were 
previously unfavourable while also extending its season.

In Australia, scientists are establishing a national pollen monitoring program 
<http://www.australianpollen.com.au/> to enable accurate daily forecasting of 
local pollen counts.

“Allergic rhinitis is one of the most common allergic conditions in 
Australia”, says Dr Janet Davies[5], Deputy Director of the Lung and Allergy 
Research Centre at The University of Queensland.

“The Australian Pollen Allergen Partnership (APAP) is working towards 
providing reliable, current pollen count information to patients and doctors 
through its website, together with patient education material and 
evidence-based guidelines on pollen allergen exposure risks in different 
locations,” Davies says.

This is all great work, but don’t leave everything up to the scientists. Do 
your own research into what allergens affect you, when they are likely to occur 
and what remedies work for you; and next time you feel the tickle of a sneeze 
coming on, check the pollen count to be prepared.

Hayfever Management CHCANZ.CFEX.16.08.0750

[1] U.S. National Library of Medicine (
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/patientinstructions/000404.htm 
<https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/patientinstructions/000404.htm>)

[2] Archives of Allergy & Immunology (
https://www.karger.com/Article/Abstract/360734 
<https://www.karger.com/Article/Abstract/360734>)

[3] U.S. National Library of Medicine (
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2218338/ 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2218338/>) and American Academy of 
Allergy Asthma and Immunology (
https://www.aaaai.org/conditions-and-treatments/library/allergy-library/sublingual-immunotherapy-for-allergic-rhinitis
 
<https://www.aaaai.org/conditions-and-treatments/library/allergy-library/sublingual-immunotherapy-for-allergic-rhinitis>
)

 [4] EFA European Federation of Allergy and Airways Diseases Patients’ 
Associations
http://www.efanet.org/resources/library/2728-atopica-results-the-air-concentrations-of-allergenic-ragweed-pollen-could-quadruple-in-europe-by-2050
 
<http://www.efanet.org/resources/library/2728-atopica-results-the-air-concentrations-of-allergenic-ragweed-pollen-could-quadruple-in-europe-by-2050>

[5] The Australian Pollen Allergen Partnership 
http://australianpollen.com.au/index.php/press-releases 
<http://australianpollen.com.au/index.php/press-releases>
 