
Online merchants are now rushing to open physical stores, as the ability of 
customers to touch and feel products becomes the latest competitive 
differentiator in a world where consumers are now utterly spoilt for choice.

Earlier this year, online giant Amazon opened its first physical store in 
Seattle’s University Village, YouTube opened its first ‘Creator Store’ in 
London and popular online menswear store Bonobos opened 10 stores this year.

At the same time, traditional businesses are scrambling to build out their 
online presence. In Australia, several established brands have substantially 
amped up their digital presence, including book retailer Dymocks and leading 
supermarket chains Coles and Woolworths, while major Australian banks have also 
invested heavily in growing their online channels as new digital models disrupt 
their long-held market dominance.

Lee Hawksley, Senior VP and GM of Salesforce Marketing Cloud JAPAC, said the 
bricks-and-mortar store is still the most important point of contact for any 
business that has one. And it might surprise many to learn that online sales 
globally account for just 10 percent of all consumer buying, with the 
proportion more like seven percent in Australia.

Yet with online trade set to continue growing its share of the bigger pie, the 
hybrid retail model is emerging as the gold standard for delivering a truly 
great customer-centric experience that keeps people coming back.

“There is an expectation retailers will know exactly who a customer is at 
every contact point, be that in physical stores, or online at any time and via 
any device,” Hawksley says. “Customers want experiences that are relevant and 
frictionless.”

Customers want experiences that are relevant and frictionless.
Lee Hawksley, Senior VP and GM of Salesforce Marketing Cloud JAPAC 
Pure online players now have new and promising opportunities to build more 
personalised and meaningful relationships with their customers. They also have 
the advantage of having amassed rich reservoirs of customer data to further 
hone their messages and deliver more targeted and responsive communications 
in-store.

Meanwhile, traditional businesses are looking outwards to entirely new markets 
and new customers. Tapping into digital channels, including social media, also 
opens doors to establish new connections and collect market data to then feed 
back into improving both online and in-store experiences.

Known as the ‘unified customer experience’, this strategy is centred around 
being able to identify the customer and access important data about them at 
every interaction, via any channel.

In its essence, offering a unified customer experience means breaking down 
silos and harnessing data to ensure that each and every customer has a 
consistent experience across every touch point they have with a business.

This means more than just ensuring all communications with customers have the 
same tone and style. It also means using data about a customer’s demographics, 
preferences and order history to tailor their customer experience, regardless 
of whether their transaction is happening in the physical world or online.

And online means wherever the customer happens to be. Salesforce’s Empowered 
Shoppers Report found very high levels of smartphone ownership among Australian 
shoppers, at 78 percent of Baby Boomers, 89 percent of Gen Xers and 98 percent 
of Millennials.

It also found 33 percent of shoppers saw the inability of merchants to support 
mobile interactions as reason enough to switch brands. And that proportion is 
only going to get larger as mobile devices assume a greater role in our lives.

Meanwhile, in-store interactive touch screens, either on fixed digital kiosks 
or portable tablets, are becoming more commonplace, especially in retail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-marriage-of-clicks-and-bricks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93757294a04b4cb038b195c30786dc27ed9e1f06%2F0_0_5130_3316%2F5130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20marriage%20of%20clicks%20and%20bricks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-marriage-of-clicks-and-bricks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20marriage%20of%20clicks%20and%20bricks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsalesforce-the-unfair-advantage%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-marriage-of-clicks-and-bricks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93757294a04b4cb038b195c30786dc27ed9e1f06%2F0_0_5130_3316%2F5130.jpg>
 Meanwhile, in-store interactive touch screens, either on fixed digital kiosks 
or portable tablets, are becoming more commonplace, especially in retail. 
Photograph: Ariel Skelley/Getty Images/Blend Images 
Tablets are being used to help retail customers find the right fit. For 
instance, some retailers are experimenting with 3D body scanners that collect 
and process large numbers of data points to create precise images. Then there 
are applications being used by grocery stores whereby tablets attached to 
shopping carts detect RFID (radio frequency identification) tags on products, 
triggering messages such as recipes related to a particular food item.

Digital screens are also being integrated with technologies like QR codes, or 
near-field communication (NFC) for immediate access to information. 
Smartphone-coded tags let shoppers scan a coded tag on an item of clothing with 
a smartphone, then use the device to select colour and size, which then 
triggers an automated system to send the item directly to the customers’ change 
room.

Retailers in the US are also experimenting with digitally connected 
interactive hangers. With this technology, the simple act of a shopper picking 
a hanger off the rack can trigger preprogrammed visual media on nearby screens, 
or change the lighting and background music in a store.

Augmented and virtual reality technologies are also looming large on the 
horizon. Both have potential to let customers view different products, colours 
and sizes from multiple perspectives and with information overlayed, while 
potentially sharing that information with friends – or colleagues – via social 
media.

Combined, these trends mean that old fears about digital retailing supplanting 
bricks and mortar stores are misplaced. Rather than developing independently, 
the two spheres are beginning to trace a similar arc, en route to delivering 
unified customer experiences.

Smarter, faster, brighter: business in an AI world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/salesforce-the-unfair-advantage/2016/oct/13/smarter-faster-brighter-business-in-an-ai-world>
For how this trajectory plays out, take Nordstrom, one of the oldest retailers 
in the US. The upscale fashion chain has been long-renowned for the peerless 
customer service at its stores but has also begun taking its customer cues from 
online as well.

Nordstrom is one of the most followed brands on Pinterest, and has used that 
following to bring a more cohesive link between the digital and physical for 
its customers.

For instance, each week Nordstrom staff will analyse which items from their 
online store are getting the most interactions, and add these to their main 
Pinterest board. They’ll also use Pinterest data to inform everything their 
stock-ordering and marketing decisions.

But the link goes further than that, as Nordstrom has also begun bring 
Pinterest to life in its stores. With the aid of a specially developed app, 
in-store salespeople are able to get an instant look at what products are 
trending most strongly, and attach signs telling customers what items are the 
‘Top Pinned’ ones and ensuring they are prominently displayed.

Through initiatives like this, Nordstrom has helped ensure effortless 
transitions between the digital and physical world for its customers.

That’s the goal for business looking to thrive astride both spheres. Neither 
needs to be competition for the other; instead, each can open up new 
opportunities to better understand and delight customers.

Learn how to ensure the very best customer experience each and every single 
time <https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/312160040;139916876;c>
 