
Man Repeller <http://www.manrepeller.com/>, a fashion blog by the American 
writerLeandra Medine 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/24/realestate/leandra-medine-man-repeller.html?_r=0>
, has become one of the most influential industry voices since it launched five 
years ago. A Man Repeller, Medine explains on the site, is “she who outfits 
herself in a sartorially offensive mode that may result in repelling members of 
the opposite sex. Such garments include but are not limited toharem pants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/apr/08/fashion-crotch>, boyfriend 
jeans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/jan/26/-sp-girlfriend-dressing-how-the-boys-borrowed-from-the-girls>
,overalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/18/gap-revives-the-overalls>, 
shoulder pads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/may/13/should-pads-fashion>, 
full-length jumpsuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/jul/27/jumpsuits-to-suit-everyone-in-pictures>
, jewelry that resembles violent weaponry and clogs.” The phrase has become a 
buzzword during a period when taking delight in clothes with a cheerful 
disregard for the male gaze has become an increasingly mainstream fashion 
position: see, the enduring and unexpectedly widespread popularity of dungarees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fman-repeller-look-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0d87314d532ee57663fca00a9a47ed208e383fc%2F0_155_2813_3959%2F2813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20'Man%20Repeller'%20look%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Milan%20turned%20its%20back%20on%20sexiness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fman-repeller-look-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%27Man%20Repeller%27%20look%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Milan%20turned%20its%20back%20on%20sexiness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fman-repeller-look-milan-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0d87314d532ee57663fca00a9a47ed208e383fc%2F0_155_2813_3959%2F2813.jpg>
 Gucci, Milan fashion week, A/W 2016. Photograph: SIPA/Rex/Shutterstock 
And now, finally, the unthinkable: “man repelling” has stormed Milan. Milan 
fashion week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/milan-fashion-week> has long 
been the spiritual home of sex appeal – which sounds like a mixed metaphor, but 
actually sort of isn’t if you have experienced the transcendental glory that is 
a supermodel on a raised catwalk at Versace – and has stayed as true to its 
principles as Anna Wintour has to her bob and sunglasses. Prada’s strange 
colours and Marni’s balloon shapes have long been but a diverting sideshow to a 
contest in which being a contender ultimately means being hot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fman-repeller-look-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e51567ed6395f7cc58795be6e0b56f60611f5a%2F205_124_2586_4002%2F2586.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20'Man%20Repeller'%20look%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Milan%20turned%20its%20back%20on%20sexiness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fman-repeller-look-milan-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%27Man%20Repeller%27%20look%20%E2%80%93%20how%20Milan%20turned%20its%20back%20on%20sexiness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fman-repeller-look-milan-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48e51567ed6395f7cc58795be6e0b56f60611f5a%2F205_124_2586_4002%2F2586.jpg>
 Fendi, Milan fashion week, A/W 2016. Photograph: SIPA/Rex/Shutterstock 
The tables have been turned by Gucci. The label that once flirted with a porn 
aesthetic – remember the advert where model Carmen Kass had theGucci logo 
shaved into her pubic hair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/jan/15/pressandpublishing.advertising>? 
– is now channelling Renaissance princesses, and the French philosophers Gilles 
Deleuze and Félix Guattari. On the catwalk, hemlines are mostly long, and where 
the dress is short it tends to come with long sleeve and tights from the 
oddball school (canary yellow, duck egg blue). The shockwaves of this 
about-turn reverberated throughout the city, this week. At Fendi, the home of 
trophy-mistress fur coats, this season’s mink has been doodled on with flowers 
and stripes, and is worn with a dressing-gown belt. At Maxmara, boiled-wool 
textures and oversized patch pockets make the models look practical, 
work-ready, rather than decorative. Versace is still leggy, but now 
businesslike, in boxily cut two-pieces, and the thin black elastic hair bands 
made the supermodels look more like sportsmen than cheerleaders. Even the 
corset – a totem of clothes as a tool for turning women into sirens – was 
debunked at Prada, divested of its power when worn loosely-laced over a woollen 
coat.

Milan fashion week autumn/winter 2016: the key shows – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/feb/28/milan-fashion-week-autumnwinter-2016-the-key-shows-in-pictures>
Miuccia Prada said her collection was a meditation on the history of women, 
and Donatella talked up her “strong woman” muse – but really, this trend may 
have less to do with gender politics than fashion-industry politics. Faced with 
the rise of see-now-buy-now fashion, Milan is digging in its heels and 
insisting that it will continue to show clothes six months before they go on 
sale. A shift from fashion that plays on basic instincts towards clothes that 
have a more thoughtful appeal and a more practical application follows 
naturally from there. Molto sexy? Only as long as sex is what sells, it turns 
out.
 