
STOREY BACK IN THE SADDLE

After three gold medals in Rio took her total to 14, making her the most 
successful Paralympian of the modern era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/sarah-storey-megan-giglia-paralympics-gold>
, Sarah Storey returns to the track in the Revolution Cycling Champions League. 
She took the C5 individual pursuit, the road time trial and the C4-5 road race 
this summer and makes her first appearance since then at the National Cycling 
Centre in Manchester in the series that pits members of the world’s biggest 
WorldTour road teams against established track champions. It takes place on 
Friday and Saturday (the latter live on Eurosport, 6.30pm) and also competing 
are Amalie Dideriksen, the World Road Race Champion and Great Britain’s Emily 
Kay who won gold and silver in the Omnium at recent UCI World Cup events.

Sarah Storey makes history on golden day of Paralympics cycling for Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/sarah-storey-megan-giglia-paralympics-gold>
ENGLAND INTERVIEW

Best suit pressed, Gareth Southgate puts his case to be the next England 
manager on Monday. Southgate, who has been in charge for four games now, will 
be interviewed at St George’s Park by a panel that will include the FA chair 
Greg Clarke, Martin Glenn, the chief executive, technical director Dan 
Ashworth, League Managers’ Association chairman Howard Wilkinson and former 
England defender Graeme Le Saux. Southgate, who has victories against Malta and 
Scotland a draw with Slovenia under his belt in England’s world cup qualifiers 
that has put them top of the group and secureda 2-2 draw with Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/16/gareth-southgate-relishes-tough-test-after-england-draw-against-spain-video>
 last week, is currently the the only candidate scheduled to be interviewed and 
the final decisi on will be made by Clarke, Glenn and Ashworth.

BOOK OF THE YEAR

The William Hill Sports Book of the Year award will be made on Thursday from 
the shortlist of seven that has attracted considerable praise. Included in the 
competition for the £28,000 prize are Diana Nyad’s memoir of her remarkable 
swimming career - at 64-years-old she became the first person to swim the 100 
miles between Havana, Cuba and the coast of Florida without a shark cage –Find 
a Way and Rick Broadbent’s fascinating examination of the life of Olympic great 
Emil Zátopek,Endurance.

DAVIS CUP DECIDER 

Having knocked out Great Britain in the semi-finals Argentina are looking to 
make history by winning the Davis Cup against Croatia in Zagreb (from Friday, 
Eurosport). They have never won the Cup, although they have reached the finals 
four times. Croatia, the champions from 2005 have still yet to beat Argentina 
in the competition and there will be huge weight on the shoulders ofUS Open 
champion Marin Cilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/09/marin-cilic-kei-nishikori-us-open-final-2014>
 and Olympic silver medal winner Juan Martin Del Potro, whose victory over Andy 
Murray was so crucial in the semis.

F1 FACE-OFF

Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg will go head to head for the title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-brazilian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-rain>
 at the final round in Abu Dhabi next weekend and the advantage lies firmly 
with the German. With 23 wins he is the most successful driver never to have 
taken the title and a podium finish will seal it, regardless of where Hamilton 
finishes, so staying out of trouble will be his goal at all costs. For which 
set up and qualifying will be key. Friday and Saturday’s sessions (both Sky 
Sports) then, may well yet be the most important thus far of the entire season.
 