
Today’s announcement of this year’s increase in the living wage 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37820846> – to £9.75 an hour in London 
(previously £9.40) and £8.45 in the rest of the UK (£8.25) – will help the 
growing numbers benefiting from the fair pay benchmark. For a full-time worker 
it amounts to earning an extra £5,000 a year in the capital, and nearly £2,500 
elsewhere, compared with a person on the government’s legal wage-floor (£7.20). 
That’s a big, life-changing difference.

I’m paying my staff a real living wage – not George Osborne’s version | Martin 
Whitlock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/10/george-osborne-living-wage>
It’s a difference, though, that has been partially obscured, not least in the 
eyes of the media, by the recent rebranding of the minimum wage – reincarnated 
as the “national living wage <https://www.livingwage.gov.uk/>”. Many assumed 
that the ensuing terminological muddle would result in the demise of the 
voluntary (real) living wage, in a case of death by imitation.

Well, it hasn’t worked out that way. The number of living wage employers has 
doubled since George Osborne first announced his revamping of the minimum wage. 
That’s a tribute to the employers and campaigners involved. But we need to keep 
this success in perspective: 6 million workers get paid less than the benchmark.

Why, though, are ever more companies signing up? Polls of employers reveal a 
mix of motives. For some, committing to the living wage is a symbolic act that 
helps make good on standard corporate mantras about the workforce being a 
prized asset. Others highlight the desire to aim higher than merely avoiding 
breaking the law. And, of course, many are simply attracted by the reputational 
halo-effect that surrounds the living wage. All are welcome.

Yet something else is going on too. For a growing number of employers it is 
the start of a wider shift in their business model: away from viewing workers 
as a cheap and disposable commodity, and towards one which sees them as a 
resource that needs to be invested in. An unlikely example is the rethink
underway at Walmart 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/upshot/how-did-walmart-get-cleaner-stores-and-higher-sales-it-paid-its-people-more.html?_r=1>
, the most iconic low-paying employer in the US. Its management eventually came 
to realise that acting on declining sales, dirty stores and disappearing 
customers required a motivated workforce. Pay levels were raised from 
rock-bottom, training boosted and predictability of working hours increased. 
It’s still early days, but customer satisfaction and sales have both risen too.

It’s a tale with echoes in the UK. When Ikea decided to embrace the real 
living wage <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-33590439> – resulting in a 
pay-rise for thousands of workers – it did so as part of a wider commitment to 
hours-security and workforce training. Likewise when the small but rapidly 
growing craft breweryBrewDog took the same step 
<https://www.brewdog.com/lowdown/blog/brewdog-is-now-a-living-wage-employer>, 
not only did two-thirds of the staff get a pay rise but zero-hour contracts 
were ditched as well. The result? Staff turnover plummeted and employee 
satisfaction has soared.

The scale of the change that some employers are embarking upon, together with 
the living wage’s greater coverage, brings with it new responsibility. Now, 
more than ever, it needs to be – and be seen to be – a robust and credible 
benchmark.

That’s why the Living Wage Commission 
<http://www.livingwage.org.uk/living-wage-commission>, created to oversee the 
rates, has reviewed theunderlying methodology 
<http://www.livingwage.org.uk/calculation> and the data on which it relies. Its 
view is that the benchmark must, above all else, tell employers and employees 
the minimum that needs to be paid if households are typically to reach an 
acceptable, if modest, standard of living.

The calculation underpinning the living wage may be complicated but the moral 
intuition behind it is not

This means it must be rooted in an assessment of the cost of living as 
determined by the price of a basket of goods and services that the public 
itself deems to be essential. Consequently the contrasting methodologies that 
hitherto set the living wage rates in London and the rest of the UK have been 
aligned. When the price of this basket goes up, upward pressure on the living 
wage results. The corollary is that the living wage won’t be driven by other 
factors that people may be concerned about, such as wider trends in earnings or 
inequality.

These technical but vital improvements occur at a time when the living wage 
campaign faces new challenges and opportunities. Over the coming year a spike 
in inflation, expected slower growth and Brexit uncertainty may make potential 
employers more cautious. Yet to dwell on the problems is to misjudge the 
moment. A diverse set of factors – concern over the “left behind” following the 
Brexit vote; a surge in unease about conditions at work following the Sports 
Direct scandal; the stunning success of theFight for $15 movement 
<http://fightfor15.org/> across America; and, just possibly, the change in 
personnel in No 10 – suggest the campaign for fair pay may be moving with the 
tide.

This isn’t vain hope. Whether it’s the bold decision of the Scottish 
government to pay all care workers the living wage 
<http://www.unison-scotland.org/2016/09/30/unison-welcomes-introduction-of-scottish-living-wage-for-social-care/>
, or that by the London mayor to expedite itscoverage to all Transport for 
London’s sub-contractors 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/mayor/tube-cleaning-and-security-staff-paid-less-than-london-living-wage-a3372951.html>
, there is undoubtedly momentum. Across England a new generation of city mayors 
are about to be elected on a hazy if heartfelt agenda of “shared growth”. They, 
too, will need to be champions of fair pay.

The calculation underpinning the living wage may be complicated but the moral 
intuition behind it is not. Building an economy that works for all requires 
reinforcing change on all manner of things from the welfare state to the fiscal 
stance. But policy alone won’t suffice. We also need to create a shared civic 
norm about what constitutes decent pay in the 21st century. On this, progress 
is being made.
 