
It’s Saturday night at Le Comédia theatre in central Paris and I’m staring at 
the stage through square plastic glasses. While the actors in the musical 
Mistinguett, Reine des Années Folles sing boisterously in French, the words 
appear simultaneously in English on a small screen in the right-hand lens. 
Though it’s not the same as watching the show unfettered, I find it 
surprisingly easy to follow the translated dialogue along with the action.

For visitors to the city who like the theatre but don’t speak French, new 
augmented-reality glasses, launched this week byTheatre in Paris 
<http://www.theatreinparis.com/whats-on.html>, open up the choice of evening 
entertainment, and there are plans to introduce them at a variety of shows next 
year.

And while theatre attendance in the French capital is sharply down following 
November’s terrorist attacks,Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>
 in Paris’s Christophe Plotard decided to go ahead with the planned launch. 
“The glasses are a world first and we felt the show must go on – we are 
resilient,” he said. “This technology is about uniting cultures through the 
arts – a way to get to know another culture.”

The glasses, designed by French tech company Optinvent and similar in look to 
Google Glass <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-glass> but with a 
larger screen and longer battery life, follow on from the company’s 
introduction of “surtitling” (translations shown above the stage or screen) for 
a selection of French plays and musicals last year.

“The aim was to give tourists and other non-native speakers access to more 
live entertainment beyond opera, and it has been a great success,” said 
Plotard. “The glasses are a further step. There’s no limit to the number of 
languages the show can be translated into: it’s up to the producer. We’ve had 
interest from everywhere, from Taiwan to the UK. They’re useful for the 
hearing-impaired, too, and for following the words in musicals in your own 
language.”

While the glasses (currently provided free) are much less distracting than 
surtitles, the battery-powered Wi-Fi equipment is still quite heavy and cannot 
be worn with normal glasses. But technology moves fast, and a lighter, wider 
model that can be used with any eyewear will launch next year.

Perhaps it marks the future of theatre for travellers, with language no longer 
a barrier. In a recent report commissioned by lastminute.com, experts predicted 
that technology of all kinds will be integrated further into performances, from 
projections to holograms, with audiences even directing the action on stage 
using real-time social media.

Plotard says the rise of immersive plays, such as Punchdrunk’s phenomenally 
popularSleep No More 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/31/sleep-no-more-avant-garde-theatre-new-york>
 in New York andThe Drowned Man in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/jul/19/punchrunk-hype-drowned-man-lyn-gardner>
, where the audience wanders among the actors, makes the potential obvious: 
“There are definitely lots of possibilities for using smartphone, smartwatch or 
smartglasses features in theatre around the world – it is really exciting.”

• Find and book shows offer surtitling and glasses at theatreinparis.com 
<http://www.theatreinparis.com/whats-on.html> 
 