
David Blanchflower, professor of economics at Dartmouth College, New 
Hampshire, and former member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee 
(MPC) from June 2006 to May 2009

The UK economy is slowing, there is no doubt about it. The incoming data so 
far though are mixed as it is early days post the Brexit vote. The PMIs were 
quite strong, suggesting GDP growth isn’t set to slow sharply in the fourth 
quarter of 2016 but 2017 is likely a different matter.Retail sales were also 
pretty good. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/uk-retail-sales-halloween-brexit-inflation>
Despite the boost from the fall in sterling, Britain’s trade deficit with the 
rest of the world widened unexpectedly in September. Inflation surprised to the 
downside but major price rises look to be in the pipeline as factory gate 
prices increased 0.6% in October compared with an increase of 0.3% in September.

The UK claimant count rose by 10,000 in October, while average weekly earnings 
grew by £1 between April and September. XPertHR, the pay consultants, report 
that the median private-sector pay award stood at 2% in the year to 31 August 
2016, unchanged from that recorded 12 months previously. Private sector 
employers are predicting a median 2% pay award in the year to 31 August 2017. 
The MPC thinks 3.75% is on the horizon shortly.


The Brexit economy: remarkable resilience as spectre of inflation looms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/the-brexit-economy-remarkable-resilience-as-spectre-of-inflation-looms>
There is every probability that the Office for Budget Responsibility will 
suggest this week that the public finances are in a terrible mess due to the 
weakening outlook for the economy. There is some suggestion that there is 
little room for a fiscal boost to the economy. It is time to condemn austerity 
into the dustbin of history. It is the unnecessary hang-up with debts and 
deficits that has got us into this fine populist mess in the first place.

In a major macro error in 2010, George Osborne slashed £30bn from public 
investment. NowPhilip Hammond looks set to respond to the slowing economy with 
a trifling £1.3bn on infrastructure and roads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/autumn-statement-safeguard-public-investment-say-experts>
. To put this in context, the UK has 29,145 miles of main roads 2,173 miles of 
motorways and 213,750 miles of paved roads so that should cover the cost of 
filling in about one pothole a mile. Or put another way, it is equivalent to 
about a fifth of the cost of refurbishing the Houses of Parliament and 
Buckingham Palace.

Too little too late as ever. Oh dear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuk-economy-economists-brexit-watch-bank-of-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff7d9893a135414eb98bdc66f495f496de2b6be9%2F1421_0_6273_3766%2F6273.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%20economy%20is%20slowing%20%E2%80%93%20experts%20debate%20the%20Brexit%20watch%20data&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuk-economy-economists-brexit-watch-bank-of-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%20economy%20is%20slowing%20%E2%80%93%20experts%20debate%20the%20Brexit%20watch%20data&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuk-economy-economists-brexit-watch-bank-of-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff7d9893a135414eb98bdc66f495f496de2b6be9%2F1421_0_6273_3766%2F6273.jpg>
 ‘Philip Hammond looks set to respond to the slowing economy with a trifling 
£1.3bn on infrastructure and roads’ – David Blanchflower Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
Andrew Sentance, senior economic adviser at the consultancy PwC and former 
member of the Bank’s MPC from October 2006 to May 2011

The picture of the UK economy since the Brexit vote is that consumer spending 
and services activity are supporting growth and employment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/brexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch>
. We still don’t have any hard data on the investment side of the economy – but 
even when we do it may be several quarters before the impact of post-Brexit 
uncertainty shows up in the level of capital spending.

GDP held up in the third quarter better than expected and the early data for 
the current quarter – on retail sales and the purchasing managers’ survey of 
services activity – has been positive. The unemployment rate has continued to 
fall, though the rate of growth of new job creation appears to be slowing.


One surprise this month was a drop in the inflation rate, from 1% to 0.9%. But 
it is clear from the measure of input prices paid by manufacturers that a wave 
of inflation is coming through the pipeline driven by a weaker pound. We should 
therefore still expect to see inflation at around 3% or just below by the end 
of next year. That will squeeze real consumer spending growth, adding to the 
slowdown generated by uncertainty affecting investment plans.

PwC’s updated forecast is for GDP to rise by just 1.2% next year – about half 
the growth rate over the past 12 months. The EU referendum vote seems likely to 
create a longer-term drag on economic activity rather than a short sharp shock.

The chancellor should be focusing on long-term priorities in his autumn 
statement this week – relieving the pressure in the housing market by 
supporting supply, boosting transport investment, helping smaller firms, tax 
reform and investment in skills. Business should view an autumn statement 
focused on long-term priorities positively and this is the best way to support 
business confidence in the face of Brexit uncertainty.
 