
Nearly eight years ago, Barack Obama stepped into the White House, promising 
to elevate US development efforts to unprecedented heights.

 This week, with just months of his term left, President Obama will host the 
first White House summit on global development. It will give him a chance to 
analyse progress, including his signature initiatives such asFeed the Future  
<https://www.feedthefuture.gov/>and Power Africa 
<https://www.usaid.gov/powerafrica>. 

But how will history judge Obama’s legacy on the advancement of women and 
girls within his global development agenda?

Under Obama, US foreign policy and assistance has intentionally sought to 
bring women and girls from the margins of society to the centre of development 
efforts. This administration can claim many victories in this regard. It 
revived aWhite House council on women and girls 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/cwg> – with representatives from 
each department and major agency within the administration – and appointed a 
global ambassador to champion women’s rights. It penned strategies to protect 
women from violence or, better still, prevent violence in the first place; to 
ensure women’s rights are not traded away at peace talks; and to educate and 
empower girls, ending harmful practices such as child marriage and female 
genital mutilation.

As we look ahead to the next administration, will these efforts become 
engrained in US foreign policy, or will they be a forgotten footnote of Obama’s 
presidency?

The global development summit 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/07/08/statement-national-security-advisor-susan-e-rice-white-house-summit>
 on Wednesday provides a moment to take stock of success and continue our 
commitments to navigating the global forces that are transforming our world.

On Ghana's cocoa farms, Fairtrade is not yet working for women | Roy 
Maconachie and Elizabeth Fortin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/11/ghana-cocoa-farms-fairtrade-not-yet-working-for-women>
The first of these is climate change. As average global temperatures rise, 
increasing droughts and floods are puttingpressure on agricultural production 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/agriculture/publication/shaping-a-climate-smart-global-food-system>
. For small-scale producers, many of whom are women, access to market 
information, as well as financial inclusion, will be increasingly important.

In the home, climate change will put pressure on water supply, requiring women 
and girls to spend more time collecting water 
<http://water.org/water-crisis/women-children-facts/> – time that could be 
otherwise spent on education or income generation or leisure. Climate change 
programmes that do not specifically address women’s needs or contributions will 
have limited success – and US climate policy is silent on gender. That will 
have to change if the US, as a major development actor, is to respond 
effectively to this global threat and prevent greater environmental damage and 
social injustice.

The second force is urbanisation, as many parts of the world are experiencing 
increasing migration 
<http://www.who.int/gho/urban_health/situation_trends/urban_population_growth_text/en/>
 from villages to cities. Urbanisation is bringing young women, single and in 
families, to growing urban centres for employment opportunities. However, these 
women often live in informal settlements with limited infrastructure – such as 
water, sewerage, electricity and schools, social services, opportunities for 
social networking and involvement in local governance. Taken together, this can 
put women’s health, well-being and safety at risk.

Committing to safe spaces and movement for women and vulnerable populations is 
rightly included in the UN’ssustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, and the US has supported UN Women’sSafe Cities initiative 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/ending-violence-against-women/creating-safe-public-spaces>
 to reduce violence in urban settings. The US must prioritise gender-equitable 
representation in its approach to urban planning or governance. If women were 
explicitly included in planning housing and local services, how different 
cities of the future might be.

From skyrises to traffic jams: our densely populated planet – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/jun/28/from-skyrises-to-traffic-jams-our-densely-populated-planet-in-pictures>
And finally, conflict and migration. Women in displaced populations – 
especially adolescent girls – too often lack access to shelter and health 
services, and are vulnerable to sexual violence and trafficking, on top of 
violence experienced in conflict. Among the Syrian refugee population, child 
marriage hasincreased 
<http://www.unicef.org/mena/UNICEFJordan_EarlyMarriageStudy2014(1).pdf> from 
12% to 32% in only three years in neighbouring Jordan.

In Nigeria and Iraq <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-30573385>, 
extremists have taken girls as sexual slaves, and under current interpretation 
of the Helms amendment, theadministration will not authorise safe abortion 
services <http://highline.huffingtonpost.com/articles/en/kenya-abortion/> for 
girls and women who have been raped or whose lives are medically in danger. 
Assessment is needed on how protracted displacement might further contribute to 
these challenges. What resources are needed to support them and ensure their 
futures are not lost?

Over his two terms, Obama has taken important steps to integrate gender in his 
development agenda, and that’s a real accomplishment. There has been an 
increased understanding that if we are to eradicate poverty, women and girls 
must be at the centre of our efforts. The summit provides an opportunity to 
reflect upon the enduring global challenges that lie ahead and how to best 
prepare for them. The next administration must build on these reforms to ensure 
an even stronger, more evidence-based and comprehensive approach to ensuring 
women and girls are full partners in finding solutions to global challenges.

• Sarah Degnan Kambou is president of the International Center for Research on 
Women
 