
“Silence, s’il vous plait,” the young court usher said, and an immediate hush 
descended on the room. “All rise, the court is now in session,” he ordered, and 
the public stood abruptly as the judge and chief investigator swept into the 
court in black robes.

Part war crimes trial, part performance art: tribunal investigates Congo 
conflict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/29/democratic-republic-congo-citizen-tribunal-milo-rau>
A man with a clapper board appeared and a voice from stage left said: “Das 
Kongo tribunal, Session 3. Action!”

The smack of the clapper board reminded the audience that they were not, in 
fact, in a court room, but on a set. The voice was that of Milo Rau, a Swiss 
director who with his company, theInternational Institute of Political Murder 
<http://international-institute.de/>, has brought the Congo conflict right into 
the heart of Europe, in one of the most ambitious pieces of political theatre 
ever staged.

Held last weekend, Rau has set out to create an “unvarnished portrait” of the 
war in Congo, which he believesis one of the most extensive economic conflicts 
in human history <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/may/16/congo>, 
estimated to have claimed anything between five and seven million lives in 
hundreds of massacres over the past 20 years, all of which have gone unpunished.

The Berlin hearings followed three days of inquiry in the town of Bukavu in 
DRC last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/29/democratic-republic-congo-citizen-tribunal-milo-rau>
, which brought former rebels face-to-face with victims of massacres, 
government and opposition politicians, economists and philosophers, and 
examined the conflict’s origins and the reasons for its continuation.

“Why this war has continued to rage is no longer to do with ethnic antagonism, 
but commodities, like coltan, niobium, or cassiterite, which are seen as 
essential to our 21st century lives, and are to be found in abundance in the 
Democratic Republic of Congo,” Rau told the Guardian, ahead of the Berlin 
sessions.

“My impression is that everything and everyone from the immediate neighbours, 
the rebel organisations, the international mining companies, even the 
government and the NGOs, profit from the perpetual chaos. This is nothing but a 
war economy,” he said.

Over a period of more than 14 hours, the Berlin hearings investigated the 
responsibility of a range of actors in the conflict, including international 
corporations, the World Bank, the United Nations and NGOs, and of course, the 
governments, past and present, of Congo itself.

 Information flooded the audience in a mixture of French, German and English, 
and in the DRC a live ticker from the court room gave a minute by minute report 
for those followers who had been at the Bukavu event, according to Congolese 
diplomats in Berlin.
Eastern Congo map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/05/drcongo_eastern_conflict/giv-212778vuCMls0OyRr/>
Congo: service shop to the world

Foreign mining companies came under particular scrutiny in the tribunal, 
accused of taking advantage of the conditions of a failed state, allowing them 
to operate tax free; dismiss former workers; and relocate whole communities to 
inadequate sites, leaving residents without compensation – all with the alleged 
support of the World Bank.

One hundred years on, the people of Congo are still a victim of the 
exploitation of (Congo’s) riches and resources
Vital Kamerhe, DRC presidential candidate 
“Parts of the Congo became like a self-service shop,” Sylvestre Bisimwa, a 
Congolese lawyer and the chief investigator, told the tribunal. “Transnational 
plundering of major dimensions took place.” He gave the example of a village 
that was moved to an uninhabitable hillside by a mining company which had 
bought the gold mining rights fromformer president Mobutu Sese Seko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/10/where-concorde-once-flew-the-story-of-president-mobutus-african-versailles>
 – one of many thousands of examples, Bisimwa said, of how an international 
corporation simply moved in and taken over.

Bisimwa said that while many violations of the law had been perpetrated by 
corporations, none of the crimes had ever come to court. “It should actually be 
possible to fight these cases legally, but this has never happened in Congo,” 
he claimed.

Berlin was chosen as the stage for the second part of the tribunal because of 
the role it originally played in the 19th century rush by the colonialist 
empires to parcel out the continent between them, known as the “scramble for 
Africa 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/abolition/scramble_for_africa_article_01.shtml>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcongo-tribunal-berlin-milo-rau-political-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435676541025%2Fe4731783-7799-42cb-a34b-208d5ef30acc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20ambitious%20political%20theatre%20%E2%80%8Bever%20staged%3F%2014%20hours%20at%20the%20Congo%20Tribunal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcongo-tribunal-berlin-milo-rau-political-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20ambitious%20political%20theatre%20%E2%80%8Bever%20staged%3F%2014%20hours%20at%20the%20Congo%20Tribunal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcongo-tribunal-berlin-milo-rau-political-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435676541025%2Fe4731783-7799-42cb-a34b-208d5ef30acc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mila Rau and his team during filming in the DRC. A film of the project is due 
to be released in Autumn 2016. Photograph: The Congo Tribunal 
Set in the capital’s popular fringe theatre, the Sophiensaele, Vital Kamerhe, 
leading presidential candidate for the November 2016 elections, told the 
tribunal: “Berlin, you have been instrumental in shaping my fate.” A century 
ago, he said, it was ivory and rubber which saw corporations piling in to 
plunder his country. Now, interests have been transferred onto commodities such 
as coltan –used extensively in mobile technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/dec/25/congo-coltan> – deposits 
of which in Eastern Congo are greater than anywhere else in the world.

“One hundred years on, the people of Congo are still a victim of the 
exploitation of (Congo’s) riches and resources,” the politician said, in what 
was one of the more emotional speeches during the often dry and highly 
intellectual hearing.

The hearings have shown that the truth can come to light, and have given 
victims a chance to speak for the first time
Jean-Louis Gilissen, chief judge 
In the dock too were, perhaps surprisingly to some, many of the NGOs who have 
had a presence in Congo. Linda Polman, a Dutch journalist andone of the most 
vocal critics of international relief organisations 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/170929/ngo-republic-haiti> gave a searing 
critique of what she called the “humanitarian aid industry”, arguing that it 
was rarely accountable enough and too often shortsighted.

Aid workers and foreign soldiers too often lack local knowledge, language or 
cultural sensibilities, she said, citing in particular theso-called Blue 
Helmets of the UN <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/feb/17/usa.world>. 

She stressed it was time to: “consider aid as an industry, rather than the 
image we have of it as Mother Theresa,” and called on all organisations to sign 
up to a code of conduct.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcongo-tribunal-berlin-milo-rau-political-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435676683175%2F9bca85d9-950e-4dc1-b852-19c5253a632b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20ambitious%20political%20theatre%20%E2%80%8Bever%20staged%3F%2014%20hours%20at%20the%20Congo%20Tribunal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcongo-tribunal-berlin-milo-rau-political-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20ambitious%20political%20theatre%20%E2%80%8Bever%20staged%3F%2014%20hours%20at%20the%20Congo%20Tribunal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcongo-tribunal-berlin-milo-rau-political-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435676683175%2F9bca85d9-950e-4dc1-b852-19c5253a632b-1020x612.jpeg>
 The jury, left to right: Wolfgang Kaleck, Saran Kaba Jones, Harald Welzer, 
Marc-Antoine Vumilia Muhindo, Colette Braeckman and Saskia Sassen Photograph: P 
The jury agreed. Consisting of various figures from the world of law, civil 
rights, business and philosophy, it includedWolfgang Kaleck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/12/german-lawyer-europeans-prosecute-us-torture-officials>
, who represents thewhistleblower Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>, Marc-Antoine Vumilia 
Muhindo, a controversial former politician, and Dutch sociologist and leading 
globalisation critic,Saskia Sassen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/saskia-sassen>. 

While some jury members expressed their frustration at the limitations of the 
tribunal – which unlike a real trial will not lead to any prosecutions – the 
chief judge Jean-Louis Gilissen said having seen the effect of the Bukavu 
hearings on the participants, he would fully support the idea of turning the 
theatre trial into something more substantial.

Gilissen, who works as a counsel at the international criminal court where he 
has represented child soldiers in trials against Congolese militia, said that 
after sessions in Bukavu the participants “came together and were discussing 
the issues in a constructive way. It was amazing to see.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F131681175&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F131681175>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F131681175&media=>
 The Congo Tribunal – trailer 
Kamerhe said of the proceedings: “Both the Berlin and Bukavu hearings have 
shown that the truth can come to light, and they have given victims the chance 
to speak for the very first time, which is at the very least cathartic.

“We are happy that this has now been addressed in Berlin – that is a sign of 
hope for the Congolese that the world is listening. This should be continued.”

Milo Rau’s film The Congo Tribunal is due to be released in Autumn 2016
 