
Istanbul culture in five words

Sunny breakfast by the Bosphorus.

Sound of the city

Istanbul is steeped in music, whether you hear it crackling out of an old car 
radio, full volume in a nightclub or sung on the street. This busy city is 
enlivened by spontaneous street performances, particularly on the main 
thoroughfare of Istiklal Caddesi, where it’s not unusual to come across a group 
of young people dancing the ‘halay’ (ubiquitous folk dance) in a circle, joined 
by onlookers. This clip is of a group of traditional musicians performing late 
at night in Taksim Square.

Everyone’s tuning into …
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnDEGJn16M1s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnDEGJn16M1s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnDEGJn16M1s&media=>
Kurtlar Vadisi (Valley of the Wolves) is a soap opera about the Turkish mafia 
that some people love and others love to hate. Each 100-minute episode is full 
of improbably dramatic twists, and the show is so successful that its cast has 
included international stars like Sharon Stone and Andy Garcia.

What’s the big talking point?

The attempted rape and murder of Özgecan Aslan on 11 February spurred a huge 
movement on Twitter, where #Ozgecanaslan and #sendeanlat (“tell your story”) 
remained worldwide trends for several days; women shared stories of harassment 
and men marched in miniskirts to Taksim Square to support women’s rights.

What Istanbul does better than anywhere else

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrnvZiwF_cCY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrnvZiwF_cCY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrnvZiwF_cCY&media=>
LGBT culture: film, clubbing, the design industry and gay pride marches. 
Istanbul boasts a concentrated LGBT arts scene, attracting gay and trans 
dancers, artists and film-makers from across the country where they are much 
less free to express themselves. One stand-out example is Zenne, a film about a 
modern male belly dancer and his friends breaking free of social constraints.

The look on the street

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fistanbul-turkey-cultural-guide-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426257783087%2Fe0be5545-7135-413f-932f-b0a0738f3299-2060x1423.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20insider's%20cultural%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20'This%20city%20is%20steeped%20in%20music'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fistanbul-turkey-cultural-guide-music-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20insider%27s%20cultural%20guide%20to%20Istanbul%3A%20%27This%20city%20is%20steeped%20in%20music%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fistanbul-turkey-cultural-guide-music-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426257783087%2Fe0be5545-7135-413f-932f-b0a0738f3299-2060x1423.jpeg>
 Istanbul is full of bold dressers who make use of the many thrift and vintage 
shops Photograph: Özge Dursun 
Traditional Turkish culture is one of handing down clothes through the 
generations and this has become fashionable; the woman pictured here designs 
and makes her own clothes, sometimes matching them with choice items from her 
mother’s wardrobe of decades past.

Who’s top of the playlist?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr9Nmsko_FlM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr9Nmsko_FlM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr9Nmsko_FlM&media=>
The wild and wonderful Luxus <https://www.facebook.com/LuxusOrientalBlues> 
resists easy categorisation – the group defines its sound as Oriental Blues, 
but any single performance will zigzag between lilting Russian classics like 
Kalinka, to chilled-out Bob Marley via feverish Turkish jazz. The energy in 
their live performances is infectious.

Best current venue

The Mekan <http://www.themekan.com/> is a warren-like neoclassical building in 
downtown Istanbul which comes alive at night. Its name means, simply, “venue”. 
It is home to several performance spaces, one of which is the sole preserve of 
the Istanbul Lindy Hoppers, a group which holds regular swing dance nights and 
hosts international acts like the unashamedly retro Hornsgatan Ramblers. The 
Hoppers have a devoted following, putting paid to the tired myth that Turks 
avoid organised fun.



Best cultural Instagram account

Can Oba is the king of fusion cuisine in Istanbul. His restaurant is a tiny 
hole-in-the-wall near Sirkeci train station – despite the unpromising exterior, 
the food is spectacularly good, an imaginative blend of traditional Turkish 
fare and the European dishes which Oba mastered in his years on the continent. 
This account gives a peek into his constantly evolving menu.







Moment from history
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMqyEPqhkZr8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMqyEPqhkZr8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMqyEPqhkZr8&media=>
The art produced during the Gezi Park protests in June 2013. Impromptu dance 
and theatre performances in Taksim Square and endlessly creative street art and 
social media memes across the city encapsulated the witty, peaceful spirit of 
the time and constituted a cultural revolution. Davide Martello, an 
Italian-German musician, brought his piano to the square to perform for 
thousands of protesters.

Best street art

Urban Geode, a piece by celebrated local artist Leo Lunatic, who is more 
easily identified by his trademark panda all over the popular central district 
of Beyoğlu. This slightly darker work can be found in the old dockland area of 
Karaköy, on the corner of Tahsin Sokak and Karatauvuk Sokak.

From me
Alev Scott <http://www.twitter.com/AlevScott> is the author of Turkish 
Awakening: Behind the Scenes of Modern Turkey 
Five to follow

 * Babylon Lounge <https://twitter.com/Babylon> 

 * SALT <https://www.facebook.com/saltonline.tr> 

 * Cimkedi <https://instagram.com/cimkedi/–photos> 

 * Flört <https://soundcloud.com/sondek/fl-rt-sevmez-olayd-m> 
 * Istanbul Daily Secret <https://www.facebook.com/e.istanbul.dailysecret> 




 