
Royal TV: the dilemma of getting access to the Windsors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/07/royal-tv-the-dilemma-of-getting-access-to-the-windsors>
Inside a Portakabin near St Albans, Prince Harry and Pippa Middleton are 
making an exclusive royal announcement. “We’re shagging,” grins Pippa. 
“Openly,” smiles Harry. “Not in public, though!” Pippa clarifies. “No, it’s 
more your classic bed job,” chimes in Harry. “Although there was that one 
incident with her knees: lacerated, they were…”

This is the kind of conversation you find yourself listening to behind the 
scenes of Channel 4’s new six-part series The Windsors. It’s a spoof sitcom 
that turns the lives of our monarchical overlords into a Dallas-esque soap, 
with the help of a heftily talented ensemble cast (Harry Enfield as Prince 
Charles, Morgana Robinson as Pippa Middleton, W1A’s dim work experience lad 
Hugh Skinner as Prince William). It’s written by the team behind mid-00s 
sleb-parodying comedy series Star Stories. And it’s not exactly the most 
reverential treatment that the royal family’s ever had.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7GvHVCguMS0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7GvHVCguMS0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7GvHVCguMS0&media=>
The rehearsal I’m watching as I wander on to the Hertfordshire set features 
Prince Harry (played by Richard Goulding: JP’s brother Tomothy in Fresh Meat) 
attempting to marry the daughter of the Aussie prime minister, in a bid to get 
over his ill-advised attraction to Pippa. The Windsor family are standing in 
the Australian embassy, a comically shoddy wood-panelled affair, alongside an 
antipodean contingent dressed as if they’re attending a 1980s prom (leopardskin 
shirts, satin bow ties, jackets so loud they deserve an asbo). The 
bride-to-be’s choice of headwear is a white hat with dangling corks. The priest 
also has an alternative way of addressing Prince William’s younger brother: 
“Henry Charles Albert David Windsor,” he pronounces, “known as Shagger, Spliff 
Head, E Monster, Ginge Minge, Hair Pie Nosher, Adolf, Shit For Brains.”

“It’s about time someone had another pop at the royals,” says co-writer Bert 
Tyler-Moore. Presumably he means as a counterpoint to the fawning column inches 
lavished upon the monarchy? “Actually, it’s more that there are so many things 
like Peter Morgan’s The Queen, which feel like PR exercises. We wanted to bring 
a different flavour. Not with any agenda – we just thought: ‘This’ll be a funny 
idea.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c47051e9e24f4875cfbe99bd8cd39fd408f7c0b%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Windsors%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20of%20a%20right%20royal%20send-up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Windsors%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20of%20a%20right%20royal%20send-up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c47051e9e24f4875cfbe99bd8cd39fd408f7c0b%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Harry Enfield as Prince Charles. 
Given that the royals have been recast as national darlings since William and 
Kate started breeding, this seems a bold move. It’s a reminder that this isn’t 
the 1980s, when the royals’ popularity was so low that Spitting Image could 
savage them with impunity. Surely they have to be fairly sensitive about how 
far they go, particularly, as on Star Stories, Tyler-Moore and writing partner 
George Jeffrie caused a kerfuffle after alluding to Princess Diana’s fatal 
crash. “Actually, we would’ve included Princess Di in this show. We just 
couldn’t think of anything funny enough,” smiles Jeffrie. Frankly, I find this 
hard to believe.

The enduring social shorthand of Harry Enfield characters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/jul/27/enduring-social-shorthand-harry-enfield-characters>
As rehearsals go on, the show starts to make a little more sense. Louise Ford, 
who plays Kate Middleton, explains how her character is recast as a “Gypsy” 
thanks to the Duchess of Cambridge’s supposed normality (at least compared to 
the rest of the royals). Meanwhile, Camilla is reimagined as a scheming villain 
determined to usher in the Parker-Bowles dynasty. It’s the kind of ridiculous 
fictionalisation of public figures that has a rich comedy tradition in Britain 
(The Comic Strip, Stella Street and, of course, Star Stories). And it’s had a 
mini-resurgence in recent years, with BBC3’s warped gameshow Murder In 
Successville and Channel 4’s structured-reality comedy Lookalikes, while 
original trailblazers The Comic Strip Presents… returned earlier this year with 
the phone-hacking scandal spoof Red Top. But, most notably, it means that a 
show that’s mocking the royals is not really mocking the royals at all – it’s 
mocking the media’s portrayal of them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4cecb9d09659610aa3947aadcf8eea50e48ada1%2F0_14_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Windsors%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20of%20a%20right%20royal%20send-up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Windsors%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20of%20a%20right%20royal%20send-up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4cecb9d09659610aa3947aadcf8eea50e48ada1%2F0_14_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
 Haydn Gwynne as Camilla Parker-Bowles 
“Yeah, it takes [the royal family’s] public personas and takes an angle on 
those,” offers Ford. “That’s why we don’t need to worry about it feeling 
bullying or insulting.” Does it also mean that the cast didn’t need to worry 
about in-depth research for their roles? “Yeah, Harry only really has three 
characteristics in our show,” offers Goulding. “One: he’s a bit stupid. Two: he 
enjoys drink and parties. Three… actually, that’s probably it.” For Robinson, 
who has to play Pippa Middleton – a woman whose personality plays second fiddle 
to her buttocks in the public imagination – the lack of realism doesn’t strike 
a bum note. “If this was a drama rather than a comedy, I’d never have been 
cast,” grins the impressionist. “Not with the size of this arse.”

Real-life monarchy aside, it soon becomes obvious that there’s a king on set: 
Harry Enfield. His take on Prince Charles is a tour de force of deep-throated 
poshness. His co-stars flock around him, giggling fannishly at his quips. “When 
we’re filming, my inner monologue is just going: ‘Don’t look at Harry Enfield, 
don’t look atHarry Enfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/harry-enfield>,’” Goulding admits. 
“He’s so funny, I just crack up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d61c07b554c8acf03a3ff9b15201916da054e9e%2F0_180_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Windsors%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20of%20a%20right%20royal%20send-up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Windsors%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20of%20a%20right%20royal%20send-up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d61c07b554c8acf03a3ff9b15201916da054e9e%2F0_180_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
 Prince William (Hugh Skinner) and Kate Middleton (Louise Ford) 
Eyes appropriately averted from Enfield, the cast rehearse the wedding. Prince 
Harry proves unable to go through with the nuptials, and in a tender vignette 
tells his jilted bride he’ll “always have those [naked] pictures you texted”. 
“And I’ll always have your dick pics!” she replies before, naturally, holding 
up a photo of… wait a minute. Are they actually planning to show a snap of 
someone’s testicles masquerading as Harry’s danglies?

“We asked extras to take photos of their balls,” reveals The Windsors’ 
producer Izzy Mant. “We had a whole meeting to decide whose testicles were 
ginger enough to be Harry’s.”

High-brow humour this is not. But, despite a number of cast and crew comparing 
the show to Spitting Image, The Windsors doesn’t feel like satire: more a comic 
drama that makes the odd comment about monarchy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59fc3812ad773c17f8d4fb7ddde93fecee6ef98e%2F0_182_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Windsors%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20of%20a%20right%20royal%20send-up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Windsors%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20of%20a%20right%20royal%20send-up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fchannel-4-royal-family-sitcom-the-windsors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59fc3812ad773c17f8d4fb7ddde93fecee6ef98e%2F0_182_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
 Beatrice (Celeste Dring), Harry (Richard Goulding) and Eugenie (Ellie White) 
“The thing about Spitting Image is that it was a sketch show. It could be 
entirely spiteful,” says Jeffrie. “But we’ve got a whole half-hour plot line – 
we’ve had to include a lot of warmth for the characters.” A serial format isn’t 
the only reason for trying to render the royals warmly, though? For all Jeffrie 
and Tyler-Moore’s earlier protestations that they could have included Diana if 
they’d wanted, there must have been some part of them that was conscious not to 
strike the wrong note? “Well, I suppose we did try to focus on the characters 
that were a bit… twatty,” admits Jeffrie. “Ultimately, if you take the piss to 
the extent that it makes the viewer go ‘Oh God!’, it can stop it being funny.”

As I prepare to leave, the cast are still talking excitedly. Robinson offers 
that “this is more Heat magazine than Private Eye” (no kidding). Goulding 
exclaims, “Hopefully no one will get sued!” (seems unlikely). And Skinner is 
telling people: “Basically I try to play a bad version of Matt Damon” (huh?). 
Which is all very well, but will the royals actually watch this?

“Actually,” chips in Ford. “I don’t think it’s high-class enough for them.”

She may have a point

The Windsors begins tonight, 10pm, Channel 4
 