
For 30 years the games industry worked in a certain way. People rented offices 
and set up studios to create games; they employed staff to work in-house, then 
got those projects funded and distributed by publishers. If you wanted to opt 
out of that setup, you worked alone, or in a small team, as an indie developer 
– you operated in a totally separate stratosphere; the system neatly 
self-segregated. Meanwhile, in the background, the business worked to the 
seven-year cycles dictated by the lifespan of the major consoles. It was a 
machine of discreet components.


But that machine is rusting and falling apart. Something new is coming. 

It started 10 years ago. The dawn of the broadband internet era gradually 
allowed developers to distribute their games digitally, rather than as boxed 
copies, immediately cutting manufacturing and distribution costs out of their 
budgets. The arrival of the Apple iPhone created a stable marketplace for the 
previously chaotic mobile gaming sector, the release of new development 
applications like Unity, GameMaker and Twine meant that people didn’t need to 
know how to code to make games, or spend months – even years – developing their 
own graphics engines. Big companies started to take notice; the console 
manufacturers opened online stores and courted indie devs to produce weird 
titles likeWorld of Goo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2008/apr/16/enteraworldofgoo> 
andBraid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/sep/04/microsoft.games>, 
both out in 2008. Then Steam arrived and blew open the PC games market.

The result is an industry that works in a radically different way than it did 
a decade ago. And we’re seeing this at every level. Take console manufacturing 
for a start. Until this generation, console makers stuck with one architecture 
for the lifespan of their current machine, maybe altering the form-factor or 
HDD size, or adding new peripherals, but rarely tinkering with the processing 
capacity. Now, both Sony and Microsoft are likely to announce mid-lifecycle 
upgrades to their machines. The rumouredPlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> 4 Neo should add CPU and 
GPU power to cope with virtual reality and 4K screens; Xbox One is likely to 
evolve closer to the PC so that it can run the Universal Windows applications 
that may unite computer and console gamers. The seven-year lifecycle may be 
over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fdbc12d62b45fb5efae4d6f86ca6bada4c20e10%2F0_83_2006_1204%2F2006.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20digital%20apocalypse%3A%20how%20the%20games%20industry%20is%20rising%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20digital%20apocalypse%3A%20how%20the%20games%20industry%20is%20rising%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fdbc12d62b45fb5efae4d6f86ca6bada4c20e10%2F0_83_2006_1204%2F2006.jpg>
 Back when games came in solid, blocky packets. Photograph: Denis Thorpe for 
the Guardian 
“I think this is a symptom of Kurzweil’s law of accelerating returns which 
we’ve seen having an impact in just about every part of society and every 
aspect of technology the world over,” says indie developer Shahid Ahmad, who 
was until recently director of strategic content atSony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> Computer Entertainment Europe. 
“Look at the pace of change in mobile phones over the past five or six years, 
it’s been crazy. There’s a fear that there will never be another console cycle 
that lasts as long as the previous generations.”

What he sees in the Xbox One and PlayStation 4 are two machines that have 
converged on the same type of architecture: they are both effectively compact 
PCs, built around essentially off-the-shelf processors and graphics cards. This 
has happened so that the platforms can be upgraded more quickly, responding to 
technological advances, without immediately making earlier versions of the 
architecture obsolete. “It’s what Apple calls atick-tock cycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/28/what-apple-needs-to-get-right-new-iphone-6s-plus>
,” he says. “You launch a product, then you came out with a .5 version.”

Piers Harding-Rolls, head of games at IHS Digital agrees. “It reveals that 
consoles are becoming more aligned to other consumer electronics categories,” 
he says. “The standardised components that are now being used to go into 
consoles means that upgrades are more numerous and easier to implement. The 
challenge for console manufacturers is adopting a more iterative lifecycle 
without fragmenting the addressable audience.” Consoles then, are now glorified 
smartphones, built to be adaptable on a two- rather than seven-year cycle, 
while keeping legacy users in mind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd20391caeea4e67c2d602c3f1c56e26b9e08c313%2F0_167_3671_2203%2F3671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20digital%20apocalypse%3A%20how%20the%20games%20industry%20is%20rising%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20digital%20apocalypse%3A%20how%20the%20games%20industry%20is%20rising%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd20391caeea4e67c2d602c3f1c56e26b9e08c313%2F0_167_3671_2203%2F3671.jpg>
 A man stands over his new Xbox One console. The big console launch night might 
become a thing of the past in future. Photograph: Nam Y. Huh/AP 
The structure of the games themselves is also radically changing. For the last 
five years we’ve seen the rise of downloadable content and in-game 
microtransactions, designed to extend the lifespan of major new console 
releases. When players buy a new title likeCall of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/11/call-of-duty-infinite-warfare>
 orFallout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/23/fallout-4-bethesda-survival-tips>
, they can also pay out for a “season pass” that will buy them all subsequent 
map packs and content additions, keeping them engaged in the product. But that 
model still relies on consumers paying out £50 in advance for the original 
game, and not enough people are willing to do that. So the industry is toying 
with new models.

One involves releasing a limited version of the game at a cheaper price point 
and allowing purchasers to pay extra for the features they want, or to simply 
download new levels. The latestHitman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/hitman-review-clever-immersive-experimental>
 andStreet Fighter V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/15/street-fighter-v-review-capcom>
 both employ variations on this method, and we’ve even seen Microsoft 
experimenting with a free-to-play variation of its console hit Forza 
Motorsports, designed specifically for the PC market.

“Triple A games continue to get more expensive to produce, but the audience 
for those experiences is not growing, so they’re becoming riskier,” says 
industry analyst Nicholas Lovell. “One powerful way of reducing that risk is 
having an audience that you know will buy your game. When Hitman goes episodic, 
it is attempting to say ‘once we have found a customer, which is expensive, 
let’s keep them, and keep offering them, directly, the thing we hope they want 
to buy’.”


Physical retail is definitely on the way out
Nicholas Lovell 
Right now, says Lovell, publishers like Capcom and Square Enix are looking to 
take the power back from retailers; to insert the store into the games 
themselves. “The trick for publishers is to build direct relationships with 
gamers that reduce the risk for development, that make it easy to grab new 
customers and that allow the gamers who love the game the most to spend lots of 
money on things they really value. It will be some combination of free-to-play, 
plus DLC, plus microtransactions. But physical retail is definitely on the way 
out.”

Disruption is also taking place in the smartphone sector. For several years, 
free-to-play supported by microtransactions or intrusive ads was the accepted 
model, but we’re seeing new variations. In 2014, the hit Frogger cloneCrossy 
Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/04/crossy-road-mobile-game-10m-freemium>
 popularised a new opt-in ad model, where players could chose to watch video 
adverts in order to access new content. At the GDC event in 2015, developer 
Hipster Whale announced it had made £3m through this model. Rovio is using 
exactly the same system with Angry Birds Go.

“It seems to be changing players perceptions of ads,” says Oscar Clark, a 
mobile industry veteran, now at Unity. “They’re no longer barriers but instead 
a way to get playing rewards for the game I’m currently playing. The focus is 
not grind ... its on the expectation of future value. According to [mobile 
developer] Seriously, their use of this ad format has not only increased 
revenues but actually increased session length by 250%! Players stay playing 
longer. Much longer.”

Clark also points to Amazon Underground as an interesting indicator. This app 
provides usually premium priced mobile games to users for free, and then pays 
royalties to developers based on how long people stay on their titles. “This 
signposts an alternative for ‘paid’ content or ad-funded services,” he says.

In the new super fluid games industry, developers are also radically changing 
the way they operate. Over the past three years we’ve seen the closure of big 
expensive studios like Lionhead, Evolution, Maxis and IrrationalGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>, and it’s partly because the 
whole idea of cramming lots of staff into the same building and employing them 
all to work on two-year projects is becoming untenable for all but the biggest, 
safest franchises.
 A detail from tie-in game Disney Crossy Road. Photograph: PR 
Instead, we’re seeing a new era of virtual studios, with small teams working 
from home, augmented by part-time contract staff at key moments in the 
development cycle. “Rocket Lolly Games currently has a team of around 15 
people, most of whom are involved in production,” says industry veteran Ella 
Romanos who had to close her more traditional studio Remode, two years ago. 
“Everyone on the team is contracted and works remotely. Most are freelancers 
but some are small companies too, coming in as needed to deliver the work 
required. We communicate primarily using Slack and Skype – with weekly calls 
and daily conversations, and meet up occasionally in person. It doesn’t make 
sense to build up the overheads, significant burn rate and management time 
required to run [an office]”.

Helen Carmichael and her husband Jake Birkett run Grey Alien Games from their 
home in Bridport, Dorset, but they work with an international team. “For our 
current game, Shadowhand, our art team is based in Ukraine, our musician is in 
The Netherlands, and we are also working with Power Up Audio based in 
Vancouver, Canada. We communicate primarily by email, which is easier due to 
different time zones, and we rely heavily on the internet and on cloud storage 
such as Dropbox and Google Drive to share files.”

This way of working isn’t just about keeping costs low, it’s about allowing a 
more diverse range of people into game development. The traditional model, 
where hundreds of staff are employed in-house on huge projects, is massively 
skewed towards young (mostly male) staff who are willing and able to spend up 
to seven days a week in an office. Jake and Helen couldn’t work like that. “We 
have enormous flexibility with our working hours and arrangements, and don’t 
lose time commuting to work,” says Helen. “Our youngest son is deaf and has 
needed a large amount of medical treatment and support this year. We really 
needed to be be there for him. This would have been even more challenging if we 
were working in traditional roles.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce604ab89e699f0931c6ad8e996aca2d8eac3a4a%2F0_235_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20digital%20apocalypse%3A%20how%20the%20games%20industry%20is%20rising%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20digital%20apocalypse%3A%20how%20the%20games%20industry%20is%20rising%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce604ab89e699f0931c6ad8e996aca2d8eac3a4a%2F0_235_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Loving the alien … Helen Carmichael and Jake Birkett, who run Grey Alien Games 
from their home in Bridport, Dorset. Photograph: Alan Dewey 
We’re also seeing the rise of shared workspaces and regional hubs, where 
larger office spaces are shared between various developers.Arch Creatives 
<http://archcreatives.com/> is a renovated Victorian railway arch underneath 
Leamington Spa train station that currently houses three development teams. 
Co-founder Ollie Clark says he and other local games industry veterans wanted 
to create somewhere affordable where startups could work, meet and play, 
without the vast overheads of renting formal office space. Desks are rented out 
at £150 per month and no one is tied into a contract.

“In an industry that finds itself on the cusp of huge changes literally every 
six to 12 months, adaptability is key,” says Clark. “It’s also important to 
have fun whilst making games as it shows in the work; a place like a hub lends 
itself to that. Being more informal, you never really know who or what is going 
to come through the door on a particular day and what adventures that will lead 
to. Also, over the last decade the demographic makeup of the industry is far 
more diverse than it used to be. A hub allows its members to take advantage of 
the flexibility they offer, meaning that work and life can fit together more 
easily.”

There has been talk of an indie apocalypse, with small studios struggling to 
fund their work, then struggling to sell it

Game developer James Parker co-manages the Bristol Games Hub 
<https://bristolgameshub.com/> in Stokes Croft with Auroch Digital. He agrees 
that flexibility is one of the main attractions for the 50 or so staff working 
in their building on a huge variety of projects. “While the games market is 
huge, it’s also very, very uncertain,” he says. “Companies and games rise and 
fall all the time but in The Hub, that team can come together for a short 
period of time, the individuals can potentially supplement their indie projects 
with paid freelance work, and if it all goes well then they have the room to 
expand further or go their separate ways without the burden of a three or five 
year lease. The result is that we’re building a community of people that is 
much more resilient in the face of uncertainty in the wider industry.”

There are now dozens of other places like this: Playhubs in London, Glitch 
City in Los Angeles, the Dutch Game Garden in Utrecht which straddles the 
divide between university incubation programme and shared office space. At all 
of these, ad-hoc collaboration is another important factor. Hub users often end 
up chatting about new projects then working on them together. “The forthcoming 
digital card game, Battle for Sector 219, is a collaboration between three hub 
residents,” says Parker. “Nils Hellberg’s Large Visible Machine is leading the 
project and publishing the game, with Alex Hodson (GamesMoby) responsible for 
the development, and Chris Raadjes (Auroch Digital) providing the UI designs.”

In some ways, the vast changes that have affected the games industry over the 
last few years have created equally vast problems. The move to a digital 
marketplace where thousands of developers are able to sell their games in 
online app stores has created a huge issue with discoverability. How do you 
build an audience when every weeks sees hundreds of new titles hit Steam, the 
Apple App Store andAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>? 
Last year, this question led to talk of an indie apocalypse – with small 
studios struggling to fund their work, then struggling to sell it.

But in a lot of places there are supportive communities growing up to counter 
the financial uncertainty. Hubs are one part of that, not only providing cheap 
workspace but also attracting interest (and maybe even investment) to an area, 
as well as providing studios with information about, and access to, funding 
channels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f3895735fb9d1f74a0898ba21074cdb7798c402%2F43_0_2324_1395%2F2324.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20digital%20apocalypse%3A%20how%20the%20games%20industry%20is%20rising%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20digital%20apocalypse%3A%20how%20the%20games%20industry%20is%20rising%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fvideo-game-industry-changing-virtual-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f3895735fb9d1f74a0898ba21074cdb7798c402%2F43_0_2324_1395%2F2324.jpg>
 The Arch creative studio in Leamington Spa. Photograph: Aron Durkin 
“There has been a maturation of the industry,” says Hannah Nicklin a game 
designer and academic who is also working as a producer on Forest of Sleep, a 
new game from micro-studio Twisted Tree Games. “Not only are there tools to 
take out the grunt work, the infrastructure of the industry itself is changing 
as governments have recognised games – there’s more support, you can get 
grants, you can take your ideas to things like the UK Games Fund. There’s also 
a larger shift in our global economy toward different working practices. Remote 
working is much easier now that the internet tends to actually work. At Twisted 
Tree games, we have people in Norway, Finland and Spain, and Google Hangout 
works.”

Nicklin has also noticed that successful studios are now looking to invest 
back into the development community. Failbetter Games recently announced a 
range of grants for developers making narrative games, while the Oxford-based 
studio Mode 7 is helping to publish the hugely promising Tokyo 42 by SMAC games.

“We were looking for ways to expand beyond just working on a single project 
for two or three years and pinning all of our hopes on that,” says Paul Taylor 
of Mode 7. “Under that model, even if you plan well, you’re basically two 
consecutive failures away from the collapse of your business. With that in mind 
I attended one of Develop’s ‘Interface’ events, which is kind of publisher 
speed-dating: teams have a short time to pitch their games and have a chat with 
those who are looking to fund and publish them. I met the SMAC guys and it was 
clear straight away that they were working on something incredible.


“Developers increasingly don’t want to sign with the bigger publishers because 
they know that they can get a better commercial deal and more relevant personal 
attention from an experienced indie team. Devs are looking for these 
opportunities because they understand that it takes a huge amount of effort to 
make your game stand out from the crowd, and they may not have the experience 
or inclination to do that personally. Having another developer who you respect 
and trust invested in the success of your own project is going to free you up 
to make the game you need to make.”

This is the games industry in 2016. Not the highly stratified, hierarchical 
model of a decade ago, but a largely digital, incredibly fluid creative 
community, in which talented developers switch seamlessly between roles, 
studios and projects. It’s not a utopia; discoverability remains an issue and 
job security is almost non-existent in an era of small teams working with 
short-term contracts.

But the uncertainty and complexity has brought with it a new approach to 
development, with micro-publishers, shared spaces, regional funds and 
improvised collaborations. This is an industry in which the big publisher-owned 
studios still exist of course, but where some of the most intriguing and 
disruptive work is coming from remote groups of teams, often comprising staff 
who wouldn’t have been making games in the old model. There was no space for 
them. There is now. However difficult things are, that doesn’t sound like an 
apocalypse.
 