
As the Syrian government and its backers tighten their grip on Aleppo, and 
Turkey and Russia reveal yet another ceasefire in Syria 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-38449551>, the same questions 
trouble many an outraged onlooker. Has the United Nations ever seemed more 
toothless than it does now? Why did this congregation of almost 200 countries 
lack the power first to prevent, and then to halt, suchcivilian bloodshed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/aleppo-civilians-plea-as-airstrikes-resume-syria>
? Why had it been unable to convene all the parties around the same table to 
any productive end? And if the UN is incapable of acting in a crisis such as 
this, what is the point of it?

António Guterres <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ant-nio-guterres> takes 
over as the new secretary general of the UN on Sunday at a time when the 
international organisation’s reputation is, at least from the perspective of 
many western countries, as low as it has ever been. The hopes that were 
invested in this successor to the failedLeague of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/10/un-failing-league-of-nations-isis-boko-haram>
 seem to have been dashed at the very time when they mattered most – and not 
for the first time. Is the former Portuguese prime minister someone who can 
show that the organisation has a mission that can work?

Turkey and Russia 'agree terms of Syria ceasefire'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/turkey-russia-agree-terms-syria-ceasefire>
It is a good deal easier to forecast failure than success. After all, 
successes for the UN in recent years have been few and far between. Much of the 
peace-brokering, such as it is, has been accomplished by others, including the 
US and – yes – the much-maligned EU.

And while there are many who blame the outgoing secretary general, Ban Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/14/ban-ki-moon-united-nations-world-humanitarian-summit-istanbul>
, for the UN’s lacklustre performance during his two five-year terms, this 
would not be entirely fair. Ban’s appointment was in large part a reaction to 
the perceived mismatch of profile and achievement on the part of the previous 
incumbent,Kofi Annan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kofiannan>. Not only 
was it Asia’s turn to provide the new secretary general, but there was a 
widespread feeling that a less frenetic and more discreet approach might bring 
less discord and more results.

If that was the job description, Ban certainly met the brief. So discreet a 
presence was he, however, that the UN, on his watch, seemed almost to fade from 
view. Specific failures of other UN branches – thecholera brought to Haiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/01/haiti-cholera-outbreak-stain-on-reputation-un-says>
 during the earthquake relief operation; the disastrously late response to the 
west Africanebola epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/15/ebola-epidemic-2014-timeline>; 
the UN refugee agency’s non-appearance during Europe’s refugee crisis – all 
reinforced the impression of an “international community” with neither the will 
nor the capacity to cope.

Then came Syria, which defeated not one, but two of the UN’s most accomplished 
diplomats, first Annan then AlgerianLakhdar Brahimi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/un-syria-envoy-lakhdar-brahimi-resigns>
.Staffan de Mistura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/30/staffan-de-mistura-man-with-toughest-job-in-world-syria>
, the Italian-Swedish diplomat, deserves more credit than he has been given, 
not least for his steadying presence, but much of the heavy lifting was 
undertaken by the old cold war pairing of the US and Russia – ultimately to 
little effect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Funited-nations-secretary-general-antonio-guterres%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a56326a3c50f319b545f7c233c2cdc554067746%2F0_160_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UN%20is%20toothless.%20It%20must%20seize%20this%20last%20chance%20to%20save%20itself%20%7C%20Mary%20Dejevsky&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Funited-nations-secretary-general-antonio-guterres%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UN%20is%20toothless.%20It%20must%20seize%20this%20last%20chance%20to%20save%20itself%20%7C%20Mary%20Dejevsky&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Funited-nations-secretary-general-antonio-guterres%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a56326a3c50f319b545f7c233c2cdc554067746%2F0_160_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 New UN secretary general António Guterres Photograph: ddp USA/Rex Features 
All of which helps to explain why, as Ban completed his farewell calls, it was 
not just his own near traceless tenure that came in for criticism, but the UN’s 
long-term record in general. Perhaps the time for a world body had simply 
passed. Such criticism, however, ignores the crucial fact: the UN is no more 
and no less than the 193 countries that belong to it. It is not the independent 
arbiter many assume it to be, and conflicts – especially once there has been 
resort to arms – are not simple to resolve. Civil wars, with or without outside 
involvement, are especially intractable – as inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

The UN has a second chance to come into its own. But it must think in terms of 
the politics of 2045 rather than 1945

The collapse of the Soviet Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/jul/14/soviet-union-collapse-in-pictures>
 had spurred hopes for a more consensual security council that would be less 
inhibited about acting. Twenty-five years on, though, it is clear that it is 
not only the enduring cold war legacy that stands in the way of agreement at 
the top of the UN. There is the newer north-south dimension, the old smattering 
of colonial grievances, but most of all some genuinely irreconcilable 
territorial and cultural interests.

It might be tempting to propose that the UN should just give up and leave the 
field. As of now, however, that looks a much worse idea than pressing on. One 
reason is the new secretary general. Guterres has the record and personal 
energy that could just put the UN back on to the global diplomatic map. Another 
is the new US president. IfDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is serious about downgrading 
US internationalism, this could leave a gap that the UN would be equipped to 
fill – perhaps even with US blessing.

A third reason, though, is the most compelling. Even before Trump, the world 
was already becoming a more contested place, with China fast becoming an 
assertive new player, India snapping at its heels, and the Middle East conflict 
entailing much more than Israel-Palestine.

Just as the G20 has largely superseded the G7 for economic discussions, so the 
UN, with its worldwide membership, has a second chance to come into its own. It 
will need to be less hierarchical, in line with the flatter organisational 
structures favoured today. It should perhaps have its own standing security 
force (to be deployed only by consent). Above all, it will have to think in 
terms of the politics and demography of 2045, rather than 1945.

Whether any of this can happen will rest to a large extent with Guterres. But 
if, as it would appear, the diplomacy of tomorrow is likely to be more 
multilateral than it is today, the UN should be an idea whose time has come 
rather than gone.
 