
The long-running British soap opera that centres on the undulating fortunes of 
Marks & Spencer enjoyed a cameo appearance byAlexa Chung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> on Wednesday as the 
department store launched its new collaboration with the TV 
presenter-cum-fashion star.

The range – Archive by Alexa – is the department store’s attempt to harness 
some of the Chung spirit, translate it into sales and halt the long-term 
decline of its clothing business.

The collection features reissues of actual M&S designs from decades past found 
by Chung in the company’s archive in Leeds, which have been tweaked and altered 
for a modern audience. At the launch there was a sense from M&S HQ that Chung’s 
tagline assertion that she has “found the future of Marks & Spencer in the 
past” could be just the trick they need.

Last week, M&S’s new boss, Steve Rowe, said the company’s clothing performance 
was unsatisfactory and improving it was his “number one priority” as he 
revealed a 2.7% fall in sales of clothing and homewares in the three months to 
the end of March. The chain’s clothing sales have only increased in one 
three-month period in the past five years.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01df21ab11231563c381346e7f992510ea6948e5%2F0_0_4088_6461%2F4088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Alexa%20effect%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20launch%20of%20Archive%20by%20Alexa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Alexa%20effect%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20launch%20of%20Archive%20by%20Alexa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01df21ab11231563c381346e7f992510ea6948e5%2F0_0_4088_6461%2F4088.jpg>
 The Frances coat from Archive by Alexa at M&S. Photograph: M&S 
Despite the collection being much anticipated and well publicised, the launch 
at the brand’s flagship Marble Arch branch on Oxford Street had none of the 
hallmarks of a modern collaboration frenzy: no sleeping bags, no queues, no 
crushes, no elbows. Instead this was a different kind of launch – well managed, 
well stocked, and with even a stately 72-year-old sales assistant well-briefed 
on the collection and Alexa Chung.

At the press launch the designer gamely turned sales assistant, wearing an M&S 
neck-scarf and name badge on top of her polka-dot minidress as she scanned 
through piecrust blouses and knowingly joked about returns policies.


The impossibly gamine Chung, who has the ability to make jeans and a jumper 
into a bonafide “look”, has had the role of Patron Saint of British fashion 
foisted upon her by the industry and public alike with some force. This makes 
her a safe bet for M&S, which struggles between pandering to fashion and 
competing with Zara on the one hand, and fending off the criticisms of 
customers who want a warm coat and a sturdy cardigan on the other.
 Alexa Chung in her polka dot dress. 
In theory, Archive by Alexa is a win-win. It ticks the fashion boxes and yet 
by its very nature swerves the criticisms that the department store is straying 
from its roots. Add to that the fact that Alexa’s style is, when boiled down, 
quite attainable – a navy cable knit, a democratic trench and a long sleeved 
blouse – it feels unimpeachable.

This collection has the whiff of the days when the department store had St 
Michael sewn into its labels. The piecrust blouse, named the “Harry”, is 
nostalgic in a good 1980s way, and the olive trench coat with its adjusted belt 
raised to make the wearer appear taller – at £89, the most expensive item in 
the range – is flattering whatever the size on the hanger.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a90b6ecce875c8de03065e0eb325e34a4852e5%2F315_186_5610_8712%2F5610.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Alexa%20effect%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20launch%20of%20Archive%20by%20Alexa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Alexa%20effect%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20launch%20of%20Archive%20by%20Alexa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a90b6ecce875c8de03065e0eb325e34a4852e5%2F315_186_5610_8712%2F5610.jpg>
 Adwoa Aboah in Alexa Chung’s polka dot dress, from Archive Marks & Spencer 
collection. Photograph: M&S 
The painter’s smock of a shirt looks modern and suits grown-ups, while the 
1960s minidresses are squarely aimed at Chung’s student fans. On the shopfloor 
the blouse and the mac were both doing brisk business.

For the most part customers, ranging from students to those in their 40s, were 
scooping up the Harry blouse in pale pink. Many had never been into the 
department store before. Having been accused of frenzy tactics in the past – 
limiting stock supply of a well received item to make it sell out and increase 
demand – this time M&S is aiming to satisfy all of its customers who want in. 
The company was at pains to underline the fact that the collection is available 
in 66 stores nationwide, as well as online, where anecdotally sales were 
already outstripping expectations.


Samantha McRae, 40, an interior designer, was one of the first through the 
doors: “I left at 8am to get here for 9am. I think she is great. I love her 
styling, I love her masculine feminine edge and I love the fact that she has 
tapped into that historical thing of M&S. I’m buying the blouse – for me and my 
sister. I think I will buy that guy too [the trench]. I’ve shopped 
collaborations before but I didn’t do the Balmain for H&M one, I don’t want to 
get stamped on for a dress.”

But there were also younger customers, of the kind that M&S will be hoping the 
collaboration will attract to its stores. Anya Magliano Wright, an 18-year-old 
student, said. “I came for Alexa Chung’s style. That’s why I am here. I 
wouldn’t say I am a regular M&S shopper but I like Alexa Chung. It’s the fact 
that everything she wears is a complete mixture of different categories of 
style – really girly and then really androgynous.” Carrying armfuls of stuff, 
she added: “I’ll try it all on but about £200 is my limit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dabcc699f888c95c071001f6924d8c66752c7cd%2F0_0_7712_4532%2F7712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Alexa%20effect%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20launch%20of%20Archive%20by%20Alexa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Alexa%20effect%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20launch%20of%20Archive%20by%20Alexa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fthe-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dabcc699f888c95c071001f6924d8c66752c7cd%2F0_0_7712_4532%2F7712.jpg>
 The Helen trainers. Photograph: M&S 
Another 18-year-old, student Cecilia Boultwood, offered a keen assessment of 
what M&S was trying to achieve. “Alexa mixes different eras and I really like 
that. This is a smart move for M&S because the thing for them is that they have 
got this old vibe about them to people like us who are younger but by 
partnering with Alexa Chung who takes that old vibe and makes it trendy they 
have found a way to make themselves relevant.”



 