
So it’s Christmas and you’ve bought your kids a video game console – for a few 
sweet hours you’re going to be the greatest parent on the face of the planet. 
Congratulations.

But, to be honest, your work has only just begun. Like any new technology, you 
can’t just let them get on with it – even if the mere sight of a games 
controller sends shivers of terror (or boredom) down your spine. You need to 
step up and take an active part in this. Giving a console is like giving a pet: 
it’s a long term commitment and it can be tricky and demanding. But at least a 
console won’t pee on your carpet when it gets over-excited.

Anyway, here are the five golden rules of family console ownership.

Set the parental controls from the outset

It’s no good just handing the new console over to your kids and hoping for the 
best, you need to take control – and that means overseeing the set-up 
procedure, registering as the main user and then setting up the parental 
controls. The PS4, Xbox One and Wii U all walk you gently through this process 
(Microsoft has even produced a video onsetting up your Xbox One this Christmas 
<https://youtu.be/SqS6pRmE_kk>) – and each of them allows you to limit access 
to games and DVDs with older age ratings. You can also control access to the 
internet and online multiplayer gaming. The important thing is, you need to do 
this right away. If one of your kids registers as the master account, they have 
all the power.

 * Setting your family up on Xbox One 
<https://support.xbox.com/en-US/browse/xbox-one/security> 
 * Setting up parental restrictions on PS4 
<http://manuals.playstation.net/document/gb/ps4/settings/restrict.html> 
 * Parental controls on Wii U 
<https://www.nintendo.co.uk/Support/Wii-U/Parental-Controls/Tutorial-video-Parental-Controls-on-Wii-U/Tutorial-video-Parental-Controls-on-Wii-U-805722.html>
The Video Standards Council also has a useful guide to parental controls 
<http://gamesratingauthority.org/GRA/> on all major systems.

Understand the Pegi rating system

Some games aren’t suitable for children. At all. Every game you buy has to 
have an age rating provided byPegi <http://www.pegi.info/en/index/> on the box, 
and when it says 16+ or 18+ it really does mean those games aren’t suitable for 
younger kids. They will contain graphic violence, explicit language and 
sometimes also scenes of a sexual nature – exactly like movies.

The problem is, however careful you are, there will be parents who’ll happily 
let their eight-year-old play Call of Duty. If you have a young child who is 
going to play games at a friend’s house, it’s worth checking what they’ll be 
playing – you don’t have to be judgmental, just say you’d rather they didn’t 
play certain games. It’s tricky, but then so is getting up at 3am because your 
child is having a nightmare about eviscerating an alien monster with a chainsaw.

Set playtime limits

It’s really up to you to decide how long your children can play on the 
console. The American Academy of Pediatricsrecommends 
<https://www.aap.org/en-us/advocacy-and-policy/aap-health-initiatives/pages/media-and-children.aspx>
 that children have no more than two hours of screen time a day, which includes 
watching TV and/or playing games. It’s a good idea to have some sort of timer 
device so your children can see how long they have left: this is very important 
when they’re playing a video game that has long levels with few save points. 
Give a 15-minute warning before the end of the session, so they can save their 
progress. Don’t just walk into the room and switch off the power without 
checking. That’s cruel.

Keep the console in a social space

If you can, it’s best to have the console in a family room rather than in a 
bedroom. There are practical benefits here. All the major consoles offer extra 
features such as apps like the BBC iPlayer, Netflix and YouTube, and theXbox One
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> and PS4 will play Blu-ray 
discs, so they’re pretty useful to have under your living room TV.

Keeping the console somewhere visible means you can monitor access and make 
sure no one is playing Skylanders until four in the morning. It also gives you 
a better idea of what your kids are playing and it means you can ask questions 
or, heck, even join in.

Get involved

Even if you haven’t played a video game since Sonic the Hedgehog on the Mega 
Drive, it’s worth taking an active interest in what your kids are doing with 
their new machine. At the very least, Google the game they’ve asked for, or 
look up reviews (Metacritic is useful for this) – find out if there are any 
issues with the game: does it have challenging themes? Are there technical 
problems? You should make an effort to find out.

There are plenty of games that you can play together, too. The Lego titles are 
brilliant for parents with younger kids, and Minecraft is a vast creative 
sandbox that you can easily enjoy together.


When you’re buying a new game, check on the back of the box to see if it has a 
local multiplayer option – that means more than one person in the room can play 
at the same time (everyone will need their own controller of course). 
Co-operative games like Yoshi’s Woolly World and Rayman Legends are great fun, 
but so are titles like Mario Kart 8 and Fifa 16, which get you competing 
against each other.

The key message is, don’t see a games console as something your kids do that 
you don’t need to understand. There are a lot of reasons why you need to know 
how it works and what it plays, but the most important one is that games are 
fun and something you can share.

 * PlayStation 4, Xbox One or Wii U – which should you go for? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/12/playstation-4-xbox-one-wii-u-which-games-console> 