
Carciofo alla giudia is the traditional crispy fried globe artichoke of Il 
Ghetto, the Hebrew ghetto in the historic heart of Rome. The ghetto was finally 
abolished in 1870 but the dish lives on, being a speciality of Roman Jewish 
cuisine.Alla giudia means “Jewish-style” in local dialect.

It was originally prepared to celebrate the end of the Yom Kippur fast, but 
carciofo alla giudia, with its golden petals that crunch in a delectable way 
when you bite into them, has long been popular with Romans from all 
communities. Today, many restaurants sell the dish (from about €8 a portion) 
but only a few get it right.

Top 10 free things to do in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/06/top-10-free-things-to-do-rome-italy>
Giggetto <http://www.giggetto.it/> (Via Portico di Ottavia 21/a-22, ), by the 
Roman temple of Porticus Octaviae, selects the best artichoke variant, called 
thecimarolo, which is 15cm wide – twice the normal size – and grows on the 
uppermost part of the plant. Once the rough leaves have been trimmed away, it 
is dipped twice in hot palm oil – once at 130C and again at 170C. Served as an 
appetiser, the gigantic artichoke sits on the plate like a blooming flower. The 
dish is not as fatty as it might sound because artichokes don’t absorb very 
much oil.

Kosher restaurant Yotvata <http://www.yotvata.it/> (Piazza Cenci 70) fries the 
artichoke in sunflower oil, adds a little salt to the petals and serves it 
upside down.Trattoria Lilli <http://www.trattorialilli.it/> (Via Tor di Nona 
23), overlooking the Tiber, serves the Roman-style variant:carciofo alla romana
. Here, the artichoke isn’t fried but cooked in a pot with olive oil, salt and 
pepper, and covered with tinfoil. It’s delicious, with flavours of liquorice 
and mint lingering on the taste buds.

 