
American Made 

Tom Cruise teams up again with Edge of Tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/01/edge-of-tomorrow-review-tom-cruise-emily-blunt-born-again-blockbuster>
 director Doug Liman for the 80s-set story of Barry Seal, a former pilot for 
Trans World Airlines who turned to drug-smuggling before being recruited by the 
DEA as a snitch – which got him involved with the Medellín cartel. Domhnall 
Gleeson and Jesse Plemons suggest credible backup.

Christopher Robin

Here’s Gleeson Jr again, this time in a different type of character study: a 
biopic ofAA Milne <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aa-milne>, whose Winnie 
the Pooh stories were inspired by his playing with young son, Christopher. 
Margot Robbie is his wife; Kelly Macdonald Christopher’s nanny.

The most exciting films of 2017: returning auteurs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/22/the-most-exciting-films-of-2017-returning-auteurs>
Felt 

That’s Mark Felt, aka Deep Throat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/dec/19/watergate-deep-throat-dies>, who 
shipped Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein vital information to uncover the 
Watergate scandal in 1974. Liam Neeson is the whistleblower, Diane Lane his 
wife and Maika Monroe their daughter.

The Greatest Showman

An all-singing, all-dancing look at the life of circus impresario PT Barnum, 
played here byHugh Jackman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hugh-jackman>, 
with Michelle Williams as Charity, the tragic wife, and Rebecca Ferguson as 
Swedish songbird Jenny Lind. Zac Efron plays someone called Phillip, who we 
don’t immediately remember from the Michael Crawford musical.

Polka King 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fexciting-films-2017-biopics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787944ad510980bcf8917462537f2e82519acef7%2F0_29_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20exciting%20biopics%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fexciting-films-2017-biopics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20exciting%20biopics%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fexciting-films-2017-biopics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787944ad510980bcf8917462537f2e82519acef7%2F0_29_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Shortly to premiere at Sundance, this is the story of Jan Lewan, a 
Pennsylvania polka sensation who badgered fans to invest in a Ponzi scheme. 
Jack Black’s best role to date was also in a biopic (Bernie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/25/bernie-review>, another sinister 
charmer) so we’re hopeful for this one – optimism boosted by the presence of 
Jenny Slate, Jacqui Weaver, Jason Schwartzman and JB Smoove in the supporting 
cast.

Professor and the Madman

Even the biggest Mel Gibson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/melgibson> 
sceptic couldn’t help but be charmed by the selfie some lad took of him up a 
mountain in Ireland earlier this year.

Climbed the Sugar Loaf today! It was great fun bit of yoga thrown in and to 
top it all off we met Mel Gibson at the summit! #SolidSunday #Mel #gibson 
#ireland #sugarloaf <https://www.instagram.com/p/BLWElZ7gqbw/>

A photo posted by Heather (@heatherfogarty277) on Oct 9, 2016 at 7:04am PDT

Likewise, it’s hard not to be a bit intrigued by the project Gibson was then 
shooting:a biopic of the two creators of the Oxford English Dictionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/02/mel-gibson-sean-penn-oed-creators-professor-madman>
 (the other is played, naturally, by Sean Penn), one of whom submitted some 
10,000 entries while in an asylum. Comeback: noun, return to big-screen acclaim 
in unlikely project for vilified Aussie.

Rebel in the Rye
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fexciting-films-2017-biopics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdc52ee9e26b7766f56376e752889967600fcb1a%2F34_0_1032_619%2F1032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20exciting%20biopics%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fexciting-films-2017-biopics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20exciting%20biopics%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fexciting-films-2017-biopics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdc52ee9e26b7766f56376e752889967600fcb1a%2F34_0_1032_619%2F1032.jpg>
JD Salinger wrote one masterpiece then went to ground for 59 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/jan/31/jd-salinger-arts-stars>, so 
we’re assuming that this biopic will focus mostly on the days around 
publication. Nicholas Hoult stars as theCatcher in the Rye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/02/100-best-novels-catcher-in-the-rye-jd-salinger-holden-caulfield>
 writer; Kevin Spacey his Columbia lecturer and mentor, Zoey Deutch as the 
daughter of Eugene O’Neill, with whom Salinger had a relationship, and Sarah 
Paulson as Dorothy Olding, Salinger’s agent. It’s another one the world will 
have its first glimpse of in Park City in January.

Stan and Ollie 

Steve Coogan and John C Reilly are the late-era Laurel and Hardy, bickering 
bitterly as they tour theatres in the north of England in 1953, trying to 
recapture the old glory days. Jeff Pope, with whom Coogan adapted Philomena, 
scripts; Jon S Baird (best known forFilth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/03/filth-review>) directs. 

The most exciting film adaptations of 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/20/the-most-exciting-film-adaptations-of-2017>
War Machine

David Michôd’s Afghanistan drama has been around a little while now – it 
appeared on last year’s equivalent list – but time has not dinted our appetite 
to see what the Animal Kingdom director does with a faintly fictionalised study 
of General Stanley McChrystal, who had command of the Joint Special Operations 
Command in the mid-2000s.Brad Pitt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt> 
is the general – disguised as one Dan McMahon – Emory Cohen is one of his 
platoon, Topher Grace his press adviser, with Ben Kingsley, Tilda Swinton and 
Scoot McNairy also somewhere in the trenches. Netflix paid $60m for this one, 
so either it’s an imminent masterpiece or a heck of a gamble.
 