

As the post-lunch slump sets in, many office workers opt for a coffee or 
chocolate to keep their eyes open, risking sleeplessness or a sugar crash. It 
is at times like this, its inventors believe, that a new wearable device can 
stimulate users via a tiny pulse that will heighten their mood or bring it down 
if they want to relax.

At first glance, the Doppel resembles a traditional watch, albeit one with the 
clock face on backwards and worn under the wrist. Behind the stainless steel 
base is not a timepiece, however, but a vibrating motor that gives off a range 
of mechanical pulses aimed at improving how the user feels.

The innovators: levitating lightbulbs take design back to the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/20/the-innovators-hoverboard-technology-to-become-normal-in-homes>
In a similar way to fast or slow-paced music dictating the natural rhythm of 
the body, the vibrations from the Doppel can control how alert or relaxed the 
user is, according to co-creator Jack Hooper.

“Everyone tries to change their state – they listen to music, they drink 
coffee, they meditate – and we see this as another tool and a very effective 
tool because it is so discreet and it is controllable,” he says.

The Doppel has been developed by Hooper, Nell Bennett, Andreas Bilicki and 
Fotini Markopoulou following their research in psychophysiology – the 
relationship between mental and physical actions – while studying at the Royal 
College of Art in London. One of the areas they looked at was in “movement 
entrainment”, where people synchronise with others in their environment by 
walking in pace with each other, and whether they could create a similar sort 
of effect. They found that a beat connected to the body could mirror the tempo 
of music and how it stimulated and calmed.

“We had found that we could achieve this effect with a tactile beat which 
means that it is very, very discreet,” Hooper says. “It is not like music that 
is going to cut you off or distract you. You could make someone more excited or 
calm them down. It is not going to make you happy or sad.

“We found that we could change someone’s state in this way. We had something 
which could only ever be awearable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wearable-technology> in that it had to 
be touching [the skin].”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fthe-innovators-wristband-pulse-doppel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F27%2F1443360761971%2Fd23d2af2-e7de-4bc9-ba67-35d5a78bce5d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20innovators%3A%20the%20pulsating%20wristband%20that%20sets%20your%20daily%20rhythm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fthe-innovators-wristband-pulse-doppel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20innovators%3A%20the%20pulsating%20wristband%20that%20sets%20your%20daily%20rhythm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fthe-innovators-wristband-pulse-doppel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F27%2F1443360761971%2Fd23d2af2-e7de-4bc9-ba67-35d5a78bce5d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Doppel gang and their new device. Photograph: Martin Godwin/Guardian 
After further testing the Doppel was born. The device vibrates according to 
pre-set criteria. The process begins by the user measuring their resting 
heartbeat via a smartphone app. They then programme a series of vibration 
settings for when they are at rest – typically less than the resting heart rate 
– and when they are performing an activity such as running or trying to perk up 
from the mid-afternoon slump, typically higher. The phone then dictates these 
vibration rates to the Doppel via Bluetooth. The user can then decide which one 
they want to use depending on whether they want to rouse themselves or relax.

“We have a theory about how it works and it is difficult to say whether it is 
true or not. We think what might be happening is we make it feel like a 
heartbeat and it sits on your pulse where you expect to feel a heartbeat and 
then if that goes faster, we think what we might be doing is confusing your 
brain to go: ‘Oh, my heart rate has gone up, I must be more stimulated’. And so 
it gets you going,” Hooper says

Uses for the device range from an aid to calm nerves before, say, a 
presentation or for help sleeping, to having a consistent beat for exercising. 
For those with mild forms of anxiety, it can work to calm them down, he claims.

The difficulty lies in trying to explain to people what exactly the new device 
is and why they would need it. “For us, it meets a need in that technology at 
the moment leads us down a path to be more alert and have demands on our time,” 
Hooper says.

“It is not just a tool which gives people the ability to do something or 
answer their emails quicker or be more productive, it actually gives them the 
control over how they feel, which is a different approach to take with 
technology, especially wearable technology.”

It is expected that the Doppel will start selling next May priced at about 
£100 after 800 pre-orders from a successfulKickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1799505246/doppel-a-new-breed-of-wearable-technology-to-set-y/description>
 crowd-funding campaign are fulfilled. Integration into existing smartwatches 
is not envisaged for the first few generations of the device although it is a 
possibility in the future, according to the company. On average they expect the 
battery in the device to last for between three and five days before needing a 
recharge – if people use it in bursts at various times of the day.

Tests have been carried out on hundreds of people so far, according to Hooper, 
and he said there was “zero evidence” that the Doppel was in any way dangerous. 
Where there may be a problem, such as for those who have a heart problem and 
have been told not to listen to upbeat music, he suggests they consult a doctor.

The creators hold back from saying their device can change a user’s mood, 
instead saying it “provides a beat your brain works to”. Effects have been 
noticeable in users who have been giving presentations and used it to calm 
down, says Hooper.

“I would not say that it overrides the heart but it gives you something else 
to focus on. You might say that it overrides what you are concentrating on.”

How the Doppel works

The various settings – among others, for running, commuting or relaxing – are 
set on a smartphone, which can then be uploaded to the Doppel. When using the 
device, pressing it in the centre brings on the high beat. Stroking a sensitive 
ridge on the face of the Doppel slows the beat. Turning a dial around the edge 
of the device alters the intensity of the sensation, much like a volume control 
on a stereo.

• You can read our archive of The Innovators columns here  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/series/the-innovators>or on the Big 
Innovation Centre website 
<http://www.biginnovationcentre.com/the-innovators-column>, where you will find 
more information on how the centre supports innovative enterprise in Britain 
and globally.
 