
PlayStation VR: nine of the best launch games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/14/playstation-vr-best-launch-games-sony-virtual-reality>
Last week saw the arrival of the world’s least bank-breaking virtual reality 
headset,PlayStation VR (£349). To use it you’ll need a PlayStation 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> (£299) and a PS Eye 
Camera (£44.99), which – while not exactly cheap – is less exorbitant than 
buying a PC-based set-up. The technology itself uses a camera at the front of 
the room to track head movements, presenting its alternative view of the world 
via a very small screen mounted in front of each eye. Despite PSVR’s slightly 
fuzzier visuals, the feeling of being somewhere you’re not is extraordinarily 
convincing, if sometimes disorientating.

It’s also been a challenge for games designers, who have had to find new ways 
of guiding players around spaces that don’t literally exist. In Ocean Descent, 
one of the mini-games included inPlayStation VR Worlds, you don’t even have a 
controller: your sole movement in the game is to look around and experience 
your slow winching into the ocean depths in a thankfully sturdy shark cage. 
Initially a relaxing experience, watching manta rays, turtles and a flotilla of 
glowing jellyfish drift by, you of course eventually bump into a shark, your 
feeling of exposure enhanced by the fact that you’re stuck in a place with 
nothing to do but anticipate your future as a chew toy. It’s a scary concept in 
spite of the not-particularly-terrifying CGI shark; even with no control, you 
feel part of the action to a vastly greater degree than in a conventional 
first-person game.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43016d6f26f25797583e424cd199ba0306e4c88%2F122_97_1634_981%2F1634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20PlayStation%20Virtual%20Reality%20is%20here!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20PlayStation%20Virtual%20Reality%20is%20here%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43016d6f26f25797583e424cd199ba0306e4c88%2F122_97_1634_981%2F1634.jpg>
 Batman: Arkham VR. 
That immersion is a sense that Arkham VR (PSVR) exploits to excellent effect 
to make you feel like Batman. Starting in stately Wayne Manor, you descend into 
the Batcave and begin by donning your suit, utility belt and cowl, eliciting a 
sensation that will leave a broad grin on the face of even the most moderate 
Bat-fan. The rest of your hour-or-so as the Dark Knight is spent investigating 
the grisly murder of sometime sidekick Nightwing, although some of its most 
impressive moments are when you can just spend time looking down at Gotham 
City, listening to the rain fall, just being Batman.

PlayStation VR review – there's magic, but the mainstream is a way off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/06/playstation-vr-review-theres-magic-but-the-mainstream-is-a-way-off>
For a sense of VR’s present limitations look no further than futuristic 
click-and-point gameLoading Human: Chapter 1 (PSVR & Oculus Rift). One glance 
in an in-game mirror shows the folly of attempting to draw in arms and legs, 
your character’s gangly, inhumanly-elongated form proving to be the stuff of 
nightmares. As you make your way through its mellow 22nd-century adventure 
you’ll also experience frequent moments of intense clumsiness brought on by the 
vagaries of thePlayStation <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> 
Eye camera’s motion-sensing. The plot excuses your maladroit attempts to move 
or pick things up by casting your character as a practising alcoholic, his 
continual fumbling and walking into things supposedly the result of booze 
rather than the technology not quite working. Very convenient.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3035d9be5e8735ba51a9d6e419d4d2c47c7cd1cc%2F0_39_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20PlayStation%20Virtual%20Reality%20is%20here!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20PlayStation%20Virtual%20Reality%20is%20here%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3035d9be5e8735ba51a9d6e419d4d2c47c7cd1cc%2F0_39_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 EVE Valkyrie. 
EVE Valkyrie (PSVR) gets around most of that awkwardness by sitting you in a 
cockpit, its scuffed, lived-in interior looking like a workhorse of the skies, 
giving the game more of a sense of history than its wafer-thin plot. Playing as 
a seated pilot is immediately more comfortable, and that’s just as well because 
you spend most of your time barrel-rolling and looping around asteroids and the 
broken hulks of old spaceships. The feeling of speed and motion is thrilling, 
but long sessions of gaming make for sudden moments of queasiness among the 
stars. More intrepid airmen and women may even welcome the slight giddiness, 
which adds an extra frisson – if you can keep your lunch down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05eaf7adc5ced03874933352a76feebeff6cca06%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20PlayStation%20Virtual%20Reality%20is%20here!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20PlayStation%20Virtual%20Reality%20is%20here%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fplaystation-virtual-reality-arkham-vr-lego-dimensions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05eaf7adc5ced03874933352a76feebeff6cca06%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Lego Dimensions presents The A-Team. 
Oculus Rift and the uses and abuses of VR
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/02/oculus-rift-palmer-luckey-virtual-reality-donald-trump>
Lego Dimensions (PS3, PS4, Xbox 360, Xbox One & Wii U) doesn’t need VR to lure 
you into its shiny polymer universe when it’s got the toy pad. Drop 
Dimensions-branded Lego kit on to this bit of gadgetry and its characters and 
vehicles bounce to life in the game, in some cases arriving with playable 
levels set in lovingly recreated Lego versions of their respective films and TV 
series. As well as Adventure Time, Mission: Impossible and Harry Potter, The 
A-Team gets the Lego treatment with a minifigure BA Baracus who can repair 
machines, shoot things, and morph at will into Hannibal, Faceman and Murdoch. 
Meanwhile, Ghostbusters comes with a perfect little recreation of their car, 
Ecto-1, and a tiny, plastic Melissa McCarthy, whose proton pack can destroy 
pretty much everything in the game. She certainly ain’t afraid of no ghosts.

 