
As the world comes to terms with the biggest political upheaval the west has 
seen for decades, there is one thing on which most analysts agree.Donald 
Trump’s election victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 in the US represents a rejection of the political class, the “elite”, who have
done well from the past few decades of globalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/neoliberalsim-donald-trump-george-monbiot>
 while those left behind have had to deal withstagnating wages and diminishing 
opportunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-product-of-new-economic-depression>
.


The same is true of the Brexit result  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
in the UK five months ago. Most people who voted for Trump and Brexit were not 
members of the working class, but it was that group that proved decisive in the 
swing from Democrat to Republican, and from remain to leave. Some voted in hope 
of radical change, some simply failed to turn out to vote for an establishment 
they didn’t think was on their side.

US aid for women’s sexual health worldwide under threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/12/us-aid-women-sexual-health-worldwide-could-be-cut-drastically-under-trump>
Without denying deep-seated cultural issues, not least racism and misogyny, 
economic depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-product-of-new-economic-depression>
 is the key factor behind this year’s political shifts.

Across Europe, the story is the same: the far right is expected to do well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/the-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right>
 in next year’s Dutch, French and German elections, partly because some people 
on the wrong side of decades of global growth will express their frustration by 
voting for extremists.

So what does it all mean for the international development industry?


Unfortunately, there are few sectors that exhibit greater detachment from the 
reality of the national economy than “international development”.


The aid industry is booming, with private companies and major international 
NGOs growing like never before in the UK and remaining stable and highly 
profitable in the US. And this at a time when almost all other public spending 
in the UK is cut severely, and so many US citizens – black and white – continue 
to wait for serious investment in their infrastructure (be it physical, 
educational or otherwise).

When an entire sector keeps assiduously quiet about growing inequality at home 
while riding a wave of growth and profit, it could fairly be accused of 
complicity in a highly unequal and potentially disastrous global economic 
order. Yes, we need a strong international development sector, but at what cost 
to powerful advocacy and dignified truth-telling?

This difficult situation is not entirely the sector’s fault. The focus of its 
work is overseas, so you could argue it is reasonable to disengage from 
domestic concerns. Moreover, attempts by some major charities to advocate on 
national poverty issues, in the UK and US, have been met with firm rebukes from 
government watchdogs, prompting NGO chief executives to batten down the hatches 
and concentrate on building political relationships and financial stability.

But there is a fine line between safeguarding important organisations that 
make a difference in the world, and keeping silent on the key issues of our 
time.

Five years ago, I asked on this site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/mar/07/domestic-agenda-international-campaigns-link>
 how long the international development sector could continue to ignore 
domestic economic issues,support aid increases without mentioning the fact that 
services for the poor are being cut 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuaqPW8gnv4>, and campaign for fairer rules 
for banks and multinationals abroad while obediently refraining from carrying 
out advocacy on exactly the same issue at home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fafter-brexit-trump-development-sector-must-heed-domestic-issues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c3322fad9cb8e1fa4d699eb9846776ae473a31e%2F0_0_3000_1939%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Brexit%20and%20Trump%2C%20the%20development%20sector%20must%20finally%20heed%20domestic%20issues%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Glennie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fafter-brexit-trump-development-sector-must-heed-domestic-issues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Brexit%20and%20Trump%2C%20the%20development%20sector%20must%20finally%20heed%20domestic%20issues%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Glennie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fafter-brexit-trump-development-sector-must-heed-domestic-issues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c3322fad9cb8e1fa4d699eb9846776ae473a31e%2F0_0_3000_1939%2F3000.jpg>
 Displaced boys receive food at a refugee camp in Iraq’s Khazir region, between 
Irbil and Mosul, where aid workers have warned of a humanitarian crisis. 
Photograph: Bulent Kilic/AFP/Getty Images 
As Trump and Brexit sink in, the answer is ever clearer: not much longer. We 
cannot respond to international poverty and inequality without also responding 
to problems at home.

Conversely, only an international perspective and political platform can come 
close to challenging the power of the 1% in the wealthier countries as well as 
the poorer ones. The barriers, the challenges, the threats are increasingly the 
same, north or south of imaginary lines.

Yet most of the international development sector maintains the absurd charade 
that global poverty is fundamentally removed from national concerns, and that 
attempts to address such poverty can be apolitical.

Led by a well-to-do urban elite, it talks of the need to educate those who 
don’t get aid and development. But what if the development sector itself needs 
to be educated? What if people in the sector, like the political class with 
which it is so closely entwined, are cut off from the reality of life for 
millions who are not benefiting as they are from globalisation?

Will Trump honour pledge to 'stop sending aid to countries that hate us'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/13/will-trump-presidency-honour-pledge-stop-sending-foreign-aid-to-countries-that-hate-us-usaid>
The international development sector comprises a spectrum of organisations, 
from community campaigners to big businesses making big money. One part of this 
spectrum that has emerged with some credibility from 2016 are the radical left 
organisations such asGlobal Justice Now <http://www.globaljustice.org.uk/> 
(formerly World Development Movement) and War on Want 
<http://www.waronwant.org/>, which have long backed calls to “globalise 
resistance <http://www.resist.org.uk/>”, linking struggles at home with those 
abroad. While I don’t always agree with their political solutions and 
strategies, this fundamental analytical insight is correct.

Tactical silences and apparently practical political alliances can create 
tension with the strategic campaigning necessary to turn around a kind of 
globalisation that is increasing inequality in almost every country, with 
consequences not only in the west but in Africa, Asia and Latin America, where 
decent growth rates belie entrenched unfairness. They stifle the emergence of a 
popular public discourse that coherently marries global struggles with national 
ones.

The development sector must listen better to people at home and abroad who are 
hurting, and speak out ever more boldly on their behalf.
 