
When speaking to former Londoners who have made the move to Germany’s capital, 
one comparison keeps cropping up: living in Berlin feels like East London did 
more than a decade ago, before Shoreditch was polished and Hackney became 
unaffordable.

Amid the steady influx of Brits moving to Berlin (the current total is nearing 
14,000), there is a growing bond between these two capital cities. Foodie 
events by former Londoners are becomingincreasingly popular 
<http://markthalleneun.de/maerkte/street-food-thursday?lang=en> in Berlin, a new
LSE Cities report 
<https://lsecities.net/media/objects/events/launch-of-towards-new-urban-mobility-report>
 highlights the cities’ shared (and growing) preference for cycling and walking 
over car ownership and Berlin is now said to berivalling London 
<http://realbusiness.co.uk/article/29799-why-berlin-is-set-to-surpass-london-as-europes-startup-capital-in-five-years>
 as Europe’s startup capital.

But on one matter, Berlin is clearly concerned about any comparisons made 
between the two cities: housing. Indeed, the manager of the Berlin Tenants’ 
Association, Reiner Wild, told the Guardian recently that thecity’s new rent cap
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/rent-cap-legislation-in-force-berlin-germany>
 was put in place precisely because “we don’t want a situation like in London”.

Ruth Barry has been living in Berlin for just under a year, after becoming 
increasingly frustrated in London. In Berlin, she’s able to focus on her 
business full-time, making a larger profit that she did in Britain. “London 
makes you work for your place there,” she says. “If you don’t make it, someone 
else will take that place.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442938254951%2Fa812a724-ac51-47af-87b8-9f46bacab69e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20housing%20trap%3A%20how%20can%20Berlin%20avoid%20following%20in%20London's%20pricey%20footsteps%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20housing%20trap%3A%20how%20can%20Berlin%20avoid%20following%20in%20London%27s%20pricey%20footsteps%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442938254951%2Fa812a724-ac51-47af-87b8-9f46bacab69e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘London makes you work for your place’ … Berliner and ex-Londoner Ruth Barry 
While Londoners are living in an ever-expanding bubble of housing-price stress 
(in the first half of 2014, nearly 60,000 Londoners in their 30s left the city: 
thehighest number since 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/29/young-londoners-flee-capital-region-house-prices>
), one still hears a lot about Berlin being comparatively cheap. Unusually for 
a national capital, thecost of living 
<https://www.expatistan.com/cost-of-living/country/germany> in Berling is still 
lower than in seven other major German cities, including Munich, Hamburg and 
Frankfurt. Yet Berlin’s rental prices are now rising atnearly twice the 
national average rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/13/berlin-property-boom-germans-end-home-rental>
.

Falk Weiss, a photographer, has been living in Berlin for over 40 years. He 
enjoys the influx of people from surrounding countries moving to Berlin, but 
says he is worried about the rising rental prices. “People moving here from 
other large cities rent flats in ‘hip’ areas for prices that seem very cheap to 
them – but for us locals, it’s expensive. We just think: ‘You poor sods, it 
must be so expensive where you’re from if you think these prices are cheap.’”

In London, that’s especially true: the monthly sq m price for renting a “prime 
central London apartment”now ranges from £51 to £64 
<http://www.globalpropertyguide.com/Europe/United-Kingdom/Rental-Yields>, while 
in Berlin, the average sq m rental price isless than €10.50 
<http://www.wohnungsboerse.net/mietspiegel-Berlin/2825> (£7.50). While London 
tenantsreportedly spend 72% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/16/tenants-in-england-spend-half-their-pay-on-rent>
 of their earnings on rent, Berliners pay outjust over 20% 
<http://www.focus.de/immobilien/mieten/so-viel-zahlen-die-deutschen-warum-wohnen-in-berlin-genauso-teuer-ist-wie-in-muenchen_id_4326536.html>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1442999016081%2F7f91d246-e4d0-4aed-8faf-1bde07badc52-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20housing%20trap%3A%20how%20can%20Berlin%20avoid%20following%20in%20London's%20pricey%20footsteps%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20housing%20trap%3A%20how%20can%20Berlin%20avoid%20following%20in%20London%27s%20pricey%20footsteps%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1442999016081%2F7f91d246-e4d0-4aed-8faf-1bde07badc52-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The hipster hangout of Kreuzberg, Berlin. Photograph: Hamza Salmi 
“It’s unhelpful to make comparisons with London rents, because prices are 
relative to the German rental economy,” says Hannah Gregory, who moved to 
Berlin from London seven months ago. She and her partner viewed 30 flats and 
put in 10 applications before finding their current apartment. “For long-time 
Berlin residents, rents are now becoming unaffordable too.”

Gregory believes there has been a change in attitude towards people who have 
recently moved to the city: “There is this ‘Du bist kein Berliner’ [You are not 
a Berliner] movement, which seems to come from a Leftist, anti-gentrification 
statement, but actually feels highly exclusionary. You see ‘Refugees Welcome’ 
graffiti alongside anti-gentrification graffiti.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442938454923%2F6c0c6d93-73c6-4fa9-afbb-68e680516499-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20housing%20trap%3A%20how%20can%20Berlin%20avoid%20following%20in%20London's%20pricey%20footsteps%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20housing%20trap%3A%20how%20can%20Berlin%20avoid%20following%20in%20London%27s%20pricey%20footsteps%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fhousing-trap-how-berlin-avoid-following-london-pricey-footsteps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442938454923%2F6c0c6d93-73c6-4fa9-afbb-68e680516499-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘You poor sods, it must be so expensive where you’re from if you think these 
prices are cheap’ … Berliner and photographer Falk Weiss 
Paul Sullivan, a photographer and writer, who runs slowtravelberlin.com 
<http://slowtravelberlin.com/>, moved from London to Berlin more than six years 
ago – and says the impact on his lifestyle has been profound. “London gradually 
started to feel like an overpriced city full of overworked people – I realised 
I was on a treadmill. Living in Berlin has enabled me to build a lifestyle 
that’s much closer to my ideal than I could have ever had in the UK.”


Sullivan believes the German capital’s efforts to avoid falling into “the 
London trap” are laudable – and largely effective. “[The] main flow of social 
and political news between my British friends and I tends to show Germany in a 
much more progressive light, whether it’s forcing landlords to adhere to rent 
caps, holding public referendums on vast swathes of potential real estate or 
prompting more women into corporate boardrooms.Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> is far from perfect, but watching 
the UK from a distance over the last few years has been a bit like watching a 
slow-motion car crash.”

“Berlin has no financial sector to speak of, no super-rich areas, and I hope 
it won’t ever be as attractive as a luxury investment object,” says translator 
Katy Derbyshire, who has been living in Berlin for 19 years. “But I’m starting 
to hear stories about buildings where many of the flats are uninhabited second 
homes, especially in the East, where a lot of public housing was sold off a few 
years ago.”

How Berliners refused to give Tempelhof airport over to developers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/05/how-berliners-refused-to-give-tempelhof-airport-over-to-developers>
Nevertheless, her recollections of why she left London suggest she still feels 
Berlin is a much more pleasant city to reside in. “John Major had just 
introduced the Criminal Justice Act and the UK felt like a very joyless place 
to be, where protest and parties were being criminalised.”

As a single parent in Berlin, Derbyshire is able to rent a centrally located 
flat and work in a job she loves. She is now applying for German citizenship. 
How does she feel about London, after having lived in Berlin for nearly two 
decades?

“I worry about how government policy will affect my sister’s life – she works 
part-time because she has a disability, and I’m scared she won’t be able to pay 
the rent if her tax credits are cut. She and her daughter couldn’t move out of 
London because that’s where her job is, and she couldn’t travel long distances 
because of her disability.


“London does seem to be becoming increasingly uncaring – a place where money 
counts more than people’s lives, and where housing is a way to make money 
rather than provide people with homes.”

Have you left London to move to Berlin or vice versa? Share your stories and 
experiences in the comments below – and follow Guardian Cities on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 