
Here, somewhere between Lisbon and New York, the weather is mild but decidedly 
unstable. Atlantic fronts barrel in, clouds tussle, shafts of sunbeams and 
great fat silvery pools of light chase over swelling seas to fields of infinite 
greens. For the Azores you pack a cagoule and sunglasses, your swimming gear 
and walking shoes, for you’re never more than a few minutes from a dramatic 
basalt seashore or an alluring grassy pathway.

This family of nine Portuguese sea-splattered volcanic farming islands is now 
easier than ever to visit, with the introduction next week of the first 
low-cost flights – from botheasyJet 
<http://www.easyjet.com/en/cheap-flights/portugal/ponta-delgada> and Ryanair 
<http://www.ryanair.com/en/cheap-flights/london-stansted-to-ponta-delgada/?out-date=2015-05-09>
 – that will enhance the year-round and inter-island offerings of state-run 
SATA. Both will fly into São Miguel, the chief Azorean island. There are three 
island groups, extending over 370 miles, so to get around you need to either 
hop on aturboprop <https://www.sata.pt/en/sata/sata-air-acores-en> or plough 
through the waves onferries <http://www.azores.com/ferry>.
 The main islands of the Azores 
Time slows down here: the locals count it in hundreds of thousands of years, 
in terms of the volcanoes that together have formed the Azores. Being at the 
junction of the Eurasian, North American and African tectonic plates, the 
Azores are a geological hotspot: when seen from its highest point, each island 
is a Clanger-land of chimneys and craters where you could believe entire 
civilisations of sprites and elves live among the fat, dappled cows.

The islands’ beauty is rare, and timeless; the volcanoes bring to mind the 
Miocene epoch, but in human terms there is a sense of 1950s-era innocence. The 
continuing restless volcanic activity seems to fill you with radiant energy and 
the salty, clean winds treat you to the world’s best free facials. There’s 
whale watching, swimming with dolphins, and diving with manta rays to be had, 
plus canyoning and kayaking. You can walk inside volcanoes, and around them, 
and drive along empty roads fringed with millions of azaleas and hydrangeas.

Each island is unique – and independent-minded. There are no resorts, but 
plenty of honesty bars. The locals’ first thought is to trust you, then to 
welcome you. I visited three of the main islands; my final Azorean thought was 
that I was mad to leave without seeing them all.

São Miguel
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427391669462%2F927d50f1-3e03-4e4d-96a3-43e00eb2751c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427391669462%2F927d50f1-3e03-4e4d-96a3-43e00eb2751c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The harbour at São Miguel’s capital Ponta Delgada. Photograph: Alamy 
Flying in, my sense is that the island floats along on a fast, froth-topped 
sea. Intensively rippled and peaked as it is, São Miguel’s surface seems 
constantly in motion, too. With almost 50,000 inhabitants and a thriving 
university, its handsome capital, Ponta Delgada, also feels like it’s on the 
move. It offers great eating and meandering – and I manage a great deal of both.

Where to eat
Money-wise, the Azores are a great deal: petiscos (Portuguese tapas) run at 
about €1 a pop, as does a glass of beer or wine. (Azorean white wine is nicely 
drinkable, but the red’s filthy.)

I loved buzzy A Tasca 
<https://pt-br.facebook.com/pages/A-Tasca/354248658014325> (around €16pp 
including wine, Rua do Aljube 16) whose hilariously hefty smoked black pudding 
petisco comes with chargrilled local pineapple. And get toMané Cigano (lunch 
only, Rua Eng José Cordeiro 1/3) early: this salty, no-frills joint serves 
mounds of spanking fried mackerel at €5.50 for as many as you can handle, and 
cracking grilled octopus, too. Like its Portuguese mother, Azorean cuisine 
revolves around gargantuan portions of sturdy, often meaty meals, so it was a 
treat to discoverRotas Ilha Verde <http://rotasilha.blogspot.co.uk/> (around 
€20pp including wine, it’s tiny – reservations essential, Rua Pedro Homen 49) 
where excellent, exclusively vegetarian, food is served. The place is quietly 
groovy, verging on the hippy, and well worth the visit for Caterina’s sublime 
caramelised garlic and chestnut risotto and her rich-but-light chocolate cake.

Ten minutes’ drive out of town, Quinta dos Sabores 
<http://quinta-sabores.blogspot.co.uk/> (around €22pp for the tasting menu plus 
wine, Alminhas de Rabo de Peixe 10) is Inês and Paulo’s semi-secret, classy 
restaurant attached to their organic smallholding.

Where to drink and enjoy live music (and soak in hot springs)
Ponta Delgada’s bar and music scene is great fun, too. Arco 8 
<http://arco8.blogspot.co.uk/> (around €14pp for petiscos and drinks, Avenida 
Abel Ferin Coutinho) is an art gallery, performance space and cafe, and serves 
killer mojitos, whileColégio 27 <http://colegio27.com/> (€27pp plus wine, 
including music, Rua Carvalho Araujo 27) specialises in live jazz. Both are 
venues for this weekend’sTremor indie music festival 
<http://www.tremor-pdl.com/>. Yes, I’m surprised, too, having thought the 
Azores were all about your blue-rinse cruise passenger: there’s a virile, 
vibrant creative culture on every island,with hundreds of festivals from jazz 
to clowns <http://www.visitazores.com/en/calendar>. There’s a feeling of deep, 
old-fashioned spirituality on each island too, withfrequent religious festivals 
<http://www.azoresweb.com/festivals_azores.html>.

Bright, confident 24-year-old Jorge runs Holistika <http://www.holistika.pt/>, 
which offers an intriguing mix of tours that meld, say, swimming with dolphins 
with mindfulness and yoga (full day from €60pp). He takes me toSete Cidades, a 
spectacular caldera three miles across, complete with breeze-ruffled, 
human-free, jade-hued lake. In Jorge’s lively company, Sete Cidades becomes a 
sacred space, a place of wonder. São Miguel’s many calderas may look like 
they’ve come straight out of Lord of the Rings, but the last significant 
eruption was in 1957, when the Capelinhos volcano, on the western coast of 
Faial island, blew its top. On the green drive from Sete Cidades, we pass a
romério of men in rough shawls and bright scarves bearing metal-tipped staffs 
and chanting prayers whilst pilgrimaging around the island’s many churches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427394023849%2Fa5f1f1e8-76f2-4c7f-bd70-4fc0b6948cda-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427394023849%2Fa5f1f1e8-76f2-4c7f-bd70-4fc0b6948cda-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Romério pilgrims visit one of the island’s churches. Photograph: Kevin Gould 
Geothermal energy powers much of the island, and provides numerous hot 
springs. We spend at least one lifetime floating our aches away in the hot lake 
atTerra Nostra Botanic Gardens 
<http://www.parqueterranostra.com/en-US/menu.aspx> (adults €6, children €2.50) 
in pretty Furnas. At Furnas Lake, the kitchen trick is to slow-cookcozido in 
the underground hot springs. They serve this Portuguesepot au feu at Tony’s 
<http://www.restaurantetonys.pt/> (around €20pp plus wine, Largo da Igreja), 
where portions are big enough to floor a hungry hobbit.

The Termas Ferraria spa <http://www.termasferraria.com/> (full day from €34) 
on São Miguel’s jagged northern tip is efficient, but better is Ferraria’s 
(free) rock pool, where you’re gently braised by hot spring water while 
grabbing gamely on to ropes as the Atlantic pounds wildly over your head.
Caldeira Velha <https://en-gb.facebook.com/ciacaldeiravelha> (signposted from 
Lagao do Fogo, entry €6) offers a tamer dip, but in green jungly beauty so lush 
as to remind me of Hawaii. The time-worn mobile bar outside will sell you a tot 
of Azorean rice pudding liqueur. Jorge also introduces me to the tea factory at
Chá Gorreana <http://www.gorreanatea.com/> (Gorreana de Cima, free) with its 
vintage machinery, and to secret waterfalls, lonely surf beaches and cool 
sundowners atCaloura Bar-Esplanada 
<https://pt-pt.facebook.com/pages/Caloura-Bar-Esplanada/473756259306171> (Rua 
da Caloura 20, Agua de Pau, meals from €14). After a couple of days here I feel 
whole and fresh. If you visit nowhere else in the Azores, seek out São Miguel.

Where to stay
In Ponta Delgada, Hotel Talisman <http://www.hoteltalisman.com/> (doubles from 
€65) has a rooftop pool;¾ Hostel <http://tresquartoshostel.com/> (dorm beds 
€15, rooms from €35) is amazing value. A few minutes out of town, and close to 
a lovely beach,Solar Gloria do Carmo 
<http://www.gloriaaocarmo.com/en/index.html> (doubles from €70) is atmospheric 
and welcoming; nearby isQuinta da Grotinha <http://www.grotinha.com/> (doubles 
from €50), a charmingturismo rural. At Caloura, Quinta do Mar 
<http://www.quintadomar-caloura.com/> (from €80) is a quietly classy boutique 
B&B. And it’s worth splashing out atTerra Nostra Garden Hotel at Furnas 
<http://www.bensaude.pt/terranostragardenhotel/en/> (doubles from €95) for the 
chance to slink out after dark for a private splash about in the bath-warm, 
camelia-bowered lake.

Santa Maria
 An international crowd at Santa Maria’s Mare de Agosto festival last year. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The 15-minute flight from Ponta Delgaa to Santa Maria reveals the island as a 
tablecloth-sized tumble of five farming parishes: there are twice as many cows 
as people in the Azores, a fact borne out on Santa Maria, which has 10,000 cows 
and 5,500 people. My guide, Laurinda, walks me to the top of the island’s 
highest point,Pico Alto (590 metres), from where it feels as though you can 
reach out and hug both sides of the island. We spend a dreamy day coasting 
along country lanes, slowing for many a lingeringOlá! with smiley ladies in 
flowery housecoats and for herds of cows on their way for milking.

From 20-22 August, the island hosts Mare de Agosto 
<http://www.maredeagosto.com/>, Portugal’s oldest music festival. There is also 
afolk <http://www.osamigosdamaia.com/> festival, from 11-12 July, and a blues 
<http://www.santamariablues.com/> festival, from 16-18 July.

On each of the islands there are specialist operators offering coasteering 
(adventure swimming and climbing), canyoning (leaping crazily down waterfalls, 
mostly) and kayaking trips and jeep safaris. Santa Maria’sBootlá 
<http://www.bootla.pt/site/index.php/en/> (activities from around €45pp per 
day) is run by two women who double as the island’s air traffic controllers.

Where to eat

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427394496595%2Fed4d2caa-5e34-4829-8a92-afb16b5f164e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427394496595%2Fed4d2caa-5e34-4829-8a92-afb16b5f164e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Lapas (grilled limpets) served up in a Santa Maria eaterie. Photograph: Kevin 
Gould 
There’s a diaspora of at least a million Azoreans, mostly in North America. At 
the one-street village of Prazeres da Maia, we meet Aida Grota, who has 
returned after 40 years in suburban Boston to revive her late father’s cafe,O 
Grota <https://www.facebook.com/prazeresdamaia>. There is much to love: fresh 
fish, simply grilled or simmered into thick soup; a warm, bubbly welcome; 
Aida’s own natural wine from her vineyard, terraced into the cliff above; 
reviving ocean spray; and a natural swimming pool hewn from the cocoa-coloured 
basalt.

Later, we feed inelegantly on lapas (dollar-sized grilled limpets) swimming in 
garlic butter at livelyGarrouchada 
<https://pt-pt.facebook.com/pages/Garrouchada/230719996975566> (meals around 
€14pp plus wine, Rua Dr Luis Bettencourt), in Vila do Porto, Santa Maria’s 
three-road “capital”.Mascote Caffe 
<https://pt-pt.facebook.com/pages/Mascote-Caffe/506248929456051> (petiscos from 
€1, Rua Téofilo Braga 23) has a vintage vibe and serves goldfish bowl-sized 
G+Ts for a pittance. The family also runs a fine bottle shop next door, should 
you still be thirsty.

Where to stay
Accommodation on Santa Maria is limited. Laurinda runs Casa do Norte 
<http://www.norteazores.com/en/> (from £30 a night) – a cute, romantic cottage 
to kick back in – and manages a handful of other turismos rurales. There are 
also five youth hostels on the archipelago (dorm beds from €12.50, single rooms 
from €23.50, doubles from €33,pousadasjuvacores.com 
<http://www.pousadasjuvacores.com/?page=santa-maria>): the one on Santa Maria 
has an infinity pool and a DJ bar.


Terceira

Founded in the 15th century, Terceira’s main town, Angra do Heroísmo, has 
twice (albeit briefly) served as Portugal’s capital. Its location as the first 
anchorage for galleons billowing back from the new world laden with gold, 
silver and spices made the city prosperous; its merchants and priests built 
themselves the splendid palaces and elegant streets that make Angra today a 
Unesco world heritage centre. Gosh, it’s gorgeous here, from the patterned
calçada pavements to the colourfully painted houses.

 Natural swimming pools carved into the rock at Biscoitos on Terceira island. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The town centre botanic garden is where students from the tiny uni and 
gossiping men in leather-front cardigans take their ease. There’s a grid of 
pretty shopping streets where almost every second address offers something 
tasty to eat or drink; the sea glimmers and above, Monte Brazil – the remnants 
of a volcano – is an essay in green. Angra wears its history with grace and 
quiet panache, and in today’s contrast-rich Atlantic light, feels like a poem, 
shot in Technicolor.

Where to eat
There are treacly, spice-filled Dona Amélia tartlets to be scoffed (through a 
mist of icing sugar) atO Forno <http://pastelariofornoangra.pai.pt/> (Rua São 
João 67), and groceries to be bought for the pleasure of it inBasilio Simões’ 
atmospheric old emporium on Rua Direita. I hang briefly with cool, young Angra 
cafe society atA Minha Casa 
<https://pt-br.facebook.com/pages/A-minha-casa/616556225100465> (Rua Direita 
80) then, as the inevitable weather front comes in, swing down the rainbowed 
road to the fishing village of São Mateus, whereRestaurant Beira Mar 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Restaurant-Beira-Mar-Sao-Mateus-Terciera-Azores-Middle-of-the-Atlantic/172428206140674>
 on the dockside (lunch around €18 plus wine) provides cheery platters of 
just-landed parrot fish, rapidly chargrilled.

Even for those of us with gargantuan appetites, the Alcantara beef stew at Os 
Moinhos <http://restauranteosmoinhos.pai.pt/> in São Sebastiao (€20 including 
wine, Rua Arrabalde 4) may have been a bite too far. I walk it off inside the 
cathedral-like hollow volcano atAlgar de Carvao <http://www.montanheiros.com/>.

There are 73 impérios on the island. These century-old, community-run chapels 
are brightly, beautifully, lovingly painted and chime nicely with my mood on 
the winding drive to Biscoitos, where natural swimming pools offer summer 
bathing amid rock formations that look like frozen fire. Biscoito’s villagers 
plant their grapevines in tiny lava rock enclosures to protect them from the 
salty breezes. And though the ocean seethes and pounds all around, I feel 
cosseted and terrifically cheered by Terceira.

Where to stay

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427393605775%2F5454eed0-d700-4137-a946-4746dced4b83-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427393605775%2F5454eed0-d700-4137-a946-4746dced4b83-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hotel do Caracol, Terceira 
Accommodation is very limited. Quinta do Martelo 
<http://www.quintadomartelo.net/ingles/index.php> (doubles from €85) is a fab 
turismo rural;Hotel do Caracol <http://en.hoteldocaracol.com/> (doubles from 
around €70) is a 20-minute stroll from Angra, and offers wide sea views. Mário 
Rego (+351 966 302 853) is a lovely guide and specialises in Terceira’s rich 
ornithology and geology.

The nine main islands at a glance

Central group
Terceira Culturally rich, with pocket-sized Unesco-listed capital Angra do 
Heroísmo.
Pico Dominated by its 2,350-metre Fuji-like volcano which gives the island its 
name. Home to the excellent Azores Fringe Festival in June – an Azorean 
Edinburgh.
Faial Legendary destination for sailors coming east on the Atlantic winds. 
Hang out with them at Peter Café Sport.
São Jorge Isolated farms hunker under massive basalt cliffs on this island 
famous for its cow’s cheeses and tuna conserves.
Graciosa All-but-abandoned natural beauty. Come for the daily summer Holy 
Ghost processions and the peace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427395422566%2Fc63347c1-4b67-470a-91af-4b52b7730e4f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azores%20holiday%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20places%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Fthe-azores-holiday-guide-portugal-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427395422566%2Fc63347c1-4b67-470a-91af-4b52b7730e4f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The 2,350-metre Mount Pico. Photograph: Sunvil 
Western group
Corvo Other-worldy, covering less than seven square miles and home to only 400 
souls.
Flores A forgotten hydrangea-filled paradise. Local handicrafts include flower 
arrangements made from fish scales.

Southern group
São Miguel The largest island, with landscapes that channel your inner Gandalf.
Santa Maria The warmest, southernmost island, for simple rural pleasures and 
fab music festivals.

Getting around 
Air SATA (sata.pt <http://sata.pt/en>) connects all nine islands 
Sea Transmacor <http://transmacor.pt/> operates ferries all year round between 
Faial, Pico and São Jorge, trips from €13.Atlântic Online 
<http://www.atlanticoline.pt/p/p/> runs daily services between all the islands 
from May-September

Way to go

The trip was provided by Sunvil Discovery <https://www.sunvil.co.uk/> 
(020-8758 4722). A week in the Azores costs from £640pp, including direct 
scheduled flights from Gatwick withSATA International 
<https://www.sata.pt/en/content/home-page>, transfers and seven nights’ B&B on 
São Miguel (other islands can be added to the itinerary). For more information 
seevisitazores.com <http://www.visitazores.com/en>.
 