
Conor Walsh’s laboratory at Harvard University is not your everyday research 
centre. There are no bench-top centrifuges, no fume cupboards for removing 
noxious gases, no beakers or crucibles, no racks of test tubes and only a 
handful laptop computers. Instead, the place is dominated by clothing.

On one side of the lab stands a group of mannequins dressed in T-shirts and 
black running trousers. Behind them, there are racks of sweatshirts and running 
shoes. On another wall of shelves, shorts and leggings have been carefully 
folded and labelled for different-size wearers. On my recent visit, one student 
was sewing a patch on a pair of slacks.

Walk in off the street and you might think you had stumbled into a high-class 
sports shop. But this is no university of Nike. This is theHarvard Biodesign Lab
 <http://biodesign.seas.harvard.edu/>, home of a remarkable research project 
that aims to revolutionise the science of “soft robotics” and, in the process, 
transform the fortunes of stroke victims by helping them walk again.

“Essentially, we are making clothing that will give power to people who have 
suffered mobility impairment and help them move,” says Professor Walsh, head of 
the biodesign laboratory. “It will help them lift their feet and walk again. It 
is the ultimate in power-dressing.”

How a robot could be grandma’s new carer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/06/robot-could-be-grandmas-new-care-assistant>
Last week, at a ceremony in Los Angeles, 35-year-old Walsh was awarded a Rolex 
award for enterprise 
<http://blog.rolexawards.com/2016/10/30-finalists-for-life-changing-award/> for 
his work. He plans to use the prize money – 100,000 Swiss francs (about 
£82,000) – to expand “soft robotics” to develop suits that could also enhance 
the ability of workers and soldiers to lift and carry weights and also improve 
other areas of medical care, including treatments for patients suffering from 
Parkinson’s disease, cerebral palsy and other ailments that affect mobility.

Walsh is a graduate – in manufacturing and mechanical engineering – of Trinity 
College Dublin. While a student, he became fascinated with robotics after he 
read about the exoskeletons being developed in the United States to help humans 
handle heavy loads. Essentially, an exoskeleton is a hard, robot-like shell 
that fits around a user and moves them about. Think of the metal suit worn by 
Robert Downey Jr inIron Man or the powered skeletal frame Sigourney Weaver used 
inAliens to deal with the acid-dribbling extraterrestrial that threatened her 
spaceship.

“I thought that it all looked really, really cool,” says Walsh. So he applied, 
and was accepted, to study at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
under biomechatronics expert Professor Hugh Herr. But when Walsh began working 
on rigid exoskeletons, he found the experience unsatisfactory. “It was like 
being inside a robotic suit of armour. It was hard, uncomfortable and ponderous 
and the suit didn’t always move the way a human would,” he says.

So when Walsh moved to Harvard, where he set up the biodesign lab, he decided 
to take a different approach to the problem. “I saw immediately that if you had 
a softer suit that accentuated the right actions, was comfy to wear and didn’t 
encumber you, it could have huge biomedical applications,” he says. “I began to 
wonder: can we make wearable robots soft?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Frobot-exosuit-harvard-helps-stroke-sufferers-walk-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c741acea37fe152109973957ff12eacfbf41f86%2F0_219_6496_3898%2F6496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20robot%20suit%20providing%20hope%20of%20a%20walking%20cure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Frobot-exosuit-harvard-helps-stroke-sufferers-walk-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20robot%20suit%20providing%20hope%20of%20a%20walking%20cure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Frobot-exosuit-harvard-helps-stroke-sufferers-walk-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c741acea37fe152109973957ff12eacfbf41f86%2F0_219_6496_3898%2F6496.jpg>
 The power pack for the exosuit developed by Conor Walsh and his team. 
Photograph: Fred Merz 
The answer turned out to be yes. Walsh, assisted by colleagues Terry Ellis, 
Louis Awad and Ken Holt of Boston University, worked with experts in 
electronics, mechanical engineering, materials science and neurology to create 
an ingenious, low-tech way to boost walking: the soft exosuit. A band of cloth 
is wrapped around a person’s calf muscles. Pulleys, made from bicycle brake 
cables, are attached to these calf wraps and the other ends of the cables 
fitted to a power pack worn on a patient’s back. When the wearer starts to lift 
his foot to take a step, the power pack pulls the cables and this helps the 
wearer lift their leg. Then, as their foot swings forward, another cable, 
attached to the toecap of their shoes, tightens to help raise the toe so that 
it does not drag on the ground as they swing their legs forward. This condition 
is known as “foot drop” and it is a common difficulty for stroke patients.

In this way, an often critical problem for someone who can no longer control 
their muscles properly is alleviated. They can lift their legs and, just as 
importantly, keep their toes from turning down so that they do not drag on the 
ground and make them stumble. It is the perfect leg-up, in short.

“Designing robotic devices that target specific joints just hadn’t been done 
before,” says Walsh. “People had only looked at constructing a full-leg 
exoskeleton. We are targeting just one joint, not a whole leg. Crucially, in 
the case of strokes, it is the one that is often most badly impaired. Also, we 
have managed to keep our materials very light and easily wearable. Simple is 
best. That is our mantra.”

Cryonics: does it offer humanity a chance to return from the dead?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/cryogenics-does-it-offer-humanity-a-chance-to-return-from-the-dead>
Originally, the pulleys that lifted the cables that helped wearers’ raise 
their legs and toes were powered by a trolley-like device that trundled 
alongside them. One of the key improvements involved in Walsh’s project has 
been to reduce that power pack to a size that can be worn reasonable 
comfortably. The unit weighs 10lbs (4.5kg) and Walsh expects his team will be 
able to make further reductions in the near future. “Motors are going to get 
lighter, batteries are going to get lighter. That will all be of great benefit, 
without doubt.”

The packs are also fitted with devices known as inertial measurement units 
(IMU), which analyse the forces created by foot movements and raise and lower 
the brake-cable pulleys. These sensors have to work with millisecond accuracy 
for the system to work properly. “Timing is absolutely critical,” says Walsh.

Test runs have already proved successful, however. Videos of stroke patients 
wearing soft exosuits and walking on treadmills reveal a marked improvement in 
their movement. Once fitted with the suits, they no longer clutch the handrails 
and their strides become much quicker and more confident. “We are not saying 
our system is the only solution to impaired mobility,” adds Walsh. “There will 
always be a place for hard exoskeleton power suits, for example, for people who 
are completely paralysed. But for less severe problems, soft robotic suits, 
with their lightness and flexibility, are a better solution.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Frobot-exosuit-harvard-helps-stroke-sufferers-walk-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcca36f58fa43c60ddb1cf302cdce970bc538738f%2F474_451_5717_3431%2F5717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20robot%20suit%20providing%20hope%20of%20a%20walking%20cure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Frobot-exosuit-harvard-helps-stroke-sufferers-walk-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20robot%20suit%20providing%20hope%20of%20a%20walking%20cure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Frobot-exosuit-harvard-helps-stroke-sufferers-walk-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcca36f58fa43c60ddb1cf302cdce970bc538738f%2F474_451_5717_3431%2F5717.jpg>
 Conor Walsh and a colleague assemble an exosuit on a mannequin. Photograph: 
Fred Merz 
Every year, about 110,000 people suffer a stroke in the UK. Most patients 
survive butstrokes are still the third-largest cause of death, after heart 
disease and cancer, in this country 
<http://www.nhs.uk/livewell/over60s/pages/the-top-five-causes-of-premature-death.aspx>
. Strokes occur when the blood supply to the brain is stopped due to a blood 
clot or when a weakened blood vessel bursts. One impact affects how muscles 
work. As theStroke Association <https://www.stroke.org.uk/> points out, your 
brain sends signals to your muscles, through your nerves, to make them move. A 
stroke, in damaging your brain, disrupts these signals. Classic symptoms 
include foot drop and loss of stamina. Patients feel tired and become more 
clumsy, making it even more difficult to control their movements.

“Patients often withdraw from life. They stop going out and miss out on all 
sort of social events – their grandchildren’s sports events or parties,” says 
Ignacio Galiana of theWyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering 
<https://wyss.harvard.edu/> at Harvard University, which is also involved in 
the soft exosuit project. “They prefer to stay at home and to stop exercising 
because it is so tiring and draining. They withdraw from the world. By making 
it possible to walk normally again we hope we can stop that sort of thing 
happening.”

The soft exosuits will not be worn all of the time, it is thought, but instead 
be put on for a few hours so patients can get out of their homes without 
exhausting themselves. The devices should also help in physiotherapy sessions 
aimed at restoring sufferers’ ability to walk. “This is a new tool that will 
greatly extend and accelerate rehabilitation therapy for stroke patients,” says 
Walsh. “Patients no longer have to think about the process of moving. It starts 
to come naturally to them, as it was before they had their stroke.”

As to timing, Walsh envisages that his team will be able to get their 
prototypes on to the market in about three years. Nor will soft exoskeleton use 
be confined to stroke cases. “Cerebral palsy, Alzheimer’s, multiple sclerosis, 
Parkinson’s, old age: patients with any of these conditions could benefit,” 
adds Walsh. “When muscles no longer generate sufficient forces to allow people 
to walk, soft, wearable robots will be able to help them.”
 