
Is your housing making you poor? This week’s report by the Joseph Rowntree 
Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/study-finds-7m-britons-in-poverty-despite-being-from-working-families>
 (JRF) warned that while overall poverty rates remain largely static, the 
headline figures mask increasing insecurity in many people’s housing and 
employment conditions.

Study finds 7m Britons in poverty despite being from working families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/study-finds-7m-britons-in-poverty-despite-being-from-working-families>
The number of working people in poverty has outstripped those out of work and 
in poverty; poverty is particularly stark in the private rented sector; while 
insecurity for private and social renters has risen since 2010, with the number 
of evictions by a landlord rising from 23,000 in 2010–11 to 37,000 in 2015–16. 
Over the same period, mortgage repossessions have fallen from 23,000 to 3,300.

The JRF report found that a toxic triumvirate of high rents, low wages and 
cuts to working-age benefits have seen the risk of poverty grow for many 
families, including working households. This has created a perfect storm 
whereby housing fuels poverty: with local housing allowance cuts, higher rents 
and wages failing to keep pace with increases in the cost of living, households 
are shelling out a higher proportion of income in housing costs and finding 
themselves in poverty as a result.

The rent gap: what is the local housing allowance?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/dec/07/rent-gap-local-housing-allowance>
For households hit by the lowered benefit cap, Local Housing Allowance cap  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/dec/07/rent-gap-local-housing-allowance>
and cuts to council tax support and disability benefits, being in work often 
doesn’t pay. The prime minister Theresa May might claim to be a champion of the 
“just about managing”, but the number of people living in poverty in the 
private rented sector has doubled in a decade, from 2.2 million people in 
2004–05 to 4.5 million people today. There are 3.8 million workers living in 
poverty in the UK today; it’s the equivalent of 12% of all workers, and 1 
million more than a decade ago.

The freeze on working-age benefits  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/04/benefits-cap-reduction-families-christmas>
has worsened the crisis: rents haven’t frozen, so households simply spend more 
on housing costs. Many people who rely on benefits to top up their earnings 
have reported difficulty in finding landlords willing to rent to them, with 
more ads stating homes are unavailable to those claiming housing benefit. The 
government’s obsession with home ownership is useless to these households: when 
73% of private renters in poverty are paying over a third of their income in 
rent, as the JRF report found, there’s little room to save anything, let alone 
tens of thousands of pounds for a deposit on a house.

Before George Osborne was sacked, his misleadingly named “national living 
wage” seemed to promise a solution to in-work poverty, but proper scrutiny 
shows it is far more likely to worsen conditions for some households.Compared 
to the living wage at £8.54 <http://www.livingwage.org.uk/what-living-wage>, 
the “national living wage”is £7.20 <https://www.livingwage.gov.uk/>. 

The JRF report  
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/press/work-poverty-hits-record-high-housing-crisis-fuels-insecurity>
found that many families will be considerably worse off even after changes to 
the income tax threshold and universal credit taper are taken into account. A 
lone mother with two children working on the new amount will be £2,600 worse 
off a year, while a family of four with both parents in work on the “national 
living wage” will be almost £1,000 worse off. If they were just about managing 
before, now they’re barely treading water.

Poverty <https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> then, cannot be tackled 
without tackling the problem of housing.

The answer according to JRF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/brexit-poverty-just-about-managing>
 is not to focus on traditional house-building, but look at more radical 
measures that can swiftly alter housing costs if adopted.

To combat in-work poverty exacerbated by rising rents, link rents to local 
earnings: the percentage of income spent on rent becomes manageable, poverty 
drops, people are able to spend more in the local economy.The “living rents” 
scheme could cut the housing benefit bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/18/living-rents-save-billions-housing-benefit-report>
considerably, and makes far more practical sense than the current “affordable 
rent” calculations of 80% of market rent.

To combat poverty in housing, the focus of policy has to be redrawn – away 
from those who seek to profit from it and back to the people who need to live 
in the country’s housing.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 