
President Obama's brave and surprising inaugural address was the 56th of its 
kind since George Washington delivered the first one in New York on 20 April 
1789. Over the last two centuries, these speeches have become as thickly 
encrusted with conventions as the limerick, the sonnet or the Times crossword: 
they are a bizarre literary form, unique to the United States, with a tiny 
handful of acknowledged classics (Lincoln's two inaugurals, Franklin 
Roosevelt's first, and John F Kennedy's solitaire) that stand proud of the 
generally depressing mass of mediocre and bombastic writing, most of which now 
reads like cold porridge.

Since Andrew Jackson's time, inaugurals have been designed for outdoor 
delivery to an often wet and shivering crowd in Washington's capricious 
weather. Even before Inauguration Day was set back on the calendar from 4 March 
to 20 January in 1937, the ceremony seems to have been a magnet for snow, rain 
and frigid northeasterly gales. Obama was lucky: the sun shone, though the 
temperature in the National Mall was a forbidding 28F.

At William Henry Harrison's March inauguration in 1841, he stepped to the 
podium without hat or overcoat, under a louring sky, his trouserlegs flapping 
in the bitter wind, and delivered the longest address on record. At nearly 
8,500 words, it took Harrison 100 minutes to read aloud to a fast-diminishing 
audience. When he died the following month, of pneumonia and pleurisy, it was 
widely believed that his rash feat of oratory must have been the cause. In 
fact, he first showed symptoms of a cold nearly two weeks after the event, but 
the idea that a presidential inaugural can be fatal has gained such a hold on 
the American imagination that the legend of Harrison's death-by-speechmaking 
lives on, despite the medical evidence against it.

Nineteenth-century presidents could count on crowds of up to 10,000 people 
milling around the east portico of the Capitol building; Franklin Roosevelt 
spoke to 100,000 in 1933, and more than a million showed up for Lyndon 
Johnson's inauguration in 1965. At least half a million came when Ronald Reagan 
changed the venue to the west portico in 1981, enabling the president to speak 
to the nation looking symbolically westward, down the Mall, past the Washington 
and Lincoln monuments, and through the earth's curvature over three time zones 
to the Pacific coast. Crowd estimates are always unreliable, but Obama is said 
to have drawn 1.8 million people on Tuesday, which, if true, is an all-time 
record.

The growing crowds and open-air character of the occasion help to account for 
the ever-increasing grandiosity of language in inaugural addresses. The words 
of most inaugurals would sound insane if spoken quietly, indoors; and they 
sometimes sound that way when carried on the wind via loudspeakers and vast 
JumboTron TV screens. These quadrennial speeches are as close as America comes 
to the rhetoric heard more than 70 years ago in Red Square, the Piazza Venezia 
in Rome and the Reichsparteitagsgel√§nde in Nuremberg. Or, to put it in the more 
kindly words of Peggy Noonan, the columnist and former Reagan speechwriter, 
they are "a golden trumpet that a president gets to blow at most twice in his 
life".

Four years ago, when George W Bush lifted that trumpet to his lips, he used it 
to declare a global war on tyranny. "America, in this young century, proclaims 
liberty throughout all the world, and to all the inhabitants thereof. Renewed 
in our strength - tested, but not weary - we are ready for the greatest 
achievements in the history of freedom." Try saying that across the kitchen 
table, paying particular attention to your pronunciation of "thereof", then 
wait for the arrival of the men in white coats.

Rhetorically speaking, much - too much - is expected from a speech delivered 
from behind shields of bulletproof glass and introduced by the band of the US 
Marines playing "Hail to the Chief", the music punctuated by gunfire from 
saluting cannons. Because the president's language has to struggle to maintain 
the ceremonial pomp of the occasion, lofty similes and metaphors are the order 
of the day, and classical tropes, with names like Aegean islands, from Anaphora 
to Zeugma, are retrieved from storage to give the oration an air of immemorial 
antiquity.

Inaugurals conventionally start with a history lesson and finish with a 
prayer. In the first paragraphs, the newly sworn-in president thanks his 
predecessor for his service to the nation, applauds the miracle of a peaceful 
transition (as if all other countries went in for putsches and coups), and 
reminds America of its unique place as the cradle of modern democracy, 
summoning the ghosts of his illustrious predecessors, Washington, John Adams, 
Jefferson, Madison and Lincoln, to crowd around him in a Mount-Rushmore-like 
tableau. In the last paragraph, it's customary to call on God to bless the 
nation and the great enterprise of the incoming administration, addressing him 
by such honorifics as "the benign Parent of the Human Race" (Washington), "that 
infinite Power" (Jefferson), "the kind Providence" (Pierce), "the giver of 
Good" (Theodore Roosevelt), "the Author of Liberty" (George W Bush).

Sandwiched between these more or less canonical beginnings and endings is the 
less predictable meat of the piece. Most often it's a mission statement, 
couched in terms of uplifting generality and promising great good for all in 
the sunlit years ahead. Clinton's second inaugural in 1997 was a dismal classic 
in this regard. Although he did try to address the issue of race, the majority 
of the speech was boilerplate: "We need a new sense of responsibility for a new 
century . . . Our greatest responsibility is to embrace a new spirit of 
community for a new century . . . The challenge of our past remains the 
challenge of our future . . . With a new era of government, a new sense of 
responsibility, a new spirit of community, we will sustain America's journey." 
Words that were already dead on the page died a second death as Clinton gave 
them voice. Coming from someone with a reputation for effortless, improvised 
rhetoric, the speech was shockingly empty: the liberal historian William 
Leuchtenburg called it "the most banal address by an American president I have 
ever heard".

It generally takes an imminent catastrophe to persuade the new president to 
talk in detail about current events. Lincoln, facing the coming civil war in 
1861, mounted an impassioned and closely argued defence of the "perpetuity" of 
the union and the constitution against the Southern secessionists, in a speech 
that's still ablaze with life today. In 1933, Franklin Roosevelt crisply laid 
out the economic theory and practice of the New Deal in less than 2,000 words, 
weaving farm prices, factories, mortgages, foreclosures, jobs and public works 
into an instantly comprehensible plan of action, which took immediate effect by 
lifting the spirits of a profoundly depressed nation. But these are famous 
exceptions to the tradition of the inaugural as an exercise in ghostwritten 
magniloquence.

Until very recently, the pretence was kept up that these speeches were the 
original work of the president-elect, scribbling alone up in his den or - in 
JFK's case - the locked cabin of a private yacht, surrounded by blunted pencils 
and scumbled pages from a yellow legal pad. But this has always been a polite 
fiction.

When Lincoln showed the first draft of his 1861 inaugural to William Seward, 
his chief rival for the Republican nomination and his designated secretary of 
state (yes, history does sometimes repeat itself), Seward returned it with a 
sheaf of corrections to almost every sentence ("Strike out the whole 
paragraph", "For 'treasonable' write 'revolutionary'") and a drastically 
changed ending. Lincoln adopted almost all of Seward's suggestions, including 
the most important one, where Seward insisted that the speech end not on a 
challenge to the South (Lincoln had written "Shall it be peace, or a sword?") 
but on an appeal to what he called "the mystic chords" of shared historical 
memory. Seward's mystic chords went in, as did his hearts and hearths, his 
patriot graves and battlefields, his bonds of affection, his angels and ancient 
music, but as Lincoln rewrote Seward he sharpened every idea and phrase, giving 
the new ending a poignancy and intimacy of tone that hugely improved on 
Seward's original.

Lincoln made Seward's words his own, but most presidents, although they tinker 
with their speeches, leave the business of writing to their ghosts, and 
sometimes, on Inauguration Day, appear baffled by the strange-tasting language 
they find in their own mouths. In January 1965, with Mariner 4 en route to 
Mars, Lyndon Johnson haltingly read aloud this lyrical paean, probably written 
by Richard Goodwin, LBJ's leading spook:

"Think of our world as it looks from the rocket that is heading toward Mars. 
It is like a child's globe, hanging in space, the continents stuck to its side 
like coloured maps. We are all fellow passengers on a dot of earth."

His disbelief was audible. So was George HW Bush's, in 1989, when he found 
himself telling the children of America that "Democracy belongs to us all, and 
freedom is like a beautiful kite that can go higher and higher with the breeze."

The two best inaugurals of modern times were written by ghosts. Raymond Moley, 
a former professor of politics at Columbia, drafted Roosevelt's 1933 address, 
and its best-known phrase, "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself", was 
slipped in at the last moment by another aide, Louis Howe. As for Kennedy's 
1961 rhetorical triumph, his chief speechwriter, Ted Sorenson, was recently 
questioned by Deborah Solomon of the New York Times, who asked him point-blank 
if he was the true author of "Ask not what your country can do for you . . ." 
His succinct reply was "Ask not".

The trouble with ghostwriting is that it raises the issue of whether the 
president is in a state of diminished responsibility for what he says. Does he 
actually grasp the implications of the words he speaks? A case in point is 
FDR's attack on bankers in his first inaugural:

"Practices of the unscrupulous money changers stand indicted in the court of 
public opinion, rejected by the hearts and minds of men . . . They know only 
the rules of a generation of self-seekers. They have no vision, and when there 
is no vision the people perish . . . The money changers have fled from their 
high seats in the temple of our civilisation. We may now restore that temple to 
the ancient truths."

The embedded quotation from the Book of Proverbs ("They have no vision") only 
helps to underline the antisemitism of the passage. But Roosevelt himself was 
not an antisemite; his closest friends, his cabinet and his Supreme Court 
appointments included many Jews, such as Felix Frankfurter, Henry Morgenthau, 
Abe Fortas and Louis Brandeis.

Yet calling bankers "the money changers", along with talk of driving them from 
the temple, was a favourite trope of Father Coughlin, the explicitly 
antisemitic demagogue and "America's radio priest". Coughlin, who supported 
Roosevelt in the 1932 election against Hoover, broke with him shortly 
afterwards, deriding the New Deal as the "Jew Deal". The lightly encoded 
message about an international conspiracy of Jewish bankers, written into 
Roosevelt's speech by Moley, ought to have been recognised by the president for 
what it was and immediately struck out. But it remained.

It's a puzzle. Perhaps the period explains it; a time when genteel 
antisemitism was so routine that it passed unnoticed. Perhaps - though this 
seems most unlikely - Roosevelt was in secret agreement with Coughlin's 
paranoid tirades. Perhaps he just warmed to the biblical roll and grandeur of 
the words when Moley showed him the script: vision, money changers, temple, 
ancient truths - powerful inaugural stuff. Whatever its explanation, this 
curious passage illustrates the danger of a president becoming the unwitting 
puppet of his ghosts, as I believe George W Bush did in 2005 with his 
neoconservative, Project for the New American Century, Weekly Standard-style 
inaugural and its - mercifully empty - promise to bring about democracy around 
the globe by force of American arms.

No recent inaugural has been as keenly anticipated as Obama's. On the strength 
of Dreams From My Father, he's not only the best writer to occupy the White 
House since Lincoln (not a title for which there's stiff competition), he's 
also the most rousing American political orator of his generation. The big 
question was: would he write it himself? To which the disappointing answer was 
a qualified no.

It was probably because Obama first made his name as an eloquent writer that 
in December the Washington Post broke the convention of tactful silence on the 
issue of ghostwriting, and published a long and revealing article about Obama's 
relationship with Jon Favreau, his chief speechwriter. Favreau is now 27, and 
has been ghosting for Obama since 2004. He was found by the Post reporter in a 
local Starbucks, working at a laptop on a document headed "ROUGH DRAFT OF 
INAUGURAL", having missed his original deadline of Thanksgiving.

Unlike Sorenson, Favreau (otherwise "Favs") wasn't coy about his job as 
presidential dramaturge, chatting freely about how he'd been listening to 
recordings of previous inaugurals and had paid a visit to Peggy Noonan to get 
the inside dope on how to write one. (Bad news, this: the modern inaugural 
address is a form that cries out to be broken, not copied.) The reporter, Eli 
Saslow, described Obama's and Favreau's usual procedure as they work up a 
speech:

"Before most speeches, Obama meets with Favreau for an hour to explain what he 
wants to say. Favreau types notes on his laptop and takes a crack at the first 
draft. Obama edits and rewrites portions himself - he is the better writer, 
Favreau insists - and they usually work through final revisions together. If 
Favreau looks stressed, Obama sometimes reassures him: 'Don't worry. I'm a 
writer, too, and I know that sometimes the muse hits you and sometimes it 
doesn't. We'll figure it out together.'"

Favreau is said to travel everywhere with a copy of Dreams From My Father, 
written before Obama entered politics, using it as the key to his master's 
authentic voice. He has internalised Obama's speech patterns along with his 
biography, and can now impersonate Obama on the page, speaking in the first 
person singular, with uncanny plausibility. Favreau says that when he leaves 
the White House he'd like to write "a screenplay or maybe a fiction book based 
loosely on what all this was like". But - whether or not he knows it - he is 
writing fiction now, losing himself inside a character remote from his own, as 
playwrights do. It's a bit like Alan Bennett writing Miss Fozzard and the other 
monologuists in his Talking Heads series: Favreau is white, single, 20 years 
younger than Obama, a buzzcut Generation Y-er, whose chief amusement, when not 
channelling Obama on his laptop, is all-night videogaming. (He caused a 
momentary scandal when the press found on his Facebook page a silly photo of 
him groping the right breast of a cardboard cutout of Hillary Clinton, while a 
friend jammed a bottle of beer against her face.)

The gulf in age and temperament between Obama and Favreau is probably a 
liberation for the speechwriter. To inhabit the skull of someone different from 
oneself is one of the great pleasures of writing fiction, and the character of 
Obama (should that be "Obama"?) must be fun to work with: his natural gravity, 
his unflappable cool, his perpetually wrinkled brow, his sudden flashes of 
self-depreciating humour ("a mutt like me . . ."), his ability to switch 
styles, from law professor to black preacher and back again, his rich and 
flexible actor's baritone. No president since Kennedy has given his ghost so 
much to exploit, so many opportunities for elaborate verbal invention.

I suppose it's naive to be disconcerted by the fact that Obama employs ghosts 
(Favreau heads a team of them), but his best speeches have been so personal, so 
drenched in the past he described in Dreams From My Father, that one can't help 
feeling a little let down to learn that, for instance, his masterful and 
exhilarating speech on race, delivered last March in Philadelphia, was a joint 
Obama/Favreau production. From the Washington Post:

"One Saturday night in March, Obama called Favreau and said he wanted to 
immediately deliver a speech about race. He dictated his unscripted thoughts to 
Favreau over the phone for 30 minutes - "It would have been a great speech 
right then," Favreau said - and then asked him to clean it up and write a 
draft. Favreau put it together, and Obama spent two nights retooling before 
delivering the address in Philadelphia the following Tuesday."

I think it's fair to assume that Favreau was here minimising his own role in 
the composition of the speech. But, however one reads the account, what is one 
to make of this much-quoted passage:

"I can no more disown [the Rev Jeremiah Wright] than I can disown the black 
community. I can no more disown him than I can my white grandmother - a woman 
who helped raise me, a woman who sacrificed again and again for me, a woman who 
loves me as much as she loves anything in this world, but a woman who once 
confessed her fear of black men who passed by her on the street, and who on 
more than one occasion has uttered racial or ethnic stereotypes that made me 
cringe. These people are a part of me. And they are a part of America, this 
country that I love ..."

As soon as one becomes aware of the presence of Favreau's fingers on the 
keyboard, the can of Red Bull, his preferred energy drink, beside him on the 
table, and the whiteness of his skin, the questions multiply: does this sound 
like Obama talking over the phone to Favreau? Obama recalling his Hawaiian 
childhood in his own words? Or just Favreau recalling Obama's 1995 memoir 
(which he must now know by heart)? As Bill Clinton almost said, it all depends 
on what the meaning of I is.

The aim of Obama's inaugural, he told George Stephanopoulos on ABC's This 
Week, was "to try to capture as best I can the moment we are in". It would have 
been a more obviously arresting speech if he'd tried to capture the moment in 
the language of the present century instead of using the faux-antique dialect 
of past inaugurals. So many phrases had the dull patina of silver that has 
jingled in dead presidents' pockets. The few mint coins in his oration stood 
out by their brightness, like "our patchwork heritage", followed by the 
addition of "non-believers" to "We are a nation of Christians and Muslims, Jews 
and Hindus" - the first time that atheism has been included under the rubric of 
religious tolerance and freedom. And there was the pretty rhetorical flourish 
of "The nation cannot prosper long when it only favours the prosperous".

The surface tone of the address was set by somewhat moth-eaten metaphors 
("rising tides of prosperity and the still waters of peace . . . amidst 
gathering clouds and raging storms") and a curious solecism in its sixth 
sentence: "At these moments, America has carried on not simply because of the 
skill or vision of those in high office, but because we, the people, have 
remained faithful to the ideals of our forbearers, and true to our founding 
documents." Forbearers? In neither American nor British English is a forbearer 
a forebear, or ancestor; it's a person who shows forbearance - endurance under 
provocation. But someone (Favreau? Obama?) must have thought that the extra 
syllable in "forbearer" gave the word the sort of solemn weightiness suitable 
to the liturgical grandeur of an inaugural address, and tipped it into the 
speech without regard for its actual meaning. Its presence in the speech as 
delivered and distributed to the press (the White House has since corrected its 
official text) reveals just how anxious the authors were to uphold the stilted 
linguistic conventions of the form - and for good reason.

Under the guise of noble platitude Obama was able to get away with murder, 
cloaking in familiar and emollient language an address that otherwise defied 
convention. There was a hint of this in his ritual bow to the outgoing 
president, in which he spent five words acknowledging Bush's service to his 
country and 10 in thanking him for his departure from office. In no inaugural 
has a president so completely repudiated the policies of his predecessor as 
Obama did on Tuesday. Look back at the "forbearers" sentence, and see the sting 
in its tail: "true to our founding documents". Most of the crowd of more than a 
million who packed the Mall, a few of whom loudly booed Dick Cheney when he was 
wheeled on to the stage, believed that the Bush administration had done its 
best to shred the constitution. The distinction between "we the people" (who 
are loyal to the founding documents) and "those in high office" (who stand 
accused of abusing them) hung ambiguously in the air. If you wanted to hear it, 
it was there; if you didn't, it wasn't.

This veiled quality suffused the entire address, whose central motif was 
stated early on: "The time has come to put away childish things . . . to 
reaffirm our enduring spirit; to choose our better history." The distinct echo 
of Lincoln's "the better angels of our nature" helped to soften the implication 
that the last eight years belong to our worse history, under a president famous 
for his childish pursuits (as one of Bush's own advisers once asked, "What kind 
of male obsesses over his bike-riding time, other than Lance Armstrong or a 
12-year-old boy?").

Yet there was no triumphalism in this; there was, rather, a note of sombre 
regret. It was necessary for Obama to announce to both the United States and 
the rest of the world (and his inaugural was directed, unusually, at least as 
much to the foreign as to the domestic audience) that on Tuesday the Bush era 
had ended and that America, after a long, unhappy detour in the wilderness, was 
returning to its better history. Since inaugural addresses are by tradition 
high-toned, bipartisan affairs, this was an immensely difficult feat to bring 
off with grace. What needed to be said had to be phrased in language as 
well-worn and conventional as possible, to give the illusion of smooth 
continuity between Obama's speech and those of past presidents.

The driving theme of the address made its appearance at artfully calculated 
intervals, with Obama touching on it, departing from it, returning to it, 
burying it for a while and digging it up again in a way that made some critics 
call the speech diffuse. But it was not diffuse. It was quietly, courteously 
insistent on its purpose.

"On this day, we come to proclaim an end to . . . the worn-out dogmas that for 
far too long have strangled our politics": an end, then, to the liberal 
imperialism of the neoconservatives and the "Bush doctrine" of preemptive 
invasion. "Starting today, we must pick ourselves up, dust ourselves off and 
begin again the work of remaking America": so, under the 43rd president, we 
have been floored and supine. The most damning censure of the Bush 
administration arrived exactly midway through the speech, at the 
nine-and-a-half minute mark:

"As for our common defence, we reject as false the choice between our safety 
and our ideals. Our founding fathers, faced with perils that we can scarcely 
imagine, drafted a charter to assure the rule of law and the rights of man, a 
charter expanded by the blood of generations. Those ideals still light the 
world, and we will not give them up for expedience's sake. And so to all the 
other peoples and governments who are watching today, from the grandest 
capitals to the small village where my father was born: know that America is a 
friend of each nation and every man, woman and child who seeks a future of 
peace and dignity, and we are ready to lead once more."

That is as near as George W Bush has come to being impeached. It covers the 
legal black hole of Guant√°namo Bay and its kangaroo courts, the overreaching 
powers of the Patriot Act, torture, warrantless wiretapping and all the other 
infractions of the civil liberties of Americans and foreigners alike that 
occurred under the outgoing administration. "We are ready to lead once more" is 
startlingly candid in its admission that, under Bush, the United States did not 
lead the world but attempted to bomb and bully it into submission.

The reference to "the rights of man" was salient. The title of Thomas Paine's 
giant pamphlet prepared the way for Paine's incognito appearance at the end of 
the speech, when Obama talked of Christmas night in 1776, when George 
Washington led his ragtag army across the ice-choked Delaware river to confront 
the British and Hessians who were encamped at Trenton, New Jersey. Obama spoke 
of "the timeless words" that "the father of our nation" ordered to be read to 
the American people: "Let it be told to the future world, that in the depth of 
winter, when nothing but hope and virtue could survive, that the city and the 
country, alarmed at one common danger, came forth to meet [it]." The oddly 
bracketed "it" replaced the original end of the sentence, which was "came forth 
to meet and to repulse it."

Every commentator I heard - including, surprisingly, the historian Doris 
Kearns Goodwin - assumed that the quotation came from Washington himself, but 
it is from Paine's The Crisis. "With hope and virtue, let us brave once more 
the icy currents," Obama said, and, again, the commentators assumed, mistakenly 
I think, that he was speaking only of the recession as it deepens, with 
increasing speed, into depression. But Paine's authorship of those words 
suggests otherwise. The "common danger", requiring "hope" and, more pointedly, 
"virtue" in order to "meet [and to repulse] it", is surely as much the spectre 
of a dictatorial administration, emboldened by Dick Cheney's theory of the 
"unitary executive", and its dangerous freedom to abuse the rights of man, as 
it is the present economic crisis. No wonder "and to repulse" was left out: 
Obama, a cautious politician and sensitive to the nuances of words, stopped 
short of calling the Bush administration repellent.

His image of leaving the blood-stained snow behind to cross the freezing river 
- famous from schoolroom reproductions of Emanuel Leutze's 1851 painting George 
Washington Crossing the Delaware - and his marriage of December 1776 to "this 
winter of our hardship" were his most daring attempts at inaugural loftiness. 
But there was more to them than a stirring call to arms to fight recession; he 
was placing between his incoming administration and that of the outgoing 
president a broad river packed with growling chunks of ice - a river just 
crossed, at great hazard to the survival of America's "founding documents".

I've read - or at least skimmed - every inaugural address since George 
Washington's, and none comes close to so categorically rejecting the political 
philosophy and legislative record of the previous occupant of the White House. 
Obama did it by stealth - so much stealth that most of the red meat of the 
speech has so far passed largely unnoticed. The most astonishing visual moment 
of the inauguration came after the speech, and Elizabeth Alexander's dud poem 
("On the brink, on the brim, on the cusp . . .", mistaking her thesaurus for 
her muse), and the Rev Joseph Lowery's magnificent, scene-stealing benediction, 
when Obama and his wife Michelle walked George W and Laura Bush to the US 
Marine helicopter parked beside the Capitol's west portico. The two couples 
joked, then hugged, before the Bushes climbed aboard, on their way to Midland, 
Texas. It was like seeing Mark Antony and Brutus locked in a warm embrace after 
"Friends, Romans, countrymen . . ."

No one will say of Obama's inaugural, as the Atlanta Constitution said the 
next day of Roosevelt's 1933 speech, "The address takes its place among the 
greatest of historic state papers of the nation, ranking with Lincoln's address 
at Gettysburg". Even on Inauguration Day itself, when the press usually takes a 
rosy view of whatever is said by the new president, journalists grumbled that 
Obama's oration, though predictably well delivered, was short of specifics, 
fire and memorability. They searched the text for phrases to stand beside "the 
only thing we have to fear . . ." or "Ask not what your country . . .", and 
came away empty-handed. Conservative journalists noted that Obama had taken 
some "digs" at Bush, but failed to read the truly damaging subtext.

Among the first-response reviews, the Dow Jones index appeared to pan the 
speech with its steady decline through trading hours, losing 332 points on the 
day, with a dip, not a blip, in the minutes immediately following the address. 
Certainly Obama failed to inject the nation with a shot of instant, FDR-style 
consumer confidence. "The state of our economy calls for action, bold and 
swift," he said, but already his stimulus package is under attack from 
Keynesians for being far too little and from fiscal conservatives for being far 
too much. His appeals for a renewed spirit of community and mutual 
responsibility, though phrased more vividly than Clinton's in 1997 ("It is the 
firefighter's courage to storm a stairway full of smoke, but also a parent's 
willingness to nurture a child, that finally decides our fate"), were cast in 
the same communitarian mould as Clinton's, and had the unfortunate effect of 
reminding me, at any rate, of the dullest inaugural in living memory. It was 
this aspect of Obama's address that his aides hawked around the TV networks as 
its dominant theme: he would, they said, use the address to herald "a new era 
of responsibility". But that was a blind: Obama's real preoccupations lay 
elsewhere.

Next week, the speech will be pretty much forgotten, and people will scratch 
their heads to remember a single quote from it. Yet if (and it's a huge if) 
2009 should eventually turn out to have been the date when the United States 
renounced the accumulated policies of the Bush years, regained an honourable 
place in the wider world and returned to the course of its "better history", 
then we'll reread Obama's inaugural and discover how subtly audacious he was 
being. It's already original - and not so much in spite of, but because of, its 
unoriginal language. It might, just conceivably, be seen as revolutionary.
 