
The recent appointment of Susan Kiefel as chief justice of the high court was 
the latest smashing of glass ceiling. Appointed entirely on merit, the 
appointment of Australia’s first female chief justice was a very welcome 
addition to the list of offices which have finally been filled by a female for 
the first time.

But as well as a moment of celebration, Justice Kiefel’s appointment should be 
a moment for a stocktake: what other areas of our government and our society 
need to catch up and see females take their rightful roles at the most senior 
levels? The military and sporting fields may spring to mind as areas where 
there is a long way to go. But there is another area of government and our 
society where the glass ceiling is very much firmly in place: our economic 
policy-making bodies.

Related: Labor's Chris Bowen pushes for more women in senior finance roles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/18/labors-chris-bowen-pushes-for-more-women-in-senior-finance-roles>

Australia has now had a female prime minister, a female governor-general. 
Every state bar one has had a female premier. We will now have a female chief 
justice. We have a female foreign minister and female shadow foreign minister.

But Australia has never had a female treasurer. Or female secretary to the 
Treasury. Or a female Reserve Bank governor. Or deputy governor. Or female 
chair of the ACCC. Or Apra. Or Asic. I think you get the gist.

We also lag behind plenty of other countries in this regard. Of course, the US 
has a female chair of the Fed and has had a female lead the securities 
commission. Closer to home, Indonesia’s highly respected finance minister is 
Sri Mulyani. And for sixteen years Malaysia’s central bank, Bank Negara, was 
headed by the highly respected Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz. In international 
institutions, Christine Lagarde is of course a role model for many.

And yet, here in Australia no female has headed a national economic 
institution and there is no sign of this changing any time soon.

This is not about symbolism or tokenism. I am not suggesting that a female be 
appointed to the next vacancy as a matter of principle. But I am saying 
Australia has a problem in that its many highly accomplished female economists 
have not been able to break through to the leadership roles they deserve and 
our nation is accordingly missing out on the potential contribution they have 
to make as our most senior economic policy makers.

The answer is not necessarily simple but the first step is, as they say, to 
acknowledge the problem. To give credit where it is due, the current secretary 
of the department of prime minister and former Treasury secretary, Martin 
Parkinson, has recognised this problem. Parkinson recognised that a blokey 
culture at Treasury led to the possibility of poor policy outcomes and set 
targets for senior female appointments. I think it is a pity that Treasury has 
withdrawn from the program since Parkinson’s departure.

Related: Susan Kiefel becomes first woman appointed as high court chief justice
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/susan-kiefel-becomes-first-woman-appointed-as-high-court-chief-justice>

Why does this matter? Well, if you accept (which I do) that some of the best 
economists in Australia are female, the fact that they are not rising to the 
top means we are missing out on a mountain of ability. And when you consider 
that some of our greatest economic challenges and opportunities – lifting 
female participation, the gender pay gap, the retirement income gap – have a 
gender dimension, this loss will be felt acutely.

The corporate world and our boards have a long way to go to ensuring that 
appointments are on merit and that females are given a fair shot for chief 
executive and board positions, but until the government of the country gets its 
act together in our most important economic institutions, corporate Australia 
will have a legitimate point that Canberra shouldn’t be holding others to 
standards that we fail to meet ourselves.

Chris Bowen is the federal shadow treasurer
 