
The world spends more than five times as much money on responding to natural 
disasters as it does on reducing the risk of them. The UN’s head of disaster 
planning, Robert Glasser, hascalled for immediate action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/24/world-heading-for-catastrophe-over-natural-disasters-risk-expert-warns>
 on mitigating the risks posed by climate change, droughts and the humanitarian 
crises that follow.

Which country is most at risk from natural disasters? Explore our analysis of 
the world risk index 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/apr/25/where-is-the-riskiest-place-to-live-floods-storms>
, which measures countries by the frequency of natural disasters as well as how 
well-equipped they are to recover. Plus browse our content markingthe first 
anniversary of the Nepal earthquake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/nepal-earthquake-one-year-on>. 

Elsewhere on the site

‘It’s a disaster’: children bear brunt of southern Africa’s devastating drought
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/21/drought-southern-africa-heavy-toll-students-fainting-malawi-zimbabwe>

Change beckons for Vila Autódromo, the favela that got in the Olympics’ way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/26/rio-de-janeiro-favela-change-vila-autodromo-favela-olympics>

UN bases in South Sudan are ‘a blessing and a curse’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/26/un-bases-south-sudan-malakal-attack-blessing-curse-unmiss>

Malaria menace: when insecticide-resistant mosquitoes bite back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/25/insecticide-resistant-mosquitoes-biting-back-malaria-death-rates>

Married at 14, abandoned by 15: the forgotten girls of Dhaka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/22/bangladesh-married-at-14-abandoned-by-15-the-forgotten-girls-of-dhaka-child-marriage>

Opinion

Over the past five years, global immunisation rates have increased by only 
about 1%, falling short of global targets. Amy Whalley, of Results UK,calls for 
an effective immunisation programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/27/millions-children-dying-preventable-diseases-immunisation-programme>
, which she argues could help developing health systems.

It is time for Liberia to ban female genital mutilation, following similar 
bans in Nigeria and the Gambia,writes Equality Now’s Mary Wandia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/27/liberia-courage-to-ban-fgm-ellen-johnson-sirleaf>
. Although Liberian president Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf called on other countries 
to “muster the courage to ban the irreparable harm inflicted by genital 
mutilation”, she is yet to make this a reality in her own country.

Multimedia

In Colombia, women who survived years of rape and violence during the 
country’s conflict have built their own haven. The City of Women houses almost 
500 people and has its own school and shops. Kary Stewart visited the 
settlement forour latest podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/apr/20/inside-colombia-city-of-women-podcast-ciudad-de-las-mujeres>
. You can alsoread Sibylla Brodzinsky’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/20/colombia-city-of-women-safe-haven-from-violence-conflict>
.

More than 250,000 people have fled Burundi since it descended into violence 
one year ago.See photographs from Nyarugusu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/apr/23/devastating-overcrowding-burundian-refugees-in-tanzania-nyarugusu-nduta-in-pictures>
, on the Tanzanian border, which has become the world’s third largest refugee 
settlement.

Students Speak

As the UN prepares to choose a new secretary general, we want to know how you 
would approach the top job.Submit a response of 250 words or fewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/21/students-speak-if-you-were-head-of-the-un-what-would-you-do>
, telling us what your first act in office would be, and we’ll publish the best 
ones.

What you said

On The construction industry must step up on human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/19/construction-industry-must-step-up-on-human-rights-migrant-workers-qatar>
,Silvia Mera wrote:

We need companies to embrace disclosure (and upcoming regulations – ie the 
Modern Slavery Act – are slowly making it more and more compelling) which means 
1) share if they’re taking action and 2) share which challenges they are facing 
when addressing this problem and 3) find solutions as an industry!

Naming and shaming is not the way if we want companies to come forward rather 
than stepping back … These are businesses with resources to fix the problem 
once they have understood the issue, the risks and are willing to put solutions 
in place, and believe me, most do, as they do not want to shut down or lose 
competitiveness. How can they fix the problem if they just go out of business? 
For a business that closes down another one will open and potentially thrive on 
abuse of human rights. And abused workers will never be freed.

Highlight from the blogosphere

The world humanitarian summit will have little hope of addressing the biggest 
crises facing the world if governments refuse to tackle the root causes,argues 
Ed Cairns on From Poverty to Power 
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/unless-governments-tackle-the-causes-of-conflict-and-the-refugee-crisis-the-world-humanitarian-summit-will-be-a-damp-squib/>
.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team –@swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 