
The Colosseum has been many things in its lifetime: it began as a place where 
emperors distracted the masses with gladiators and gore; it was plundered for 
stone to construct buildings like St Peter’s Basilica and the Palazzo Venezia; 
then it was declared a sacred site to Christian martyrdom and left alone.

Now the arena – or rather, the bacteria within it – is becoming a living 
artwork for the first time, over three nights starting on 17 September.

Multimedia artist Sabine Kacunko will make the Colosseum glow with a 
projection of bacteria she has gathered from its very walls. Far from being a 
dilapidated 2,000-year-old carcass, Kacunko’s project – officially calledThe 
Invincible Big Bacteria Project 
<http://micro-human.org/#/entry/coliseumrome-17th-19th-sep-2015-08-00pm-02-00am/>
 – will show that the Colosseum is teeming with life. “I make visible what you 
normally don’t see,” she says. “My film brings the surface of the Colosseum to 
life.”

It was being stranded in New York when the towers fell on 9/11 that started 
Kacunko’s obsession with bacteria. “I wanted to use this terrible situation to 
show how we can go in a more peaceful, constructive direction,” she explains. 
“I realised that humans are so small in the evolutionary process and that we 
should have more respect for life.” A meeting with a microbiologist at the 
Metropolitan Museum ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> showed 
her how art, history and science could be connected. “She explained patina and 
bacterial film, and that inspired me to work with it, to show that the smallest 
lifeform is so intelligent and strong and collaborative. That they are the 
winners and we are the losers. Bacteria shows the metamorphosis of life.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D764q6Arni54&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D764q6Arni54>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D764q6Arni54&media=>
Kacunko soon started using bacteria to subvert her black-and-white 
photography. “I destroyed my photographs by covering the negatives with 
bacteria,” she says. “They like the gelatin in the negatives, and their 
metabolic process produces pigments. It was a fantastic surprise – all these 
beautiful colours!” The Total Museum in Korea exhibited a six-week, real-time 
webcast of her evolving, bacteria-ridden artworks. The scientific community 
took notice, and she was given a research lab in the renowned Robert Koch 
Forum, part of the Charité Hospital in Berlin, to continue her studies.

In a true art-meets-science story, Kacunko’s research into Alexander von 
Humboldt’s famous desert-dust sample from 1823 – which showed that the dust in 
southern Italy had blown in from the Sahara – led to a startling discovery that 
increased her standing in the scientific community. Kacunko found that a 
section of RNA sequence in humans was identical in plants and animals (if DNA 
is the blueprint of life, RNA makes proteins that carry out its instructions). 
The artist named the new sequenceOceanobacillus pulvirenatus, or dusty rebirth.

This sparked her first artistic collaboration with Unesco: the Life Flag 
Project. Flags showing the sequence were flown over embassies in 98 countries 
for a week. “The message was that we should build no borders, just like the 
bacteria on the Sahara dust,” she says. “The embassies of Israel and Palestine, 
America and Russia all flew the same flag.”

For the forthcoming project, which is part of Unesco’s International Year of 
Light <http://www.light2015.org/Home.html>, Kacunko has also designed software 
that translates bacterial movement into sound. Over the three nights, a pair of 
dancers will perform to the track before some of the buildings constructed from 
the Colosseum’s remains.

“The Colosseum is a masterpiece,” says Kacunko.“This arena is where fierce 
competition, life and death happened. I’m projecting the oldest and smallest 
lifeform on to it to show that we can cooperate rather than fight. That it’s a 
better way for our future.”

• The Invincible Big Bacteria Project will be live-streamed here 
<http://sabinekacunko.de/>.
 