
From bullet trains to active volcanoes, travel guide publisher Lonely Planet 
has named its top new experiences for 2016. Consisting entirely of newly-opened 
or yet-to-open attractions, the list gives a peak at 31 experiences, ranging 
from extreme adventure challenges, such as zip-lining in Cuba’s Valle de 
Viñales, to cultural venues, including the Louvre Abu Dhabi.

Where to go on holiday in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/01/2016-holiday-guide-where-to-go> 
Topping the list is the Center for Extreme Tourism in Chinandega, Nicaragua, 
which opened in October 2015, and is a new ecotourism facility to support those 
who want to climb the country’s tallest active volcano and explore the San 
Cristóbal volcano natural reserve.

Japan’s new bullet train route is second: the Tokyo to Hakodate line is an 
850km, four-hour journey connecting the capital to the country’s northernmost 
island, Hokkaido, famous for its high-quality seafood, skiing and hot springs.

In third place is Rwanda’s Akagera national park 
<http://www.africanparks.eu/Park_2_Akagera+National+Park+Rwanda.html>, where, 
last summer, lions were reintroduced after 15 years. This year, as the pride 
establishes itself in its new territory, it will be easier for visitors to 
track the lions on safari.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-new-travel-adventures-lonely-planet-2016-holiday-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11087840913464b79ff838be17631b170d3b9ae6%2F0_130_1999_1200%2F1999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20new%20travel%20adventures%3A%20Lonely%20Planet's%20tips%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-new-travel-adventures-lonely-planet-2016-holiday-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20new%20travel%20adventures%3A%20Lonely%20Planet%27s%20tips%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-new-travel-adventures-lonely-planet-2016-holiday-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11087840913464b79ff838be17631b170d3b9ae6%2F0_130_1999_1200%2F1999.jpg>
 The sun rises over Akagera national park, Rwanda Photograph: Riccardo 
Gangale/AP 
Wales’ perfect new wave: Snowdonia’s inland surfing lake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/01/surfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia>
Other new experiences on the list include the world’s first Dr Seuss Museum 
<https://springfieldmuseums.org/about/dr-seuss-museum/> in Springfield, 
Massachusetts; immersing yourself in desert flowers at the Field of Light 
installation at Uluru, Australia; and walking on water at theFloating Piers art 
installation 
<http://www.christojeanneclaude.net/projects/the-floating-piers?view=info#.Vo-qY2ThByo>
 on Italy’s Lake Iseo.

Beyond the top 10 are several UK attractions. The extension of the Tate Modern 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/projects/tate-modern-project>, due to open in 
June, is in 16th place, while the cutting edgeartificial surf lake in Wales, 
Surf Snowdonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/01/surfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia>
, also features on the list, as does Stratford-upon-Avon, which celebrates the 
400th anniversary of William Shakespeare’s death this April.

The full New In Travel list is available to download as a free ebook at 
lonelyplanet.com/newintravel2016 <http://www.lonelyplanet.com/newintravel2016>.

Lonely Planet’s New in Travel top 10
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-new-travel-adventures-lonely-planet-2016-holiday-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd213f1190a6ffc989dd05a39c1c7fb2a2018bc5%2F0_378_5613_3366%2F5613.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20new%20travel%20adventures%3A%20Lonely%20Planet's%20tips%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-new-travel-adventures-lonely-planet-2016-holiday-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20new%20travel%20adventures%3A%20Lonely%20Planet%27s%20tips%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-new-travel-adventures-lonely-planet-2016-holiday-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd213f1190a6ffc989dd05a39c1c7fb2a2018bc5%2F0_378_5613_3366%2F5613.jpg>
 St Helena, British Territories. Photograph: Darrin Henry/Shutterstock 
 * Nicaragua 
Climb the country’s tallest active volcano at the Center for Extreme Tourism, 
Chinandega – opened October 2015 
 * Japan 
Zoom along northern Japan’s new bullet train route, Hokkaidō Shinkansen – 
opening spring 2016 
 * Rwanda 
Spot lions in the Akagera national park – expected early 2016 
 * St Helena, British Territories 
Be among the first to fly to remote St Helena, from South Africa – available 
mid-2016 
 * United Arab Emirates 
Be awed by the new Louvre Abu Dhabi – expected opening in 2016, date TBC 
 * Italy 
Walk on water at The Floating Piers art installation on Lake Iseo – June 2016 
 * Panama 
See an even bigger Panama Canal after its $5bn expansion – opening April 2016 
 * Australia 
Glow among desert flowers at the Field of Light installation at Uluru – 1 
April 2016 to 31 March 2017 
 * US 
Visit the new museum in Springfield, Massachusetts, honouring native son Dr 
Seuss – opening June 2016

 * Indonesia 
Luxuriate on Gili Meno’s island retreat, BASK – opening 2016, date TBC  