
Sticky, sweet, crunchy, flaky, soft and nutty... baklava is a staple of every 
pastry shop in the east from Athens to Ankara, but the ancient city of 
Gaziantep (previously Antep) in south-east Turkey, is the only place in the 
world where it has been granted protected status – granted by the European 
Commission in 2014.

Although there are many places that claim to have invented it, it’s likely 
that baklava originated in what is now the Middle East. During the Byzantine 
empire, it made its way westward into Anatolia, and then to Istanbul, where 
Ottoman chefs adapted it for the notoriously picky sultans living in Topkapi 
Palace.

Istanbul city guide: essential sights, and where to eat, drink and stay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/08/istanbul-city-guide-eat-drink-hotels-galleries>
Gaziantep baklava is baked in a wood-fired oven and made with dozens of layers 
of gossamer-thin filo pastry, syrup (honey is for amateurs, apparently) and the 
prized, locally grown Antep pistachio, which gives the filling of the delicacy 
its distinctive green colour. The nuts were the deciding factor for the EC. The 
hot, dry climate provides ideal growing conditions and gives the pistachios 
their bright green (rather than greeny yellow) colour. They’re also harvested 
in August, one month earlier than elsewhere, when they are higher in protein 
and fat.

At the last count, Gaziantep has more than 180 bakeries, some with adjoining 
cafes – serving the delicious finished product. One of the most famous is the
Güllüoglu bakery <http://www.gulluoglubaklava.com/>, founded in 1871, which 
claims to be the world’s biggest baklava producer and has franchises in 
Istanbul, Athens, Los Angeles, New York and Tallinn. And the production process 
has changed very little from Byzantine times.

 