
 The World Is Not Enough .......................33-1

Tomb Raider: Chronicles ..................14-1

Fifa 2001 .......................7-1

Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? ..................6-1 Driver 2 
........................5-1 WWF Smackdown .........1-5 "The videogame market 
has similarities with the Christmas number one pop record," says Andy Clifton, 
Ladbrokes' entertainment odds compiler. "It's almost as important. Publishers 
try to get the marketing and release date just right."

WWF Smackdown has just broken records in its first week of sales, helped by a 
massive marketing campaign and release right after Sheffield Arena's WWF event. 
"The launch suggests it's going to be a big success," says Andy.

There are other contenders, though. Driver 2's dramatic launch included a car 
wreckage installation in Times Square, and in its first few weeks it got to the 
number two spot. "Game players rate it, but it's been out too long for the 
Christmas sales push."

The prospective number one is often released in the week before Christmas - a 
date taken by Westlife this year. "This means that Fifa 2001 is on lower odds, 
despite
 being massively popular with game lovers and football punters," notes Andy.

Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? offers the chance to win a virtual Â£1m. "Form 
is improved by the family factor," says Andy. "This is a sociable game, for 
everyone to enjoy."

With a bewildering number of games on the shelves, the more famous the better 
if you're trying to attract Christmas shoppers. The latest in the Bond 
franchise, The World Is Not Enough (pictured), debuted at number two in the 
Nintendo 64 charts, while the Tomb Raider franchise has two instalments in the 
top ten games list.

"Granny, who doesn't really understand but has seen Jimmy playing Tomb Raider, 
will buy the new game," says Andy. "Dad'll buy The World Is Not Enough and hope 
to play it himself. Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? could be the family game on 
Christmas day." Interview by Jennifer Rodger
 