
The Beguiled

It’s been a while – 2013’s Bling Ring, to be exact – since we’ve had a film 
fromSofia Coppola <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sofia-coppola>, but this 
civil war drama (about a Union soldier caged in a boarding school for 
Confederate girls) is on its way. It’s adapted from Thomas P Cullinan’s 1966 
novel A Painted Devil; Coppola’s films are always interesting, and this sounds 
like its in the same territory as her debut, The Virgin Suicides.

The most exciting comedy films of 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/19/the-most-exciting-comedy-films-of-2017>
The Circle


Dave Eggers’ novel is a sort of warning blast against the power of giant tech 
companies – still a highly relevant topic – and this adaptation directed by 
James Ponsoldt has an appropriately heavyweight cast: Tom Hanks as one of the 
outfit’s leaders,Emma Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-watson> as 
the lowly employee rising up the corporate ladder, and John Boyega as the 
mysterious Kalden.

The Glass Castle

Jeannette Walls’ memoir of her chaotic, unconventional childhood – alcoholic 
father, artist mother, constant debts and midnight flits, a dark streak of 
sexual abuse – provides a meaty role for Oscar winner Brie Larson: a stark 
contrast to the Kong and Avengers films that she;s got coming down the chute

Murder on the Orient Express

The venerable Agatha Christie whodunnit gets a big screen workout: the last 
time it was this fashionable was 1974, when Albert Finney donned the Poirot 
moustaches. This timeKenneth Branagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-branagh> directs himself as the 
Belgian detective, and corrals a big name support cast in the time honoured 
manner: Penelope Cruz, Johnny Depp, Judi Dench.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-most-exciting-film-adaptations-of-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd9288af52accd2183224be51a0e781b4b8b24cc%2F0_7_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20exciting%20film%20adaptations%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-most-exciting-film-adaptations-of-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20exciting%20film%20adaptations%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-most-exciting-film-adaptations-of-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd9288af52accd2183224be51a0e781b4b8b24cc%2F0_7_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Rebecca mark 2 ... My Cousin Rachel. Photograph: PR 
My Cousin Rachel

Rachel Weisz has become pretty active lately, and this is her next one down 
the pipe: an adaptation of a 1951 novel byDaphne du Maurier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/daphnedumaurier>. A Cornwall-set 
mystery-thriller, It reads a bit like Rebecca mark 2: Weisz will play the 
cousin, who is suspected (by Sam Clafin’s Philip) of possibly poisoning her 
husband.

The Snowman


Jo Nesbø’s Scandi-noir about a detective after a serial killer who leaves 
snowmen at murder scenes is getting a high tone adaptation:Michael Fassbender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender> is playing Harry Hole, 
the detective on the case, and Rebecca Ferguson (Mission Impossible – Rogue 
Nation) his somewhat suspect partner. Tomas Alfredson, of Let the Right One In 
and Tinker Tailor renown, directs.

Tulip Fever 

This has been a long time coming: it was all ready to go over a decade ago 
with Keira Knightley and Jude Law before stalling. But this adaptation of 
Deborah Moggach’s novel about an affair beteen a painter and his sitter during 
Holland’s 17th century “tulipmania” now featuresAlicia Vikander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alicia-vikander> and Dane DeHaan, with Justin 
Chadwick (Mandela) directing.



 