
In 1936, Dutch geologist Jean Jacques Dozy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Jacques_Dozy> climbed the world’s highest 
island peak: the forbidding Mount Carstensz, a snow-covered silver crag on what 
was then known as Dutch New Guinea. During the 4,800-metre ascent, Dozy noticed 
an unusual rock outcrop veined with green streaks. Samples he brought back 
confirmed exceptionally rich gold and copper deposits.


Today, these remote, sharp-edged mountains are part of West Papua, Indonesia, 
and home to the Grasberg mine, one of the biggest gold mines – and third 
largest copper mine – in the world. Majority-owned by the American mining firm 
Freeport McMoRan, Grasberg is now Indonesia’s biggest taxpayer, with reserves
worth an estimated $100bn 
<https://www.ft.com/content/c65b8c78-12cf-11e6-91da-096d89bd2173> (£80bn).

But a recent fact-finding mission (by the Brisbane Archdiocese’s Catholic 
Justice and Peace Commission) described a“slow-motion genocide” 
<https://cjpcbrisbane.files.wordpress.com/2016/05/we-will-lose-everything-may-2016.pdf>
 (pdf) taking place in West Papua, warning that its indigenous population is at 
risk of becoming “an anthropological museum exhibit of a bygone culture”.
West Papua locator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/papua_final_map/giv-1406XhvALpZTdk91/>
Since the Suharto dictatorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jan/27/obituaries.johngittings> annexed 
the region in a 1969UN referendum largely seen as a fixed land grab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/indonesia-accused-of-arresting-more-than-1000-in-west-papua>
, an estimated500,000 West Papuans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/west-papua-un-must-supervise-vote-on-independence-says-coalition>
 have been killed in their fight for self-rule. Decades ofmilitary and police 
oppression, kidnapping and torture 
<http://catholicleader.com.au/news/new-catholic-report-tells-stories-of-murder-kidnapping-and-torture-in-west-papua>
 have created a long-standing culture of fear. Local and foreign journalists 
are routinelybanned, detained, beaten 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/11/10/something-hide/indonesias-restrictions-media-freedom-and-rights-monitoring-papua>
 andforced to face trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/oct/17/press-freedom-indonesia>
 on trumped-up charges.Undercover police regularly trail indigenous religious, 
social and political leaders 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2011/08/14/indonesia-military-documents-reveal-unlawful-spying-papua>
. And children still in primary schoolhave been jailed 
<http://asiapacificreport.nz/2016/09/28/new-report-details-human-rights-abuses-in-west-papua/>
 for taking part in demonstrations calling for independence from Indonesia.

“There is no justice in this country,” whispered one indigenous villager on 
condition of anonymity, looking over his shoulder fearfully. “It is an island 
without law.”

****


Dozy had not set out to find gold in 1936; his goal was to scale the region’s 
highest glacial peak. But his discovery sparked the interest of Freeport 
Sulphur – later to become Freeport Minerals Company and then, through a 1981 
merger with the McMoRan Oil and Gas Company, Freeport McMoRan – whose board of 
directors included the well-connected Godfrey Rockefeller (serving from 1931 
until the early 1980s) and Henry Kissinger (1988-1995).

Today, indigenous tribes such as the Kamoro and the Amungme claim their 
communities have been racked with poverty, disease, oppression and 
environmental degradation since the mine began operations in 1973.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdeb950e6ab9146c4d86e102776ba987450caf61%2F509_107_3475_2549%2F3475.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdeb950e6ab9146c4d86e102776ba987450caf61%2F509_107_3475_2549%2F3475.jpg>
 Chief of the Kamoro people, Hironimus Urmani, in Tipuka, close to the Grasberg 
mine. 
“We are a coastal people, and we depend on the environment,” says the Kamoro’s 
chief, Hironimus Urmani, in Tipuka, a lowland village down-river from the 
Grasberg mine. “Nature is a blessing from God, and we are known by the three Ss:
sago [trees], sampan [canoes] and sungai [rivers]. But life is very difficult 
now.”

Urmani motions to the river opposite, languishing green and motionless. He 
claims that tailing sediment from the mine has raised the riverbed, suffocating 
the fish, oysters and shrimp on which the Kamoro diet and economy are 
traditionally based. A 2012 report fromEarthworks and MiningWatch Canada 
<http://www.earthworksaction.org/files/publications/Troubled-Waters_FINAL.pdf> 
asserts that mine waste from Grasberg has “buried over 166 square kilometres of 
formerly productive forest and wetlands, and fish have largely disappeared”.

Although most Kamoro still try to eke out a living fishing and foraging for 
food, they struggle to find paid work, says Urmani. “We need to earn money. But 
now we face major competition from non-Papuan migrants.”

Locals fear that the government’s controversial transmigration programme, 
which resettles Indonesians from high-density islands such as Java to 
low-population areas, iswiping out their population completely 
<https://westpapuamedia.info/2015/10/19/indonesias-colonial-transmigration-is-intentional-annihilation-of-papuas-indigenous-peoples/>
. Indigenous Melanesian Christians – theycomprised 96% of the population in 1971
 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjStqTT5NfPAhVCCBoKHfINBYUQFggcMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsydney.edu.au%2Farts%2Fpeace_conflict%2Fdocs%2Fworking_papers%2FWest_Papuan_Demographics_in_2010_Census.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHCESxtlPlXFfIIByFukFtf16f7EA&sig2=FHuk0vfwa05l5kABHOnP5g&cad=rja>
 (pdf) – now make up a 48% minority, with numbers expected to fall to 29% by 
2020 if migration rates continue.
West Papua 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/index-html-zip/giv-1406b5fuj2s2dQOO/>
Clashes between the indigenous Christians – and migrant Indonesian Muslims – 
have also resulted inriots, fires and injuries 
<https://www.worldwatchmonitor.org/2015/08/3963098/>.


“Land has been taken away, directly by Freeport … and indirectly, as the 
Indonesian settlers have appropriated it,” says Dr Agus Sumule, professor of 
agricultural socio-economics at the University of Papua.

“The stresses [on indigenous people] are intense,” says Sumule. “They have 
been very negatively impacted.”

The Indonesian government signed over to Freeport the right to extract mineral 
wealthfrom the Grasberg site in West Papua in 1967 
<http://www.papuaerfgoed.org/en/amungme%3A_mountain_papuans_deprived_of_their_land#3.%20Freeport%20%20changes%20%20the%20landscape>
. A2002 report <http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/G00563.pdf> from the International 
Institute for Environment and Development (IIED) details that land agreements 
were not negotiated with the Amungme until 1974, a year after the mine opened, 
and with the Kamoro in 1997.

The compensation paid for Kamoro and Amungme land has been mainly in the form 
of communal benefits, such as thebuilding of homes, schools and places of 
worship 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjUr8b2k-TPAhWIPBQKHUe-AewQFggiMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fpubs.iied.org%2Fpdfs%2FG00563.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEUjZwo7-iUrd8snZaSqKjlLsYIKQ&sig2=BAxaiQ1fuUmVgqmofKdxmQ&cad=rja>
. The IIED report notes, “Perceptions of land rights and historic compensation 
claims are a continuing source of dissatisfaction and conflict in the mining 
area.”

Recent census data 
<http://pacificpolicy.org/2013/06/economic-and-social-indicators-in-west-papua/>
 shows Papua’s GDP per capita at $3,510, compared to the Indonesian average of 
$2,452. Yet Papua has the highest poverty rate in the country, nearly three 
times the national average. It also has the highest infant, child and maternal 
mortality rates in Indonesia, as well as the worst health indicators, and the 
poorest literacy rates.


The scale of destitution is best observed from the highland Amungme village of 
Banti, just 20 miles down from the Grasberg mine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc3d38ccd3293fda9e75d4ca1cd1c632658b4acc%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc3d38ccd3293fda9e75d4ca1cd1c632658b4acc%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The river Aikwa, near Banti, is turned thick and silver with the tailings from 
the mine. Here, artisanal miners pan the tailings for gold. 
Estimates from Earthworks suggest that Freeport dumps as much as 200,000 
tonnes of mine waste 
<http://www.circleofblue.org/2012/world/global-gold-rush-the-price-of-mining-pursuits-on-water-supply/>
, known as tailings,directly into the Aikwa delta system every day 
<https://www.earthworksaction.org/files/publications/Troubled-Waters_Otomina_Ajkwa_Rivers_WestPNG.pdf>
. The practice has devastated the environment, according to Earthworks and 
locals, turning thousands of hectares of verdant forest and mangroves into 
wasteland and rendering turgid the once-crystal waters of the highlands.

The tailings from the Grasberg mine are so rich with ore that Papuans walk for 
as long as a week to get here. Crowding the length of the river and the delta 
wasteland, thousands of unlicensed panners shore up small sections to slow the 
river’s flow and dig into the thick sediment on the side.

Although some of these panners are located within Freeport’s official mining 
operations, they are not evicted or controlled in any way, they said. Instead, 
they claim they sell their findings to the police and military who work as 
security on the mine. (An anonymous Freeport source also confirmed this).

One of the panners, Martine Wandango, 25, bends over her pail of water as she 
filters out rocks and searches for ore. “You can only survive with money, and 
you can only find money from gold,” says Martine, who followed her husband to 
the delta 15 years ago by walking 60 miles over the mountains from their remote 
highland village.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24ebd1b7d8453d418da051945e8268c0a9c5b81d%2F0_0_3984_2656%2F3984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24ebd1b7d8453d418da051945e8268c0a9c5b81d%2F0_0_3984_2656%2F3984.jpg>
 The Aikwa river, which used to provide the Kamoro people with the staples of 
their existence. 
“I work really hard as I want to give my children better lives, so they can go 
to school. But it isn’t enough, so she helps me here mining,” says Martine of 
her daughter, nine, who swings a gold pan in her hands. “On a good day, I can 
get three grammes, which I sell either to the police or [to buyers] in Timika.”

A tiny village when Freeport arrived here 40 years ago, Timika is now a boom 
town dotted with bars, brothels, gold-processing shops and various military 
personnel. Under Indonesian law, Freeport is a designated “strategic industry”, 
which mandates that external security for the mine, its access roads and its 
pipelines all be provided exclusively by Indonesia’s security forces. Freeport 
hasnever been implicated in any human rights 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-14417718> abuses allegedly 
committed by the Indonesian military in Papua.

Freeport McMoRan, based in Phoenix, Arizona, did not respond to multiple 
requests for comment.

The company’s website defends its method of disposal of tailings at Grasberg, 
managed by PT FreeportIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> 
(PTFI), an affiliate company: “PTFI’s controlled riverine tailings management 
system, which has been approved by the Indonesian government, uses the 
unnavigable river system in the mountainous highlands near our mine to 
transport tailings to an engineered area in the lowlands where the tailings and 
other sediments are managed in a deposition area.”

A 2009 report by the company 
<http://www.circleofblue.org/2012/world/global-gold-rush-the-price-of-mining-pursuits-on-water-supply/>
 says it utilises levees to contain tailings in the deposition area, and that 
the tailings management programme costs Freeport McMoRan $15.5m (£12.7m) each 
year. According to the report, company monitoring of aquatic life in the rivers 
found that fish and shrimp were suitable for consumption, as regulated by 
Indonesian food standards, while water quality samples met Indonesian and US 
Environmental Protection Agency drinking water standards for dissolved metals. 
In a2011 BBC report <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-14417718> on 
alleged pollution in the area surrounding Grasberg, the company says that the 
tailings management method was chosen because studies showed the environmental 
impact caused by its waste material was reversible.


Elsewhere on its website, the company says: “We are committed to respecting 
human rights. Ourhuman rights policy <http://www.fcx.com/sd/pdf/hr_policy.pdf> 
requires us (and our contractors) to conduct business in a manner consistent 
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and to align our human rights 
due diligence practices with the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business 
and Human Rights (UN Guiding Principles).”

The company also emphasises its work with indigenous people in West Papua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/west-papua>. A 2015 Freeport McRoRan report 
on working towards sustainable development said: “PTFI has engaged with 
indigenous Papuan tribes for decades, including through numerous formal 
agreements to promote workforce skills training, health, education and basic 
infrastructure development … In 2015, PTFI continued to evaluate the 
effectiveness of alternate options for Kamoro community members whose estuary 
transport routes are impacted by sedimentation associated with the controlled 
riverine tailings management system. Provision of smaller sized boats, in 
addition to 50 passenger vessels, for route flexibility as well as additional 
local economic development programmes were identified as additional mitigation 
measures during the year.”

Back in the area surrounding the Grasberg mine, many Papuans, struggling for 
work, find themselves pulled into the bar and sex industries that cater to the 
miners, particularly around the highland village of Banti. Here brothels and 
bars line up side by side, allegedly with help from the Indonesian military, 
who are said to supply sex workers and alcohol, according to a Freeport source 
who wished to remain anonymous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd89c3b955d48c4b2445d4a472061e1a7be97ebe8%2F0_66_3984_2390%2F3984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd89c3b955d48c4b2445d4a472061e1a7be97ebe8%2F0_66_3984_2390%2F3984.jpg>
 Inside a brothel complex in Timika, West Papua. HIV rates in the region are of 
‘epidemic’ proportions,according to the UN 
<http://www.unicef.org/indonesia/A4-_E_Issue_Brief_HIV_REV.pdf>, 15 times 
higher than anywhere else in Indonesia. 
Indigenous chiefs have watched as a newfound promiscuity has brought sexually 
transmitted infections that have ravaged their communities. “Traditional Papuan 
culture forbids free sex, but alcohol makes our communities vulnerable,” says 
the Amungme chief, Martin Mangal. “And brothels make it easy to contract HIV.”

HIV rates in West Papua are of “epidemic” proportions, according to the UN 
<http://www.unicef.org/indonesia/A4-_E_Issue_Brief_HIV_REV.pdf>, 15 times 
higher than anywhere else in Indonesia. Driven almost entirely by unsafe sex, 
HIV is also far more prevalent among indigenous Papuans. Yet the existence of 
only one hospital – built by Freeport – means that most people, particularly 
those in remote highland villages, don’t get the help they need.

Late last year, the Indonesian president, Joko Widodo, claimed he was willing 
to work towards a “better Papua”: “I want to listen to the people’s voices 
<http://jakartaglobe.beritasatu.com/news/joko-breaks-silence-security-force-killings-paniai/>
.”

However, human rights violations have actually increased since Widodo took 
power, according to Indonesia’s Commission for the Disappeared and Victims of 
Violence (Kontras), which has logged1,200 incidents of harassment, beatings, 
torture and killings of Papuans by Indonesian security forces 
<http://www.radionz.co.nz/international/pacific-news/301234/indonesian-rights-body-notes-rampant-rights-abuses-in-papua>
 since his election in 2014.

The Indonesian government did not respond to multiple requests for comment. 
The country’s military has consistently denied any wrongdoing in Papua.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a67d57fe51195b92697341ba644a4de26c6fae%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%24100bn%20gold%20mine%20and%20the%20West%20Papuans%20who%20say%20they%20are%20counting%20the%20cost%20%7C%20Susan%20Schulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2F100-bn-dollar-gold-mine-west-papuans-say-they-are-counting-the-cost-indonesia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a67d57fe51195b92697341ba644a4de26c6fae%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Tribes from across the region have come to Banti in order to exploit the 
artisanal mining of the river, causing significant disruption to life in the 
village. 
Despite everything, there have been small glimmers of hope. This summer, Dutch 
human rights law firm Prakken D’Oliveira submitted a formal legal complaint 
against Indonesia to the UN Human Rights Council, accusing the government of “
long-term, widespread and systematic human rights violations 
<http://www.prakkendoliveira.nl/en/news/launch-of-campaign-for-self-determination-of-west-papua/>
” and the “complete denial of the right to self-determination of the people of 
West-Papua”.

Later this year, West Papua is expected to be granted full membership of the 
Melanesian Spearhood Group <http://www.msgsec.info/>, an important sub-regional 
coalition of countries including Fiji, Vanuatu and Papua New Guinea.

The Brisbane commission, which warned of the risk of genocide, is calling on 
Indonesia to allow Papua, once and for all, the right to self-determination.


Yet some fear the opportunity for change in Papua is long gone.

“Is healing even possible?” asked Professor Agus Sumule, shaking his head. “It 
could be too late.”
 