
At Christmas – as with any occasion where your whole extended family is 
crammed into one house amid an abundance of unresolved tensions and alcohol – 
Monopoly is not always the answer. Similarly, there are times in life when 
Trivial Pursuit is just going to make everything worse, and when people simply 
don’t want to hear you explain the rules to Settlers of Catan for the 300th 
time. Sometimes, only video games will do.

So, if at any point during the festive season you find yourself desperate for 
shared entertainment options (that don’t involvegetting out in the fresh air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/dec/14/top-10-group-walks-guided-walking-festivals-uk>
, of course), here is a selection box of local multiplayer titles that will fit 
the bill. All of them are available for current machines, and most can be 
downloaded in a couple of hours. This Christmas, don’t become a victim of 
charades.

Minecraft (basically all consoles and computers in existence)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F051e1e1d1fb94f7e4a591394a460e8a8ac865a3c%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20video%20games%20to%20play%20with%20your%20family%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20video%20games%20to%20play%20with%20your%20family%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F051e1e1d1fb94f7e4a591394a460e8a8ac865a3c%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 A soothing way to while away a few hours. Photograph: Microsoft 
The blocky building sim is the soothing way to while away a few hours with 
family members, either joining together to create a scale replica of York 
Minster, or competing in the variety of mini-games available on thePC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> and now on the console versions. 


Overcooked (PS4, Xbox One <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one>, 
PC)

This frenzied and fun four-player game has you working together in a busy 
restaurant kitchen supplying increasingly complex dishes to increasingly 
impatient customers. You really have to work together to fulfil orders, 
chopping ingredients, mixing them together then washing up afterwards. If 
nothing else, it’s great practice for the inevitable nightmare of preparing the 
Christmas dinner with a kitchen full of relatives who don’t know what they’re 
doing, have drunk too much sherry, and really are going to argue over the best 
way to stuff a turkey.

Lego Dimensions (PlayStation 4, Xbox One, PlayStation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> 3, Xbox 360, Wii U)

Boasting a huge range of licensed playsets, the entertaining action-adventure 
game lets players put real Lego mini-figures and models on a special plinth to 
control them on screen. But the fun new addition to the game is the Battle 
Arena mode, which invites up to four players into a series of fights, using any 
characters they own. Want to see what would happen if Harry Potter faced off 
against Sonic the Hedgehog? Now you can.

Space Team (Android, iOS)

Released in 2012, this raucous party game is still one of the best local 
multiplayer experiences on smartphones and tablets. Up to four people will need 
to download the game on their iOS or Android devices – they then need to work 
together to save their space ship – by shouting nonsensical phrases at each 
other. Each team mate has a different computer display, and will need to listen 
out if another participant has instructions for them – so your living room 
essentially becomes the bridge of the USS Enterprise during a scuffle with a 
Romulan Bird of Prey. What isn’t fun about that?

Mario Kart 8 (Wii U)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4047990eedc0e6fc8273f3c1c265b1de6738e3c8%2F20_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20video%20games%20to%20play%20with%20your%20family%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20video%20games%20to%20play%20with%20your%20family%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4047990eedc0e6fc8273f3c1c265b1de6738e3c8%2F20_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Mario Kart 8: a great place to start your video game racing career Photograph: 
Nintendo 
Any Super Mario Kart title will do to be honest, but the latest title, 
available on theWii U <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii-u>, is a 
great place to start. The set-up is simple: four-players, an array of classic 
Nintendo characters, superbly designed courses, and the often skill-nullifying 
presence of power-ups. It’s a recipe for excitement, tension and recrimination, 
which is what Christmas is all about.

Rocket League (PC, PS4, Xbox <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> One)

It’s football, but with cars and stunts, and it’s incredibly amusing. That’s 
all you really need to know about what some see as the greatest multiplayer 
sports game since Daley Thompson’s Decathlon.

Head’s Up (iOS, Android)

Endorsed by US television star Ellen DeGeneres, this is a smartphone and 
tablet version of that classic party game where you scrawl the names of famous 
people on post-it notes then stick them on your heads and try to guess who is 
on yours. It’s as fun as it’s always been, but here all the scores and famous 
people are sorted by your phones, so you have one less thing to squabble over.


Towerfall (PC, PS4, Xbox One)

A lovely, highly intuitive four-player archery battle, in which players leap 
around single-screen environments trying to shoot their arrows at everyone 
else. Lots of scenic traps and power-ups add to the tactical side of the game, 
as does the fact that your arrows are in short supply and must be retrieved 
after every shot. Fast-paced and sometimes confusing, but really enjoyable.


Rayman Legends (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Wii U, PS3, Xbox 360)

Ubisoft’s charming and wonderfully colourful platform adventure can be enjoyed 
by four players simultaneously, all working together to solve the puzzles and 
progress through an enchanted forest realm.


Fifa 17 or PES 2017 (PC, PS4, Xbox One)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5ec21ce257788be4ef0f16e0752c8d08714dd8%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20video%20games%20to%20play%20with%20your%20family%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20video%20games%20to%20play%20with%20your%20family%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-best-video-games-to-play-with-your-family-at-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5ec21ce257788be4ef0f16e0752c8d08714dd8%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Boxing day kickabout? Photograph: Electronic Arts 
It doesn’t really matter which title you go for – they both have good and bad 
points. For the purposes of a basic Boxing day kickabout, you just need either 
one of these games, four controllers, a big screen and a lot of overly 
competitive footy fans. Add extra realism to your living room tournament by 
charging everyone else £80 to watch and then serving them flat beer in plastic 
glasses for £6 a pint.


Just Dance 2017 (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Wii U, PS3, Xbox 360)

The latest title in Ubisoft’s well-designed dancing sim series combines modern 
hits with classic pop songs, and provides dance routines that vary in skill 
requirements, so everyone can get involved no matter how old, uncoordinated or 
tipsy. You’ll need the camera peripheral that’s supported by your console, or 
you can play using a smartphone as the controller.


Have we missed out your favourite local multiplayer game? Please do add it in 
the comments below!
 