
If you did your growing up in the 20th century, the chances are your youthful 
predictions for 2016 would have involved colonies on the Moon, flying cars and 
friendly, subservient robots. Although these visions of ultra-modernity are 
sadly yet to be, we can always console ourselves with the fact that at least 
we’ll all soon be using virtual reality, gaming’s holy grail, which has been 
tantalisingly out of reach since its initial appearance in the early 90s. But 
this month even that small piece of future-certainty looked questionable with 
news that, in the US, sales of Oculus Rift (£549), the Facebook-owned 
technology that re-sparked interest in VR, and HTC Vive (£799), its technically 
superior rival, had both ground to a halt. PC gaming platform Steam showed a 0% 
growth for Vive and a 0.01% increase in Oculus Rift ownership last month, a 
possible indication that early adopters have got theirs, and everybody else is 
waiting for some decent games and a price reduction.

PlayStation boss: virtual reality throws out the game-design rule book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/16/playstation-virtual-reality-vr-headset-game-andrew-house>
Sony is hoping its launch of PlayStation VR (out 13 October, £349.99) will 
buck that trend and persuade punters that looking like a wildly gesticulating 
beekeeper is a small price to pay for this new level of escapism. The company 
has also announced a sort-of-new console to go with its VR headset. Mooted 
earlier in the year, thePS4 Pro (£349, 10 November) will play PS4 games in 4K, 
the new much-better-than-HD standard for people with ostentatious TVs, although
Sony <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> insists that it will not 
have any exclusive titles, a move designed to assuage fears that owners of the 
current PS4 would be left behind as players migrate to the more powerful 
system. Not planned for release until the end of next year, Microsoft’s Project 
Scorpio will do the same thing for the Xbox One, but with slightly higher spec 
than PS4 Pro, a fact likely to be cited ad nauseam in endless online arguments 
about which one is better. Oh joy!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fps-vr-deus-ex-mario-metroid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed3192b55be93096d1dffa06b74ee480645ee23b%2F329_94_2143_1286%2F2143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20PlayStation%20Virtual%20Reality%20is%20almost%20here&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fps-vr-deus-ex-mario-metroid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20PlayStation%20Virtual%20Reality%20is%20almost%20here&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fps-vr-deus-ex-mario-metroid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed3192b55be93096d1dffa06b74ee480645ee23b%2F329_94_2143_1286%2F2143.jpg>
 Super Mario Run. 
This month’s other apparition from the near-future was Super Mario Run (iOS), 
Nintendo’s first proper mobile game, which was unveiled at Apple’s gargantuan 
iPhone 7 launch and comes out in December. Like Temple Run and its ilk, this 
new Mario game is an endless runner. Your job is to guide the diminutive 
plumber around obstacles, hop on enemies’ heads and collect coins, all without 
ever pausing for breath. The exciting bit will be finding out whether 
Nintendo’s trademark panache can reinvigorate a genre so tired you’d need 
defibrillators to wake it up.

Back in the present there was the release of Deus Ex: Mankind Divided (PS4, 
Xbox One, PC), a stealth game that presented players with a dystopian vision of 
what the world might one day look like, this time as a society split between 
those who have cybernetic implants, and “naturals” who haven’t. Its rainy 
rendition of conspiracy-theory-rich future Prague, with brief sojourns in 
Dubai, London and the Alps, provide a playground for testing returning 
protagonist Adam Jensen’s catalogue of physical augmentations, ranging from 
high-jumping robot legs to ocular implants that let him see through walls. 
These mean you can approach missions in a variety of ways, frequently obviating 
the need for shooting anyone at all.

The month in games: No Man’s Sky goes where no gamer has gone before
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/the-month-in-games-no-mans-sky-pokemon-go-ghostbusters>
F1 2016 (PS4, Xbox One, PC) is firmly rooted in the now: its cars, drivers, 
teams and events reflecting this Formula One season’s actual lineup. In a game 
filled with this much authenticity, there’s no room for music, just you and 
what sounds like a chainsaw with gears, hurtling around accurately recreated 
real-world circuits. Along with a 10-year career mode, you can also now upgrade 
your car, earning resource points by completing challenges during practice 
sessions, like driving through gates marked on the track, or beating lap times. 
This has the benefit of subtly teaching you about things like tyre management 
and pit strategy without making the game feel like reading the instructions on 
a tax return.

More disappointing this month was Metroid Prime: Federation Force (3DS), a 
multiplayer riff on Nintendo’s popular and venerable Metroid franchise. Its 
first-person shooting action is hampered by controls that don’t work well 
enough, the claw-like position your hand needs to adopt to move and shoot 
compounded by long, carpal tunnel syndrome-baiting boss fights that leave you 
feeling as though you’ve spent four hours with a grip exerciser. If you like 
your games gruelling and dreary, Federation Force’s insipid brand of masochism 
might just be for you.
 