
The Fourth of July used to be one of my favorite holidays, but the 
significance of the day has changed since the halcyon days of slip’n’slides and 
flat soda pop. When I was a kid, it was all fireworks and good cheer, plus the 
kind of pure, unadulterated patriotism that only the young – and blissfully 
unaware of our country’s international foreign policy – can tap into.


As an irresponsible 20-year-old, I made the Fourth a bit of a blue-collar 
bacchanal of cheap hot dogs, lukewarm beer, and far more illicit fireworks 
purchased from Mexico. Now, all I can think about is how to keep my dog from 
freaking out over the constant popping sounds in our neighborhood, whether or 
not the people at my barbecue can see my bald spot, and how soon I can go home. 
My point is that getting old is awful.

With age comes political awareness, higher alcohol tolerance, and an earlier 
bedtime. But it’s possible to be a responsible, perpetually harried adult and 
still enjoy yourself this weekend. Here’s how.

Age 10: Indulging at an early age
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1753ae0c3f7d33523029d508c3636cee7768f900%2F0_21_5121_3073%2F5121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fourth%20of%20July%3A%20how%20to%20celebrate%20in%20your%2020s%20and%2030s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fourth%20of%20July%3A%20how%20to%20celebrate%20in%20your%2020s%20and%2030s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1753ae0c3f7d33523029d508c3636cee7768f900%2F0_21_5121_3073%2F5121.jpg>
 Ah, the ignorant bliss of youth. Photograph: Alamy 
Fun: As a kid, the Fourth means indulging in carbonated beverages in unlimited 
quantities. I could drink an entire two-liter bottle of Pepsi by myself if I 
really applied myself. The rest of my Fourth of July barbecue experience was 
running around, avoiding pools (I couldn’t swim,as you might know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/29/black-swimming-race-pools-dave-schilling>
) and appreciating the rare opportunity to go sans-shoes without my mother 
worrying I’d step on a nail and get tetanus.

Patriotism: It’s easy to be a patriot when you’re a kid, especially in my case 
as my father was in the Air Force. He was sent to Saudi Arabia during the first 
Gulf war, which meant we were even more patriotic than usual during that whole 
period. I was the proud owner of numerous Gulf war trading cards and at least 
one plastic Army tank toy. In short, I thought of America’s role in the world 
being similar to a game of Missile Command.

Fireworks: My dad was really particular about safety with fireworks. We’d have 
to stay at least 15ft away from the explosion, and he always kept a bucket of 
water handy in case things got out of control. Every year he’d get those snakes 
that all kids hate. Youlight a black disc on fire 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oYytdZuV47M)> and it expands into something 
that resembles rat excrement. If you get to hold the sparkler, you’re really 
doing well for yourself.

Age 20: Heavy on the drinks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dd66bcdf028ad26700abe343733a3b24d6fb679%2F0_0_2650_1589%2F2650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fourth%20of%20July%3A%20how%20to%20celebrate%20in%20your%2020s%20and%2030s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fourth%20of%20July%3A%20how%20to%20celebrate%20in%20your%2020s%20and%2030s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dd66bcdf028ad26700abe343733a3b24d6fb679%2F0_0_2650_1589%2F2650.jpg>
 In your 20s, the Fourth means getting blackout drunk and usually throwing up 
on someone’s backyard. Photograph: image net 
Fun: In your 20s, the Fourth means getting blackout drunk and usually throwing 
up on someone’s backyard. The question isn’t so much what to drink, but how 
early to start? My evenings always ended the same way: eating leftover potato 
salad and watching Fight Club on DVD or bootleg torrents of Family Guy. I had 
horrible taste.

The biggest difference in Fourth of July festivities in your 20s is that you 
don’t have a backyard any more. You probably have some crappy apartment or dorm 
that may or may not have a hardly luxurious patch of astroturf. Maybe you can 
dupe your one friend who has a rooftop to throw a party, but is it really the 
same? You’re older now, but not old enough to appreciate that you aren’t dead.

You’re older now, but not old enough to appreciate that you aren’t dead

Patriotism: America’s a bummer, man. My 20s took place during the Bush years, 
so I was especially angsty about the United States. The Fourth became an ironic 
occasion for me and my filthy leftist friends. Who could wear the tackiest 
flag-themed outfit? Who could recite the entire monologue from Independence 
Day? Look at us, drinking Budweiser and smoking Marlboros. America, LOL! It was 
insufferable.

Fireworks: Fireworks in your 20s are usually influenced by the amount of 
alcohol you’ve had beforehand. In my mid-20s, I would routinely go to a party 
hosted by my friend Josh. He’d get really drunk and try to light a sparkler 
with his cigarette. Illegal fireworks became a bit like scoring drugs back 
then. You knew a guy who knew a guy who could get you a crate full of shit that 
could set your entire block on fire.

Age 30: All about the grub
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0f68f240018f46581e3474a7fad601d66d19765%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fourth%20of%20July%3A%20how%20to%20celebrate%20in%20your%2020s%20and%2030s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fourth%20of%20July%3A%20how%20to%20celebrate%20in%20your%2020s%20and%2030s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ffourth-of-july-weekend-activities-grownups-beach-bbq-fireworks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0f68f240018f46581e3474a7fad601d66d19765%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Food becomes far more important when you’re a proper adult. Photograph: Morgan 
Lane Photography / Alamy/Alamy 
Fun: Here’s the same conversation I anticipate having at every party I attend: 
“Do you have any IPAs? My wife loves IPAs. I brought rosé. It’s such a hot day. 
Doesn’t that sound refreshing? Where’s your bathroom? When’s your wedding 
again? October. Oh, the rosé? I just finished it. Well, good to see you again. 
Give your parents my best. I’m just going to wait outside for my Uber. Can I 
bum a cigarette? I’ll give you a dollar.”

Food becomes far more important when you’re a proper adult. There will be 
vegans at your party. There will be guests who are gluten-free. There might 
even be some pregnant women who demand pickles dipped in ranch dressing.

It’s polite to bring something to any party, but especially a Fourth of July 
barbecue. These are communal affairs, and you need to chip in. But what do you 
bring? Bearing in mind the unique restrictions that govern your fellow 
partygoers, you must bring something that’s edible for everyone: healthy, but 
not too healthy; vegetarian-friendly, but not veggie dogs or veggie burgers. 
Invariably, veggie dogs get eaten by non-vegetarians, who then feel put upon by 
carnivores who steal their food. Best to not create that clear division.

I suggest apple pie. 

The point is not to make yourself happy, it’s to satisfy a social obligation

The point is not to make yourself happy, it’s to satisfy a social obligation, 
so just purchase a thing that has a patriotic significance and can be consumed 
by just about everyone. Pro tip: get a gluten-free one and only tell the people 
who are gluten-free. That way, no one turns their nose up at it.

Patriotism: By the time you hit 30, your country has let you down numerous 
times. No matter what side of the ideological spectrum you’re on, you will 
probably end up finding something to complain about: taxes being too high, 
taxes being too low, the damn Democrats, the shifty Republicans, the cost of 
medical care, the proliferation of guns, the lack of guns, the crummy US soccer 
team, and of course, whomever the president is. The United States to a person 
past the age of 30 is nothing more than a stuffy debt collector that also 
happens to be a huge prude.

Fireworks: Fireworks? What fireworks? Who wants to put their kids in harm’s 
way like that? At most, maybe you can light them at least 15ft away from your 
house and keep a bucket of water on hand just in case things get out of control.
 