
Sixty years after Sun Ra released his debut album, the influence of the late 
avant garde jazz musician and “cosmic philosopher” persists. In the intervening 
decades artists as diverse asSpiritualized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/spiritualized>, Krautrock pioneers Amon Düül 
and electronic minimalists Silver Apples have attempted to emulate his freeform 
style. But now in 2016, his true heirs may just have arrived.

Ra is a clear touchstone for futurists The Comet Is Coming 
<https://thecometiscoming.bandcamp.com>, whose debut album Channel The Spirits 
arrives this month. Formed three years ago, after saxophonist – and compulsive 
collaborator – Shabaka Hutchings spontaneously joined funk duo Soccer96 on 
stage, the trio combine Sun Ra’s mythological themes and love of the 
experimental, whipping up a fusion of jazz, Afrobeat and electronica in an 
improvisational, intergalactic mash-up. Sci-fi song titles such as Slam Dunk In 
A Black Hole and Lightyears drive the point home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBih6JQzbFY0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBih6JQzbFY0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBih6JQzbFY0&media=>
An occasional member of the Arkestra – Sun Ra’s freeform ensemble, still going 
more than two decades after his death – Hutchings thinks “the truest link we 
have to Sun Ra is being exploratory with ways of approaching conventional 
instruments”. It’s an ethos as much as a style, starting with an “orthodox jazz 
sensibility” and taking it to the dancefloor. That’s where The Comet Is Coming 
really tear it up, with tracks such as the pulsating Star Furnace and the dirty 
sax-fuelledNeon Baby <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lh7HtH3cm-M> aimed 
squarely at making feet move.

Sun Ra: jazz's interstellar voyager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/15/sun-ra-jazz-interstellar-voyager>
Threaded through all this is Ra-like myth-making. You can see it in the names 
the trio adopt – synth player Dan Leavers is Danalogue the Conqueror, drummer 
Max Hallett becomes Betamax Killer, but most telling is Hutchings’s pseudonym 
King Shabaka, a homage to the ancient Nubian ruler of Lower Egypt who, as the 
sax player tells it, “transcribed the doctrine that would become Kemeticism” – 
a belief system that revives the ancient Egyptian polytheism dear to Sun Ra. 
It’s also reflected in the name of one of Hutchings’s other jazz outfits, Sons 
Of Kemet (he’s in jazz skronkers Melt Yourself Down too, a situation he 
describes as an “administrative nightmare”).

So is all of this inspiration or just mere imitation? Hutchings argues it’s 
the former. “Being avant garde in the same way as Sun Ra was avant garde isn’t 
very true to Sun Ra.” Instead they share a mindset, an “acknowledgement we’re 
in space”. Far out, but can they take it down to Earth and to the masses? 
Channel The Spirits is exuberant and – yes – ridiculous enough to bust out, and 
Hutchings concedes “a sync with a commercial could give us a wide appeal”, but 
he’s happier to see his band’s fanbase grow organically. The decision might not 
be his to make. Powered by Arkestral cosmic forces, The Comet Is Coming. Brace 
for impact.

Channel The Spirits is out now on The Leaf Label

&lt;a 
href="http://thecometiscoming.bandcamp.com/album/channel-the-spirits"&gt;Channel 
The Spirits by The Comet Is Coming&lt;/a&gt; 
• The Comet is Coming are also performing at Sydney festival 2017 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/>
 