
In the southern Mediterranean, on the edge of the Aegean sea, fire met water 
and an odd island was born: Santorini.

For years, it was considered one of the Aegean’s poorest islands. It had very 
little rainfall, but everything that grew on its volcanic soil was full of 
amazing flavour. Santorini’s most characteristic foods are white aubergines, 
capers,fava (a purée of yellow split peas) and, above all, cherry tomatoes.

This minuscule indigenous variety is aromatic, delicious and the key 
ingredient in one of the island’s most famous specialities,tomatokeftedes, or 
tomato fritters. They are made by mixing finely chopped tomato with onions, 
marjoram, fresh oregano, flour and, sometimes, feta cheese or grated courgette. 
This is made into little patties and fried in sizzling oil.
 Selene restaurant 
It’s a dish full of vitamins and energy at very low cost, and can be found in 
most of Santorini’s restaurants. Tomato fritters of exceptional quality are 
served with a garlicky yoghurt sauce at theCave of Nikolas 
<http://www.thecave-ofnikolas.gr/index.php/en/> taverna right by the sea in 
Akrotiri, on the south coast.Taverna Roza 
<https://www.facebook.com/TAVERNA-ROZA-115819745106886/timeline/> in the 
village of Vourvoulos in the north of the island also does great 
tomatokeftedes, and all the vegetables, including the tomatoes, are grown by 
Mrs Roza herself.

A leading light in Santorini’s gastronomic movement is award-winning Selene  
<http://www.selene.gr/about.aspx>restaurant in the hill village of Pyrgos. Its 
meze menu includes an excellent gourmet sandwich (€5.50) of warm tomatokeftedes 
in mini pitta bread with fava sauce.

• Elias Mamalakis is consultant chef at newly opened Suvlaki 
<http://www.suvlaki.co.uk/> in London’s Soho
 