
When it was released, Errol Morris's The Thin Blue Line went radically against 
the grain of documentary convention. The film made something artful out of a 
horrific real-life event – it changed the trajectory of my career. The film is 
about the wrongful imprisonment of a man, Randall Adams, following the murder 
of a Texas police officer in 1976. Morris uses a combination of interviews and 
tasteful reconstruction to create a full picture of the case, which ultimately 
ended with Adams' acquittal after 12 years in prison.

Morris's film is a minefield of complexity, one that mirrors all the grey 
areas inherent in a murder trial. His interviews, conducted against a neutral 
backdrop, expose different versions of events and their many contradictions. 
The result is strangely epistemological: it raises questions around how we know 
what we know, about the unreliability of human memory.

There was a pompous notion among documentary makers in the 80s that the truth 
might only be captured if the camera was shaky, and the interviewees 
interrogated. But Morris didn't so much interview his subjects as let them 
talk, capturing hours of footage. He found the camera acted like a therapy 
couch, prompting people to say things they normally wouldn't.

The use of reconstruction was also a huge no-go area for documentary purists, 
but Morris demonstrated that actors could be used without any loss of 
authenticity. His deftly crafted reconstructions used film noir-style lighting 
and unusual camera angles, a technique that's since influenced my films, like
One Day in September <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0230591/>. I also borrowed 
his "interrotron" technique of interviewing inTouching the Void 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0379557/>, which captures all the intensity of eye 
contact – each look, blink and flicker – because the subject looks directly 
into the lens. Morris taught me that the more obtrusive you make a situation, 
the more honest people are.
 