
Cicero called Herodotus the father of history, but he is not a historian's 
historian in the sense that Thucydides is. Thucydides, the younger man by about 
15 years, produced a forthright account of the war that broke out between 
Athens and Sparta in 431BC, dished up without fear or favour and generously 
seasoned with cynicism and hard-nosed political insight. It's a narrative based 
on eye-witness accounts, often his own - with evidence, he tells us, carefully 
sifted so that he presents only the most authoritative version of events. He 
bequeathed us a highly influential world view in which the weak topple in the 
face of the mighty with plangent inevitability.

Thucydides is the ancient historian whom prime ministers and presidents most 
like to quote, and who is taught at West Point (an institution nicknamed 
Sparta). His work has often been co-opted by later thinkers - to help explain, 
for example, how democracies can become embroiled in disastrous military 
expeditions. Bernard Knox, the great American classicist, cited him when 
referring to the US's entanglement in Vietnam, but the idea has no doubt been 
applied to Iraq or Afghanistan.

Herodotus, by contrast, has none of this heavyweight support. He was written 
off by Thucydides, who poured scorn on what he characterises as Herodotus's 
fanciful, romantic view of the world. The criticism stuck. Herodotus's account 
of the Persian wars of 481-479BC takes six books out of nine (or 300-odd pages 
of Robin Waterfield's excellent English translation) even to begin on the 
Battle of Marathon; for many it is a rambling, rather disappointing try-out for 
the academic discipline that history would later become.

And what nonsense he includes. Along the way we have a bearded priestess; a 
description of the embalming techniques of the Egyptians; a great number of 
mouthy women (including Atossa, the wife of Darius, whose pillow talk is 
supposed to have convinced the Persian king to turn his attention towards a 
Greek conquest); and the curious giant ants of India, bigger than foxes but 
smaller than dogs, who tunnel deep underground to harvest gold. That's not to 
mention the steppe-dwelling Scythians, who wear coats made from human scalps; 
the musician Arion, whose life is saved by a dolphin; and the sheep of Arabia, 
whose tails are so long they drag them on little carts. The world of 
Thucydides, by contrast, is cool and rational - one in which women, animals, 
children, religion and other such distractions are almost entirely absent. 
What, then, is the value of Herodotus, with his tabloid fascination for the 
private lives of leaders, his garrulity, his love of gossip?

Like many of the most glamorous intellectuals of what we term "ancient 
Greece", Herodotus was born on Turkey's Aegean coast, in the Greek city of 
Halicarnassus, now Bodrum. On this Ionian coast began an enlightenment, an 
intellectual movement of incalculable importance to subsequent streams of 
thought in Greece and beyond, a movement that threatened to topple the gods 
from their Olympian thrones. Thinkers such as Thales - usually regarded as the 
first scientist-philosopher - set up rationalising accounts of the universe in 
which the terrifying vicissitudes of nature might be explained not by the wrath 
of Poseidon, nor by Zeus's thunderbolts, nor by Hera's jealousies, but in terms 
of rationally explicable, normally occurring phenomena. Hecataeus of Miletus, 
Herodotus's most important forerunner and one of the earliest Greeks to write 
in prose, produced works of rationalising geography and genealogy. A little 
later, on the islands of Cos and Cnidus, doctors appeared, Hippocrates the most 
famous of them. Surviving medical treatises indicate a rejection of the notion 
of disease as heaven-sent. Instead, the doctors pursued rational enquiries into 
the causes of things.

An enquiry into the causes of things: this is also Herodotus's project, laid 
out in his prologue. His particular enquiry is into the Persian wars, in which 
a jittery, barely united coalition of Greek city-states fended off conquest by 
the world's most powerful empire. The prologue to the Histories recalls the 
opening of the Iliad - the first and most important work of classical 
literature, whose influence on later Greek writing cannot be overestimated. 
That poem begins with an invocation to the muse to reveal the reason for the 
feud between Achilles and Agamemnon: the answer is the fury of the god Apollo. 
What Herodotus does is to set up the Persian wars as a kind of second Trojan 
war. But he transforms Homer's account of fictional motivation into a survey of 
historical causation. And the answer, he suggests, to his question about the 
cause of the Persian wars, lies not with the gods, nor, as the Phoenicians and 
Persians contend, in the continuation of a long line of tit-for-tat mythical 
abductions of women between Europe and Asia, but in the real world of politics 
and foreign policy. To transfer the responsibility for events away from heaven 
and squarely on to mortals may seem, two and half thousand years on, an obvious 
task, but in so doing Herodotus fundamentally changed the way that humans look 
at the world - and that is why Cicero called him the father of history.

But what about his reputation as a rambler and a gossiper? Reading the 
Histories, I feel he'd be a marvellously entertaining dinner guest, 
particularly after a few glasses of wine, but you'd never expect him to give a 
direct answer to a direct question. His project is to interrogate the deep 
causes of things. When he starts his account of the origins of the Persian 
wars, he does so - cogently - with an account of the patterns of Persian 
expansionism, which begins with the nascent empire's defeat in the 6th century 
of Lydia, the then dominant power in the near east. And for that to be told 
properly, he gives us an excursus on the history of Lydia, including the 
unmissable story of the rise to power of Gyges, five generations back from 
Croesus, the ruler at hand.

Gyges was the trusted adviser of King Candaules of Lydia - who was besotted 
with his own wife, and who decided that Gyges should see the queen naked, the 
better to appreciate her beauty. Gyges was horrified, and tried to dissuade his 
master from this perverse plan, but Candaules was insistent, and had Gyges hide 
behind the royal bedroom door so he could catch a glimpse of the lady. Gyges 
was forced to obey, but the queen saw him out of the corner of her eye. The 
next day she summoned Gyges and said, "You have seen what you ought not to have 
seen. It's your choice: either I will have to have you killed, or you must kill 
the king and become king in his place." Gyges killed Candaules, married the 
queen and became the ruler of Lydia.

This is the story that Katharine Camps tells round the desert campfire in 
Michael Ondaatje's The English Patient - prefiguring her own love affair with 
her husband's colleague, Almásy. One of Ondaatje's projects in the novel is to 
represent the interconnectedness of human affairs and great events - a lesson 
embedded in every page of the Histories. The Herodotean "digressions", which 
apparently interrupt the straight onward thread of his account (they "hang" 
from the narrative, as ancient historian Carolyn Dewald puts it, like pieces of 
laundry on a washing line) are as much illuminations as entertainments.

This broad structural pattern continues for the first half of the Histories: 
Herodotus charts Persian expansionism, and along the way presents descriptions 
of each conquered nation. The most extensive of these accounts is of Egypt, 
which occupies a whole book. It is clear that Herodotus travelled over an 
immense amount of the ground himself. With enormous élan he tries to make sense 
of these foreign cultures, sometimes showing remarkable insight, sometimes 
making what we know to be clangers, sometimes peddling nonsense (such as the 
"information" that Egyptian women pee standing up while the men pee squatting). 
And, though he always relates foreign mores to Greek habits, he is, like a 
modern ethnographer, self-consciously unjudgmental. "If one were to order all 
mankind to choose the best set of rules in the world, each group would, after 
due consideration, choose its own customs; each group regards its own as being 
the best by far," he observes.

Travel writers and foreign correspondents know that Herodotus is their 
ancestor; Ryszard Kapuscinski felt an instinctive fellowship with the Greek 
when, plucked from Poland as a young correspondent, he struggled to make sense 
of the deep foreignness of India and China, and his book Travels With Herodotus 
lovingly preserves these memories. Herodotus's techniques can be journalistic: 
he will often note different accounts of the same event, and sometimes names 
his sources. At one point in book seven, writing about whether the Argives 
sided with the Persians, he says: "I am obliged to record the things I am told, 
but I am certainly not required to believe them." In book two he says: "Anyone 
who finds such things credible can make of these Egyptian stories what he 
wishes. My job, throughout this account, is simply to record whatever I am told 
by each of my sources."

Which is not to say that Herodotus does not mould his text to his 
preoccupations. A moral thread runs through the Histories. Herodotus tells the 
story that Solon, the reformer and proverbially wise man of Athens, visited 
Croesus, ruler of Lydia. Croesus showed the Greek around his treasury, full of 
artworks and gold, and asked Solon, "Who do you think is the happiest man?" He 
fully expected the Athenian to say that it was he, Croesus. But Solon replied 
that it was Tellus, an Athenian who had raised a family, done great deeds in 
battle and been given a marvellous funeral. "So who is the second-happiest, 
then?" asked Croesus. Solon's infuriating reply this time was that it was a 
pair of Argive brothers who had died in a temple to Hera having transported 
their mother there in an ox-cart. Croesus was furious; but Solon explained that 
no man can be counted truly happy until he has died, since life contains too 
many possibilities for reversal.

And so it turns out with Croesus. His misplaced confidence that he can defeat 
Persia ends with the loss of an empire and humiliation. Herodotus's moral 
message is the one also at the heart of the tragedy Oedipus the King, by his 
peer and perhaps friend, Sophocles. In that play, a rich and well-loved man is 
reduced to a blinded exile within the course of a day. We cannot take good 
fortune for granted: a moral for our own times.
 