
Imagine a story with so much inherent drama it sounds far-fetched even for a 
Hollywood thriller. Our heroes dig tunnels from freedom into enemy territory to 
help loved ones and others escape. They are bankrolled in part by a savvy media 
executive looking for a network exclusive. Meanwhile, the White House seeks to 
shut it all down in the interest of politics – and avoiding nuclear war.

 It sounds over the top but it’s all true and detailed in Greg Mitchell’s new 
book,The Tunnels: Escapes Under the Berlin Wall and the Historic Films the JFK 
White House Tried to Kill 
<http://gregmitchellauthor.com/books/the-tunnels-tr/the-tunnels-hc>. Utilizing 
a mix of interviews and archival records Mitchell tells a kaleidoscopic cold 
war story from 1962, recreating a world seemingly on the edge of a third world 
war.

 The action revolves around the brave and indefatigable young Germans of West 
Berlin who take up shovels against repression; yet even as they aid the escape 
of those trapped in East Berlin, they are undermined by a Stasi informer in 
their midst. Mitchell also recounts the efforts of CBS and NBC reporters and 
executives to gain an upper hand in their own competition by racing to secure 
the rights to film a tunnel escape for the education – or perhaps entertainment 
– of the American audience back home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-tunnels-greg-mitchell-jfk-cold-war-berlin-wall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcecbe98152fd8ae8e110dd7059fc50ea39509a1c%2F0_0_2046_3000%2F2046.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Tunnels%3A%20JFK%2C%20the%20cold%20war%20and%20the%20Berlin%20Wall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-tunnels-greg-mitchell-jfk-cold-war-berlin-wall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Tunnels%3A%20JFK%2C%20the%20cold%20war%20and%20the%20Berlin%20Wall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fthe-tunnels-greg-mitchell-jfk-cold-war-berlin-wall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcecbe98152fd8ae8e110dd7059fc50ea39509a1c%2F0_0_2046_3000%2F2046.jpg>
 Edward Kennedy inspect the Berlin Wall at Bernauer Street in 1962. Photograph: 
Reichert/AP 
President John F Kennedy’s administration, meanwhile, aims to control the 
media’s message, perhaps out of general distrust of the press, perhaps out of 
political concerns, including the all-too-real notion that the Soviet Union 
could interpret American involvement as a step toward war.

 All of this plays out against an increasingly fraught backdrop as East German 
guards shoot fellow citizens in cold blood as they try to escape, West German 
officials break the law to help escapees and the Soviets begin maneuvers for 
what will become the Cuban missile crisis.

 “It’s not a very nice solution,” Kennedy said of the Berlin Wall as it went 
up, “but a wall is a hell of a lot better than a war.”

 Mitchell, 68, has written numerous books about the intersection of American 
politics and media and about nuclear war. The former editor both ofNuclear Times
 <http://cironline.org/partners/nuclear-times> and Editor & Publisher 
<http://www.editorandpublisher.com/> magazines, he stumbled on to the idea for 
The Tunnels when his daughter and her husband moved to Berlin. He went to visit 
them at their new home which turned out to be about a mile fromBernauer Strasse 
<http://www.berliner-mauer-gedenkstaette.de/en/>, the former East Berlin street 
that turned out to be the focal point of much of the book’s action.

 “I knew about the Berlin Wall, of course,” Mitchell says. “I grew up with 
Berlin being in the news all the time and I had the childhood trauma of fallout 
shelters, air raid drills and duck and cover. My favorite movie wasDr 
Strangelove, Or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/feb/11/us-military-propaganda-film>.”

 But what he knew about the wall was fairly general and it all felt like part 
of a distant past until that visit. “Going to the memorial site and reading the 
stories about the escapes was overwhelming,” he says. “Seeing the ‘death strip’ 
made it all very vivid.”

 Mitchell started digging in to the escape stories and was particularly drawn 
to the notion that those living in freedom, including many who had escaped East 
Berlin, were willing to tunnel directly into danger to help others. “That story 
was incredible enough with plenty of suspense,” he says, though he felt like it 
was a “foreign story” Americans would not be interested in – indeed, while the 
sagas have been recounted in German language books, they have never been told 
in full detail here. But then he uncovered the story of the television 
documentaries and the White House’s efforts to suppress them and realized “this 
was also an American story”.

 Hollywood recognized its potential before the book industry did. His proposal 
sold its movie rights, withPaul Greengrass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paulgreengrass> attached as director, even 
before he had found a publisher. “That was a little odd and embarrassing for a 
moment,” Mitchell says.

 Mitchell says he was fortunate that his son-in-law is half-German because he 
provided vital help in translating Stasi archives – many never seen in public 
before – and interpreting during interviews. “I had a list of 20 people and 
hoped to get six, not knowing who would be alive or well enough or willing to 
talk,” Mitchell says. Instead, he found 16, including the major West Berlin 
diggers.

 In writing, Mitchell strove to be even-handed. “I hate to announce a stand,” 
he says. On the issue of Kennedy’s decision to allow the wall to be built and 
his efforts to shape the media’s coverage of the escape attempts, he knows some 
of the president’s methods seemed wrong then and would be taboo today but 
believes that the genuine threat of nuclear war changed the equation.

“Half the readers will say I’m too hard on him and he had to worry about the 
end of the world while the other half will say he was too cautious and should 
have done more to support the people trying to escape,” Mitchell says, adding 
that there will be also conflicting views on the networks dishing out money to 
the tunnelers in exchange for filming rights.

 While the events are a half-century old, they resonate today in a world 
trying to figure out how to handle escaped refugees, walls real (imposed on the 
West Bank by Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/10/william-sutcliffe-west-bank-wall>
) and proposed (Donald Trump’s “great, great wall” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/31/donald-trump-mexico-meeting-president-pena-nieto-immigration>
), and deepening tensions between the US and Russia which are exacerbated by 
media leaks. “It all makes me feel like I’m back in 1962,” Mitchell says.
 