
There was a sense of joy in Manchester as the Whitworth art gallery reopened 
at the weekend. On Friday, the art worlds of Manchester, Glasgow and London 
converged to celebrate its £15m renewal with amemorably explosive fireworks 
display 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/whats-on/whats-on-news/explosive-start-whitworth-art-gallery-8647197>
 (or meteor shower, as it was poetically described). On Saturday and Sunday
about 18,000 members of the public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2015/feb/16/18000-visit-revamped-manchesters-whitworth-opening-weekend-helen-pidd>
 came to see the art and hear music fromManchester Camerata 
<http://www.manchestercamerata.co.uk/> and the Hallé Youth Choir 
<http://www.halle.co.uk/halle-youth-choir.aspx>.

Such was the feeling of newly minted municipal pride one could have been 
forgiven for thinking one had fallen through a chink in time to the days before 
the banking crisis. But then the refurbishment of the Whitworth (a gallery that 
CP Scott, owner and editor of the Manchester Guardian, was instrumental in 
establishing in 1889) is merely one in a series of major events in the city’s 
artistic life [see footnote]. TheCentral Library reopened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/21/manchester-central-library-reopens-50m-pound-revamp>
 last spring after a £50m revamp; the Royal Northern College of Music completed 
a£7.1m refurbishment of its concert hall in the autumn 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-manchester-29915966>; Manchester School 
of Art has openeda new £34m building 
<http://www.art.mmu.ac.uk/facilities/spaces/>. The £25m Home 
<http://homemcr.org/> – a theatre, five-screen cinema and gallery – opens this 
April. And in July, theManchester international festival  
<http://www.mif.co.uk/>will take over the city with its programme of 
eye-catching artistic collaborations.

The council is the driving force behind all this, with cash also coming from 
the city’s universities, the Heritage Lottery Fund and other bodies. Its 
longstanding leader, Sir Richard Leese, and chief executive, Sir Howard 
Bernstein, have an unwavering vision for the city, and its cultural development 
is entirely of a piece with Sir Howard’scanny deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/12/secret-negotiations-restore-manchester-greatness>
 with chancellor George Osborne for increased spending power (known as 
Devo-Manc locally) and, as announced in last year’s autumn statement,more cash 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/8b617a9c-7aff-11e4-8646-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3RuzTTSG4>
 (including for yet another cultural building, the £78m Factory). Manchester 
wants to run its own affairs, and it wants to stand out.

It is reasonable to ask why Manchester should be so fervently supporting the 
arts, regarded by many austerity-pressed British cities as a nice-to-have 
rather than a necessity. The reason is that Manchester sees culture as part of 
its growth strategy. A flourishing arts scene promotes the city as adestination 
for tourism 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/01/11/travel/52-places-to-go-in-2015.html>
 and attracts businesses. Cultural regeneration does not work for every 
post-industrial town, but it does in Manchester because of a strong artistic 
history that includesthe Hallé <http://www.halle.co.uk/>, the Royal Exchange 
theatre <http://www.royalexchange.co.uk/> and its outpouring of pop music from 
the late 1970s. Perhaps most important of all, there is an understanding in 
Manchester that investing in culture makes it a better place for all its 
inhabitants.

When Home opens its doors, it will do so not with a funding grant from the 
council but with a service contract stating that it will provide social benefit 
to the community, especially the most disadvantaged. Places such as the 
Whitworth work with children, and with sufferers from dementia. The view in
Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> is not that cultural 
organisations divert cash from society’s most pressing problems but that they 
are the bodies best placed to help. Many other communities – and the government 
– could learn from that.

• This footnote was appended on 20 February 2015. The editorial says in 
parenthesis “a gallery that CP Scott, owner and editor of the Manchester 
Guardian, was instrumental in establishing in 1889”. To clarify: while it is 
true that Scott was the proprietor he did not become so until 1907. John Edward 
Taylor, his predecessor, was the proprietor at the time of the Whitworth’s 
founding.

 