
There is a picture on Instagram that perfectly captures the current row 
<http://fashionista.com/2016/09/vogue-blogger-takedown> about who decides what 
is fashion. The dispute is between Vogue magazine, fashion’s ultimate arbiter 
for the last 100 years, and the fashion bloggers regarded by their millions of 
social media followers as the real deal. The picture, posted by the blogger
Caroline Vreeland, <https://www.instagram.com/carolinevreeland/> was taken 
during Milan’s fashion week.It shows 
<http://fashionista.com/2016/09/vogue-criticism-bryanboy-susie-bubble> the 
editor of American Vogue, Anna Wintour, timelessly chic, being followed down 
the street by a much younger woman ina shiny vinyl coat 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/gallery/london-fashion-week-street-style-shop-the-look-2016>
, black shorts and fishnets. She is pointing and laughing at Ms Wintour’s 
unresponsive back. Street style challenges high fashion; digital unsettles 
analogue; democracy threatens elite.

Vogue editors accused of hypocrisy after declaring war on fashion bloggers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/29/vogue-editors-declare-war-fashion-bloggers>
In one way this is a familiar story, an everyday tale of the brutal disruption 
of an old business model by a new one. Vogue’s accountants will undoubtedly 
have a nasty headache from the financial success of a handful of bloggers such 
as Susie Bubble and Chiara Ferragni, young entrepreneurs who have monetised 
their personalities by turning their online presence into brands and their 
millions of followers into a market for their own lines of shoes or swimwear. 
The bloggers have brilliantly exploited the capacity of social media to be a 
global platform for free-spirited creativity: now Vogue accuses them of selling 
out to commerce.

Some of Vogue’s criticisms verge on the petulant; but the accusation that the 
bloggers are selling out goes to the heart of a real debate.Posing for 
photographers in paid-to-wear fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/29/vogue-editors-declare-war-fashion-bloggers>
, as some do, rather than taking selfies showing off their own style, says 
Vogue, “heralds the death of style”. The bloggers, laughing and pointing again, 
note that Vogue itself depends on close commercial relationships with the major 
fashion brands. Bloggers, in contrast, build their brand on being real people, 
wearing real clothes; they see themselves as self-created style celebrities and 
entrepreneurs. For them, Vogue’s attack is motivated by envy of the way their 
authenticity has usurped traditional authority, directly challenging glossy 
magazines such as Vogue, whose historic genius is to put together fantastical, 
highly staged images that are as desirable as they are remote from reality.

Vogue’s real response to the challenge was to adapt the “real” appeal of the 
digital fashionistas for itself. The high-street fashion chain H&M is at it 
too. Itslatest commercial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/hm-advert-diversity-ad-women>
 features a diverse mix of models and bloggers (and an almost subliminal 
glimpse of a hairy armpit) set to a version of the Tom Jones song She’s a Lady. 
Fashion houses now often tear up invitations to the fashion editors and put the 
bloggers on the front row, final proof that authenticity is the new authority.

But if the bloggers are becoming enmeshed in the world of big business, they 
may have set the clock running on their claim to authenticity. Their success 
depended on their ability to sell themselves as unique personalities acting 
autonomously. They are not all conventionally good-looking, they claim to be 
Anyone, living in Anytown. Now they are becoming recognised celebrities, sought 
out by the industry, and they are changing from creative artists into 
commercial players. For a fleeting moment they democratised fashion. Now it 
looks very much as if they may be becoming another elite, new and young – but 
an elite just the same.
 