
You’re familiar with red, white and rosé, but did you know about orange wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/12/orange-wines-guide-best-david-williams>
? First-time drinkers of it often get a shock. First there’s the colour, that 
can range from deep amber through satsuma orange to dark pink. Don’t be 
surprised if it is cloudy: that is par for the course. Then there’s the taste. 
My first experience was of a sauvignon fromFranco Terpin 
<http://www.francoterpin.com/>, an artisan winemaker in Friuli, north-east 
Italy. The process produces intense aromas and complex flavours, and I’d never 
have guessed it was made with this grape.

The difference in technique is quite simple. Normal white wine is made from 
the crushed juice of the grape, with the skins discarded. Orange winemakers 
retain the skins, as they would for red wine, and the fermenting grape juice is 
left to macerate with the skins, which add colour and tannin.

Top 10 bike-friendly wine routes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/26/top-10-bike-friendly-wine-routes>
So don’t expect this to taste like any other white wine you have drunk. It is 
almost like a craft-brewed mead, as the tannins create a honey, apricot flavour 
– smoky, spicy, a little bitter. Although orange wines are all the rage in 
fashionable wine bars and Michelin-starred restaurants, it is a technique that 
was used in antiquity, especially in Georgia and Armenia, where it has never 
gone out of favour.

In Europe, the hot spot for orange wine is the Collio vineyards in Friuli and 
wineries across the border in Slovenia, but some winemakers in France and 
Germany are now experimenting, too.

The guru of orange wine is Josko Gravner <http://www.gravner.it/>, who 15 
years ago drove a lorry from his estate in Italy’s Oslavia to Georgia to pick 
up the giant clay amphorae (for fermenting) that are now buried below his 
cellar. Josko does not often receive visitors however, and a better bet is to 
cross into Slovenia to Medana and visitAleks Klinec <http://www.klinec.si/>, 
who is not only a great winemaker but runs a restaurant and cosy B&B.
 