
 12. Llandrindod Repair Cafe, Llandrindod Wells, Wales

What is a repair cafe? It’s exactly what it says on the tin; it’s a
 place where you can go, with your broken items, to consult people more
 knowledgeable than you about how to fix them. Oh, and have a cup of tea and a 
cake while doing so. The world’s first repair cafe appeared in Amsterdam in 
2009, set up by Martine Postma. Now,there are around 400 
<http://repaircafe.org/>, from Australia to the US, with more being registered 
each day.

 At present, Wales hosts two, one in Newtown and the other – which I am 
attending – in Llandrindod Wells, a Victorian spa town in the Radnorshire hills 
where folk would go to take the chalybeate waters, believed to be curative (and 
which taste like blood licked off a rusty hoe). Once a temperance town, it is 
poorly equipped with hostelries, but the hotels are grand (in one of which the 
Welsh FA meets annually to discuss how badly the qualifying campaign is going), 
the architecture impressive, and Rock Park, where Rupert Bear used to play (his 
creator, Mary Tourtel, lived in the town for some years), is a magical grade 
2-listed squirrel-busy and salmon-rivered dingly dell where you can get 
contentedly lost and want never to be found again.


Llandrod’s (as the locals abbreviate it) repair cafe takes place under the 
Rock Park pavilion canopy, all blue paint and frosted glass, mosaic floors and 
a horseshoe bar of marble. Late swallows zip through. Around it stand gingkos, 
sweet chestnuts, sequoias. Pierrot shows and balls were once held here. When I 
arrive, there are people up ladders, stringing wires, there are lathes, lamps, 
workbenches, and signs above them that read: Electricals & computers/woodwork 
and general/textiles & jewellery/bikes. Centrepiece is a small library table of 
instruction manuals and guides. A hanging banner reads: Throw it away? No way! 
Just visible, through a gap in the static thrash of exotic trees, is the 
playing field on which Roman soldiers would test their weapons. It’s a strange 
and intriguing place, right enough.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjoys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F17%2F1410952992061%2F442b8ad4-553f-4d53-b215-36486c3c5d9e-1596x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20joys%20of%20a%20repair%20cafe%3A%20Mad%20Max%20with%20a%20KitKat%20and%20a%20nice%20cup%20of%20tea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjoys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20joys%20of%20a%20repair%20cafe%3A%20Mad%20Max%20with%20a%20KitKat%20and%20a%20nice%20cup%20of%20tea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjoys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F17%2F1410952992061%2F442b8ad4-553f-4d53-b215-36486c3c5d9e-1596x2040.jpeg>
 Llandrindod Repair Cafe relies heavily on donations in this early stage of its 
development Photograph: Joseph Botting 
I talk to Joe Botting and Nick Talbott, organisers (and Joe is also a 
geologist, whose fossil display in the town’s museum is fascinating) and Hilary 
McAuley, who advises with woodwork and is also chairperson of the Friends of 
Rock Park. They clue me in on the repair cafe’s ethos, how it is both 
galvanised and propelled by austere economics and a response to ecological 
concerns; white goods and the like, and their poisons, need to be recycled, 
cannibalised, maintained in working order for as long as possible. The terms 
throwaway culture, or disposable culture, belie the longevity of the discarded 
item’s capacity to pollute and damage.

Added to this is the desire to keep old skills alive, and pass them down, and 
to create new ones; the wireless speaker which I take along, for instance, 
would have been unthinkably ensorcelled to any frock-coated and top-hatted 
whiskered gent wincing at a beaker of sulphur water. And Di Greaves, as 
co-secretary for the Transition Group, sibling to the repair café, places the 
philosophy in the wider context; the Welsh towns of Rhayader, Presteigne, 
Montgomery and Newtown are preparing for a society post-carbon and fossil fuel. 
To quote the manifesto: “We are committed to positive local community action in 
response to the global challenges of economic crisis, climate change, and 
resource depletion … We see this transition as an enjoyable journey … We are 
non-political and non-confrontational.” A world after peak oil, Greaves says, 
“is on its way, and the politicians will do nothing.” This is the apocalypse 
with a homely smile and a slice of Battenburg. It’s Mad Max with a KitKat and a 
nice cup of tea. The well waters contain lithia.

 The mayor, Elaine Worgan, sadly without her regalia, and Jan Swindale the 
town crier, resplendent in hers (and which, she proudly tells me, she made 
herself), turn up to open the proceedings; the bell is rung, the people – a 
score in number, at first, but many drift in and out throughout the day – are 
gathered, the announcement is made: ‘Oyez! Oyez! Throw it away? No way!’ 
Instantly there’s industry, busy-ness; there is grinding and gossip, there are 
torrents of sparks. I take my speaker over to Jake Rothman, the electronics 
guy, and witness the birth of a new skill, namely that of discovering how to 
get into a sealed electronic box.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjoys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F17%2F1410953284075%2F0b79d124-13f3-4042-98ca-d06fb542fb7f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20joys%20of%20a%20repair%20cafe%3A%20Mad%20Max%20with%20a%20KitKat%20and%20a%20nice%20cup%20of%20tea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjoys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20joys%20of%20a%20repair%20cafe%3A%20Mad%20Max%20with%20a%20KitKat%20and%20a%20nice%20cup%20of%20tea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fjoys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F17%2F1410953284075%2F0b79d124-13f3-4042-98ca-d06fb542fb7f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Llandrindod Repair Cafe staff are joined by the town cryer Photograph: Joseph 
Botting 
It’s a puzzle and a challenge which clearly delights Rothman. The original 
makers hide the screws, he explains, to deterDIY 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/diy>, which leads to increased 
profits for the manufacturers and greater expense for the consumer and, 
generally, needless waste. I’m told about RoHS - the restriction of hazardous 
substances, which demanded that lead be replaced with tin, which is less toxic 
but a lot more perishable; there’s been an expeditious increase in discards. A 
greater emphasis on repair, of course, is one solution to this. Rothman finds 
the hidden screws and gets into the box but he can’t find anything wrong; I 
wonder about a built-in suicide device. “These are not designed to be fixed,” 
says Rothman, but he’s tenacious as a terrier, he identifies the problem and 
the solution (embarrassingly, after all that, it turns out that the plug has 
gone, so all it needed was batteries and a replacement lead. Ridiculous.


The problem is that if the piece of machinery is as baffling as a wireless 
speaker – I mean, how on earth do they work? – then I assume that the fault 
will be baffling too) and a few hours later I’m home, Bluetoothing music across 
the house, the iPad and the wine at my knee, happy. As happy as the giant 
salmon seemed to be when it launched itself out of the Ithon when I went for a 
stroll through the Rock Park woods.

 It’s a tremendous idea, the repair cafe. And I loved, in Llandrod, the air of 
amiable assistance, the spirited warmth of communal endeavour; this sense is 
strengthened when Jake tells me that his grandfather was Benny Rothman, who led 
the great trespass across Kinder Scout. Credentials to admire. The well waters 
here were never going to mend the broken body, but a non-spinning washing 
machine, a tickless clock, an unchained necklace, a buckled bicycle, a silent 
speaker, or a wheezing planet … well, they’re a different matter entirely.

The projects in this series: 

1. The community supported farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/01/writers-community-challenge-how-i-helped-bring-in-the-harvest>

2. The bike repair co-operative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/bike-blog/2014/sep/02/bicycle-repair-taking-apart-first-step-putting-back-together>

3. The community garden centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/03/teach-children-about-berries-they-engage-with-nature-connect-with-others>

4. The community forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/04/we-made-a-wooden-table-then-ate-a-meal-on-it-people-were-amazed>

5. The meat-rearing collective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/05/the-pig-society-life-in-south-pork>

6. The owl conservation group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/08/operation-owl-boxes-help-save-beautiful-bellwethers-of-biodiversity>

7. The neighbourhood community scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/10/how-neighourhood-scheme-ended-nightmare-on-ethel-street-halloween>

8. The local beer-growing group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/11/hops-herbs-of-beer-growth-of-local-harvest-groups>

9. The Solar Schools project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/12/the-worlds-first-visually-impaired-ukulele-band-what-next-for-a-school-with-dreams>

10. The clothes swap project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/15/swap-till-you-drop-clothing-exchange-beats-london-fashion-week>

11. The beekeeping group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/16/why-beeurbans-hives-are-creating-a-buzz-across-the-capital>

12. The repair cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/17/joys-repair-cafe-mad-max-kitkat-nice-cup-of-tea>

13. The ecotherapy garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/18/garden-ecotherapy-here-easier-for-people-to-open-up>

14. The community allotment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/19/garden-learning-space-carrot-for-motivation-instead-of-youre-grounded>

15. The nature reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/22/where-the-wild-things-are-the-nature-reserve-giving-kids-the-wildlife-bug>

16. The school growing project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/23/digging-the-love-the-school-growing-project-taking-learning-outdoors>

17. The traffic reduction project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/23/carbon-cutting-transport-scheme-helping-black-isle-go-green-scottish-highlands>

This article is part of the Live Better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better> Community Project month. 
In September, we are showcasing 17 community projects from around the UK.We are 
asking you to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/competition/2014/sep/24/live-better-community-project-competition-reader-vote>
 for your favourite project. The project with the most votes will be awarded 
£1,000 of funding, and two runners-up will each receive funding of £500.One 
voter chosen at random will receive £150 worth of gift vouchers for Nigel’s Eco 
Store.Terms and conditions here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/01/the-guardian-live-better-challenge-community-project-award-and-prize-draw-2014-terms-and-conditions>
.

With thanks to: 10:10 <http://www.1010global.org/uk>; FOE 
<http://www.foe.co.uk/>; Project Dirt <http://www.projectdirt.com/>; Neighbourly
 <https://www.neighbourly.com/>; UK Community Foundations 
<http://ukcommunityfoundations.org/>; Groundwork <http://www.groundwork.org.uk/>
;Business in the Community <http://www.bitc.org.uk/>; Federation of City Farms 
and Community Gardens <https://www.farmgarden.org.uk/>; the Prince’s Trust 
<https://www.princes-trust.org.uk/>; Garden Organic 
<http://www.gardenorganic.org.uk/>; the Royal Horticultural Society 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/>; the RSPB <http://www.rspb.org.uk/>; Keep Wales Tidy 
<http://www.keepwalestidy.org/home>; The Wildlife Trusts 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/>; and Mind <http://www.mind.org.uk/>. 


Interested in finding out more about how you can live better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better>? Take a look at this 
month’s Live Better challengehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/26/welcome-to-the-live-better-challenge>
.

The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable 
living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 