
Something still niggles away at Justice Terence Higgins, the man who unmade 
Manus.


Sitting in a quiet restaurant in Canberra’s trendy inner south, a world away 
from his home inPapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea>, Higgins shakes his head 
as he mulls it over.

Why did the Australian government ever think its Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> detention centre 
would survive a constitutional challenge?

Eight months ago Higgins became one of five Papua New Guinean supreme court 
justices who unanimously ruled that thedetention of asylum seekers on Manus 
breached detainees’ human rights and was therefore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
 at odds with the PNG constitution.


Australia’s federal government ought to have known it was an unavoidable.

Most judges would not have children who have mental problems and come in 
contact with the law
Gregory Stretton SC 
As long ago as 2013 the then prime minister, Kevin Rudd, and the then 
opposition leader, Tony Abbott, had beenwarned that the Manus plan was 
unconstitutional 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/rudd-and-abbott-were-warned-png-detention-plan-was-unconstitutional-in-2013-20160815-gqsjae.html>
 because it deprived asylum seekers of their liberty despite them not having 
committed an offence.

In his first interview since the decision, Higgins tells Guardian Australia 
that subsequent governments may not have taken the independence of PNG’s 
judiciary seriously.

Should they not have foreseen the outcome?

“You would have thought so, unless they thought the government up there 
controls the judiciary, which it doesn’t,” he said. “That’s one of the features 
of PNG that’s good, unlike Fiji or Nauru, and the judges really hold it very 
dear.”

Higgins has a long history of action in the highest courts on behalf of the 
least powerful.

Hamid Kehazaei inquest exposes failures of Australia's secretive immigration 
regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime>
In the early 1970s he had founded a modest-sized firm operating in Canberra’s 
small legal pond. The practice could barely scratch two cents together. The 
trust account was bare.

But while others were slogging away on mundane money-makers in lesser courts, 
Higgins could often be found on his feet in the high court, championing the 
causes of clients who could scarcely afford to pay.

“There was not even a penny in the Higgins Faulks trust account but there was 
his honour off on another venture to the high court for some poor unfortunate 
case he was championing,” Higgins’s friend and former colleague Gregory 
Stretton SC recalls.


“He was always a champion of the underdogs and the oppressed, there’s no 
question about that.”


It’s a constant thread weaving its way through Higgins’s life. 

It was there in his early days as a solicitor, again as chief justice of the 
Australian Capital Territory supreme court and once more during the momentous 
Manus Island decision – by far his most high profile – which threw the future 
of Australia’s offshore detention regime into uncertainty.

It’s hard to justify the continued detention of people who have not committed 
a crime
Terence Higgins 
Higgins said the 2012 decision to reopen Manus was clearly rushed. “I think 
that’s almost certainly true, they thought they could come to an agreement with 
the PNG government and it would be their problem, which is what they say in 
Nauru – ‘It’s not our problem, it’s the Nauruan government’s problem.’”

Higgins spent almost all his practising life in Canberra, starting as a 
solicitor in the 1960s, becoming partner, plying his trade as a barrister in 
the 1980s and then eventually joining the ACT supreme court bench in 1990, 
where he stayed for 23 years.

Periods of personal turmoil, often spilling into the harsh glare of the media, 
shaped his last years on the bench. His son and stepson have both experienced 
mental illness and have both faced criminal charges and spent time in custody.

His son was charged for seriously assaulting Higgins in 2003, an attack that 
attracted media publicity. The day after the assault, Higgins was back at work 
on the ACT supreme court bench, his injuries clearly visible.

He plays down any argument that this gave him a special insight into detention 
and mental illness, or any deeper understanding of the circumstances of those 
detained on Manus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-judge-who-unmade-manus-island-on-why-offshore-detention-has-no-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05fc9a04cf882c983881d254d6b3de1b9220c517%2F0_144_2281_1369%2F2281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20judge%20who%20unmade%20Manus%20Island%20on%20why%20offshore%20detention%20has%20no%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-judge-who-unmade-manus-island-on-why-offshore-detention-has-no-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20judge%20who%20unmade%20Manus%20Island%20on%20why%20offshore%20detention%20has%20no%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fthe-judge-who-unmade-manus-island-on-why-offshore-detention-has-no-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05fc9a04cf882c983881d254d6b3de1b9220c517%2F0_144_2281_1369%2F2281.jpg>
 Asylum seekers on Manus island in 2014. Photograph: Reuters 
“I do understand that if you lock people away and don’t tell them when they’re 
going to get out, it does create mental health problems,” he said. “[But] 
that’s not a unique insight.”

Stretton, however, believes Higgins’s personal experiences gave him something 
many judges are sorely lacking: a proper, real world grounding.

“Most judges would not have children who have mental problems and come in 
contact with the law, that’s just something way outside what you’d call a 
normal judge’s life,” he said.

“The criticism of judges is they always claim to know what the average person 
on the street thinks. They think they know … but they haven’t experienced it 
and therefore they don’t really know. Terry had experienced it and he did know.”

Before he joined the bench, Higgins was a longtime member of the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>. He worked for some 
time as a Labor branch president and helped write the party’s earlier human 
rights policies.

Gough Whitlam was counted as a friend, a mentor and a client. The pair met 
through the Australian National University in Canberra and Higgins would later 
represent Whitlam through the fallout of the 1975 loans affair.

Higgins believes that the support of both parties for offshore processing is 
not sustainable and says the policy is hurting the international reputation of 
PNG, as well as Australia.


Human rights day: installation invites public to open hearts for offshore 
detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/07/opening-hearts-unwraps-offshore-detention-its-about-letting-yourself-feel-something>
“Eventually it will need to be rethought but how [Labor] do that is a matter 
for them,” he said. “I wouldn’t have thought they could sustain the current 
regime indefinitely. I don’t think they think they can either. I don’t just 
mean the Labor party there, I mean the government is in the same position …

“It’s hard to justify the continued detention of people who have not committed 
a crime. Of course, in PNG that’s taken for granted because the constitution 
expressly sets out the human rights of people.”

Higgins, who left the ACT supreme court in 2013 aged 70, joined the PNG 
national and supreme courts last year under laws allowing the appointment of 
non-citizen judges. He followed a number of other judges who decided to serve 
there after reaching their mandated retirement age in Australia.

Now Higgins’s retirement in PNG is fast approaching, and his relatively brief 
love affair with the country is coming to an end. He has developed a keen 
interest in the country’s history and animatedly recounts stories of its time 
as a German colony.

But when conversation turns to Australia’s history, and how the current 
immigration policy will be remembered in decades to come, the tone becomes 
serious.

“Look, I’m pretty sure it will be regarded as a significant event,” he said. 
“It’s certainly not enhancing our reputation any more than it was enhancing the 
reputation of PNG or has enhanced the reputation of Nauru.


“When they compare us, of course, with Europe, we don’t come off too well.”

 