
Priti Patel <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel>, you seem to 
have all the answers: where we’ve been going wrong, apparently, is in our 
failure to bring enough jobs to places like Eritrea.

“I want to use our aid budget to directly address the great global challenges 
that affect the UK – like creating jobs in poorer countries so as to reduce the 
pressure for mass migration to Europe,” youwrite 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/710402/British-foreign-aid-should-be-spent-on-jobs-in-poorer-countries-to-stop-migration>
 in the Daily Mail.

If only it were that simple. First, it’s good to know where the mass migration 
to Europe is coming from. Thishandy chart 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-34131911> is fairly simple to 
understand.

UK NGOs raise concerns about Priti Patel's new approach to foreign aid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/14/uk-ngos-raise-concerns-about-priti-patels-new-approach-to-foreign-aid>
The top three sources of migration to Europe are from the conflict-ridden 
countries of Syria, Afghanistan and Iraq. When you’re fleeing barrel bombs, job 
prospects are a low priority, though there are probably opportunities to create 
more jobs in illicit arms trading should you so desire. You could also, of 
course, create more jobs in humanitarian aid, but I’m not sure that’s what 
you’re after.

We do indeed have thousands of migrants coming to Europe from sub-Saharan 
Africa. But creating jobs in many of these countries is hardly the answer 
either. Take Eritrea, for example. Here you would be better off ending their 
own government’s policy of a job for life in the army. Most migrants from 
Eritrea are escaping a lifetime of forced conscription – effectively slave 
labour – alongsidehuman rights abuses <https://www.hrw.org/africa/eritrea> 
including arbitrary arrests, torture or enforced disappearances.

A lot of migration is coming from Europe, of course. But you’ve led the Brexit 
campaign to make sure that stops. That will help to create a lot of job 
vacancies here at home, as Europeans who work in our NHS, our restaurants or 
our farms are forced to go home. But it won’t create jobs in developing 
countries.

As for other parts of your trade and job creation strategy, here are some home 
truths. You want to “empower the poorest to work and trade their way out of 
poverty, not treat them as passive recipients of our support”. Clearly, you’ve 
never met a poor person. A typical person living in poverty often works from 
dawn to dusk, seven days a week: domestic workers, or farm labourers, for 
example. They don’t have any help from anyone else, no pension, no education, 
no relief. They are hardly “passive recipients of our support”. Is a job the 
answer? They have jobs, Priti. But they’re insecure, without rights or a decent 
wage. What they need are stronger rights, a living wage, access to affordable 
health care and affordable education for their children.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fpriti-patel-job-creation-dfid-poor-countries-aid-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72a299a2f990cdd316f2de2a67286f054d082cfa%2F0_11_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There's%20no%20magic%20wand%20-%20creating%20jobs%20won't%20simply%20solve%20the%20world's%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fpriti-patel-job-creation-dfid-poor-countries-aid-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%27s%20no%20magic%20wand%20-%20creating%20jobs%20won%27t%20simply%20solve%20the%20world%27s%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fpriti-patel-job-creation-dfid-poor-countries-aid-budget%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72a299a2f990cdd316f2de2a67286f054d082cfa%2F0_11_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 ‘A typical person living in poverty often works from dawn to dusk, seven days 
a week.’ Photograph: Paul Ratje 
And before you reply: “That’s why we need to encourage more British trade in 
services like health and education” let’s hit that nail on the head. While 
there may be benefits for some who can afford it, there is evidence to show that
privatising services like education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/education-is-a-basic-human-right-why-private-schools-must-be-resisted>
 actually reduces access to them by the poorest.

In fact, your approach to free trade as a way to help the poorest, actually 
does the opposite. Instead, it tends to line the pockets of the rich, 
extracting money from the local economy, increasing poverty and vulnerability 
in the long run. What we need is just trade, not free trade, which is a 
universal recipe for a race to the bottom. Countries compete on cheap and 
insecure labour, on lower and lower taxes, on lax environmental standards.

They have jobs, Priti. But they’re insecure, without rights or a decent wage.

A lot of what needs to be done for development has nothing to do with your 
priorities. If you want to address the “scourge of corruption” look no further 
than here at home. The UK’s economy isfuelled by a tax dodging 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/blogs/2015/06/g7-companies-tax-dodging-lost-africa-6bn>
 international elite, and a corporate sector intent on shielding their money 
from the pesky hands of poor countries.

Poll: Which country should new secretary of state for development Priti Patel 
visit first?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/27/poll-which-country-should-priti-patel-visit-first>
But I suspect you’ll forge ahead anyway. You’ll subsidise the building of 
shopping malls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/may/02/british-aid-money-gated-communities-shopping-centres-cdc-poverty>
 for middle- and upper-class consumers, or perhaps line the pockets of 
pharmaceutical companies whocharge colossal amounts for access to basic 
medicines 
<http://www.msf.org.uk/sites/uk/files/msf_the_right_shot_report_2nded_2015.pdf> 
that people in poor countries can ill afford. You’ll make sure British 
companies benefit by repatriating their income, keeping people in developing 
countries in low-paid, insecure jobs, rather than helping them climb the value 
chain.

You want to end aid dependency? So do a lot of us. I’m no fan of a defensive 
development industry, and I even welcome a healthy, localised market.

A fresh pair of eyes may indeed be quite helpful. But rather than talking 
about what needs to be done based on your own biases, perhaps you could step 
out of the Conservative echo-chamber, and start asking some hard-hitting 
questions? A simplified programme of job creation and free trade may sound like 
an obvious way forward to your ears, but in reality it is not going to be a 
step forward for most of the world’s poor.

Deborah Doane is a writer and consultant on international development 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 