
Executive pay reforms do not come much more modest than the idea of requiring 
public companies to say how much the chief executive is paid relative to the 
firm’s median earner. Nothing would have to happen as a consequence. 
Shareholders would not be asked formally if the ratio is too high or too low. 
The boss’s pay would not have to be capped at a fixed multiple. Instead, the 
hope is that boards, occasionally, might be embarrassed into exercising a 
little discipline.

Yet even this gentle proposal, likely to be included in the government’s green 
paper on corporate governance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/executive-pay-under-unprecedented-scrutiny-iod-chief>
 on Tuesday, is running into resistance. Pay ratios are too crude and could 
mislead, runs one argument, because an investment bank, where lots of people 
tend to earn megabucks, could seem to be a “fairer” employer than a supermarket 
chain employing tens of thousands of shelf-stackers and checkout assistants. 
Worse, pay ratios could prove inflationary if bosses demand a higher place in a 
theoretical league table, runs another objection.

Neither argument is persuasive. The “too crude” theory is too lofty. Outsiders 
are quite able to understand that a pay ratio is merely one measure among many 
and that investment banks and supermarkets have different pay structures. Where 
ratios could be revealing is in charting a company’s pay gap over time.

As for the inflationary impact, that depends on the pay-setters. If Theresa 
May wants to change the make-up of remuneration committees or introduce an 
advisory panel of “stakeholders”, it’s up to those newcomers to resist any 
over-the-top pay demands by the executives. One suspects the corporate 
hostility to seeing pay ratios in the public domain is very simple: boards wish 
everybody would shut up about executive pay. It’s a bit late for that.

The prime minister should stick to her guns. Nobody would pretend that pay 
ratios are a cure-all but even the US, where the inflation in boardroom pay is 
truly extreme, is due to introduce mandatory disclosure next year. If the US is 
doing it, the reform really isn’t terribly radical. The fuss will die down as 
soon as the PM says yes.

Profits fall at Aberdeen show need for new approach

It was only a few years ago that Aberdeen Asset Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aberdeenassetmanagement> was trying to 
slow inflows into some of its emerging market funds; the money was arriving 
faster than it could usefully invest it. The game is very different these days. 
Net outflows were £32.8bn in the last financial year, roughly the same as the 
previous 12 months. The election of Donald Trump, threatening trade wars and 
protectionism, is unlikely to improve the investment appeal of emerging 
markets, where the Aberdeen name is strongest.

The fund manager is probably right that Trump, Brexit and European elections 
“will contribute to ongoing volatility in global markets in the short term” and 
that it is difficult to make longer-term judgments. It is hardly going out a 
limb in making that assessment. But the greater problems are more direct and 
affect most active fund managers. New chairman Simon Troughton summarised them 
as “fee pressure, increased investment in technology and regulatory capital 
requirements”. Of those, the pressure from low-cost index funds is probably the 
most severe and is the least likely to reverse.

Henderson Global Investors has found a plausible escape route by merging with 
Janus Capital of the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/oct/03/janus-henderson-deal-shows-brexit-hasnt-altered-londons-status>
. Aberdeen chief executive Martin Gilbert called that deal “clever,” by which 
we can take him to mean he would love his own version. But the group has been 
open to a big deal in the US, home of half the world’s invested assets, for 
ages and it hasn’t happened yet.

In its absence, Aberdeen must keep attacking costs and hunt for smaller rivals 
to buy and restructure. It is a perfectly sensible strategy and Aberdeen will 
have no regrets over its purchase of Scottish Widows Investment Partnership a 
couple of years ago. But the approach has its limits. After Aberdeen’s 28% fall 
in underlying pre-tax profits to £353m, the same-again dividend was barely 
covered by earnings and its £250m cost will swallow most of the year’s 
cashflow. That can’t go on indefinitely. Unless something turns up in the next 
year, a dividend cut looks inevitable.

Sports Direct advice may come back to haunt Grant Thornton

In a ranking of Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sports-direct-international>’s governance 
misdemeanours, possible failure to tell shareholders about a deal with founder 
Mike Ashley’s brother would not be top of the list. But, note, it is not Sports 
Direct that is being investigated by the Financial Reporting Council.It is 
Grant Thornton, the sportswear chain’s auditor, that is under the microscope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/sports-direct-auditor-under-investigation-over-companys-family-deal>
.

The accounting rules in this area seem clear enough. A related party includes 
“close family members of key management” and transactions should be disclosed. 
It will thus be enlightening to hear Grant Thornton’s explanation of why it 
thought it was OK for Sports Direct to be silent about its outsourcing of some 
of its international deliveries to a company owned by John Ashley.

The FRC’s judgment is keenly awaited. For Grant Thornton, the reputational 
stakes are high. It was one of the advisers that washeavily criticised by MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/27/grant-thorntons-role-in-the-bhs-debacle-should-not-be-overlooked>
 this year for its contribution to the BHS debacle. To slip up on Sports Direct 
as well would be a notable double.
 