
The commonwealth ombudsman has launched an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/ombudsman-launches-investigation-into-centrelink-debt-recovery-crisis>
 into Centrelink’s automated debt-recovery system. The issue had been referred 
afternumerous complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/29/government-confident-in-centrelink-debt-compliance-system-despite-reported-errors>
 that the system, which matches income data reported to Centrelink with that 
held by the Australian Tax Office, was issuing incorrect debt notices to 
welfare recipients.

The tax and social security systems can be seen as two sides of the same 
process –income support payments 
<https://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/enablers/income-support-payment-description>
 are a safety net funded through taxation. Both systems depend on an assessment 
of the financial resources of the “client”, whether a taxpayer or a recipient 
of a payment.

Centrelink crisis: people targeted with inaccurate debts may be able to sue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/centrelink-crisis-people-targeted-with-inaccurate-debts-may-be-able-to-sue>
Data matching between the two systems could seem a logical step to 
policymakers and data analysts charged with reducing the budget deficit. But 
there are several important differences between the tax and social security 
systems. These include the principles and intentions underlying the two 
systems, and differences in the data captured.

The ability to pay

The most important difference is to recognise the fundamental purpose of each 
system, by revisiting the principle ofvertical equity 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/JlATaxTA/2010/5.html>, that people 
earning more should pay more tax.

Our taxation system is built on this “ability to pay” principle. People who 
report higher levels of taxable income pay progressively higher rates of 
personal income tax (although this is eroded by the availability of tax 
concessions includingnegative gearing 
<https://theconversation.com/the-way-australia-taxes-housing-is-manifestly-unfair-58421>
 andcapital gains tax discounts 
<https://theconversation.com/is-it-time-for-australia-to-tackle-its-warren-buffett-style-tax-anomalies-10886>
).

In contrast, the purpose of income-support payments is to assist people in 
need at the time when they most need support. The means testing applied in 
Australiavery effectively targets welfare spending 
<https://theconversation.com/who-really-benefits-from-australias-tax-and-social-security-system-48808>
 to those with limited financial resources; to the extent that evenbusiness 
organisations have called for increases 
<http://www.bca.com.au/publications/submission-to-the-senate-inquiry-into-the-adequacy-of-the-allowance-payment-system-for-jobseekers-and-others>
 as the current rate of payment is inadequate and presents a barrier to 
employment.

Timing and reconciliation

The timing of income-support payments is critical for recipients. This is a 
consequence of the different purpose of the payments. Income-support recipients 
have, by definition, exhausted their financial reserves, so payments must be 
assessed and paid on a timely basis to meet basic expenses.

In contrast, although tax payable is estimated periodically 
<https://www.ato.gov.au/General/PAYG-instalments/> under a “pay as you go” 
(PAYG) system 
<https://www.ato.gov.au/individuals/working/in-detail/payg-withholding/how-much-tax-should-be-taken-from-my-pay-/>
, tax is assessed annually on a final taxable income figure. The amount owed is 
reconciled against what has already been paid.

The reporting systems implemented by Centrelink do require periodic income 
reporting <https://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/enablers/income-reporting>
, but each payment is assessed and paid fortnightly with no annual 
reconciliation. To do so would be inconsistent with the underlying principle 
that income support is a safety net.

Clearly, where a person is in casual work or is unemployed for only part of 
the year, fortnightly income will not be consistent over the year. Data 
matching also relies on employers providing accurate employment dates on 
employment summaries. This is a technicality that does not have significant 
consequences when calculating taxable income but could deny income-support 
payments to a claimant.

All of this needs to be taken into account when writing the algorithms that 
attempt to match the income reported under the two systems.

Calculation and policy differences

Centrelink’s algorithms are based on the data the ATO holds in relation to 
income, but the calculation of income-support payments is more nuanced. The 
different roles played by the income and transfer systems cause them to record 
and highlight different things.

The principle of horizontal equity 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/JlATaxTA/2010/5.html> requires that the 
tax and social security systems take into account individual circumstances. 
Notably, the income tax system is based on the income earned by the individual, 
after adjustment for work-related and other expenses. Meanwhile, the social 
security system must also recognisefamily circumstances 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/eJlTaxR/2014/10.html>, through parenting 
supplements and family tax benefits.

As a result, revenue authorities are more concerned with transactions that may 
give rise to a tax liability, while welfare authorities also need information 
about the claimant’s circumstances to verify entitlements to benefits.

Automated systems

The ATO has used automated systems effectively 
<https://www.ato.gov.au/General/Building-confidence/In-detail/Data-matching/> 
to alert taxpayers to discrepancies in data received by the ATO against what 
has been returned in income tax returns. Where a discrepancy is identified, 
taxpayers are given an opportunity to dispute the information prior to the 
issue of a notice of assessment.

The issue of a notice of assessment is an important procedural step as it 
crystallises the debt and the formal right to object against the assessment.

In contrast, when Centrelink alleges that an overpayment has been made, the 
client is issued with a debt notice. Although this can be challenged, the 
process is far more intimidating – particularly if the recipient does not have 
an intermediary or agent acting on their behalf to assist in resolving the 
issue. Many recipients are turning towelfare rights organisations 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/what-should-you-do-if-you-get-a-centrelink-debt-letter-20170104-gtlmgl.html>
 ormembers of parliament 
<http://andrewwilkie.org/centrelink-debt-nightmare-continues/> for help.

It is worth noting that the Australian Taxation Office has been adopting a 
light touch 
<https://www.ato.gov.au/Media-centre/Speeches/Other/Tax-administration-transformation--Reinventing-the-ATO/>
 in dealing with tax debts. It is engaging with taxpayers earlier to resolve 
issues and make it easier to comply with their obligations. Centrelink could 
learn from this approach.

Learning from our mistakes

The problems inherent in using taxable income to determine periodic social 
security payments were demonstrated following the introduction of the Family 
Tax Benefit. In its original form, parents received fortnightly payments based 
on an estimate of annual income. At the end of the first year, coincidentally 
in the middle of the 2001 election campaign, income estimates were matched 
against reported taxable income. Over500,000 clients 
<http://www.ombudsman.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0012/26202/investigation_2003_04.pdf>
 were asked to refund overpayments.

The 2004 commonwealth ombudsman’s report 
<http://www.ombudsman.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0012/26202/investigation_2003_04.pdf>
 highlighted the problems in estimating income where earnings are not regular 
and ongoing. This resulted in a redesign of Family Tax benefits and was the 
original reason for the introduction of the annual FTB Supplement. Although 
technology has improved since 2001, it illustrates the dangers of matching data 
from two different systems.

One of the benefits of living in Australia is that we have an income safety 
net for those in most need. This social contract imposes an obligation on 
recipients to accurately report income and assets to qualify for support; the 
vast majority of income support recipients comply to the best of their ability.

A properly designed income-matching system can help to identify anomalies, but 
the information needs to be appropriate and fit for purpose. The current 
exercise is using information in a way that it was not designed to be applied, 
without properly adjusting for the technical and policy differences between the 
tax and social security system. At the very least,Centrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> could learn from the 
ATO regarding how to engage with the client before issuing debt notices.

• Helen Hodgson <https://theconversation.com/profiles/helen-hodgson-94553> is 
an associate professor at Curtin law school and Curtin business school, Curtin 
University
 