
Theresa May, who makes a major speech on Tuesday, has reached a moment of 
truth on Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
. No one can blame her for the result of the referendum – she was a remainer – 
but from now on she takes responsibility for the consequences. If Britain not 
only leaves the EU but also loses free access to its main export market in 
Europe, our economy will become smaller and poorer.

Of course, she will argue that British exporters will not be barred from 
Europe’s vast marketplace, and technically that is true. But from now on we 
will be selling our goods and services on Europe’s terms; not as insiders but 
as competitors and rivals. Any deal that helps us will depend on Europe’s 
willingness to grant us preferential access.

Without favoured treatment, many exports to the EU could face tariffs in some 
cases of 10% or a lot more. Robust customs barriers will add significant export 
costs and expensive delays, and many exports of services will be blocked once 
we abandon Europe’s single regulatory rulebook. This means not just a hard 
Brexit but a destructive and harmful rupture that will, over time, reduce 
trade, shrink manufacturing investment and destroy jobs.

Related: Theresa May's speech to warn EU of risk of giving UK a raw Brexit deal
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-speech-warning-eu-risk-giving-britain-raw-brexit-deal>

May will claim that this can be mitigated by special new trade arrangements 
between Britain and the EU. There are indeed options: an agreement that 
eliminates tariffs; a customs agreement to limit trade delays; mutual 
recognition of standards and regulations to smooth trade in services; and 
possibly an investment protection agreement. A transitional period could tide 
Britain over the lengthy time all this will take to negotiate and implement. 
But none of these will fall into place just because we want them to.

I used to negotiate such deals with foreign countries – “third countries” in 
EU parlance – with the same status as Britain will have. I can testify that 
so-called free trade agreements never come for free, they never cover all 
trade, and they are a devil’s own job to agree. As a rule, they are launched 
with ambition then conclude disappointingly many years later with both sides 
protecting their key interests.

President-elect Donald Trump’s offer of a “fair” and “rapid” trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/16/trump-wants-a-uk-us-trade-deal-signature-ready-for-brexit-in-2019-says-gove-politics-live>
 with the US is welcome, but what would it look like in reality? Outside the 
EU, Britain would have little power to resist the imposition of US demands. The 
trade potential would largely be found in eliminating UK-US regulatory 
differences in goods and services, but Britain would be aligning itself with US 
technical standards rather than the other way round. So we would have to import
hormone-treated beef <https://www.theguardian.com/business/1999/mar/23/5> and 
accept other US agricultural norms currently outlawed in the EU to protect 
consumers. And the more we aligned with the US, a matching regulatory gap would 
hit our European trade.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
UK is ‘smart’ to leave EU, Trump tells Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/16/uk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video>
No doubt the government will continue to talk up the chances of this and other 
good trade deals, including with the EU, but there is only one way that Britain 
can enjoy the same tariff-free rights and regulatory privileges we currently 
have inside Europe’s single market – that is by joining theEuropean Economic 
Area (EEA) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2016/nov/28/article-127-new-article-50-leave-eu-stay-eea>
, as Norway did when it rejected EU membership. Hardline Brexiters oppose this, 
claiming that in voting to leave the EU, Britain also decided to leave the 
single market. But this isn’t true. The public were assured by leave 
campaigners that we would continue to have all the advantages of trade in the 
single market without EU membership. This outcome is only available to us inthe 
EEA <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Economic_Area>.

Yes, it would mean accepting rulings of the European court of justice in 
future disputes between the UK and the EU. It would also mean accepting 
mobility of labour between Britain and the EU. But how this principle is 
applied and how it operates in practice is not set in stone. There are growing 
calls in Europe for movement of labour to be reformed.

Already, labour market rules differ across the EU. Welfare entitlements vary. 
In many EU states, if you come you are expected to have a job. And the ability 
to work is not regarded as the same as the right to settle, with all the 
benefits and access to public services that come with it.

May should aim to negotiate arrangements with the EU, combined with changes in 
UK labour market legislation, which give us both continued free trade in Europe 
and greater control over labour mobility and employment rules.

Related: We can escape Brexit doom with one small tweak to free movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/we-can-escape-brexit-doom-with-one-small-tweak-to-free-movement>

Instead, the prime minister’s reading of the referendum is that the only thing 
the public cares about is immigration, and that immigration should now run 
economic policy even if it means the country becoming poorer as a result.

At the same time, she claims that the strength of our democracy and our 
identity as a nation is that we show respect for each other as fellow citizens. 
What about the half of the country that voted to leave the EU showing respect 
for the half that didn’t? If she really wanted to unite the country she would 
say “the country voted to leave by a small margin but parliament’s job is to 
find the least harmful way of doing this”.

Instead she has brushed aside advice from her civil servants, threatened the 
EU with tax and trade wars,bullied business leaders 
<https://www.ft.com/content/a40264d2-c790-11e6-8f29-9445cac8966f> into keeping 
quiet about the consequences, and allows anyone with a different view to be 
treated as a heretic. The correct response from those in all parties who care 
deeply about the national interest is to cast partisan politics aside and make 
their voices heard in the country and in parliament. This is going to hang over 
British politics for the next decade at least. If the prime minister is not 
serious about unifying the country, others should be.
 