
Last weekend the United Nations completed its annual 16 days of activism 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/ending-violence-against-women/take-action/16-days-of-activism>
 against gender-based violence – a global campaign aimed at raising awareness 
of what is the rawest, most visceral example of gender inequality. That such an 
effort still needs to be made in 2016 highlights the size of the problem –one 
in three women 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/ending-violence-against-women/facts-and-figures>
 globally still suffer from gender-based violence in some form in their 
lifetime. The wider fight is equally stark. Some62 million girls annually are 
denied access to education <http://theirworld.org/explainers/upforschool>, four 
out of every five children trafficked are girls, and women continue to suffer 
in terms of pay and representation in the workplace.

Politics and public life seem little better. The poisonous rhetoric brought to 
the surface during the US presidential election is just the latest example of 
how the internet has empowered keyboard misogynists to vent their anger against 
women. Take astudy by this newspaper earlier in the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/the-dark-side-of-guardian-comments>
: of the 10 most abused writers on the Guardian platform eight were women.

How to end gender violence? Give money to visionary local groups | Jessica 
Neuwirth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/06/end-gender-violence-give-money-to-visionary-local-groups-16-day-campaign>
But there are some small chinks of hope. A reminder that while the status quo 
is unacceptable, the longer-term trend is pointed towards gender equality. And 
this trend is global, not simply confined to the western world. Just look at 
healthcare. Maternal mortality remains a mass killer in the developing world. 
It may not be as newsworthy as gender-based violence or as stark and immediate 
as disease or starvation, but it is thesecond biggest killer of women 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs334/en/> of reproductive age in 
the developing world. This is changing.

Due to a concerted focus not least through the recently concluded UN 
Millennium Development Goals 
<http://www.who.int/topics/millennium_development_goals/maternal_health/en/>, 
the amount of women dying in childbirth has fallen by45% since 1990 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/may/07/maternal-mortality-rate-drops-half-report-who-childbirth-pregnancy>
. A staggering achievement. Gender-based development campaigns aimed at 
educating women have also pushed aside outmoded approaches to pregnancy and 
family planning, empowering women to take control of their own welfare in one 
of the most vulnerable periods of their lives.

Through the work of my own foundation in Nigeria, we have found that 
relatively small interventions (such as ourMamaCare Antenatal 
<http://www.wbfafrica.org/mamacare-antenatal-edu> and Postnatal Education 
Curriculum) can have a huge impact on the wellbeing of a mother, and in turn 
have a ripple effect on the communities which these mothers lead, thus 
improving and transforming the health of families slowly but effectively.

Improvement is also being made in education. While secondary education remains 
a critical problem in many developing countries, the challenge of primary 
school enrolment has virtually been solved. Enrolment rates globally are now on 
anear parity between boys and girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/jul/04/mdgs-girls-match-boys-primary-school-enrolment>
.

And what of the workplace? The top-line figures may be bleak, but there is 
evidence to suggest slow change is happening. Astudy of 70 countries 
<http://www.noceilings.org/>, including many in the developing world, showed 
that since 1995 the gender wage gap has narrowed from 28% to 20%. The gap is 
still far too big. But it is falling.

But what of politics and public life? There has been one story and one story 
only this year. The failure of the US to elect a female president. Regardless 
of the merits or pitfalls of the victor, the symbolism of a woman leading the 
most powerful nation on Earth would have been a touchstone moment for gender 
equality from New York to Nairobi.

But in this respect the developing world can again provide some hope. Look at 
the great surge of democracy and representative government in Africa, Asia and 
Latin America that began in early 1990s. In virtually every new constitution 
that followed, guarantees of gender equality were enshrined in law. And while 
the US is still yet to elect its first female head of state, countries as 
diverse as Brazil, Chile, Malawi, Liberia, Bangladesh and South Korea have all 
done so. General political participation is also on the rise.Rwanda’s parliament
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/01/lessons-rwanda-female-run-institutions-mps>
 has the largest number of female representatives on Earth.

Cash chaos shows India's women need financial system they can bank on | Sarah 
Gammage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/12/cash-chaos-india-banknotes-shows-women-need-financial-system-they-can-bank-on>
The reality is that the life chances (and quality of life) for millions of 
women are still bleak. But while there has been backsliding, we must also 
remember the progress that has been made. If we allow the narrative of gender 
equality to become too negative we risk allowing that negativity to be 
self-fulfilling.

In my own country of Nigeria I don’t want attention to be focused on the 
failure of a woman to reach the White House. I want attention to be on the 
gradual, incremental victories. Like the fact that our country has passed the 
second reading of thegender and equal opportunities bill in the senate 
<http://www.aacoalition.org/images/Gender_and_Equal_Opportunities_Bill_National.pdf>
, a level of reform now becoming the norm in Africa. While western countries 
are reappraising their progress on gender equality, many countries in the 
developing world are quietly writing their own stories on the issue, which 
remain largely untold beyond their borders.

We have so far to go on the journey to true gender equality that it can 
sometimes seem daunting. But the long-term trend is in our favour, and if 2016 
teaches us anything, it should be to stay the course. The fight for gender 
equality within a generation is winnable. Battles may be lost, but the war will 
be won, eventually.
 