
The defining policy of her government remains unpopular with this audience, 
but at least her outfit was a hit.

At Theresa May’s champagne reception to celebrate the start of London fashion 
week <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week> the prime 
minister played, it was generally agreed, a strong sartorial game. In a crisp 
white shirt with a utilitarian drawstring waist and stepped asymmetric hem, May 
looked more fashion-forward than her cocktail-dress-clad fashion industry 
guests.

So In right now: fashion enters the Brexit debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/15/fashion-enters-brexit-debate-in-london-menswear-shows-eu-referendum>
That the shirt was designed by a London designer label, Palmer Harding, but 
sells for £120 as part of a collaboration with John Lewis, added to the 
political kudos. May wore the shirt with Amanda Wakeley trousers, Russell & 
Bromley kitten heels and the same silver necklace she wore when she promised to 
“make Britain a country that works not for the privileged few but for every one 
of us”.

She may have a well-documented predilection for leopard print shoes and have 
famously chosen a lifetime’s subscription to Vogue as her luxury on Desert 
Island Discs, but Thursday evening had a strategic purpose.

Fashion offers May a photogenic opportunity to promote a Britain that can 
thrive in a global economy on its own terms. London fashion week, after all, is 
not part of European fashion, but one that successfully competes for attention 
and business with France and Italy. This is an industry in which Britain 
continues to be a small nation continuing glorious traditions and punching 
above its weight.

Dame Natalie Massenet, the chairman of the British Fashion Council that 
co-hosted the event, described the evening as reaffirming “the message that 
Britain, and London, is very much open for business”.


But while her look may be on point, in fashion industry parlance, May’s 
government is anything but. The prospect of Brexit is deeply unpopular in an 
industry that contributed £28bn to the UK’s economy in 2015 and employs 880,000 
people.


A survey of 290 UK based designer fashion businesses, undertaken by the 
British Fashion Council in the run up to the referendum in June, found that 90% 
wished to remain in the EU.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftheresa-may-shows-britain-is-still-open-for-business-at-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F092dbf695795923db67693f5589e941963293bc7%2F0_156_2772_1664%2F2772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20shows%20Britain%20is%20still%20open%20for%20business%20at%20London%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftheresa-may-shows-britain-is-still-open-for-business-at-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20shows%20Britain%20is%20still%20open%20for%20business%20at%20London%20fashion%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftheresa-may-shows-britain-is-still-open-for-business-at-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F092dbf695795923db67693f5589e941963293bc7%2F0_156_2772_1664%2F2772.jpg>
 Theresa May has a fondness for leopard print heels. Photograph: Chris 
Radburn/PA 
Burberry designer Christopher Bailey, one of 100 business leaders who signed a 
letter backing the Remain campaign, and pro-EU activistVivienne Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vivienne-westwood>, were both present to 
hear May’s short speech attempting to forge common ground: “On any other night 
here, nobody knows what I’m wearing, but tonight everyone here knows what I’m 
wearing.” The reception was polite but cool, the loudest applause coming when 
May thanked Samantha Cameron, an active and popular ambassador for British 
fashion, for attending.


A Downing Street reception has been a fixture of London fashion week 
throughout the Brown and Cameron years, but it takes on added significance in 
being hosted not by a prime minister’s wife, but by the prime minister herself. 
Mindful of this, May instigated a changed guest list. Instead of the glamorous 
plus-ones of recent seasons – Naomi Campbell and Salma Hayek have attended – 
the guest list had a more sober, practical bent, and included apprentices 
currently training withBurberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup>, shoe designer Charlotte 
Olympia and menswear brand Private White VC.
 