
I’m going to Glastonbury this weekend. I’ve been before, but any fashion tips? 
I’m 24.

Ellie, by email

It never fails to amaze me that anyone associates festivals – especially 
festivals held in Britain – with fashion. And yet, judging by the 10,785,943 
emails I’ve received just today from fashion PR companies full of “festival 
fashion suggestions!!!!”, I seem to be in the minority on this. Personally, I 
approach dressing for festivals in the same way I tackle dressing for longhaul 
flights: as if I’m about to embark on an endurance test. I gaze upon those who 
place style over comfort in these scenarios with a feeling that is a mix of 10% 
admiration and 90% bewilderment.

I appreciate that Glastonbury has developed a reputation for being a catwalk 
in a field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/28/glastonbury-2015-festival-style-strong-looks-all-round>
 – a Milan-in-Somerset, if you will – thanks to the endless pap photos of 
celebrities milling about stylishly backstage. But what no one seems to realise 
is that these celebrities are all staying either in Babington House or in 
massive Airstream mobile homes in the VIP section, which have luxuries such as 
indoor plumbing and plug sockets. Therefore, they are not exactly 
representative of the festival look. It’s easy to look good when you can have a 
hot shower every morning and a blow-dry; less so when your only form of 
personal hygiene for four days is a wet wipe.

And the cold! My main memories of Glastonbury involve freezing at 3am and 
wandering around in the dark drizzle, looking for my sleeping bag. The idea of 
taking up valuable packing space with a feather boa instead of another 
sweatshirt is as anathema to me as skipping lunch in order to buy shoes. Why 
would I need shoes when I’d be lying on the floor having fainted from hunger?

I think the big misapprehension about Glastonbury – about any big event – is 
that people care what you’re wearing. They don’t. They’re too busy looking for 
their damn sleeping bag. We’re so used to seeing the festival via the photos of 
celebrities that it’s easy to confuse these images with reality, and believe 
that we’re all being looked at, too. I made this mistake when I went to LA last 
year to cover the Oscars for this paper and, on some unconscious level, 
imagined that people would be looking at my clothes on the red carpet the way I 
had, for so many years, looked at theirs. It turned out, amazingly, that no one 
gave a stuff what I wore, because they were too busy staring at Julianne Moore 
and Cate Blanchett.

“No one’s looking at you,” was one of the most reassuring things a teacher 
told me when I was a teenager, crippled by self-consciousness. It liberated me 
to stop worrying about how I thought people wanted me to look and just be how I 
wanted to be. Of course, this maxim doesn’t work so well now, given that 
everyone is their own paparazzo, posting their selfies online and hoping for 
likes. But I maintain it is a useful message for life.

Look, I salute anyone with the constitution to plan a Glastonbury look, and if 
it helps you get in the mood, go to it. But I personally find that being warm 
and dry is the only moodsetter I need, and if I achieve that with three 
sweatshirts, a cagoule, some old thermal leggings and pair of boots, well, I’m 
pretty pleased with my Glastonbury look. You’re going into a warzone, Ellie. 
Arm yourself.

Final word: anyone who wears flip-flops to Glastonbury needs psychiatric 
assistance immediately. Seriously, have you seen the toilets? You might as well 
save yourself the effort of even going to Somerset. Just inject gangrene 
directly into your heel and head to the amputations wing of a hospital. Happy 
to help!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fthermal-leggings-and-three-jumpers-what-to-really-wear-at-glastonbury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5803f7a0c929e4e85158ee339fd86c7fbbe9576b%2F0_0_5120_3413%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thermal%20leggings%20and%20three%20jumpers%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20really%20wear%20at%20Glastonbury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fthermal-leggings-and-three-jumpers-what-to-really-wear-at-glastonbury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thermal%20leggings%20and%20three%20jumpers%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20really%20wear%20at%20Glastonbury&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fthermal-leggings-and-three-jumpers-what-to-really-wear-at-glastonbury%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5803f7a0c929e4e85158ee339fd86c7fbbe9576b%2F0_0_5120_3413%2F5120.jpg>
 ‘Having spent however much money on maternity clothes, it seems absurd to wear 
them for only six months and then chuck them away.’ Photograph: Sam 
Edwards/Getty Images 
How wrong is it to wear your maternity clothes after the baby has been born?

Me, here

The question is not really about its wrongness, but its viability. In short, 
do you look weird wearing maternity clothes when the baby is on your exterior 
instead of your interior? I really wanted to believe not. Having spent however 
much money on those clothes, it seems absurd to wear them for only six months 
and then chuck them away. Surely they can be incorporated into your normal 
wardrobe?

Not so much. After giving birth, I accepted I’d have to get rid of the 
maternity jeans with their bizarre elasticated knit waistbands, although I kept 
one pair to be worn when eating Christmas lunch (my Christmas day look is as 
stylish as my Glastonbury one). But, I thought, if I still wore the draped 
maternity tops, I would look fine. And I did, if by “fine” you mean “kinda 
pregnant”. True, it was fun to see the look of sheer horror on the face of the 
person I live with when I came down to breakfast that morning, but it was not 
quite the chic look I aspired to that day.
 