
Theresa May’s new year video message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/31/theresa-may-new-year-message-brexit>
 looked a bit like a royal address: artfully shot in front of a grand Downing 
Street mantelpiece, a twinkle of seasonal lights relieving the trademark 
severity. Firmly upholstered in a navy blue jacket, as if taking a brief break 
from the slog of EU negotiations, May promises a “greige” Brexit, nuanced 
enough to appeal both to Brexiteers fretting that their victory last June will 
be unwound by a concatenation of courts, civil servants and parliamentarians – 
and remain voters too vociferous and numerous to be merely swept aside.

The prime minister's knack is to make contentious issues sound dull enough to 
lull all but the most energetic dissenters

An outbreak of healing unity after the fissures of 2016 is the implied 
covenant as the prime minister embarks on a countdown to triggeringarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/article-50-brexit-debate-britain-eu>
 by the end of March. Out with the remnants of 2016 goes strident rhetoric 
about arrogantliberal elites, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-conference-interventionist-government-for-workers>
 so feistily deployed at the Conservative conference. “Last year’s words belong 
to last year’s language,” asTS Eliot might have noted 
<https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/476456-for-last-year-s-words-belong-to-last-year-s-language-and>
 of T May.

Carefully balanced commitments are being made to appease both sides. The prime 
minister’s default knack is to make contentious issues sound dull enough to 
lull all but the most energetic dissenters into submission. A couple of senior 
backbenchers, summoned to pre-Christmas chats about the febrile mood among MPs, 
described the process to me as “likeKaa in The Jungle Book mesmerising Mowgli 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1WpCy6b_dZ8>”. The charge that May has been 
evasive or uninformative in her approach to Brexit in the latter half of last 
year misses the point – that is precisely her modus operandi.

Summoning up the memory of the “fantastic MP Jo Cox” in her address will irk 
those who believe that the Labour parliamentarian’s murder was in some way 
related to a divided national mood. But it appeals to a broader feeling that 
the fractiousness needs to abate in the coming months. As strongly as many 
feel, an awful lot of voters have had enough of the wrangles and hanker for 
some kind of certainty about what comes next.

Getting to this point, however, entails a formidably tricky act of political 
triage, determining the priorities that will shape not only the technical 
structures of Brexit, but its tone and pace.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20addresses%20'divisive'%20Brexit%20in%20new%20year%20message%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20addresses%20%27divisive%27%20Brexit%20in%20new%20year%20message%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video&media=>
Theresa May addresses ‘divisive’ Brexit in new year message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2017/jan/01/theresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video>
It has been fashionable to dismiss her “Brexit means Brexit” mantra as vacuous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/05/so-brexit-means-brexit-means-brexit-is-that-it>
. But using it sends a simple but necessary message: namely that she will 
trigger article 50 and deliver an exit from the EU on clear terms in short 
order. Not such an empty pledge, given the original intention by soft 
Brexiteers that it would end up meaning something very like remaining.

Delphic pronouncements have already bought her time to square competing 
interests on her team. So Liam Fox, originally positioned as the most vigorous 
Brexit warrior in the cabinet, has given ground on the possibility of theUK 
remaining in an EU-based customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/01/brexit-slow-burning-fuse-powder-keg-in-2017>
, while David Davis has suggested that Britain couldpay for single-market access
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-secretary-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access>
. Philip Hammond, despite a Downing Street omerta on phrases such as 
“transitional arrangements”, has declared that a period of “smooth” Brexit 
could take up to four years.

Smooth, greige or plain equivocal, these concessions hint at the kind of 
compact May needs to reach among her cabinet and MPs. She will never overcome 
the opposition of those who believe that exiting the EU is a heinous act, or 
satisfy spiritual Faragists, who desire acontinent cut off by fog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/29/the-guardian-view-on-the-uk-and-europe-a-binary-choice>
. But she does not need to do either. A Brexit mode that non-combatants think 
represents a not-bad outcome, and a sense that she has endeavoured to find 
reasonable compromises, will suffice.

Brexit’s slow-burning fuse will reach a powder keg this year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/01/brexit-slow-burning-fuse-powder-keg-in-2017>
For those who wish to play their part in future acts, this poses challenges. 
Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, remains the most outspokencritic of 
remaining in a customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/britain-probably-leaving-eu-customs-union-says-boris-johnson>
 – a measure that has come to stand for remaining close to existing EU trade 
arrangements. That leaves him as the standard-bearer for vigorous 
Euroscepticism – though boxed in by other cabinet roles. A second Boris 
offensive on the leadership is a date that could easily slip into the 
never-never, the latest chapter in the Arthurian legends of Ken Clarke and 
Michael Heseltine as prospective leaders never able to get the sword out of the 
stone.

In the more forgiving light of a new year, hatchets are being buried in the 
Tory tribe. May’s conciliatory tone is intended to encourage more of that. So 
Michael Gove, an intellectually respected player despite his ousting from the 
ministerial Premier League,writes on ConservativeHome 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/12/michael-gove-in-this-coming-year-lets-all-come-together-to-campaign-for-a-clean-constructive-and-complete-brexit.html>
 that “it is critical that we recognise and respect the concerns of the 16 
million who did not vote to leave” – a late-breaking emollience. Those who wish 
to play a role in the Tories’ near future have been given to understand that 
wherever they stood in the bitter internal wars of 2016, they must sheathe 
their resentments,

That leaves the other great absentee, George Osborne, with an intriguing 
choice to make. The former chancellor has been, at least in the eyes of No 10, 
the most sore loser of the Tory remainers. Yet he is also the character most 
driven to make areturn to front-line politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/george-osborne-centrist-pro-european-rival-to-theresa-may>
. In 2017 the accessory required of those wishing to prosper under the May 
supremacy will be an olive branch, even if the bearers come with gritted teeth.
 