
Pink’s got a pretty poor reputation. Following recent campaigns against gender 
stereotyping such asPinkstinks <http://www.pinkstinks.co.uk/>, it’s become 
emblematic of all that’s wrong with traditional ideas of femininity and the way 
we raise girls. That’s a lot of bad vibes to heap on a simple colour.

But fashion rarely sweats the sensitive stuff anyway. So the proliferation of 
pink on the summer catwalks and its continuation as a trend for autumn is 
unlikely to have been sparked by any cultural analysis of gender issues – 
except for a few obvious exceptions. The Moschino summer collection was 
inspired by Barbie, and the range of bubblegum bikinis, tracksuits and 
balldresses really wasevery feminist’s worst nightmare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/04/sports-illustrated-cover-barbie-sexualisation-arguments-feminism-body-image>
. The label’s designer, Jeremy Scott, loves thumbing his nose at fashion and 
culture, and personally I find it hard not to smile at his provocation. At the 
other end of the scale, Prada’s autumn show also featured a lot of pink. This 
collection was a meditation on whether manufactured beauty lacks the validity 
of natural beauty. A subject that Barbie may well have an opinion on.

The rest of the shows just featured a lot of lovely pink because, well, if 
you’re not three and having your world view warped, it’s actually a nice 
colour. Pink doesn’t have to stink. In the summer shows there were 
sophisticated shades of flesh and salmon at Dolce & Gabbana, Giles and Agnès b, 
as well as pretty rose colours at Victoria Beckham, Burberry and Roksanda. For 
autumn there was lots of pastel and nude (look to Chanel or Alexander McQueen 
for inspiration).

This colour carryover means that if you’re clever with the sales you can pick 
up bargains that will look totally new season. Always a satisfying achievement.

There are some great pale-pink shoes in the sales, but the best styles to seek 
out for autumn are chunky loafers and Mary Janes. Look up Finnish shoe designer
Minna Parikka <http://minnaparikka.com/>. Her label’s suddenly all trendy 
because Taylor Swift and Cara Delevingne are wearing her bunny-ear footwear, 
and her loafers are pretty cute.

Etre Cecile <http://www.etrececile.com/> is always good for fun basics and the 
brand also has some great sweatshirts, tees and jumpers in the sale.Iris 
<http://www.irisfashion.co.uk/> is a small chain of fashion boutiques that has 
a nice own-label range. On the website there are some lovely raspberry silk 
dresses and skirts at extremely reasonable prices.

If you can’t wait for the new seaon, the high street can do you pink at the 
right price. Gap has great jumpers, shoes and silk-cotton-mix shirts, Cos 
weaves its usual colour magic with a range of tops and dresses in an unusual, 
edgy pastel shade, and & Other Stories has some really on-trend loafers with a 
metal detail. Get used to rivets and eyelets – they’re going to be on 
everything from bags to dresses this autumn.

Give pink a chance. Don’t waste it on the kids – save it all for yourself.


Follow Alice on Instagram @aliceefisher  <https://instagram.com/aliceefisher/>
 