
Bemused, bewildered and blissful, Bradley Wiggins yesterday became the first 
Briton since 1964 to take three medals in a single Olympic games. He and his 
madison relay partner Rob Hayles - bloodied and bruised as well as blissful - 
won bronze in a display of colossal guts and ice-cold composure.

All had seemed lost when Hayles fell off shortly after half-distance, and the 
duo's untrammelled joy as the race finished turned into an agonising wait after 
the German team put in an appeal over the distribution of points. The judges 
threw it out, and for once sporting justice was done.

Already the winner of the individual pursuit and a silver medallist - again 
with Hayles - in the team pursuit, the 24-year-old Londoner was overwhelmed to 
have matched Mary Rand's haul in Tokyo in 1964 of a gold in the long jump, 
silver in the pentathlon, and bronze in the 4x100 relay. For a British cyclist, 
it is a unique feat.

"I was told a few times that this was possible, but this sort of thing only 
happens to other people," said Wiggins. "I never, ever thought that anything 
like this could happen to me. It's terribly hard to take in. I'm still in a 
bubble here, and I'll have to wait and see what the response is when I get 
home, but it's mindblowing for me."

This 50-kilometre event is the longest Olympic track discipline, and is a 
curious cycling variant on tag wrestling, with one of each of the two-man teams 
circling the track slowly while his colleague races for a couple of laps before 
grabbing his hand and slinging him bodily into the fray. The object is to gain 
laps on the field, and score points which are awarded every 20 laps and are 
used to separate teams finishing on the same lap.

"The [individual] pursuit was incredible, the team pursuit was hard and a bit 
disappointing, but I had a day off yesterday, had some time away from the 
village and even managed to have a pint of beer, which must have done me more 
good than harm. I came here relaxed and ready for it."

He will find out soon enough how the British public responds when he rides 
next week's Tour of Britain as the leader of his Cr√©dit Agricole team. His 
response since taking gold in the individual pursuit has been exemplary, 
however.

On Sunday and Monday he tried his damnedest to assist the team pursuiters in 
the latest episode in their lengthy, frustrating quest for victory over the 
Australians, and after that he could have been forgiven for relaxing a little 
as only the eighth Briton to take a gold and silver medal in one games in the 
post-war era.

This race was unfinished business, though. In Sydney, Hayles had crashed and 
broken his collarbone with two laps to go when the pair were in the 
silver-medal position, and they were relegated to fourth. "It haunts me," said 
Hayles before yesterday's start.

With 36 cyclists spread out over the 250 metres, travelling at up to 40mph, 
this is an adrenalin-fuelled, dazzling spectacle, but not easy on the nerves as 
cyclists weave past each other continually and throw their team-mates with gay 
abandon with inches to spare.

"I was about to attack, but a French guy swung up in front of me and I clipped 
his wheel," said Hayles. "If it had been a car accident it would have been my 
fault because I hit him from behind, but I'm blaming him. I had visions of 
Sydney and thought 'oh my God, the British public must think I'm an idiot'." He 
landed heavily on his left side, got up rapidly, with his hip and elbow skinned 
raw. "A few beefburgers," as their coach Simon Jones put it.

Riders are allowed four laps out for such an incident and Wiggins merely 
remained "in the race" while Hayles got back on a replacement bike but he 
quickly needed a second bike change. "It was the same one I fell off on in 
Sydney, so I wanted to get rid of it as quickly as possible. I knew I was OK, 
it was a question of getting my breath back and going for the lap near the end 
when everyone was tired."

They had made a superb start, taking an early sprint, and were well-placed in 
fourth but, with Hayles pedalling stiffly and painfully, they slipped to 
seventh. But Wiggins said: "I knew we had to wait for the right moment." It 
came with 32 laps remaining when Wiggins, who had looked the strongest and 
smoothest rider throughout, shot out of the string of riders in a last-ditch 
attempt to gain the lap that would put them back with the leaders.

It took 10 laps of all-out effort to achieve the lap gain but it brought the 
crowd to their feet. It took the duo into the silver-medal position, but the 
next sprint edged the Swiss past them. The finishing sprint was all that 
remained; Wiggins raced his heart out from five to go to keep the pair well 
placed, and it fell to Hayles to hold off Ukraine and New Zealand.

Cruel luck, and the implacable judges had already deprived the pair's 
team-mate Jamie Staff of a probable medal in the keirin. The world champion had 
fought his way back into the final after going out in the first round of this 
event in which riders are paced for six laps by a small, puttering motorbike 
piloted by a grim-looking driver in a black catsuit.

Staff was judged to have obstructed another rider in the final two-lap dash 
for the line en route to winning the second round, and was disqualified. It 
seemed harsh, given that every round involved bumping, boring and jostling 
which led to two heavy crashes, and the former BMX world champion was 
devastated. At 31, this may have been his only chance for an Olympic medal, and 
for him, unlike Wiggins and Hayles, there may be no sweet revenge.

Gold, silver and bronze in same games post-war: 

 Bradley Wiggins  2004 Gold in individual pursuit, silver in team pursuit, 
bronze in madison

 Mary Rand  1964 Gold in long jump, silver in pentathlon, bronze in 4x100m 

 Gold and silver at the same games 

 William Laurie  1948 Gold coxless pairs, silver eights gold coxless pairs, 
silver eights

 Ann Packer  1964 Gold in 800m, silver in 400m 

 Derek Alhusen  1968 Three-day event team gold, individual silver 

 David Wilkie  1976 gold 200m breaststroke, silver 100m breaststroke 

 Seb Coe  1980 and 1984 Gold 1500m, silver 800m 

 Jason Queally  2000 Kilo gold, team sprint silver 

 Leslie Law  2004 Three-day event individual gold and team silver
 