
An eastern European city, several years into a civil war. A man named Christo 
and his young daughter Iskra have been forced from their home and end up 
sheltering from the bombs and snipers in an abandoned building torn apart by 
shrapnel. Food is hard to come by; Christo has been going hungry to make sure 
Iskra has enough to eat. He lies to her about his own needs so that she won’t 
worry.

Reluctant to leave his daughter in the shelter alone, he teams up with another 
survivor so that one of them can always be around – but even that isn’t enough 
to keep them safe. While the new companion is out scavenging one night, Christo 
is unable to fend off a group of raiders who steal their food and injure Iskra. 
Traumatised, she starts to have panic attacks that last through the night.

This isn’t a true war story, but it could be. The events portrayed here are 
taken from a video game, This War of Mine, inspired by thesiege of Sarajevo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/ng-interactive/2015/dec/14/sarajevo-portrait-city-20-years-bosnian-war-dayton>
 during the Bosnian war. Created be Poland-based 11 Bit Studios and released in 
2014, the simulation portrays the effects of modern war on civilians far more 
effectively than most other battle strategy games. Instead of commanding 
soldiers, the player is instead controlling a group of survivors as they 
explore the broken city for food and medical supplies. It is tense, harrowing 
and often devastating, and now, the console version This War of Mine: The 
Little Ones provides even more realism by adding a new – and crucial – kind of 
civilian: children.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthis-war-of-mine-little-ones-children-11-bit-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60d2c8d8d9610465f0f4bc9a520f4c9f95152831%2F0_44_1424_857%2F1424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20War%20of%20Mine%3A%20Little%20Ones%20%E2%80%93%20bringing%20children%20into%20a%20war%20simulation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthis-war-of-mine-little-ones-children-11-bit-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20War%20of%20Mine%3A%20Little%20Ones%20%E2%80%93%20bringing%20children%20into%20a%20war%20simulation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthis-war-of-mine-little-ones-children-11-bit-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60d2c8d8d9610465f0f4bc9a520f4c9f95152831%2F0_44_1424_857%2F1424.jpg>
 This War of Mine: The Little Ones. Photograph: Koch Media 
“During the development of the original version, we always had kids in the 
back of our heads,” says Maciej Sułecki, who worked on thePC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> version and was promoted to lead 
designer for The Little Ones. “At first, we wanted to just tell this story with 
adults, but we knew that this is not how wars are. During conflicts, there are 
a lot of kids and orphans and so on. It’s an element of war. We wanted to 
complete the picture of struggle, horror and tragedy.”

When others from the team moved on to a new project, Sułecki was left to 
figure out how to add children to this dark and gruelling survival sim. Since 
realism is so crucial to the impact of the game, the process began with 
detailed research. The civil war in This War of Mine is fictional, but it’s 
based not only on the siege of Sarajevo (1992-1996) but other modern sieges 
such as those ofGrozny 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Grozny_(1994%E2%80%9395)> (1999-2000) 
andHoms <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siege_of_Hom> (2011-2014), the latter of 
which ended mere months before the game’s release. As well as research papers 
about children’s behaviour during war, the team read diaries of those who had 
lived through these sieges, including some written by children.

What the team discovered is that children often have a very different 
perspective to adults. Even in times of conflict, they are likely to worry more 
about personal issues than the world at large. In This War of Mine: The Little 
Ones, children are severely affected by any harm that befalls them or other 
members of the group but, the rest of the time, their concerns revolve around 
things such as missing their classmates and not having things to play with.

When kids in your survivor group are sad, you might direct them to draw on the 
walls of the shelter or play a hand-clapping game with one of the other 
survivors, or craft them an indoor swing. When left to their own devices – 
perhaps while you’re busy directing an adult to construct a rainwater collector 
or make a meal out of rat meat and home-grown vegetables – children will run 
around the house, climb on the furniture, sing and talk to themselves or their 
companions. All of this makes the shelters – viewed from the side like a 
dollhouse – feel very different to the original game.

“We wanted to add these behaviours like singing and playing to add more 
happiness, I think, to the shelters,” says Sułecki, “Because in all of these 
diaries we read, all of these research papers, the kids, even during war, were 
kids – so they want to play, they want to interact with other people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthis-war-of-mine-little-ones-children-11-bit-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96ff276697c86c9cdfd3a07e2199a558981062d9%2F0_0_1374_827%2F1374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20War%20of%20Mine%3A%20Little%20Ones%20%E2%80%93%20bringing%20children%20into%20a%20war%20simulation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthis-war-of-mine-little-ones-children-11-bit-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20War%20of%20Mine%3A%20Little%20Ones%20%E2%80%93%20bringing%20children%20into%20a%20war%20simulation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthis-war-of-mine-little-ones-children-11-bit-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96ff276697c86c9cdfd3a07e2199a558981062d9%2F0_0_1374_827%2F1374.jpg>
 This War of Mine: Little Ones. Photograph: Koch Media 
Sometimes those games and interactions take a dark turn, as when Iskra tells 
her horrified father that when she grows up she wants to be a sniper. Sadly, 
even what the children say is based in reality: “We also read that some of the 
kids during war were enacting the soldiers,” Sułecki says, “So it was very 
disturbing for the adults, because the kids were playing war and trying to 
mimic the behaviour of adults that during war do terrible things. We also 
wanted to include this element.”

So determined were the team to create realistic characters that they used 
motion capture for their animation, which is perhaps surprising for a 2D game 
created by a relatively small studio. It turns out that nearly every character 
is based on the motion-capture data of a developer, a family member or friend. 
When came the time to animate the new younger characters, this became an issue: 
“It was quite hard to find someone who would allow us to scan their kids into 
the game,” says Sułecki. “People don’t want to see their kids in a game about 
war, about dying in war.”

However, one of the most interesting design decisions made for The Little Ones 
is that children don’t actually die. Instead, whenever they get into a 
situation in which an adult character would die – for example, from starvation 
or extensive injury – the player receives a message that the child has left the 
shelter. According to Sułecki, the team wanted the player to be ignorant as to 
the child’s fate rather than shock them by making death explicit as with the 
adult characters.

“Maybe it’s a little bit unrealistic,” Sułecki admits. “Yes, kids die during 
war, but we think that showing the death of the child would be a shortcut to 
shock the player and to tell him that he went wrong. Instead of this, we put a 
lot of effort into creating this bond, this connection between the player and 
his civilians.”

In a game designed to teach the player the effects of war on society, that 
empathic bond is critical. The addition of children makes the process more 
effective, not just because of our emotional instincts but because, from a 
mechanical perspective, the younger members of your group are almost useless. 
“We didn’t want to make kids another gameplay element and helpful for the 
player,” Sułecki says, “We didn’t want to make something like, you know, 
because kids are smaller they can steal better or something. So instead of 
this, we wanted to add another layer of depth to the game, an emotional depth, 
to raise new emotions.”

The fact that children use up resources without being able to scavenge or 
craft or really give back anything at all, makes This War of Mine even more 
challenging than its predecessor, but that additional emotional depth makes it 
worthwhile. As Sułecki points out, including children is considered taboo in 
other war games, but 11 Bit Studios felt it was necessary for what they wanted 
to achieve, a goal that was sadly reaffirmed as conflict persisted around them.

“During the development of This War of Mine, the war on Eastern Ukraine 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-28969784> broke, and for us it was a 
very terrifying experience because we were making a game about war and war 
actually happened,” says Sułecki. “But this made us confident that the game has 
something important to say. I think now, with the children, the picture is 
complete. This message, this pacifistic message, that war is a very bad thing 
... it’s now stronger.”

 * This War of Mine: Little Ones is available now on Xbox One and PS4
 