
Now that we are in August, has there been a big trend for summer 2016?
Mia, N1

Indeed there is, Mia, and it’s one that I only cottoned on to after the US 
political conventions – not, it has to be said, usually a hotbed of fashion 
trends. I don’t want to be mean about American politicians (well, not all of 
them), but let’s put it this way: they don’t tend to give Milan fashion week 
too many paroxysms of insecurity when it comes to carving out the look of the 
season.

And yet, a trend most definitely came from, of all places, Pittsburgh and 
Cleveland – and that trend is white. I first noticed this duringMelania Trump’s 
karaoke version of Michelle Obama’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/melania-trump-republican-convention-plagiarism-michelle-obama>
 during the Republican National Convention, when she wore a white Roksanda 
dress that was a lot more impressive than anything that came out of her mouth. 
It was also, I thought, not very Melania. I have made it my mission over the 
past decade to acquaint myself with the ways of Melania, just as I did with 
Donald Trump’s previous two wives, all of them fascinating in their own ways. 
Each of his wives was perfect for the decade in which they married him: Ivana, 
with her shoulder pads and open love of wealth, was like a human embodiment of 
the 80s; Marla Maples looked like a cast member of Baywatch or Melrose Place, 
making her perfect for the 90s. Then there’s Melania, with her frankly 
terrifying smoky-eye makeup and permanently blown-out hair: so very 21st 
century. She looks, and I don’t think she’ll take this as an insult, like an 
assassin in a Bourne movie, or maybe an Austin Powers film, or possibly even 
Zoolander. Anyway, the soft femininity of the Roksanda dress was so strikingly 
different from Melania’s usual fembot style (which can be summed up as tight 
and pointy with brass detailings) that I knew something was up. As, indeed, it 
was: white was up.

Hillary Clinton then wore a white pantsuit at the DNC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/29/emotion-watching-hillary-clinton-woman-candidate-for-president>
, a nod, apparently, to white being the colour of the suffragettes. Rather 
amusingly, CongresswomanJoyce Beatty wore the same white dress as Melania to 
the DNC 
<http://www.dispatch.com/content/blogs/the-daily-briefing/2016/07/290716-why-everyone-is-talking-about-joyce-beatty-dress.html>
, and not only did she look better in it, she also reminded everyone about what 
is now referred to as the Melania Incident. So 2-0 to Congresswoman Beatty.

Finally, this week, Michelle Obama wore a sleeveless full-length white dress 
to a state dinner for the prime minister of Singapore 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/entertainthis/2016/08/02/michelle-obama-singapore-state-dinner-brandon-maxwell/87979666/>
. I like to think Queen Obama chose this as an homage to thefull-length white 
dress by Jason Wu 
<http://content.time.com/time/photogallery/0,29307,1872988,00.html> that she 
wore to the Inaugural Ball in a kinda “Remember that night? Well, now we are 
outta here! You’re gonna miss us, guys!” way.

White really is the ultimate power colour. We can talk about its references to 
purity, saintliness and all other words that are just synonyms for virginity 
until the white cows come home. But the truth is, what it is about now is a 
woman who wants to be noticed, doesn’t care if her thighs look fat and doesn’t 
give a damn about her dry-cleaning bill. Now, if that isn’t a power statement, 
I don’t know what is. And that’s what summer 2016 is all about, fashion-wise: 
ladies not giving a good goddamn, whether it’s about breaking glass ceilings or 
blatantly ripping off someone else’s speech on the international stage.

Ah well, win some, lose some, eh, ladies?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fthe-us-election-has-given-us-summers-power-fashion-trend-white%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad0350165c9f4371489344c504545d910ac033b2%2F0_0_3808_4760%2F3808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20summer%E2%80%99s%20power%20fashion%20trend%20%E2%80%93%20white&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fthe-us-election-has-given-us-summers-power-fashion-trend-white%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20summer%E2%80%99s%20power%20fashion%20trend%20%E2%80%93%20white&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fthe-us-election-has-given-us-summers-power-fashion-trend-white%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad0350165c9f4371489344c504545d910ac033b2%2F0_0_3808_4760%2F3808.jpg>
 Sarah Jessica Parker ... not a feminist. Photograph: 
Lovekin/WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
Sarah Jessica Parker has disowned feminism. What does this mean?
Cara, by email

That she’s an idiot? I mean, I know this column is called Ask Hadley, but it’s 
hard to know how to answer this question, at least without being blatantly 
rude. To recap,Parker was interviewed in Marie Claire 
<http://www.marieclaire.com/celebrity/a21886/sarah-jessica-parker-september-2016-cover/>
 and was asked if she considers herself a feminist. “I am not a feminist,” she 
replied, to the sound of a million heads falling on the desk. “I’m so tired of 
separation. I just want people to be treated equally.”

You know, when Andrea Leadsom said something similar last month, I honestly 
didn’t mind. “I’m not a feminist because I’m not anti-men ...Feminism is a term 
that has been used to abuse men, so I don’t identify with it 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/andrea-leadson-feminist-feminism-times_uk_5780f9eee4b074297db31b28>
,” quoth Andrea, in the now infamous interview thatended up torpedoing her 
leadership bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/conservative-leadership-andrea-leadsom-pulls-out-of-race>
. And the reason I didn’t mind is because I didn’t expect her to know better: 
she’s a Tory MP who looks like she hangs out at private golf clubs in Surrey. I 
never thought she would be up on her Dworkin. But SJP, for God’s sake. You live 
in Manhattan, you starred in a show that was in some ways a feminist landmark, 
you have – I assume – New York friends. How could you have got to the age of 51 
and still be saying things like this without hitting yourself in the face? 
There’s nothing surprising about a celebrity saying something stupid – the 
truth is that most celebrities are stupid. But for a woman who grew up in the 
70s, lives in a modern metropolitan city and hangs out with writers and artists 
to not understand that feminism is about equality, well, that takes some 
serious effort. Well done, SJP. You win the coveted crown of Ask Hadley’s 
Numpty of the Month.
 