
Casa Cook is out to impress. On arriving at the newly-built Kolymbia resort, 
on the Greek island of Rhodes, we are informed that the reception area is not 
merely a reception, but also a “concept store”. The restaurant is not simply a 
restaurant but “The Kitchen Club”. The poolside bar is, as far as I can tell, 
just “the bar”, but there are none of the usual fishbowls, no tiki huts, and 
definitely no Sex on the Beach. Instead, it is filled with cast-iron chairs, 
wicker lampshades and rustic wooden stools (all available for purchase from the 
aforementioned concept store).

But this is not the newest branch of the Ace Hotel chain, or a trendy 
Scandinavian boutique (although there’s plenty of Nordic inspiration to be 
found and, more importantly, Instagrammed). Casa Cook Rhodes is the latest 
resort from Thomas Cook, the brand better known for offering family-friendly 
budget getaways, which is now hoping to harness the “bohemian spirit” of a “new 
generation of traveller”. It is the first of a newly-launched collection of 
hotels (with more due to open next year) built specifically for Thomas Cook – a 
move extremely rare in the tourism industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b4fd7a70d58d4d678cd40d87fff43a61e706732%2F0_360_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b4fd7a70d58d4d678cd40d87fff43a61e706732%2F0_360_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
But crucially, Casa Cook understands that, in order to pull off its boho 
ambitions, it needs to distance itself from its parent company. The company’s 
traditional branding is nowhere to be seen throughout my stay.

And, to its credit, the decor is on point: wooden decking, tasselled hammocks, 
rattan egg chairs, and fabric cushions in cool, muted tones adorn the 90 rooms 
and communal areas, with plants everywhere – from poolside cacti to cheese 
plant-printed tiling. There is one big communal pool, but each room opens on to 
a long, smaller pool (shared by about 10 guests), so guests can swim right from 
their terrace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d4281e5a6a894c064f9fa33f056d30e5010ed03%2F0_159_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d4281e5a6a894c064f9fa33f056d30e5010ed03%2F0_159_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
It’s health spa chic meets east London cafe with a hint of Greek character – a 
hotel as keen to provide you with handcrafted furniture and one-on-one yoga 
classes as Wi-Fi and airport transfers. To those who prefer to feel they’ve 
immersed themselves in local culture, it may sound slightly contrived – but to 
many it will just feel familiar.

In contrast to the reps at nearby Faliraki, famous for its teenage hedonism, 
here they won’t slap a wristband on you

The hotel’s ever-present “guest experience manager”, Evelina, who is waiting 
for us despite our late arrival, is the closest thing Casa Cook has to a 
traditional holiday rep. She is a local (as are most of the staff – another 
conscious attempt to shrug off package-holiday vibes, perhaps) who accommodates 
our requests with ease.

In contrast to the reps at nearby Faliraki, famous for its teenage hedonism, 
Evelina won’t slap a wristband on you, tie you to the nearest member of the 
opposite sex and send you on a bar crawl. She can, however, book a personal 
training session or a mountain hike (both run by another local staff member, 
George, and a great way to balance out lazy days at nearby Tsampika beach, 
which is also worth a visit). There’s not much else on the hotel’s doorstep, 
medieval Rhodes town and its harbour are about half an hour’s drive away (taxis 
can be booked at reception), where there are more traditional tourist shops, as 
well as the Palace of the Grand Master for those keen to learn a little about 
the history of the island.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f287dd32939367b1531948e04839297d933f7a5%2F0_197_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f287dd32939367b1531948e04839297d933f7a5%2F0_197_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
The distinction between Casa Cook and its neighbouring resorts is palpable – 
and nowhere more so than in the hotel’s restaurant. A buffet breakfast is 
included as standard, with the made-to-order egg bar well-received by those 
keen to get their protein hit before visiting the small but popular gym – it 
was rarely empty during my stay. Guests can get their fill of goji berries and 
carrot juice – just don’t expect any hash browns.

The Kitchen Club’s evening menu would be at home in a pop-up Dalston diner, 
incorporating just a touch of the local Mediterranean cuisine: grilled feta, 
stuffed vine leaves and locally sourced fish are met with celeriac puree, “wild 
greens”, and coconut milk desserts. Expect London prices too: a tasting menu, 
which changes daily, is around €50 a head without drinks – but certainly makes 
staying put for the evening worthwhile. There’s also a standard dinner menu 
with an extensive range of meze appetisers for those keen to try more Greek and 
Middle East-inspired dishes. Fellow guests who wandered off site raved about the
gyros (meat, salad, chips and tzatziki rolled into a pita) available nearby for 
just a couple of euros.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb73bcb657d6d17fb9c915b0fc9aac7dfdf885d3c%2F0_0_3422_2053%2F3422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb73bcb657d6d17fb9c915b0fc9aac7dfdf885d3c%2F0_0_3422_2053%2F3422.jpg>
Only occasionally does the hotel’s aspirational aesthetic overtake its 
practicality. The chic sliding bathroom door in our standard double room, for 
example, had a design fault which meant it could only be closed for either the 
shower or the toilet, not both, and had a habit of rolling midway between the 
two, providing privacy to neither. There’s bohemian and then there’sbohemian.

The Casa Cook website and brochures proclaim “Mi casa es su casa” repeatedly – 
a fine mission statement, but one that does feel slightly at odds with the 
strict instruction, given at check-in, not to use the throws hung from the 
bedroom walls – “They are DECORATIVE!” However, the throws are for sale at the 
you know where, of course. Every space is stunning, each interior meticulously 
designed, but the opportunities to shop your surroundings 24/7 can leave you 
feeling like you’re sleeping in Ikea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cf7b63644e1f6982e180b3f839cae726629861e%2F0_226_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thomas%20Cook%20repackaged%3A%20tour%20firm%20opens%20its%20first%20boutique%20resort%20in%20Rhodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthomas-cook-casa-cook-new-boutique-resort-rhodes-greece%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cf7b63644e1f6982e180b3f839cae726629861e%2F0_226_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
Casa Cook is unapologetic in its mission to entice guests who will appreciate 
its “chill beats, tasty drinks, sunshine and super good food”. Ultimately, it 
delivers on all accounts, and with an admirable degree of authenticity. As 
such, it could have been packed out with intimidatingly cool media types, 
clean-living travel bloggers and career Instagrammers. But, in reality, my 
fellow holidaymakers – a mix of Brits, French, Germans and Italians – were 
reassuringly down to earth. I spotted a few incidental beards but not a single 
topknot; a couple of sunlounger selfies (guilty), but no one too cool to hum 
along to Adele (she’s big in Rhodes, apparently).

Casa Cook may not yet be overrun with the crowd it hopes to attract – all the 
more reason to visit sooner rather than later, in my opinion.

• The trip was provided by Thomas Cook, which offers seven nights’ B&B at Casa 
Cook (0844 412 5970,casacook.com <http://casacook.com/#casa-cook-rhodes>), 
Rhodes, from £719pp, including flights from Gatwick (price based on 14 
September departure)
 