
Fort McMurray wildfire crisis worsens

Canadian officials are planning a helicopter-led 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/canadas-wildfires-grow-tenfold-in-size-as-thousands-more-people-are-evacuated>
 mass road convoy of 400 vehicles through Fort McMurray as thousands flee 
catastrophic wildfires. The Alberta fires have grown tenfold, and as many as 
8,000 people require evacuation from camps. Witnesses say the situation is
“absolutely apocalyptic” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/alberta-fort-mcmurray-wildfires-canada>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Falberta-drivers-dashcam-footage-of-wildfire-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alberta%20driver's%20dashcam%20footage%20of%20wildfire%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Falberta-drivers-dashcam-footage-of-wildfire-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alberta%20driver%27s%20dashcam%20footage%20of%20wildfire%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Falberta-drivers-dashcam-footage-of-wildfire-video&media=>
Alberta driver’s dashcam footage of wildfire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/05/alberta-drivers-dashcam-footage-of-wildfire-video>
Trump faces divisions within party

The House speaker, Paul Ryan, has declined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/paul-ryan-declines-to-support-trump-as-republican-nominee>
 to support Donald Trump, saying he’s not ready to “at this point”. Ryan’s 
reluctance exposes fissures in the Republican establishment. Will theycome round
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/05/will-republican-party-embrace-donald-trump-nomination>
 and support the billionaire developer? While some may consider supporting a 
third party candidate, othershave been plunged into the five stages of grief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/epublicans-5-stages-grief-donald-trump-anger-denial-depression->
over Trump’s improbable, unstoppable rise. In his first campaign event since 
becoming the presumptive nominee, Trump last night told supporters inWest 
Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/donald-trump-west-virginia-campaign-rally-election-2016>
 not to bother voting in the state’s upcoming primary on Tuesday and to instead 
“save your vote for the general election in November”. On Cinco de Mayo, he 
also tweeted a picture of himself eating a taco bowl, adding:‘I love Hispanics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/donald-trump-taco-bowl-i-love-hispanics-picture>
. <https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/728297587418247168>” (For their 
part,81% 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/page/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2016/04/14/National-Politics/Polling/question_16174.xml?uuid=DJ281AIwEeaLsfEkpD-E3A&tid=a_inl#>
 of Hispanics have an unfavorable opinion of Trump, according to a Washington 
Post-ABC News poll of 1,010 adults conducted last month.) For good measure, 
Trump also told Fox News Britain would be better offout of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/may/05/donald-trump-nomination-republican-party-us-election-news-sanders-clinton-live>
.

US in post-Panama crackdown on tax 

As part of the ongoing fallout from the Panama Papers revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> disclosed by a 
consortium of international journalists including the Guardian, the White House 
is taking executive action  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/may/06/panama-papers-us-launches-crackdown-on-international-tax-evasion>
to close loopholes used by foreigners in the US. Barack Obama said there was 
“no doubt” global tax avoidance is a “huge problem”. Recognising the impact of 
the leak, the White House said the investigation had “brought the issues of 
illicit financial activity and tax evasion into the spotlight”.

Sandy Hook families to comb gun files

The families of the victims of Adam Lanza will get to see internal records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/sandy-hook-victims-families-gun-manufacturer-records>
 showing how gun companies market military-style rifles, a Connecticut judge 
has ruled. It is the latest in a string of legal victories in a lawsuit against 
the manufacturer, distributor and dealer of the Bushmaster rifle used in the 
December 2012 school shooting in Newtown, Connecticut, in which 20 
first-graders and six educators were killed.

Jobs report nervously awaited

European stock markets are down this morning as traders await the US jobs 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/may/06/markets-nervously-await-us-jobs-report-business-live>
 for April. If, as many anticipate, payroll growth is down, this will be widely 
interpreted as suggesting that the US economy is no longer as well insulated 
from global economic problems and could be a harbinger of a more deep-set US 
economic slowdown.

Gucci apologises to Hong Kong

The booming Italian luxury goods house has apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/06/gucci-apologises-hong-kong-funeral-fakes-row>
 for going after Hong Kong funeral homes that sell paper fakes of its products 
that are burned as tributes to the dead. An outcry over Gucci’s actions 
prompted a swift response; the company said it regretted any misunderstandings 
and wished to “sincerely apologise to anyone we may have offended through our 
action”.

Wellness blogger facing legal action

Australian blogger Belle Gibson faces legal action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/belle-gibson-facing-legal-action-over-deceptive-claims-lifestyle-changes-could-cure-cancer>
 over her claim that lifestyle changes cured her of cancer. Gibson reportedly 
faked brain cancer to her hundreds of thousands of followers, and then claimed 
she’d been able to cure herself through diet and lifestyle changes. Penguin 
published a book of her recipes.

‘Baby boxes’ in Indiana

Pro-life campaigners in Indiana are introducing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/baby-boxes-abortion-indiana-pro-life-safe-haven>
 an “abortion alternative” – so-called “baby boxes” – heated, padded, 
incubator-type holes in the wall – in which parents can now deposit unwanted 
newborns. Once a baby has been left there, an internal alarm alerts 
firefighters on duty to come and pick it up. “They are working perfectly,” said 
Monica Kelsey, the pro-life campaigner behind the scheme.

Rock’n’roll beyond the grave

As the grim reaper goes about his work in rock and roll, a profitable new 
business has sprung up managing music estates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/06/jeffrey-jampol-los-angeles-jam-inc-rock-legacy>
. Forget reissuing the albums, says JAM Inc’s Jeffrey Jampol, who looks after 
the estates of Kurt Cobain, Otis Redding and Janis Joplin – nowadays, you have 
have to make a deeper connection.

Mixed results from UK elections

Mid-term elections in Britain brought mixed results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/uk-elections-at-a-glance-the-key-points>
 for the leftwing leader of the opposition Labour party, Jeremy Corbyn. In 
Scotland, the Scottish National party may now have to share power, but Labour 
slipped to third place. In England, Labour lost fewer seats than expected but 
became the first opposition party not to increase its number of seats in 
mid-term elections in England since 1985. The party is waiting to hear whether 
its candidate for mayor of London,Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/30/battle-london-mayor-dirtiest-fight-zac-goldsmith-sadiq-khan>
, has become the capital’s first Muslim mayor.

Appeal hearing for Penn State coach 

A Pennsylvania judge will give Jerry Sandusky a hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/05/jerry-sandusky-penn-state-sexual-abuse-appeal-hearing>
 later this month to prove his claims that prosecutors lied, withheld evidence 
and leaked secret grand jury testimony, during his trial on sexual abuses 
charges. Judge John Cleland said the hearing would “provide the defense with an 
opportunity to prove” its claims. Sandusky is currently serving 60 years for 
sexual abuse.


And another thing ...

Over the past 18 months, at least six startups have launched some variation on 
the theme of “Uber for gas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/05/gas-delivery-tech-startups>
” – your car’s tank gets refilled while it is parked somewhere. “I live across 
the street from a gas station,” one customer lamented, “but I don’t always have 
time to make the stop.”


_______________

Please take a moment to tell us what you think 
<https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/R3G3H2J>.
 