
The measures announced by the chancellor in his autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-social-housing>
 last week were welcome, but do not add up to the comprehensive strategy needed 
to tackle the housing crisis.

Housing: boost from autumn statement but sector wants more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-social-housing>
The Office of Budget Responsibility’s assessment 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/download/economic-and-fiscal-outlook-november-2016/>
 (pdf) of the autumn statement suggested that the overall result of the 
measures would be a reduction in housebuilding of 13,000 by housing 
associations, primarily as a result of relaxing funding restrictions and 
scrapping pay to stay.

Clearly, more is needed to tackle the undersupply and unaffordability of 
housing in the UK, and the housing white paper offers the government the 
opportunity to do just that.

The last attempt by a government to set out a comprehensive approach to 
housing policy was nearly a decade ago, in July 2007. So, what needs to be in 
the new white paper if we’re to deliver the homes that we need?

Devolve more housing powers

The government must recognise that each housing market faces different 
challenges and opportunities. OurOctober report 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/closer-to-home> recommended that the 
government should seek to devolve a much more ambitious set of housing powers 
as part of its devolution and city deals.

These powers should come as part of a deal. Local and combined authorities 
must commit to ambitious targets and programmes. In return, government must put 
new options on the table including lifting national planning restrictions; 
fiscal devolution; and increased responsibility for design codes and standards.

Treat London as a special case

London’s housing crisis should be recognised as particularly distinct. 
Affordability and undersupply pressures are greatest in London. TheLondon 
Housing Commission 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/building-a-new-deal-for-london> found that 
the capital should therefore be exempted from the national planning policy 
framework, with the London Plan instead given priority, and the mayor should 
have the power to secure compliance across boroughs. Restrictions on borrowing 
should also be lifted, retention of stamp duty introduced, and council tax 
powers devolved.

 Land reform

The government must take action to reform the dysfunctional land market 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/we-must-fix-it-delivering-reform-of-the-building-sector-to-meet-the-uks-housing-and-economic-challenges>
 and improve the planning system. This should include the compulsory 
registration of all land, full public transparency on land ownership and strong 
consideration should be given to the levying of a new land value tax or similar 
mechanisms to incentivise housebuilding.

In addition, there is a strong argument for establishing a parallel strategic 
planning system to deliver a new wave of new towns by separating the processes 
of land acquisition and housebuilding.

Looking beyond the housing white paper, the government should get serious 
about investment in affordable housing. In addition to our proposals to remove 
borrowing limits that arbitrarily restrict local councils from prudent 
borrowing to build the homes their communities need, the government should also 
seek to prioritise housing capital expenditure by allocating more each year to 
the budget for affordable homes.

Luke Murphy is a senior research fellow at the Institute for Public Policy 
Research

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 