
Italy is going to rebuild the Colosseum 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/53/Colosseum_in_Rome,_Italy_-_April_2007.jpg>
, the most renowned of all ancient Rome’s monuments. Once again, emperors will 
watch from the royal box as gladiators fight to the death and Christians are 
thrown to the lions.

Perhaps not quite. But Rome really is giving the arena a new floor at a cost 
of more than €18m. Italy’s Culture Minister Dario Franceschini calls the 
reflooring “a promise kept 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/afp-italy-earmarks-18-mln-to-rebuild-colosseum-arena-floor-2015-8?r=US&IR=T>
”.

I call it a history betrayed. 

The Colosseum has been a ruin for more than 1,500 years. Over the centuries 
people have flocked to see it in its broken yet imposing state.Renaissance 
Italians went there at midnight to practice necromancy 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Arts/Arts_/Pictures/2010/4/14/1271242550443/Salvator-Rosas-Witches-at-001.jpg>
 – the sculptor Cellini tells of doing so in his autobiography. 
Eighteenth-century travellersdaydreamed among its hanging mosses 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/images/work/T/T00/T00664_10.jpg>. Henry James’s 
Daisy Miller caught malaria nearby, in the equally ruinous Roman Forum.

It is totally barbarous to bring the builders in to spank up this noble mass 
of stone with a brand new floor. That floor will cover up what visitors today 
see when they look down from the crumbling tiers of seating high above: a 
warren of cavernous exposed tunnels where gladiators and animals once awaited 
their entrance into the arena. That’s what time has left. That’s real history 
before your eyes. By covering it with a fake cinematic arena, the Italian state 
proposes to turn the Colosseum into a film set.

Why? There can only be one reason – to please people who go to the Colosseum 
because they’ve seen it in movies and HBO dramas and expect it to look like it 
does in digital special effects.

Mom, where’s Maximus 
<http://static.comicvine.com/uploads/original/10/106251/3785636-maximus+decimus+meridus.jpg>
?

The revival of Roman spectacle on screen since Ridley Scott made Gladiator has 
totally transformed tourism in Rome. The Colosseum is now the city’s biggest 
draw. It attracts massive queues, a phenomenal circus of global tourism, with 
guys dressed as gladiators offering to pose for pictures while you drink 
overpriced water in the scorching sun. Then when you get in – it’s just a huge 
ruin! There’s not even a floor!

Frankly, if you cannot be moved by what does remain of the Colosseum – that 
sublime cruel manmade hollow mountain – you have no imagination. The beauty of 
ruins is precisely that they leave space to imagine what they were once like. 
To restore is to wreck. It is to close off imaginative possibilities.

Of course, all old monuments that survive have had something done to them. 
Even the most unrecognisable heap of stones in the care ofEnglish Heritage 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk> has had some cement put in to make it 
safe. Aesthetic restoration, too, is unavoidable. I was recently atAvebury in 
Wiltshire 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/fb/Avebury_Panorama,_Wiltshire,_UK_-_Diliff.jpg>
, whose stone circle eerily surrounds a living village. It is awesome and 
mysterious, but some of its stones had to be raised in the 20th century after 
they were deliberately knocked down in the middle ages. Was even that an 
over-restoration?

The Colosseum has had plenty done to make it safe and accessible. The mosses 
and weeds that once overgrew it were eradicated years ago. Stairs were fixed 
and shops put in. All that is necessary – but no more. Step beyond simple 
preservation and you replace history with cheap fantasy. Renewing the 
Colosseum’s arena is not the kind of necessary restoration that raises the odd 
fallen stone or keeps a structure safe – it’s a gross intervention for the sake 
of modern bad taste.

If Rome feels the need for a new-looking Colosseum to keep the most 
superficial visitors happy it should build a replica elsewhere in the city, and 
stage fake games there. And why not? In fact, what this monument most needs is 
a lot less visitors. Luring some elsewhere would make it nicer for everyone 
else.

The task of restoration is to preserve the past – not replace it. 

 