
A popular perception is that the NFL’s Thursday night games – broadcast on the 
league’s own NFL Network and recentlydescribed by the Seattle Seahawks’ Richard 
Sherman as a “poopfest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/richard-sherman-thursday-night-football-criticism-nfl>
” – are a product of greed. This is not entirely true. Thursday Night Football 
had a lot more to do with power and leverage than a simple sniff at the money.

This week the Giants play the Eagles in what could be the final ever, regular 
Thursday night telecast. Recently,Profootballtalk.com reported <> the league is 
looking hard at cutting back their schedule of Thursday night games, citing a 
source that said the games don’t generate enough money to be worth the overload 
of prime time football (never mind that the match-ups are often underwhelming 
and leave little time for players to recover if they have played the previous 
weekend). The NFL denied the report but it is clear that Thursday Night 
Football has now served its mercenary purpose and has become a drag on the rest 
of televised football. At the very least, the broadcast will have significant 
tweaks if it returns.

Richard Sherman: Thursday Night Football a 'poopfest' and insults players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/richard-sherman-thursday-night-football-criticism-nfl>
Unlike the Sunday and Monday night telecasts, which have a big game aura and 
feel more like an event, Thursday Night Football was created a decade ago to be 
ballast against the other networks. At the time NBC, CBS, ESPN and Fox still 
deemed the NFL to be their path to salvation. And so the league figured that by 
broadcasting their own games on their own channel they could frighten the 
networks into believing the NFL might someday take all their games “in house,” 
cutting out the networks. The plan worked better than anyone could have 
imagined. The networks caved. Five years ago NBC, CBS and Fox agreed to spend 
63% more 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052970204026804577098774037075832> to 
televise games through 2022.

The NFL understands clout like few sports organizations ever will. For 20 
years they held open Los Angeles while nearly all their teams negotiated new 
stadium deals under the implied guise that a move to LA was always possible if 
the legislatures and voters didn’t pay up. Their television network has been a 
similar kind of hammer. The first Thursday night games in 2006 weren’t just a 
weight against the networks, they were an opening to raise their channel’s cost 
to customers from 20 cents to 70 cents with a message: Don’t deny your 
customers their football. They even bought the rights to some minor college 
bowl games with the idea that schools based in the markets of non-compliant 
cable providers would be irate that their bowl games were blacked out and 
pressure the cable companies to pay theNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> whatever it wanted. 

“I’m a guy that likes winning, right?” Steve Bornstein the NFL’s 
then-executive vice president for media told me 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/11/20/AR2006112001120_pf.html>
 not long before the first Thursday night game in 2006. “One way you can 
measure this is: can you make money? I’ve found personally that’s where I can 
excel.”

Bornstein, who helped build ESPN into a giant, does indeed know how to make 
money. He made the NFL billions before leaving the league in 2014. His legacy 
is an NFL Network that has been chiseled into more than 70m homes and an 
astounding $27bn squeezed from the other networks. Not a bad trade for a few 
lousy midweek games between teams you don’t want to seewearing garish color 
rush uniforms 
<http://www.si.com/nfl/photo/2016/09/13/nfl-color-rush-uniforms-jerseys-best-worst-rankings>
. 

For a long time, NFL executives marveled at the seemingly endless demand for 
their product. They were surprisedESPN <https://www.theguardian.com/media/espn> 
found an audience years ago for a year-round, afternoon football show and 
dreamed their own network could generate significant revenue. As they pushed 
more games into lucrative primetime slots they must have wondered how far they 
could go before the public had enough. Maybe they are reaching that point.

The NFL's perfect player: how LP Ladouceur has made $10m from long snapping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/14/lp-ladouceur-long-snapper-dallas-cowboys-nfl>
A word people have used lately to describe the NFL’s all day Sunday, Monday 
night, Thursday night schedule is “oversaturation”. In other words there are 
too many games billed as events that really aren’t events. For years, media 
analysts have wondered if the league was going too far, giving people too much.

“But until now, especially with the NFL, that has never happened,” Robert 
Thompson, a professor of television and popular culture at Syracuse University 
told the Guardian this fall. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/09/baseball-challenge-nfl-tv-ratings-world-series>
 

This year the ratings have tanked 
<http://www.sportsmediawatch.com/nfl-tv-ratings-viewership-nbc-cbs-fox-espn-nfln-regular-season-playoffs/>
. And while a few compelling Thursday match-ups in recent weeks have pushed 
that evening’s numbers back up the overall picture for the NFL on TV is much 
bleaker than it was a year ago. Some of this undoubtedly is due to an overall 
drop in the number of people watching television. And yet the NFL has always 
defied industry declines in the past. A bigger problem appears to be that the 
league has too many nationally-televised games for a public that no longer 
wants them.

Sunday and Monday nights have always seemed special as if those games are 
something you’d want to see. Thursday never had that feeling of being special. 
But maybe that’s because Thursday Night Football was never meant to be a big, 
great presentation of football. It was a weapon designed to bring network 
executives to their knees. Once the NFL proved they could televise their games 
in a quality similar toNBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> and CBS and 
all the others, Thursday’s games became an ugly warning to the bosses in 
television’s boardrooms. Pay up or watch the NFL take their ratings monster 
away. 

Thursday Night Football was not created from a love for the game. It was never 
a celebration of America’s biggest sport. It was a power play that pitted 
networks against themselves and fans against big cable. For 10 years Thursday 
Night Football played its role perfectly. The Thursday night hammer pounded out 
TV deals with amazing efficiency.

But television is slipping now. What’s the point of a Thursday night hammer if 
there is nothing left to hit?
 