
I’ve yet to reach my thirties, but sometimes feel I’ve seen more housing 
reviews commissioned and launched than I’ve had holidays. Each time, a small 
clamour of tentative optimism is pricked by the predictable conservatism of the 
findings and recommendations issued.

So I held out little hope for the Redfern review 
<http://www.redfernreview.org/?page_id=18>, not least because it was chaired by 
the chief executive of Taylor Wimpey. It is understandable that Pete Redfern 
would accept the offer to run an independent review, commissioned by Labour’s 
shadow housing minister John Healey, but to the casual observer, it seems akin 
to asking a match manufacturer how to lower the number of fires in the country.

Redfern housing report 'has downplayed true reasons for homes crisis'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/landmark-redfern-housing-report-has-downplayed-true-reasons-for-homes-crisis-says-shelter>
Some points in the Redfern review seem obvious, some are welcome: few people 
will be surprised that the review blames rising house prices, tougher 
first-time buyer credit constraints, and real-term decreases in earnings for 
falling home ownership rates. The review points out that a blinkered obsession 
with increasing supply to lower house prices is fruitless: the cumulative 
effect of large-volume housebuilding on prices is negligible, and does very 
little to lower them. The answer, the review argues, is to establish an 
independent housing commission to look at creating a fair market for all 
tenures.

For people at the sharp end of the housing crisis, this softly, softly 
approach will be of little comfort. Staid ideas that don’t rock the boat 
haven’t helped so far, and as the crisis drags on, it deepens. So here are some 
more radical ideas that could genuinely help.

Right to buy has had its day: Scotland has scrapped it, Wales is moving to 
scrap it, England is clinging on desperately, and the government is now facing 
the prospect of backtracking on its plan to extend the scheme to housing 
associations post-Brexit. When the scheme was initially rolled out, dissent was 
mollified with claims that the homes sold would be replaced on a one-for-one 
basis. This has never happened: what has happened is the wholesale flogging of 
council stock at knockdown rates, which is then often sold, leaving councils 
poorer and expanding the private rental sector.

Local authority waiting lists around the country show that the demand for 
council housing has rarely been higher: flogging more municipal housing shows a 
contempt for the tenure and makes no economic sense, since councils are instead 
forced to house homeless families in expensive temporary accommodation and 
housing benefit is paid out to private landlords, rather than to councils.

Building for building’s sake is pointless: areas need clear guidelines on what 
tenures are needed, and communities need to be mixed. Many people who may not 
be on low incomes would prefer to rent from a local authority than a private 
landlord: giving them the option to do so by boosting council building (through 
increased funding) offers tenants more security, will reduce the stigma of 
social housing, and helps councils fund their work through rent.Social housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-housing> isn’t subsidised: in the 
long term it pays for itself.


How many shared ownership homes are there and who's buying them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/15/shared-ownership-housing-crisis-house-prices>
The council tax system needs to be overhauled: since the coalition government 
withdrew council tax benefit, hundreds of thousands of the poorest households 
have ended up in arrears or in court. Meanwhile, people in the most expensive 
houses in Britain pay little more in council tax each month than their poorer 
neighbours. The tax is regressive and a rethink is long overdue.

Finally, a report for the London Assembly 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/final-draft-lvt-report_2.pdf> 
[pdf] this year recommended a pilot of a land value tax in the capital – taxing 
the rental value of land, rather than buildings – to encourage development, 
especially for housing. It also has thepotential to redistribute wealth more 
equally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/15/queen-duke-westminster-land-value-tax-distribute-wealth-super-rich>
, which remains a huge problem in Britain.

Anyone hit by the housing crisis – an increasing number of us – has little 
patience for tinkering around the edges of the UK’s dysfunctional and 
geographically distorted housing system. They want radical new approaches to 
housing, and that requires a complete rethink of how we house people, how we 
think about housing, and whether homes should function as assets.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 