
Welcome to this week’s blog, and our roundup of your comments and photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/sep/05/tips-links-and-suggestions-what-are-you-reading-this-week>
 from last week.

There Vesca <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1700934> had two very 
fine suggestions. First, The Golden Age of Murder by Martin Edwards:

Which is all about what you’d expect but more specifically the Detection Club 
which banded together with Chesterton as president, with Sayers advocating, and 
with dinners and collaborations. The forerunner of the current club of which 
Edwards is now President.

The book is fascinating, just small portraits of the individuals, then 
references to their work. Sayers comes through particularly clearly, a 
publicist and advocate for the whole gang, secretary of the club, a bit 
daunting on occasion. Christie is more elusive, not just here but in the BBC 
archives and even her own autobiography. All accounts suggest she was shy 
throughout her life, and spent much of her time daydreaming and travelling.

And then, more interesting still, there are the people I’d barely heard of, 
with their own take on the genre, their own politics, their own private lives...

After that came Oxford by Jan Morris, for the simple - and perfect - reason 
that “I just like the way Morris writes”:

If I were a sentimental spaniel, or a tabby in need of sympathy I think I 
would avoid this ironical, analytical city and go somewhere soppier. Paris 
perhaps, or Manhattan Island.

Glorious. Meanwhile, this isn’t exactly a recommendation from Swelter 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3828881>, but it is a very interesting 
idea:

On a visit to the supermarket today, I saw a row of paperbacks advertised with 
the card:

BINGE READING! 
Introducing James Patterson’s BookShots 
Each under 150 pages 
Impossible to put down!

From that last, I assume that the covers are coated with some sort of 
adhesive. These short books seem to be the opposite of what I thought of as 
“binge reading”, which would be something like reading, say, the Aubrey / 
Maturin series one after another.

Why James Patterson’s fiction factory is lining up the ‘shots’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/mar/25/why-james-pattersons-fiction-factory-is-lining-up-more-books-in-short-shots>
Like other people commenting on the thread, I find my inner book-snob 
rebelling. At the same time, my inner reading evangelist for is applauding 
loudly. You’ve got to hand it to the Patterson machine (‘it’ in this case being 
even more money...).

In contrast, a definite recommendation from paulburns 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13121203>: 

Finished Angela Carter’s Nights at the Circus. Parts of it approach sheer 
genius, especially some of the Mignon sequences and clown sequences. Though one 
needs to read the chapter on Fevvers’ seduction by the Grand Duke in St. 
Petersburg very carefully, otherwise you might be left scratching your head 
about what exactly was going on. Suffice to say, I’ll never think of a Faberge 
Egg the same way again. I have to admit when it did finally click, I thought it 
was absolutely inspired. (Hint, its to do with magic, not sex.)

The Siberian section, too was an extremely satisfying read, that brought the 
work to a masterful conclusion.



Finally, an enjoyable bit of controversy from conedison 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10021252>:

A half dozen or so years ago I saw a sharply written comedy at the Almeida 
Theatre called Becky Shaw by Gina Gionfriddo. I just now finished reading it 
and realised afresh that plays (Shakespeare the lone exception) are not written 
to be read. One can listen to a play - at least that way you hear the music of 
the spoken word. But simply to read those words on a page is like reading a 
menu with never a bite to eat.

Begging to differ was interwar 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14992181>:

I find, on the contrary, that there are many plays that read well: Oscar 
Wilde’s, for example, or Shaw’s, or Tennessee Williams’. or Beckett’s or the 
whole lot of Restoration and 18th-century comedy. Or maybe I am just more 
inclined to stage the production mentally (as reported previously in these 
pages); I suspect I do the same with novels, with strong visuals and voices. I 
wonder how others feel about this.

conedison  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10021252>came right back:

 I could not disagree with you more. A playwright writes with an audience in 
mind - most assuredly not an audience of one. Books, plays, poems, songs are 
all separate entities with different requirements. You can read a play, but it 
is the skeleton only, with no flesh on the bone.

Happily, machenbach  <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16064333>found a 
good middle ground:

For what it’s worth, I think you’re both right. The vast majority of plays are 
massively improved by being performed, and, indeed, I’m sure we can all think 
of plenty that seem fairly unimpressive on the page but are the very opposite 
when staged (I’ll nominate A Playboy of the Western World). On the other hand 
(and excluding those closet plays like Faust and Prometheus Unbound that were 
never intended to be staged), there do seem to be some plays which, let’s say, 
benefit slightly less than others from being performed. And I would agree with 
@interwar that Wilde, much of Shaw and a good chunk of Beckett belong in this 
category - perhaps because the staged versions of them so often just seem like 
recited dialogue anyway...??? In other words, they are less performed than 
spoken?

Interesting links about books and reading

 * A fascinating Paris Review article on cover art for flying saucer books 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2016/09/13/flying-saucers-art-department/> 
of the 1950s and 60s. (Thanks toSwelter 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3828881>- who also warns one of the 
images - of Those Sexy Saucer People is ever so slightly NSFW). 
 * Some astonishing music <https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=A5Oa7pK7Oo0> that 
will resonate with fans of Bruce Chatwin’s Songlines (among many others). 
(Thanks tokmir <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2381358>) 
If you would like to share a photo of the book you are reading, or film your 
own book review, please do. Click the blue button on this page to share your 
video or image. I’ll include some of your posts in next week’s blog.


If you’re on Instagram and a book lover, chances are you’re already sharing 
beautiful pictures of booksyou are reading 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/nowreading/>, “shelfies” 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/bookshelf/> or all kinds of still lifes 
with books as protagonists <https://instagram.com/p/5foOfkLDFI/>. Now, you can 
share your reads with us on the mobile photography platform – simply tag your 
pictures there with #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection here. Happy 
reading!
 