
As I enter the hotel suite, Tom Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford> stands in silhouette against an 
industrial, ceiling-height window, the light refracted behind him in a 
sunburst. It’s an irresistible image, so perfect it almost had to be composed: 
both man and room shown off to their optimal effect. And, who am I kidding, it 
probably was. I had been checked at the door for a minute or two while Ford had 
rearranged some furniture that was irking him. Even a rented room, used for a 
day to plug a new movie, can be improved. Ford is obsessed with beautiful 
things and has had an enduring and hugely successful career, first in fashion, 
now as a film director, making people and places look their best.

Ford strides towards me, eager, like a politician on the election trail, and 
extends his hand. I had read that he prefers to be called “Mr Ford” and check 
if that’s the case. “No, no, no,” he smiles, as if it was one of the top five 
most ridiculous things he’s ever heard. “Pleeease call me Tom.”

Tom Ford, the man, has always been the most compelling advertisement for Tom 
Ford, the creative output. He is, it’s almost inane to note, a very handsome 
individual. These are looks that many would sell their souls for, but Ford, now 
an impossible 55 years old, hasn’t needed to: just lots of vegetables and fish, 
no booze for years, tennis three times a week and an occasional restrained 
touch-up with Botox under the eyes and Just for Men dye on his beard stubble.

Today, as he almost always does, Ford wears a cinched black suit, matching 
tie, a gold collar bar. “A suit is armour,” he explains. “You know, I’m not 
good in knitwear.” His voice, almost a growl, is saturated with disdain. “I 
feel mushy and soft. I’m not good in anything but a boot. I feel solid and 
grounded. You gotta learn in life what makes you feel comfortable in terms of 
clothing and that’s what you should wear. Some people look great in knitwear; 
that’s what they want to wear, they look good in it, it feels right for them. 
Trainers: I feel weak in trainers. I mean, I wear them when I’m at the gym, but 
I feel soft and I don’t like that.”

I actually had people say to me, ‘My God, I didn’t realise you had such 
depth.’ It’s kind of shocking

How about when he was shooting his new film, Nocturnal Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nocturnal-animals>, did Ford wear a suit 
then? “Yes, I wore it on set, it’s a uniform. I’m comfortable, it suits who I 
am,” he replies. “Except the parts when we were in Texas, where I wore cowboy 
boots and a cowboy hat, which looks surprisingly good on me. Well, all of a 
sudden, 200 years of Texas pioneer background kind of genetically seems to just 
work on my head. And I don’t look like a fool.”

Ford – I hope this is coming across – is surprisingly funny. He is completely 
serious and at the same time, nullifying the criticism often levelled at those 
in the fashion world, completely aware that some people will find what he’s 
saying ridiculous. There are numerous stories-cum-urban-legends that have 
attached themselves to Ford over the years. That he takes five baths a day. 
That he doesn’t like to see or smell food in his office. That he once sent an 
employee home for wearing three-quarter-length trousers. That he cannot abide 
hot drinks. That – this one courtesy of Victoria Beckham – he flies long haul 
in his suit and his only concession is to undo a single waistcoat button.

Some people would regard him as eccentric, I say. “Eccentric?” says Ford, 
visibly perking up, his hands carving arcs, like a matador’s. “Oh, tell me 
about that!”

The multiple baths in a day. “Oh, I can explain that,” he counters, a little 
disappointed perhaps that the rumour was not more outrageous. “For me, it’s 
meditation. I take a bath in the morning, because the time I lie in the bathtub 
is when I work out all my problems. I think about the day, I think about what 
I’ve got to do. I think about nothing, I clear my head. Same in the evening, 
before dinner, I can’t go from work and out to a dinner and be good at a dinner 
– meaning be interesting and charming and be interested and listen to someone – 
unless I kind of wash away the day. The same at night, I can’t go to sleep 
unless I get in the bathtub and again, wash away the day. So it’s meditative 
for me, it’s not that I have some cleanliness obsession.”

So that’s cleared that up. “I don’t smoke,” he goes on. “Some people go out 
and have a cigarette. I don’t drink, some people drink.” He exhales 
theatrically. “I lie in a bath full of hot water.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6553595738ebf7b1e3a6e5379442f2d1ffda0239%2F0_384_3926_2355%2F3926.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It's%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It%27s%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6553595738ebf7b1e3a6e5379442f2d1ffda0239%2F0_384_3926_2355%2F3926.jpg>
 ‘That very hard, lacquered, manufactured, glamorous life is part of the 
story’: Tom Ford directs Amy Adams in the opening scenes of Nocturnal Animals. 
Photograph: Merrick Morton 
It is common, as shown here, to fixate on Ford’s aesthetic. This is, after 
all, how he made his name: he arrived, unheralded, as a designer atGucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> in 1990, when the company was on 
its knees; when he departed in 2004, it was one of the world’s most desired 
luxury brands, owning Yves Saint Laurent, Alexander McQueen and Stella 
McCartney, and valued at $10bn. In 2006, he started trading under his own name 
and there are now 122 Tom Ford stores, which take around $1bn each year in 
sales. Daniel Craig insists on Tom Ford suits for the Bond films, while 
Michelle Obama chose one of his gowns when she met the Queen.

The idea, though, that he might be stronger on style than substance endured 
when Ford moved into film. His first feature, in 2010, wasA Single Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/14/a-single-man-film-review>, which 
followed a day in the life of a college professor, masterfully played by Colin 
Firth, who is contemplating suicide. It was a deeply assured debut and one that 
Ford was involved in every aspect of: as a writer – adaptingChristopher 
Isherwood’s 1964 novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/20/100-best-novels-a-single-man-christopher-isherwood>
 – director and producer, plunging in some of his own savings, not all of which 
were returned at the box office. Still, many reviewers struggled to see past 
the lush cinematography and Firth’s instantly iconic thick-rimmed spectacles. 
Peter Bradshaw in theGuardian wrote that it sometimes resembled “a 100-minute 
commercial for men’s cologne: Bereavement by Dior” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/11/a-single-man-review>.

Ford believes, with some justification, that there is a perception of him as 
an individual that precedes his films. “I’m a very, very, very private person,” 
he says. “I’m also a very shy person. So what most people know of me is a 
product. It is a billboard. It is a selling tool. That’s not to say it’s false. 
It comes from me. Everything I make I am proud of. So this is a part of my 
personality, but it’s the surface. When I madeA Single Man, I actually had 
people say to me, ‘My God, I didn’t realise you had such depth.’ It’s kind of 
shocking. You realise, ‘Oh, oh-kay…’”

His point is that the real Ford is more than the guy with perma-stubble who 
happens to look fantastic in aviators. “I’m glad that there is a large part of 
my character and my personality that is private,” he says. “You know, I don’t 
have a personal Instagram account, I’m not photographing my dinner every night 
and sending it out to the world. I’m quite private and the older I get the more 
I guard that, and the more famous I’ve become, the more and more and more I 
guard that.”

It’s not just reviewers, either. When Ford approached Jake Gyllenhaal to star 
inNocturnal Animals, the actor has admitted that he was concerned Ford, whom he 
didn’t know at this point, would“focus on the aesthetic over the heart of the 
story” 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/tom-ford-designer-turned-director-925601>
. Gyllenhaal, however, was quickly convinced after speaking to the director, as 
was Amy Adams, who signed on to play the female lead, Susan, a privileged but 
unhappy gallery owner.

My son is going to grow up in a very privileged world, and I want to make sure 
that he’s grounded

“I have to say, luckily most of the reviews of Nocturnal Animals have been 
terrific,” notes Ford. “But the very few criticisms have been that’s it’s too 
beautiful, too stylised. I think if I didn’t have another life as a fashion 
designer I wouldn’t be hearing that and people wouldn’t be judging that.

“Not comparing myself to Hitchcock,” he continues, “but I’ll use him as an 
example. He was notorious for spending weeks on his leading ladies’ hair, 
makeup, look, clothes. What most directors do is intentional: how they frame 
something, whether it’s composed or not composed is part of telling the story. 
In this particular case, that very hard, lacquered, manufactured, glamorous 
life is part of the story. It’s key to understanding who Susan is and how she 
lives. It isn’t just random because I wanted to see some beautiful clothes and 
beautiful hair and beautiful makeup. This is part of the story.”

That story is something of a departure for Ford, as well. Nocturnal Animals  – 
a Grand Jury prize winner at Venice – which is adapted, again by Ford, from a 
1993 novel calledTony and Susan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/17/tony-and-susan-austin-wright> by 
Austin Wright, begins as very much a companion piece toA Single Man. Susan 
lives in a striking modernist house straight from the pages ofWallpaper*; her 
husband, Hutton (Armie Hammer), seems to smell of money, but they clearly don’t 
much like each other. Susan has even inherited Colin Firth’s signature glasses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc1109f1912a8de1a3f8c8d23833f756168b9b95%2F717_21_1958_1176%2F1958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It's%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It%27s%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc1109f1912a8de1a3f8c8d23833f756168b9b95%2F717_21_1958_1176%2F1958.jpg>
 Colin Firth in Tom Ford’s acclaimed directorial debut, A Single Man (2009), 
based on the novel of the same name by Christopher Isherwood. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Everything changes, though, when Susan receives a package from her first 
husband, Edward (Gyllenhaal), whom she hasn’t seen in years: it’s a novel he’s 
written, dedicated to her; a brutal page-turner about a family travelling 
across the Texas desert who find themselves in an altercation with a gang of 
young droogs.Nocturnal Animals now starts flicking between Susan’s sedate, 
joyless life in Los Angeles and a pulse-racing crime thriller that plays out in 
her head as she reads Edward’s book. Ford ultimately intertwines these stories 
into one suffocatingly intense narrative and makes powerful, sometimes stinging 
comments on the importance of loyalty, the thrill of revenge and the perils of 
consumerism.

Yes, you read that straight: Tom Ford is railing against the perils of 
consumerism. A man whose eponymous fashion label sells an oversize Dakota bag 
for $6,450 (£5,250) and whose suits for men all cost in excess of $5,000 
(£4,100). A man who owns a house in Bel Air designed by Richard Neutra, an 1827 
John Nash Mayfair townhouse and a ranch in New Mexico, on land larger than 
Manhattan, with Tadao Ando buildings and an airstrip, which was recently put on 
the market for £60m. But Ford is no fool and well aware of the extreme 
potential for hypocrisy.

“The character of Susan is quite autobiographical; in some ways, she was a 
female version of me,” Ford admits. “Fortunate or not, I live in that world 
that Susan lives in. I know those people. A few years ago now, I really had a 
midlife crisis. I think a lot of my younger years – and a lot of people’s 
younger years, I bet – are spent achieving whatever it is, when you’re young, 
you think you need to do. Getting ahead in your career, getting this, getting 
that, buying your first apartment, getting married and then you realise, ‘OK, 
well I’ve done all that, now what? Is this what there is?’”

A low point came when he acrimoniously left Gucci: his drinking got out of 
control, he became depressed. “A lot of people keep it in check. I didn’t. That 
doesn’t mean you want to give up those material things, but it means you need 
to keep a balance and so yeah, I’ve struggled with that. And I’ve struggled 
with contemporary culture. Sometimes, contemporary culture revolts me. And 
where we’re moving, it just disgusts me.”

Ford shakes his head. He’s aware he’s asking questions and not supplying too 
many answers. “We’re culturally taught now that there’s this thing called 
happiness that’s achievable,” he sighs. Where we’re just happy because we’ve 
done this and that, we’ve gotten there, we’ve bought this house and we’ve got 
these kids and we’re just happy now. That’s a relatively new idea. Because 
happiness doesn’t exist. A happy morning exists and then maybe a depressing 
lunch and a bad afternoon and maybe a nice evening. We’re sold this concept and 
I realise that I’m one of the people that’s helping do this because I’m 
responsible also for our contemporary consumer culture.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a47b25361ca78b8590da8319fe939966cb5eff2%2F0_0_3209_4012%2F3209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It's%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It%27s%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a47b25361ca78b8590da8319fe939966cb5eff2%2F0_0_3209_4012%2F3209.jpg>
 Tom Ford on the set of Nocturnal Animals. Photograph: Merrick Morton 
Ford grew up middle class in middle America, first in Texas, then New Mexico 
from the age of 11; his parents were real-estate agents. From as early as he 
can remember, Ford had a singular fascination with style. He often chose to 
wear a suit as a child and was mercilessly bullied at school for carrying a 
briefcase. “Actually, it was an attache case,” he corrects. “But that’s true, 
they were really mean to me. I look back at pictures of myself in a little 
raincoat and briefcase and I just think, ‘Oh God…’ But that was me and my 
parents just let me express who I was, which was also great.”

Again you get the impression, though he might deny it, that Ford has never 
been bothered by being regarded as eccentric. “I have a sister, she didn’t 
dress like that at all,” he says. “She’s not remotely interested in fashion, 
she’s an English teacher. She could have all the Tom Ford clothes she wants; 
she doesn’t care. She’s quite beautiful but she’s never been into fashion. My 
mother is, however, and my grandmother was to the nth degree. So I had women 
around me who were. I don’t think I ever saw my mother without her makeup as a 
child. Ever. But that’s a very Texas thing. My first scent memories were 
hairspray – it was the early 1960s, I was sitting on the floor playing while 
she was getting dressed.”

Ford has been reflecting on his early years more since he’s become a parent 
himself. Jack was born four years ago, reportedly by in-vitro fertilisation and 
a surrogate, to Ford and Richard Buckley, a fashion writer and his partner of 
30 years. “He’s going to grow up in a very privileged world and I want to make 
sure that he’s grounded,” says Ford, who, after 25 years living in Europe, 
mainly London, recently moved his primary residence to Los Angeles (“All of a 
sudden I needed some sun. I did!”). “So a big consideration is to try to raise 
him in a very natural, non-elitist way.”

Jack’s arrival, Ford believes, has made him perhaps a fraction less uptight; 
he’d hoped that Jack would play with tasteful, grey wooden toys, but his stark, 
beautiful houses are now defiled by lurid plastic. “At the end of the day, he 
always tells me about his day and I tell him about my day and Richard talks 
about his day,” says Ford. “The other night, Jack says, ‘Well, how was your 
day? You look sad.’ And I said, ‘Well, it was a tough day.’ Then he said, ‘You 
know, you say that every night.’ And I said, ‘I do?’ And he said, ‘Yeah. So 
what are you going to do about that?’

“And I thought, ‘Wow, what am I going to do about that?’ Their observations 
are so simple and so clear: ‘Well, you’re sad, you need to do something about 
that.’ It’s very interesting. Then I felt guilty and terrible: ‘Oh God, I’m 
going home every day and seeming sad and I should be really there for him.’ But 
you know, just the daily stresses of businesses sometimes get to you.”

Films make Ford happy, he insists, but he still retains a stubborn streak of 
melancholy. “Working, for me, keeps me distracted and keeps me from pondering 
the ultimate end to all of this, which is the same for all of us,” he says. “We 
have to let go of it all, we have to say goodbye to everything. That doesn’t 
terrify me, but I’m aware of it every second. And I think it’s one of the 
things that makes me appreciate things, because you realise this isn’t going to 
last, so I need to look at it, I need to experience it, I need to try to drink 
it in. Beauty I find so sad. There’s nothing sadder to me than true, true 
beauty because it is so temporary and so transient, so somehow you’ve got to 
embrace that aspect of it.

“I don’t know,” he concludes, “I sound like a crazy person. I guess I’m quite 
philosophical and I spend an enormous amount of time pondering all of these 
things – in the bath. In the bath!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbddb3e01b6acec1d94093270526331a8ec0267ec%2F0_0_4163_2499%2F4163.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It's%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It%27s%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbddb3e01b6acec1d94093270526331a8ec0267ec%2F0_0_4163_2499%2F4163.jpg>
 Ford walks the runway during his London fashion week show at Lindley Hall, 
February 2014. Photograph: Samir Hussein/WireImage 
Seeing as much of modern culture, as he says, “disgusts” him, does Ford ever 
worry about the world that Jack will grow up in? “I think every generation 
feels that,” he replies. “You go back and read something 100 years old and 
that’s what adults are talking about. For them, it will be their world. And 
some day Kim Kardashian is probably going to be on some stage at Kennedy Center 
Honors [annual awards given to a handful of artists judged to have made a 
meaningful contribution to American culture] when she’s 80, getting an award.” 
Ford claps, perhaps sarcastically. “And everyone’s going to say, ‘Oh my God, 
Kim Kardashian, don’t you remember when she was…’” She will be their Marilyn. 
She will be there because this is the world we live in.”

It’s been seven years since A Single Man, but Ford has been keeping busy. He 
wanted to devote proper time to raising his son. Meanwhile, the fashion 
juggernaut rolls on, requiring a new collection for men and women twice a year. 
There were false starts, too, before he settled onNocturnal Animals as the 
script to pursue. “There’s been work. Thought. And things I turned down.” He 
laughs. “And two screenplays I wrote that are not so good and I wouldn’t make.”

Ford continues to love clothes and he’s proud of the enduring popularity of 
Tom Ford, but it’s hard not to feel that he has little left to prove in that 
world. He pretty well admits as much. “There’s a moment in fashion when you 
think of the idea,” he says. “You think, ‘Oh God, fuck, that’s it!’ And a lot 
of times you’re wrong and it doesn’t work at all, but that moment when you 
think it does is great. But fashion is very fleeting. You can look at that same 
thing the next year and you’re like, ‘OK, yeah that’s nice.’ And you look at it 
years later in a museum and you go, ‘Well, that’s interesting, look at how I 
did that stitching, that was great.’ But it never has the power that it does at 
the very beginning.

“And film does,” he continues. “You watch an old film, everyone’s dead but 
you’re crying with them, you’re emoting with them; it’s the most rewarding 
thing if you’re someone who wants to express themselves. It’s the most 
permanent thing I think that we have. Even painting. Let’s take abstract 
expressionism. The very first time people saw an abstract painting it would 
have been shocking. Today, it’s modern vocabulary, we see it everywhere, it 
can’t have the [same] power. Film doesn’t do that. Film, if it’s not something 
that’s easily dated, if it’s genuine, has the same power when you watch it 30 
years, 40 years, 80 years later. It’s not diluted. And that’s incredible.”

There’s a stubborn sniffiness about a fashion designer making films, but the 
process is remarkably similar, Ford has found. Both require a strong vision, 
something to say and the ability to command an army of hired hands, working 
them hard without demoralising them, inspiring them to bring to life what you 
have in your head. Both activities also suit an obsessive, single-minded 
temperament. It’s easy to mock the idea of Ford luxuriating in three baths a 
day, but he wakes at 4.30am, barely sleeps and can subsist for days on just 
iced coffee and Oreo Thins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2450213a01e622115bae3d89723e634f4124f9f3%2F0_0_3285_1971%2F3285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It's%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Ford%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wore%20a%20suit%20on%20set.%20It%27s%20a%20uniform%E2%80%A6%20I%20feel%20weak%20in%20trainers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftom-ford-suit-set-film-nocturnal-animals-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2450213a01e622115bae3d89723e634f4124f9f3%2F0_0_3285_1971%2F3285.jpg>
 Jake Gyllenhaal as Tony Hastings in Nocturnal Animals. Photograph: 
Allstar/Universal Pictures 
Ford has also brought a mastery of the eye-catching stunt to both fields, 
often involving nudity. One advertisement for Gucci, shot by Mario Testino, 
featuring a female model pulling down her pants to show a G shaved in her pubic 
hair. Sophie Dahl sprawled libidinously on a silk sheet for Opium by Yves Saint 
Laurent, meanwhile, found its way on to the Advertising Standards Agency’s“Top 
10 Most Complained About Ads” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-18243577> 
list. Ford, though, has always considered himself“an equal-opportunity 
objectifier” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/21/tom-ford-im-an-equal-opportunity-objectifier>
 and in 2002 he showed a male martial artist full frontal in an ad for YSL’s M7 
fragrance.

The opening scenes of Nocturnal Animals have been causing a similar fuss at 
film festivals. It depicts a montage of full-figured, not-young women dancing 
naked in slow motion. They are accessorised with bits and pieces of Americana 
while glitter tumbles around them. Eventually, the viewer clicks that it is in 
fact a video art piece that is being projected in Susan’s gallery. So Tom Ford, 
what were you…

“What were you thinking?” he interjects. “What the hell was that?”

Exactly. “When I was young I had a poster of Farrah Fawcett in a red bikini, 
which I’m sure you’ve seen, with the big teeth and hair, and I think that was a 
lot of people’s idea of America: the land of tans, beauty and youth,” Ford 
explains. “And I decided that today, perhaps, to the outside world America 
looks gluttonous, overfed, ageing, sagging, decrepit. So I shot that and I had 
the most fun day making that. These women were so happy to be there, they were 
so free, they were just liberated, they were spectacular. I fell in love with 
them. And I realised that actually they were the opposite of Susan: they were 
joyful because they had let go of what they were supposed to be and they were 
just themselves. Whether you like them or hate them and think they are fat or 
not fat, they were themselves. And they were comfortable with that. So that 
became the opening art sequence.”

Ford has clearly thought about his defence, marshalled his arguments, but he 
can’t help a mischievous aside. “From a practical standpoint and a theatrical 
standpoint, it also pulls you right into the film from the beginning,” he says. 
“Gets your attention and that’s important. And then you’re like, ‘Where’s this 
going?’ And you’re watching.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5n750DzGzG0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5n750DzGzG0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5n750DzGzG0&media=>
Watch the trailer for Nocturnal Animals. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5n750DzGzG0> 
Nocturnal Animals is likely to surprise many people: it is smarter, more 
visceral, more thought-provoking than doubters would have expected from Tom 
Ford, while still being just as beguiling to look at. He draws compelling, 
award-worthy performances from Amy Adams,Jake Gyllenhaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> and Michael Shannon, as a 
nihilistic Texas policeman charged with tracking down the thugs. It is a 
terrific film that stirs and aggressively challenges the head, eyes and heart.

Ford vows that it won’t be seven years before he has a new movie project; 
he’ll never be prolific, partly because he wants to be involved in every stage 
of the process, but three years is more like it. What about children, would he 
like more? “Originally, I thought yes; however now I think no,” he says. “I 
love Jack, we’re a great family, we’re very happy, the three of us. I’m not a 
young dad, Richard’s an even older dad. If I pick Jack up out of the bathtub 
and he wiggles the wrong way, it throws my back out. I think there’s a reason 
why people have children when they’re in their 20s and 30s! So no, we’re really 
happy as a family as we are.”

This is perhaps the most shocking moment of the interview: Ford, a man who 
seems personally to defy the progress of time, acknowledges that he is getting 
older. As we wrap up our conversation, I ask him if he’s just a bit terrified 
about ageing. “I think it’s time I started ageing, otherwise I’ll start looking 
odd,” he says. “You have to give in to it. I mind the physical part that comes 
with it, but the actual mindset that comes with it, I love. Because while I 
don’t like it, I also don’t care as much. So what? This is who I am.”

What about letting himself go grey? He looks at me sternly, then a little 
hurt. “What makes you think I’m grey?!” Then his voice rumbles like a muscle 
car revving its engine: “Oh no, I’ve planned on going grey. I know exactly when 
I’ll go grey. I have a four‑year-old child, there’s lots of time to go grey. I 
plan on living into my 90s, so maybe 72, 73, 74, I’ll go grey. Then I’ll have a 
good 20 years of grey.” A stickler for good manners, he walks me to the door of 
the suite. “That’s plenty.”

Nocturnal Animals is out on 4 November
 