
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> charged 
taxpayers more than $3,000 for travel that coincided with his attendance at 
Santo Santoro’s 60th birthday party in Brisbane and has cited a party event and 
a lecture as reasons for his travel.

A spokesman for Abbott told Guardian Australia his claim for a travel 
allowance and flights for himself and his wife Margie were for official 
business in Abbott’s capacity as the former prime minister.

The duties carried out on the trip – delivering a lecture, attending a morning 
tea to support Liberal National party candidates, and several private meetings 
– demonstrate the wide range of duties able to be billed to the taxpayer.

Abbott attended Santoro’s 60th birthday party on 30 April 2016 along with a 
number of other senior politiciansreported to include 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/business/former-minister-santo-santoro-partied-with-380-of-his-nearest-and-dearest-in-brisbane-on-saturday-to-celebrate-his-60th-birthday/news-story/5327525edbb18aeb317d1bf9984d2209>
 the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, and the attorney general, George 
Brandis. The night before the party Abbott had deliveredthe Father Gregory 
Jordan memorial lecture 
<http://tonyabbott.com.au/2016/04/transcript-of-the-hon-tony-abbott-mp-father-gregory-jordan-sj-memorial-lecture-tattersalls-club-brisbane/>
.

Crossbenchers pledge to reform expenses as Sussan Ley scandal widens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/crossbenchers-pledge-to-reform-expenses-as-sussan-ley-scandal-widens>
The morning of Santoro’s party he spoke at a morning tea in Oxley in outer 
Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane>.

Santoro is a former Liberal politician who resigned as minister for ageing 
from John Howard’s ministry and the Senate in 2007 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/national/santoro-resigns-from-ministry/2007/03/16/1173722720321.html>
 after breaching the ministerial code of conduct and the register of senators’ 
interests.


Santoro failed to immediately sell off shares in a biotechnology company after 
being appointed to his health-related portfolio in 2006.

In expenses claimed from the Department of Finance 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P38_ABBOTT_Tony.pdf>, Abbott 
incurred:

 * $1,562.96 for flights from Sydney to Brisbane on 29 April and from Brisbane 
to Sydney on 1 May 
 * $860 for two nights of travel allowance on 29 and 30 April

 * $781.48 for a family traveller domestic scheduled fare for wife Margie from 
Sydney to Brisbane on 29 April; and 
 * $50.90 for a Comcar in Brisbane on 29 April 


Abbott’s spokesman confirmed he attended Santoro’s party, but noted no Comcar 
or Cabcharges were used to do so.

In a Facebook post on 30 April, Abbott said he attended Oxley with his wife 
Margie “to support Senator Joanna Lindgren and our LNP Liberal National party 
candidates”.
 Tony Abbott Facebook post of 30 April, 2016 about event at Oxley 
The duties cited by Abbott’s spokesman on the afternoon and evening of 30 
April or morning of 1 May were “private meetings”.

“Abbott’s travel to Brisbane in late April 2016 was consistent with his 
entitlement as a former prime minister.”

Asked what duties justified taxpayer-funded travel by a former prime minister, 
the spokesman replied: “If he’s invited to speak somewhere, he’ll speak 
somewhere as a former prime minister.

“The community expects to see former prime minister from time to time and to 
have engagement with them.”

Throughout his parliamentary career, Abbott claimed taxpayer funds for trips 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/tony-abbott-rejects-calls-for-reform-of-mp-expenses-20131010-2vagx.html>
 linked to the Coffs Coast Cycle Challenge, the 2011 Bathurst V8 Supercar race, 
2010 Melbourne Cup, 2010 Boxing Day Test match at the MCG, and 2011 Birdsville 
Races.

Abbott also claimed about $1,700 in expenses for attending the weddings of 
former Coalition MPs Peter Slipper and Sophie Mirabella in 2006, which he 
repaid in 2013.

In the 29 April lecture, Abbott praised Gregory Jordan, the former head of 
Abbott’s high school St Ignatius Riverview, and addressed the subject of “free 
speech”.

Bronwyn Bishop blames 'socialists' for criticising Sussan Ley over expenses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/bronwyn-bishop-blames-socialists-for-criticising-sussan-ley-over-expenses>
Abbott said he “in principle” supported no curbs on freedom of speech, citing 
cigarette plain packaging laws and section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act 
as examples of “bad laws”.

He described speech that is “offensive, insulting, humiliating and even 
intimidating” as “the price of freedom”.

Abbott said the Coalition’s policy on same-sex marriage was to hold a 
plebiscite and expressed hope it would “strongly confirm” the definition of 
marriage as between a man and a woman.

Finance department records show Dutton 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P38_DUTTON_Peter.pdf> and 
Brandis also flew in and out 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/P38_BRANDIS_George.pdf> of 
Brisbane at taxpayer expense on 29 April and 1 May, but both live in Brisbane 
and are entitled to do so to return to their home base.

A spokesman for Brandis said he returned to Brisbane on 29 April as it was the 
end of the sitting week and travelled to Canberra on 1 May ahead of the next 
sitting week on 2 May.
 