
Porto Moniz Lava Pools, Madeira


Set amid jagged black lava, Porto Moniz isn’t just a pool, it’s a whole linked 
complex of them. The pools mark the point where molten lava met the Atlantic 
aeons ago. The surroundings are spectacular – the captured water is a clear 
sharp blue on a sunny day and offshore volcanic islands form the backdrop. The 
differences from hotel pools are refreshing: the water, renewed by the tide, is 
so clean and natural there are often fish and shrimps in the water (take 
goggles). They are good for children although the water is not entirely tame: 
during high tides and stormy conditions, waves can splash over the walls and 
slosh over belongings, and the pools may be shut in bad weather. They tend to 
be more serene in the mornings.
• Entrance €1.50, with similar fees for sunloungers and sunshades, 
visitmadeira.pt 
<http://www.visitmadeira.pt/en-gb/explore/detalhe/porto-moniz-natural-swimming-pools>

Giola Lagoon, Thassos, Greece

 Photograph: Alamy 
Nature has done all the work in creating this sea lagoon, which must be in the 
running for the most beautiful natural swimming pool in the world. Carved into 
the rocks by the sea, this turquoise 20-metre-wide pool is nearAstris 
<http://www.go-thassos.gr/about-thassos/places/astris> on the island of Thassos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/22/greek-island-holiday-guide-north-east-aegean-samos-thassos>
. The surrounding cliffs have natural terraces and the only way in is to jump. 
The water in the lagoon comes from the Aegean but, being enclosed and shallow, 
is warmer than the sea, and has a sandy bottom. It’s a bit of a trek to get 
there: a few kilometres drive along a dirt road and then a short walk, with 
arrows painted on stones. Myths abound – in one of them, the Giola Lagoon is 
the eye of Zeus.
• For location see wildswim.com <http://wildswim.com/thassos-natural-pool>

Queen Joan’s Baths, Sorrento, Italy

 View of cove with ruins of Villa Pollio. Photograph: Getty Images 
On a stretch of the Italian coast with few beaches, Queen Joan’s Baths (Bagni 
della Regina Giovanna) lie amid the ruins of an ancient villa outside Sorrento. 
Romans built holiday villas here at places with panoramic views, and these 
baths are part of the first-century Villa Pollio. Stories say that Giovanna, 
the 14th-century Queen of Naples, visited the baths with either her ladies in 
waiting or her young lovers. The pool is large, sheltered, turquoise and 
surrounded by the remains of the villa and huge cliffs, with a towering rock 
arch between the pool and the sea. Swimmers and snorkellers can enjoy clear 
sheltered water. It’s not that well known locally – to get there take a bus 
from Sorrento to Capo di Sorrento, and then it’s a long walk down to the Roman 
ruins (a signpost points toi ruderi romani) and the bathing waters. 
• enjoythecoast.it 
<http://www.enjoythecoast.it/it/i-bagni-della-regina-giovanna>

Plage de Bon Secours, Saint-Malo, France


On calm days, there is a striking contrast between the mirror-like surface of 
Saint-Malo sea pool and the ruffled sea beyond, between the order of its 
geometric walls and the random rocky outcrops behind them. The tides in 
Saint-Malo bay are some of the largest in Europe, rising and falling 14 metres 
(double the normal Atlantic range). The sea retreated too far down the beach 
for bathers in the 1930s, so this pool was built. Designed byRené Lesaunier 
<http://www.saint-malo-tourisme.it/scoprire/turismo-sostenibile/le-spiagge/227804-plage-de-bon-secours>
 in 1937, it allows visitors to swim 24 hours a day. The arch of its diving 
tower rises from its sea wall like the neck of a monster. Lesaunier always 
claimed that the water in the pool changed twice a day, at each tide (in 
comparison with the nearby Dinard sea pool, which is refreshed only on higher 
tides).
• saint-malo-tourisme.co.uk 
<http://www.saint-malo-tourisme.it/scoprire/turismo-sostenibile/le-spiagge/227804-plage-de-bon-secours>

Sliema Rock Pools, Malta

 Photograph: Alamy 
The Azure Window in Gozo gets all the attention in Malta. The limestone rock 
arch is featured in films and free divers, scuba divers and swimmers flock to 
the Blue Hole next to it for its clarity, blueness and depth. But atSliema 
<http://www.malta-info.co.uk/resorts/sliema.htm> on the mainland a series of 
pools offer a charming and less vertiginous alternative. The foreshore is 
rocky, so a series of square pools have been cut into them, with ladders and 
steps into the water. Dug in the 1600s, they had little canopies over them in 
Victorian times so women could bathe in private. All swimmers long for a (rock) 
pool of their own, and these are particularly peaceful.
• malta-info.co.uk <http://www.malta-info.co.uk/resorts/sliema.htm>

Kasrtup Søbad seawater lido, Copenhagen, Denmark

 Photograph: Alamy 
The Ørseund Bridge <https://www.oresundsbron.com/en/node/6738#!> that connects 
Denmark to Sweden appears to have connected two of the most amazing sea bathing 
facilities in Europe:Ribersborgs Kallbadhus 
<http://en.ribersborgskallbadhus.sk-3.se/> on the Swedish side, established in 
1898, and Kastrup Søbad on the Danish side, built in 2004. Ribersborgs 
Kallbadhus is an open-air public bath on a pier where Swedes go for sauna, 
skinny dipping and diving all year round (winter temperatures 4C). Kastrup 
Søbad is a modern building, with a wooden pier leading out to a huge wooden 
snail rising from the sea, offering protection from the wind, and three- and 
five-metre diving platforms. Access is free, the facility is spotlit at night, 
and there are some supervised hours. It was originally intended to be open at 
all times, but entrance is now restricted because of vandalism.
• taarnby.dk 
<http://www.taarnby.dk/oplev-taarnby/idraetslivet-i-taarnby/kastrup-soebad>

Grotta della Poesia, Roca Vecchia, Italy

 Grotta Della Poesia 
The Cave of Poetry is on the Adriatic sea in Puglia, with the mouth facing the 
sky, rather than the sea, producing an egg-shaped crater that holds clear blue 
green water, with five-metre cliffs for jumpers. Popular but not too busy, it’s 
name comes fromposia, which means water source in ancient Greek, rather than 
poetry as it is generally translated (but it still stirs the soul of many a 
swimmer). Before it was a destination for swimmers, it was one for writers, who 
came here to compose dedications to a local deity. Buses to the cave stop 
running in mid-September, after which you will need a car.
• visual-italy.it 
<http://www.visual-italy.it/EN/puglia/roca-vecchia-archeology-messapis/>

Charco Azul Pool, La Palma, Canary Islands


The sea in the Canaries is often a bit lively, which makes the several 
saltwater pools in these islands a blessing. The pool at Charco Azul provides a 
rare place to swim on the north-east of La Palma. It’s a manmade, modern rock 
pool that fills naturally with fresh sea water, deep and clear. There are 
changing rooms, and a cafe serves fresh fish. With fish in the pool, crabs on 
the edges, Canarian geckos scurrying between rocks, a wild ocean to stare out 
at, volcanic lava banks and the occasional kestrel above, the scenery is 
stunning. Plus there’s a children’s pool, a tiny waterfall, a sunbathing zone, 
showers, changing rooms, and parking. Other top pools in the Canaries include 
Charco de la Laja and Puerto Santiago natural pool, both in Tenerife.
• hellocanaryislands.com/natural-pools 
<http://www.hellocanaryislands.com/natural-pools/la-palma/la-fajana/>

Azenhas do Mar, Sintra, Portugal

 Photograph: Alamy 
This is a small town of whitewashed houses on a cliff 30km from Lisbon. A 
seafood restaurant of the same name sits just above the town’s natural pool, 
tucked into the base of the rocks. The sea is often ferocious, with crashing 
waves showering swimmers as they bathe. But this serene pool allows bathers to 
enjoy the marine violence without having to interact too much with it. Between 
the beach and the restaurant, this is a wonderful way to spend an afternoon by 
the Atlantic.
• azenhasdomar.com <http://www.azenhasdomar.com/en/#/home>

Sørenga seawater pool, Oslo, Norway

 Photograph: Alamy 
Opened in June 2015, Sørenga is a fjord pool near the Opera house in the city 
centre. It is part of a five-acre park, a free public space that offers 
floating jetties, a beach, diving boards, outdoor showers, separate children’s 
pool, grassy areas, a 50-metre pool with lanes, and a 200 sq metre seawater 
pool. There is plenty of room to sunbathe and picnic on the wooden decks, and 
it’s all free. Brits particularly will find such safe open-sky swimming in the 
heart of the city intoxicating – roll on the opening of theThames Baths 
<https://thamesbaths.com/> (where river water will be filtered and heated) in 
London.
• visitoslo.com <http://www.visitoslo.com/en/product/?TLp=1011324>

Kate Rew <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/katerew> is the founder of the 
free, crowd-sourced,worldwide swim map <http://wildswim.com/> and the Outdoor 
Swimming Society <http://www.outdoorswimmingsociety.com/>
 