
Though this list includes some of the best ashrams, retreats and shalas India 
has to offer, there are three notable omissions:BKS Iyengar’s school 
<http://bksiyengar.com/> in Pune, Pattabhi Jois’s <http://kpjayi.org/> in 
Mysore, and the pan-IndianSivananda Centre <http://www.sivananda.org/>, 
excluded on account of their existing popularity and fame. They are highly 
recommended nonetheless. Several other places were vetoed on account of various 
scandals and disputes, and I have also excluded luxurious and obscenely priced 
retreats.

As with many things in India today, yoga doesn’t necessarily come cheap but 
all of these are very good value given the quality of teaching on offer. Be 
advised that customer service in India isn’t always the best, and some of the 
more traditional places might prove hard to contact. But be patient, persevere, 
switch to “Indian-time” and, if you must, see it as the first step in letting 
go of your ego.

One last thing: while yoga in the west focuses almost exclusively on the 
physical postures and sequences (asana), in India, particularly in traditional 
ashrams, asana is only one aspect of a wider whole. In this case one can expect 
a greater emphasis on meditation, breathing and cleansing techniques, along 
with devotional practices such as mantra chanting, tuition in philosophy, and 
karma yoga (community service).

Bihar School of Yoga, Munger, Bihar
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d547eb119c9a623db1bb31863ce40b5d881f5cd%2F0_0_677_481%2F677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d547eb119c9a623db1bb31863ce40b5d881f5cd%2F0_0_677_481%2F677.jpg>
At the sprawling Bihar School, yoga is a lifestyle not a practice, and karma 
yoga is given precedence over asana. So alongside classes expect hours of seva 
(service) – including gardening, kitchen work and toilet cleaning – 
supplemented by cold showers and a simple diet.

It may sound daunting, but comfort’s loss is authenticity’s gain, and former 
students attest to the life-altering qualities a stint in this ashram can give. 
Days begin at 4am, and end with twilight satsangs (discourses) or kirtans 
(mantra chanting) before lights out at 8pm. Many yoga styles are taught, 
including Hatha, Raja (mental discipline), Kriya (breathing, chanting and 
ritual gesture) and yoga therapy, as well as Yoga Nidra, a deep meditative 
technique lulling the mind into a state neither awake nor asleep, developed by 
the ashram’s founder Swami Satyananda Saraswati.
• Open to all (beginner to advanced), year round (though in May-July, 
temperatures can reach 45C). The four-month residential course in yogic studies 
starts every October, around £1,200 for international students including 
accommodation and all meals.biharyoga.net 
<http://www.biharyoga.net/bihar-school-of-yoga/about-bsy/>

Purple Valley, Assagao, Goa
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6add1b9fa74e619d50715bf47bd6424104dd0c41%2F0_66_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6add1b9fa74e619d50715bf47bd6424104dd0c41%2F0_66_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Photograph: Coni Hörler/Purple Valley Yoga 
If you’re a modern yogi craving India plus detox juices and fast Wi-Fi, with 
access to the world’s best Ashtanga teachers (John Scott, Petri Raisanen, 
Alexander Medin), Goa’s Purple Valley is your place. Despite its hardcore 
reputation, beginners are not only welcome but encouraged, making it a great 
place to kick-start your Ashtanga training, with Mysore-style self-practice in 
the morning and special classes in the afternoons, including philosophy, yogic 
living, kirtans and pranayama.

The retreat is spread over two Portuguese-style houses and landscaped gardens 
with a tropical forest feel. Two international and one Ayurvedic chef prepare 
buffet meals that include the likes of masala millet crepes and soy burgers. 
Consultations with Ayurvedic doctors and massage therapists are also offered. 
Once the preserve of foreign students, Purple Valley now has a growing Indian 
following.
• Open from mid-October to late April. Full-board is £590/£890 for one/two 
weeks in a shared room, or £750/£1,100 in a single room.yogagoa.com 
<http://www.yogagoa.com/>

Kaivalyadhama Ashram, Lonavala, Maharashtra
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe57b53f891480053f5da1765261db752c4760e56%2F0_312_949_569%2F949.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe57b53f891480053f5da1765261db752c4760e56%2F0_312_949_569%2F949.jpg>
Set within 180 acres of parkland at Lonavala, a hill-station between Mumbai 
and Pune, this ashram, designed as a yogic research centre when it opened in 
1924, is the kind of place you can spend days, months or even years immersed in 
its myriad programmes. The ashram’s school offers diplomas and fully accredited 
degrees for yoga teachers, along with shorter courses for both beginners and 
advanced students, while the health centre – where Gandhi was an early patient 
after a breakdown in 1927 – has week-long packages that include yoga with a 
focus on either relaxation, naturopathy or Ayurveda. You’ll stay within the 
leafy, old-fashioned campus, at the health centre or in the rooms of the main 
hall, some of which are air-conditioned. The diet throughout is organic Indian 
vegetarian.
• Open all year. £42 a week for yoga with naturopathy, £115 a week for yoga 
with Ayurvedic treatment; accommodation starts at £67 a week for a shared room 
and goes up to £425 for a cottage. The year-long diploma in yoga therapy is 
£4,255, including accommodation and all meals.kdham.com <http://kdham.com/>

Mysore Krishnamachar Yoga Shala, Mysore, Karnataka
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde40ced485a7441a9b2a7913bd2b798a5182e23b%2F0_0_4982_3408%2F4982.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde40ced485a7441a9b2a7913bd2b798a5182e23b%2F0_0_4982_3408%2F4982.jpg>
 Mysore, in the southern state of Karnataka, is one of India’s most popular 
yoga destinations. Photograph: David Pearson/Rex 
BNS Iyengar, who has taught quietly in his Mysore shala for the last 38 years, 
was one of the original students of “super-guru” Krishnamacharya, the teacher 
of the famous BKS Iyengar and Pattabhi Jois, founders of Iyengar and Ashtanga 
yoga respectively.

His classes include Ashtanga yoga asanas (the sequence differs from the main 
Ashtanga institute’s, with a 55 minute primary series) pranayama (breathing), 
kriya (breathing, chanting, gesture), neti and dhauti (cleansing techniques), 
meditation and philosophy, all of which are taught as part of a teacher 
training course. BNS has a steady following despite or perhaps because of his 
“brutal” style.

Think of him as a cantankerous old kung-fu master whose tough love hides a 
deep-seated desire for his students to prosper. Students are required to 
register for a minimum of one month. Accommodation is provided nearby at extra 
cost, otherwise there are plenty of rooms to rent around this yoga-friendly 
city.
• Open all year; next teacher training begins on 4 July 2016. £65 for a month 
of morning classes; £650 for a month-long teacher training course (excluding 
accommodation).bnsiyengar.net <http://bnsiyengar.net/>. 

Himalayan Iyengar Yoga Centre, Dharamkot, Himachal Pradesh & Arambol, Goa
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59fc018e8a1cf061c2af882a9f24d74563df7bf4%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59fc018e8a1cf061c2af882a9f24d74563df7bf4%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
 Downward dog … Arambol beach in northern Goa is wide quiet, perfect for 
practising yoga. Photograph: Ami Vitale/Getty Images 
An old student of BKS Iyengar, Sharat Arora became well-known in yoga circles 
for his serious and dedicated approach to the tradition. His school, the 
Himalayan IyengarYoga <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/yoga> Centre 
(HIYC), spends summers in Dharamkot, a picturesque Himalayan village above the 
Tibetan refugee settlement of Mcleodganj, and winters in Arambol, the former 
hippy beach town in the far north of Goa.

All students, regardless of ability, must first complete the compulsory 
five-day course before progressing onto teacher training and specialised 
courses such as yoga therapy, yoga for Vipassana, and yoga with Ayurveda. 
Besides the respected teaching, the centre’s summer location, a mountain in the 
shadow of glaciers, set amid oak, rhododendron and pine forests – not to 
mention the Dalai Lama’s nearby residence – is a real draw.
• Dharamkot open mid-February to late October; Arambol from November to end of 
March. Five-day courses start at £42 (accommodation extra).hiyogacentre.com 
<http://www.hiyogacentre.com/en/>

Phool Chatti, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d0b04aa908536d1edf4f2c7719ae060630b2a84%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d0b04aa908536d1edf4f2c7719ae060630b2a84%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
Built beside an ancient pilgrimage route on the banks of the river Ganges, 5km 
upriver from Rishikesh’s famous Laxman Jhula suspension bridge, the ashram taps 
into the holy town’s spiritual vitality while eschewing its chaotic hustle.

Though the ashram is under the stewardship of Swami Dev Swarup Nanda, most 
classes are led by yoga director Sadhvi Lalitambay, who has lived here since 
she was 15. The seven-day yoga course includes meditation, mantra chanting, 
neti-pot cleansing (a nasal cleaning technique), pranayama, asana practice, 
prayer, kirtans and plenty of discussion around yoga philosophy. Meditative 
walks, hiking and river dips are also included.

The ashram itself is over 100 years old but the building was renovated 
recently, so rooms come with some modern comforts, including hot showers. 
Couples can share rooms. Outside treats are permitted, but the food prepared 
in-house is very good.
• Open February-May & September-December. The seven-day course is £110, 
including accommodation in a shared room, all yoga classes and three meals.
phoolchattiyoga.com <http://www.phoolchattiyoga.com/>

Mysore Mandala, Mysore, Karnataka
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4caf2c21bcf69e2c88748fac0e4a28d3a9fe827a%2F0_0_1376_1032%2Fmaster%2F1376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4caf2c21bcf69e2c88748fac0e4a28d3a9fe827a%2F0_0_1376_1032%2Fmaster%2F1376.jpg>
With a tranquil, century-old house and charming cafe supplied by the owners’ 
organic farm, this is Mysore’s prettiest yoga space – closer to a western style 
studio than a traditional ashram, but no less authentic for it. Ashtanga is the 
focus (this is Mysore after all) but there’s a wide range of other classes to 
choose from, including hatha, shatkriya (cleansing), backbending and pranayama 
as well as instruction in Sanskrit and lessons in the yoga sutras. Teacher 
training is very highly regarded here; led by a team of nine teachers, it 
includes the aforementioned branches, alongside classes in anatomy and Ayurveda.
• Daily drop-in is £6; £95 for a month of morning classes, £990 for the 
one-month teacher training, including food and accommodation.ashtanga.org 
<http://www.ashtanga.org/>

Omkarananda Patanjali Yoga Kendra, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff999a6bc31eade8b14be1c0a5069a9fbafe96297%2F197_426_1851_1110%2F1851.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff999a6bc31eade8b14be1c0a5069a9fbafe96297%2F197_426_1851_1110%2F1851.jpg>
Swiss born Usha Devi is a strict adherent of BKS Iyengar and his famously 
precise but therapeutic style, and the ashram in which she teaches, on the 
banks of the Ganges just outside Rishikesh, is as functional and austere as her 
instruction is straight from the source. You won’t find any teacher training or 
certifications here, only daily drop-in classes (for beginners and 
intermediate) for which no early registration is required, and a nine-day 
intensive course for which three years regular practice in Iyengar yoga is a 
prerequisite. Rooms are available on site, and the nearby town is teeming with 
guesthouses.
• Classes run from October to May. One week (beginners) is £11; one week 
(general) £16; accommodation in the ashram from £6-£9 per night.iyengaryoga.in 
<http://www.iyengaryoga.in/>

International Center for Yoga Education and Research, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d15511b610aa197fd92bd42aed21d0afce82fd0%2F0_0_2860_1907%2F2860.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d15511b610aa197fd92bd42aed21d0afce82fd0%2F0_0_2860_1907%2F2860.jpg>
 Walking the elephant to the temple in Puducherry (formerly Pondicherry). 
Photograph: Alamy 
This coastal gurukul (guru centre) is arguably the most traditional and 
immersive on this list, teaching a classical style that embraces all eight 
limbs of yoga. Famous for their six-month teacher-training course – which 
requires the completion of a year-long correspondence course before you’re even 
eligible to apply, and to which only 10 students per year are accepted – this 
is not for the casual yogi, but, for the bold, the rewards are abundant, with a 
depth and breadth of teaching that’s remarkable.

Having said all that, they run a three-week course on Yantra, “the science of 
number, name and form”, alongside daily yoga and pranayama practice. All 
courses are residential, with a strict vegetarian diet, a no-alcohol, no-drugs 
policy, and very limited contact with the outside world.
• The three-week Yantra course is held once a year in February and costs £625, 
including accommodation and all meals. icyer.com <http://www.icyer.com/> 

The Yoga House, Mumbai, Maharashtra & Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cd7f3a8aef5727a1861ab565fa6f5426086c71b%2F0_126_1078_605%2F1078.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20yoga%20retreats%20in%20India&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftop-10-yoga-retreats-holidays-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cd7f3a8aef5727a1861ab565fa6f5426086c71b%2F0_126_1078_605%2F1078.jpg>
 Morning prayers on the ghats of the river Ganges in Varanasi, that most holy 
of Indian cities. Photograph: Bhishma Choudhary 
A modern, bright and welcoming space in the lively Mumbai neighbourhood of 
Bandra, which seeks to link traditional Indian knowledge and practice with a 
contemporary health-conscious lifestyle. If you’re coming from, say, London or 
New York, or are desperate to discover “the real India” (whatever that might 
be) it could feel a little too close to home, but you’d be foolish to dismiss 
this place. The Yoga House is a sanctuary, the teaching is first-rate, and the 
cafe food (both western and Indian vegetarian) is exceptional. What’s more, 
they recently opened a new shala and boutique hotel in Varanasi, that most holy 
of Indian cities. Styles (for beginner and advanced) include Hatha Vinyasa, 
Iyengar and Ashtanga. Daily drop-ins and monthly class passes are available. 
They also run retreats around the country.
• In Mumbai, drop-in classes £7 or £42 for an eight-class pass; no 
accommodation. In Varanasi (open Oct-March), £5 for a yoga class; rooms £28-35 
per night including breakfast.yogahouse.in <http://www.yogahouse.in/>
 