
The unreliable narrator is an odd concept. The way I see it, we’re all 
unreliable narrators of our lives who usually have absolute trust in our 
self-told stories. Any truth is, after all, just a matter of perspective. The 
only rule I have in how I let characters tell stories is that they must always 
tell the reader their version of the truth. No one likes being outright lied 
to, even in fiction. I don’t mind a narrator who’s self-deceiving, but the 
clues for their truth have to be there for the reader to see.


My novel Behind Her Eyes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/behind-her-eyes.html> is, on the surface, the 
story of the three people in a love affair. An affair combined with a marriage 
built on secrets – which there must be in a thriller – is perfect for creating 
unreliable narrators. After all, it’s in the situations when we’re acting at 
our most shameful – cheating on a partner, sleeping with someone else’s 
partner, or secretly fighting to keep a spouse, that our versions of the truth 
are the most tenuous.I couldn’t help it. I didn’t mean to. It just happened. I 
was going to end it. And that’s a fun pit to play in for a writer. Fertile 
ground, because let’s face it,good people make for really dull stories.


There are, of course, different types of unreliable narrators; those who are 
fooling themselves, those who are fooling others, and a range in between. Here 
are a few of the ones that stand out for me.

1. Gone Girl by Gillian Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/03/gone-girl-phenomenon-gillian-flynn>
The fabulously unpleasant tale of Amy and Nick’s marital problems breathed new 
life into the psychological thriller. The twist wasn’t what I loved most about 
this book – it was the slow reveals in the first section from Nick about 
himself, that turned him from immediate protagonist to somewhat tarnished hero.

2. Fight Club by Chuck Palahniuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/dec/20/first-rule-about-fight-club-no-one-talks-about-the-quality-of-the-writing>
Unreliable narrators go hand in hand with plot twists and never so much as 
here. When the unnamed, insomniac narrator meets the enigmatic Tyler Durden, 
the two men start an underground boxing club for men who feel they want to be 
defined by more than their jobs and pay grades. This becomes Project Mayhem, an 
army with the aim of bringing the whole system down. A punch of a twist – 
excuse the pun – reveals both characters to be completely unreliable.

3. The Three by Sarah Lotz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/05/the-three-review-sarah-lotz-high-concept-thriller>
This dark story of four plane crashes and the three children who survive plays 
with unreliable narration in quite a different way, as diary entries, extracts 
of a book, news reports and psychiatric reports make up the puzzle pieces of 
the plot. After seeing events and actions from one character’s viewpoint and 
believing them, Lotz then presents you with another character’s version of the 
same events. Who you can trust, if anyone, is hard to know.

4. The Wasp Factory by Iain Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/05/saturdayreviewsfeatres.guardianreview28>
Teenager Frank Cauldhame has no National Insurance number, no birth 
certificate and has been told by his overprotective father to lie should anyone 
ask who he is. Living on a remote island off Scotland, Frank tells the reader 
bluntly he had murdered three people by the time he was 10. With an older 
brother just escaped from a psychiatric institution and a father who keeps his 
secrets locked away, The Wasp Factory is a darkly disturbing study of a hugely 
dysfunctional – and unreliable – family.

5. Rebecca by Daphne du Maurier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/29/psychological-thrillers-grip-lit>
In the second Mrs de Winter we have a narrator who is unreliable through no 
fault of her own because she misunderstands everything about the eerie 
situation around her, and the reader is misled along with her. Rebecca is a 
masterclass in the search for secrets at the heart of a marriage as one woman 
tries to find out what became of her predecessor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ftop-10-unreliable-narrators-edgar-allan-poe-gillian-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03e2ce3b073afe33b24b5871da887e9bc16e9f25%2F448_166_2708_1625%2F2708.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20unreliable%20narrators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ftop-10-unreliable-narrators-edgar-allan-poe-gillian-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20unreliable%20narrators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ftop-10-unreliable-narrators-edgar-allan-poe-gillian-flynn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03e2ce3b073afe33b24b5871da887e9bc16e9f25%2F448_166_2708_1625%2F2708.jpg>
 Someone should be watching their back … Joan Fontaine (left) and Judith 
Anderson in Alfred Hitchcock’s 1940 film of Rebecca. Photograph: Courtesy 
Everett Collection/Rex 
6. Lolita by Vladimir Nabokov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/23/100-best-novels-lolita-vladimir-nabokov-nymphet>
He’s sly, is Humbert Humbert. He flatters the reader, and tries to bring them 
on side as he talks of his perverse infatuation with a prepubescent girl and 
attempts to justify his actions. A disgustingly brilliant book.

7. The Girl on the Train by Paula Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/19/girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-observer-review>
I can hardly believe there is anyone left in the world who hasn’t read this 
yet, but it’s hard to beat for unreliable narration. The central character in 
its clever tale of mistrust and murder is unreliable simply because she’s drunk 
for much of the book and blacks out.

8. The Tell-Tale Heart by  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/19/how-well-do-you-know-edgar-allan-poe-quiz>
Edgar Allan Poe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/19/how-well-do-you-know-edgar-allan-poe-quiz>
Never trust a narrator whose opening gambit is to insist he’s not mad. 
Although only a short story, this is a chilling tale of the effects of guilt on 
a person’s psyche will stay with readers a long time. Is the tell-tale heart 
really beating, spectrally, beneath the floorboards, or does murder create a 
hell of its own?

9. Notes on a Scandal by Zoë Heller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview9>
From the outset, narrator Barbara’s acid tongue and confidence that she is the 
only one in a position to tell the sordid tale of an art teacher’s ill-judged 
affair with a pupil give the reader the nod that the perspective they are about 
to get on everyone involved is likely to be skewed.

10. The Life of Pi by Yann Martel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/04/books-interview-yann-martel-the-high-mountains-of-portugal>
After the boat a young boy was travelling on sinks, he’s left in a life raft 
on the ocean with only a tiger for company. Such a beautiful story, and yet at 
the end the reader is left to wonder how much is true and how much has been 
reimagined in order for him to cope with tragedy and the brutal struggle for 
survival. This narrator’s unreliabilty might just break your heart.

 * Behind Her Eyes by Sarah Pinborough will be published later this month by 
HarperCollins, priced £12.99.It can be ordered from the Guardian bookshop for 
£11.04, including free UK p&p 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/behind-her-eyes.html>.
 