
Galleries

The Van Gogh museum may be an unmissable (albeit very crowded and expensive) 
destination in Amsterdam, but the contemporary art scene in the city thrives in
small independent galleries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/jun/22/top-10-independent-galleries-amsterdam>
 that are far more accessible for the budget traveller. Spend an afternoon 
cycling between some of the more prominent ones, such asRadar 
<http://www.radar-amsterdam.com/index.html>, an art and architecture gallery 
that features exhibitions usually with an urban inspiration;Galerie Fons Welters
 <http://www.fonswelters.nl/exhibitions/current>, a gaping industrial space 
you'll find filled with forward thinking art and installations; andKochxBos 
<http://www.kochxbos.nl/homepage.html>, a converted living room on a 
residential street with a focus on kitsch, colourful and surreal artwork. All 
three are situated in or around the quiet and picturesque Jordaan area, where 
you'll find many other small galleries among the leafy streets.

The Condomerie
 Photograph: Condomerie 
The Condomerie is the world's first specialist condom shop, a treasure trove 
of latex artistry that has helped keep the city's (in)famous red-light district 
safe and sheathed since 1987. The colourful store and information centre on 
Warmoesstraat – one of the oldest streets in the city – displays an eye-opening 
collection of rubbers as well as colourful hand-painted novelty condoms in the 
shape of chickens, frogs and, ahem, Big Ben. There's even a small "condom 
museum" (currently closed for refurbishment).

Perhaps it's hard to imagine it now, but when the idea for the shop was first, 
er, conceived during a discussion in a restaurant between three friends, it 
really was a radical proposition. The work the shop has done to break down the 
taboos surrounding contraception and sexually transmitted diseases – 
particularly HIV – makes it far more than a shop; it's more like a rather 
important institution in modern sexual history.
• Warmoesstraat 141, +31 020 627 4174, condomerie.com 
<http://condomerie.com/?___store=english&___from_store=nederlands>. Mon-Sat 
11am-6pm, Sun 1pm-5pm

Droog
 Tejo Remy's Chest of Drawers at Droog. Photograph: Alamy 
If the sight of impeccably dressed 'Dammers taking their kids to work on their 
bakfiets teaches us anything, it's that the Dutch take design very seriously. 
Droog – a conceptual design studio set up in the 1990s – remains one of the 
forerunners of Dutch design, and their shop and showroom in Amsterdam is a 
must-visit for anyone interested in modernist eye candy. Among the classics you 
may find on display are Tejo Remy'sChest of Drawers 
<https://www.droog.com/webshop/studio-work/chest-of-drawers/> (a seemingly 
random assortment of wooden drawers tied together with a jute strap) and the Do 
hit stainless steel chair by Marijn van der Poll, which consists of a metal 
cube and a hammer you can use to bash it into whatever shape you desire.
• Staalstraat 7b, +31 020 523 5059, droog.com 
<https://www.droog.com/stores/amsterdam/>. Tues-Sun 11am-6pm, closed Mon.

The EYE film museum
 Photograph: Alamy 
While the temporary events at the EYE film museum require tickets, in the 
basement visitors can immerse themselves in cinema at a free permanent 
exhibition. The Panorama room surrounds visitors with around 100 movie clips 
and scenes, which are projected on to the walls and can be browsed via seven 
control panels. Perhaps the most popular plaything (expect to wait a while for 
one to become free!) are the viewing pods – specially designed, futuristic 
cabins which contain a small sofa for visitors to watch films in. It's also 
worth taking a close look at the EYE building itself, which moved to its 
current location in 2012 and now sports a dramatic new look with jagged angles 
and a shimmering white exterior. From the bar and restaurant you can also enjoy 
a fantastic view across the IJ waterfront towards Amsterdam's Centraal station.
• IJpromenade 1, +31 020 589 1400, eyefilm.nl <http://www.eyefilm.nl/>. 
Basement open every day 10am-6pm

Markets
 Waterlooplein market. Photograph: Alamy 
Like all busy cities, Amsterdam has lots of markets, each with their own 
character, such as the workadayAlbert Cuyp markt 
<http://www.albertcuypmarkt.nl/ac_english.html> in De Pijp, where you can do a 
grocery shop for next to nothing or the weeklyNoordermarkt 
<http://www.noordermarkt-amsterdam.nl/> farmer's market in the Jordaan, where 
you can fill up just by sampling all the organic food on sale. Probably the 
best markets to peruse in terms of free entertainment are the Waterlooplein 
flea market - where you'll find everything from antiques to vintage suits and 
lots of boxes of old keys, photographs and camera parts – and Bloemenmarkt - a 
unique floating flower market with more tulips than you could possibly sneeze 
at. For something more contemporary, check outModerne Hippies 
<http://www.modernehippies.nl/>, a recent addition to the city's market line-up 
and the best place to browse stalls hawking left-field lifestyle fare.
• Waterloopleinmarkt, Waterlooplein, waterloopleinmarkt.nl 
<http://www.waterloopleinmarkt.nl/>. Mon-Sat 9am-6pm. Bloemenmarkt, Singel, 
Mon-Sat 9am-5.30pm, Sun 11am-5.30pm

City archive
 Photograph: Alamy 
The permanent exhibition at the Stadsarchief, Amsterdam City Archives, is an 
ideal place to learn about the history of the city through the unusual and 
quirky "treasures" in its collection. Among the artefacts are a sympathetic 
1942 police report regarding the theft of Anne Frank's bike, a less sympathetic 
police telegram regarding Karl Marx's visit to the city in 1872, and 
photographs of the likes of John Lennon and Audrey Hepburn. The collection is 
contained within a majestic tiled vault in the basement of the Bazel building, 
a former bank notable for its impressive geometric brickwork designed by ADN 
van Gendt.
• Vijzelstraat 32, +31 20 251 1511, stadsarchief.amsterdam.nl 
<http://stadsarchief.amsterdam.nl/>. Tues-Fri- 10am–5pm, Sat-Sun noon–5pm

Take the ferry across the IJ
 The free ferry service at Amsterdam Centraal. Photograph: Alamy 
Getting a view from the water is always a favourable experience in a city like 
Amsterdam. The overpriced daytime tour boats that squeeze through the canals 
like floating logs, however, aren't necessarily the best way to do it, and 
sadly the donation-runSt Nicholaas Boat Club <http://www.amsterdamboatclub.com/>
 that used to chug guests around on a traditional diesel fuelled 
Tuindersvletten has recently been shut down because of a licencing dispute.

So anyone wanting a gratis boat trip should hop on one of the free ferries 
across the IJ, Amsterdam's waterfront, and explore Amsterdam-Noord. Link it 
with a bike trip around the leafy countryside and historic villages in the 
area, or drop in on theNDSM Wharf <http://www.ndsm.nl/en/> for quite the 
opposite – a regenerated shipyard that's now a Berlin-esque hub for cultural 
and creative entrepreneurs.
• Ferries run every few minutes from behind Centraal station 

Free classical and jazz concerts 
 The Bimhuis music venue, on Amsterdam's IJ waterfront, hosts a monthly free 
jazz night. Photograph: Alamy 
Wednesday lunchtime performances at Concertegebouw are a long-running 
institution. Some of the performances are public rehearsals – meaning you could 
get a taste of the full Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra – while others are 
smaller chamber music ensembles made up of young musicians. For those after 
something more buzzy, the Bimhuis jazz venue has a monthly free night called 
Monday Match, in which dancers and musicians collaborate to create an 
improvised performance. At around 10pm a DJ takes over to keep feet moving 
until midnight with an eclectic mix of "hidden treasures and crazy grooves".
• Concertgebouw, Concertgebouwplein 10, +31 020 573 05 73, concertgebouw.nl 
<http://www.concertgebouw.nl/en/free-lunch-concerts>; concerts every Wednesday 
at 12.30pm except during July and August. Bimhuis, Piet Heinkade 3,bimhuis.com 
<http://bimhuis.com/>;Monday Match usually on the first Monday of the month, 
from 7.30pm-10pm

Begijnhof
 Begijnhof, a beautiful square of 17th and 18th century houses, Amsterdam. 
Photograph: Alamy 
While the enormous Vondelpark will always be the obvious spot for anyone 
wanting to wind down, enjoy a picnic and watch the flocks of green parakeets 
who have taken up residence there, the Begijnhof offers an alternative island 
of tranquillity in this already rather tranquil city. A small square of 
historic buildings with a quiet garden, the enclosed courtyard dates to the 
early 14th century and is reached through a narrow passageway. While not the 
place to crack open a Heineken – it's still a residential square with a working 
chapel – it's an excellent place to read a book, recoup or admire the 
architecture. From the Begijnhof you can also reach theCivic Guards Gallery 
(also free) <http://amsterdammuseum.nl/en/about-museum>– a covered street lined 
with 15 huge 17th-century paintings and managed by the Amsterdam Historical 
Museum.
• Begijnhof 30, begijnhofamsterdam.nl <http://www.begijnhofamsterdam.nl/>

Botanical garden at Vrije University 

 Photograph: VU Hortus 
More than 6,000 species of plant can be found growing in this small botanical 
garden owned by Vrije University, which, among its many roles, is a place of 
sanctuary for rare and endangered plants intercepted by customs at Schipol 
airport. The much-loved garden – which also hosts concerts and workshops – was 
almost closed down in 2009 to make way for expansion of the university 
hospital. Fortunately, after protests from staff, academics and visitors, it 
received a stay of execution and should remain open for at least the next eight 
years.
• Van der Boechorststraat 8, +31 20 598 9390, vriendenvuhortus.nl 
<http://www.vriendenvuhortus.nl>, Mon-Fri 8am-4.30pm
 