
If you haven’t communed with your socks lately, thanked your shoes for their 
hard work or bowed (at least mentally) to your home in appreciation, maybe it’s 
time to consider doing so.

“It is very natural for me to say thank you to the goods that support us,” 
says Marie Kondo, whose method of lovingly connecting with belongings that 
“spark joy” and bidding a fond but firm farewell to the rest is popular inJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> and is now catching on elsewhere.

Kondo’s book, The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up: The Japanese Art of 
Decluttering and Organising, is an international bestseller. She has been the 
subject of a movie in Japan and the waiting list for her services, once three 
months long, is now so extensive she has temporarily stopped accepting more 
clients.

Her “KonMarie method”, as she calls it in the diminutive and illustration-free 
volume, encourages a rapid, dramatic and transformative one-time organising 
event completed methodically and lovingly in no more than six months. It is not 
an ongoing battle against clutter.

Kondo sees tidying as a cheerful conversation in which anything that doesn’t 
“spark joy” is to be touched, thanked and ceremonially sent on its way towards 
a better life elsewhere, where it can discover a more appreciative owner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Ftop-tips-to-joyfully-declutter-your-home-from-marie-kondo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417062739342%2F5f26e77f-f375-4943-bed3-077f3122ce8e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20tips%20to%20joyfully%20declutter%20your%20home%2C%20from%20Marie%20Kondo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Ftop-tips-to-joyfully-declutter-your-home-from-marie-kondo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20tips%20to%20joyfully%20declutter%20your%20home%2C%20from%20Marie%20Kondo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Ftop-tips-to-joyfully-declutter-your-home-from-marie-kondo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417062739342%2F5f26e77f-f375-4943-bed3-077f3122ce8e-1020x612.jpeg>
 Before … a client’s room before decluttering. Photographs: AP  After … the 
same room after the ‘KonMarie method’ 

The results can be life changing, she says. Clients suddenly find themselves 
surrounded entirely by things that provide clarity, unencumbered by belongings 
that carry baggage (unwanted gifts, clothes that no longer fit) or anxieties 
about the future. Even her book, she says, should be quickly discarded when 
it’s no longer needed.

Part of what makes her method unusually speedy is that instead of decluttering 
room by room, she tackles belongings by subject, starting with what is easiest 
to part with. So, all the clothes, then all the books, then documents, then 
miscellany and, last and most difficult, photos and mementos.

Instead of deciding what to get rid of, she says, the focus should be on what 
to keep: which few things spark sufficient joy or are truly necessary.

But how to contend with family members unready to join in the celebratory 
purge? If possible, carry the bags out of the house yourself.

“There’s no need to let your family know the details of what you throw out or 
donate,” she writes, although she advises against secretly disposing of other 
people’s things. “You can leave communal spaces to the end. The first step is 
to confront your own stuff.”

After joyfully relegating mountains of unneeded or unloved belongings to 
charity or the bin, she turns to organising what is left. The key, she says, is 
storing things mostly in drawers, arranged so everything can be seen at a 
glance and nothing is stacked, a practice decidedly unkind to items at the 
bottom.

So T-shirts and socks (the ones you’ve kept because they make you happy) are 
rolled and arranged beautifully, like sushi in a bento box. Cupboards are 
meticulously reorganised to fit everything from electric fans (at the bottom) 
to spare blankets (on top).

Papers and documents – there won’t be many since few are truly necessary and 
they generally hold so little joy – are likewise filed rather than stacked.

Kondo says she has been obsessed with tidying since she was five, opting to 
arrange shoes and pencils while other kids played outside. She began communing 
with her belongings in high school and, after years of work at a Shinto shrine, 
realised her calling as a professional consultant on attaining the joy of 
minimalism.

“The inside of a house or apartment after decluttering has much in common with 
a Shinto shrine ... a place where there are no unnecessary things, and our 
thoughts become clear,” she says.

“It is the place where we appreciate all the things that support us. It is 
where we review and rethink about ourselves.”

 