
The show that opened London Collections: Men 
<http://www.londoncollections.co.uk/> – the menswear showcase and first fashion 
week of 2016 – undeniably set an agenda for the year ahead. The honour fell on 
Friday to Topman Design, the catwalk label from the high street store, with its 
autumn/winter show. The trends on display? Velvet, blouses for men, floral 
prints and colours inspired by autumn leaves and oxidised metals.

A front row including TV presenter Dermot O’Leary, singer Nick Jonas and actor 
Douglas Booth watched beanie-wearing models showcase a collection that was 
flamboyant, glamorous and ornate. Suits were slouchily cut in panne velvet, 
delicate devoré blouses had retro floral motifs, and decorative tailoring was
worthy of One Direction’s Harry Styles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/14/harry-styles-ikea-chic-nudie-cohn-suit-stylewatch>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b9da90dc115e74d446463ad35e9a6752340c25a%2F0_148_2515_3768%2F2515.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topman%20rocks%20on%20with%20catwalk%20show%20of%20flamboyant%20menswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topman%20rocks%20on%20with%20catwalk%20show%20of%20flamboyant%20menswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b9da90dc115e74d446463ad35e9a6752340c25a%2F0_148_2515_3768%2F2515.jpg>
 Soon to be seen on Harry Styles? Panne velvet tailoring at the Topman Design 
show. Photograph: Stuart C Wilson/Getty Images 
A break from the high-pile count came with satin robes worn over wide-legged 
trousers, frayed knitwear anddouble denim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/02/double-denim-is-back-in-fashion-and-this-is-how-to-wear-it-oz-stylewatch>
. But even these looks weren’t simple: jackets and pegged jeans had embroidered 
panels, with loose threads hanging down for a punk feel. It was a collection 
that owed a debt to 90s deconstruction by designers such asMarc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marc-jacobs>. The luxuriant fabrics and 
louche feel recalled rock stars from Marc Bolan to Kurt Cobain, and the retro, 
foppish androgyny seen in the buzzy collections ofAlessandro Michele at Gucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/16/guccis-alessandro-michele-british-fashion-awards-karl-lagerfeld>
.

Athevening: how to wear jogging bottoms to the pub
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/08/athevening-how-to-wear-jogging-bottoms-to-the-pub>
Such a wide-ranging collection makes sense: Topman has to be many things to 
many men. Backstage, design director Gordon Richardson gave little of the 
inspiration away, for fear of the collection becoming pigeonholed. The 90s and 
thelatest fashion buzzword “athevening” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/08/athevening-how-to-wear-jogging-bottoms-to-the-pub>
 – slouchy sportswear to wear out on the town – were mentioned but not quite 
committed to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26be70fe299f4700be101e434823d1c710a4bacf%2F1213_971_1101_1651%2F1101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topman%20rocks%20on%20with%20catwalk%20show%20of%20flamboyant%20menswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topman%20rocks%20on%20with%20catwalk%20show%20of%20flamboyant%20menswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26be70fe299f4700be101e434823d1c710a4bacf%2F1213_971_1101_1651%2F1101.jpg>
 Slouchy 90s-style sportswear made a comeback. Photograph: Justin 
Tallis/AFP/Getty 
“It was about clothes that move between what we wear for going out and staying 
in – simple easy things, but you do something to the fabric,” said Richardson 
when asked about the influence of athevening. The year on the collection’s 
moodboard was 1993, he said, but the emphasis was on “how that mood translates 
to now”.

Richardson said he hoped that this collection was “like a movie. You watch it 
again and see something else.” With 85% of the clothes on the catwalk due to 
hit Topman stores in the autumn, consumers represent those fresh eyes. The 
customer is becoming more open to menswear inspired by high fashion, as seen on 
the Topman Design catwalk. “They are changing, and they now want that from us,” 
Richardson said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec9c8572516bdd7f75aa248783a2ec088a3ebf72%2F49_0_2953_4426%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topman%20rocks%20on%20with%20catwalk%20show%20of%20flamboyant%20menswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topman%20rocks%20on%20with%20catwalk%20show%20of%20flamboyant%20menswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ftopman-design-rocks-on-with-catwalk-show-of-flamboyant-menswear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec9c8572516bdd7f75aa248783a2ec088a3ebf72%2F49_0_2953_4426%2F2953.jpg>
 The influence of rock stars such as Marc Bolan could be seen in the flamboyant 
looks. Photograph: Stuart C. Wilson/Getty Images 
The general growth of the menswear market certainly suggests that men’s 
interest in fashion is increasing. Global sales of menswear in 2014 reached 
£298bn, up 4.5% on the previous year. London Collections: Men, partly set up in 
response to a burgeoning menswear market, has been a success. Now in its eighth 
season, it has 170 designers on the schedule, including global brands Alexander 
McQueen, Burberry and Coach.

This year, there is a push to involve the public. Press and buyers from more 
than 40 countries will be joined by people without a front row ticket, 
virtually at least. Shows will be streamed on screens at Piccadilly Circus in 
London and a series of public talks have been scheduled. On Sunday, meanwhile,
JW Anderson – arguably the most influential designer in the showcase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/03/jw-anderson-loewe-interview> – 
will stream his show to the seven million users of gay dating appGrindr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grindr>. 
 