
He still has his knighthood, but Sir Philip Green has forfeited another prized 
bauble of social status: his place on the front row atLondon fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week>.

Green, who previously revelled in the photo opportunities provided by his 
Topshop catwalk show, was nowhere to be seenon Sunday afternoon <>. One 
imagines that whoever would have been responsible for recruiting the supermodel 
required to sit next to him breathed a sigh of relief when that announcement 
was made.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc635d97eb2d529c76855cf7258c444708c1b25f%2F0_167_3280_4098%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topshop%20aligns%20with%20ordinary%20people%20as%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20stays%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topshop%20aligns%20with%20ordinary%20people%20as%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20stays%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc635d97eb2d529c76855cf7258c444708c1b25f%2F0_167_3280_4098%2F3280.jpg>
 A PVC minidress worn on the catwalk was hanging on a rail with a £295 price 
tag. Photograph: Niklas Halle'N/AFP/Getty Images 
Topshop <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/topshop> worked hard at making 
this an event that aligned it with ordinary people who wear high street clothes 
rather than the front row elite.

“See now buy now” may be revolutionising the fashion industry, but it is still 
largely an abstract concept for the consumer – or it was until Topshop, the 
spiritual home of instant retail gratification, tackled that head-on with a 
collection which was on sale at a pop-up shop at the end of the catwalk as soon 
as the show at Spitalfields Market ended.

A PVC minidress worn on the catwalk with bare legs and high-heeled fuchsia 
booties was hanging on a rail with a £295 price tag (this is Topshop Unique, 
the upscale sub-brand of Topshop, so don’t expect bargain-basement prices).

A blouse with jumpsuit-style D-ring fastenings in this fashion week’s hot 
shade of sugar pink, paired on the catwalk with a khaki miniskirt, was on sale 
for £115.

If the first remarkable thing about these clothes was that many were for sale 
immediately – though some will be held back for a second drop to freshen up the 
shop floor in November – the second point to note was that they did not conform 
to the outsider-chic, street-corner-sportswear aesthetic currently dominating 
fashion.

The sharp change in direction to a sexed-up, glamorous, straightforwardly 
dress-to-impress look was all the more interesting since it was Topshop Unique 
that did much to make the hoodies-and-tracksuit-bottoms look happen in the 
first place.

The programme notes had a more political tone than might have been expected, 
in the wake of the BHS scandal: “From the black hole of the recessionary 
seventies, an age of rocketing unemployment, burst a passionately tribal youth 
culture.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F515bac6131cc037c5278657ac2505db76e63f39c%2F0_162_2616_3268%2F2616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topshop%20aligns%20with%20ordinary%20people%20as%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20stays%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topshop%20aligns%20with%20ordinary%20people%20as%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20stays%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F515bac6131cc037c5278657ac2505db76e63f39c%2F0_162_2616_3268%2F2616.jpg>
 Mulberry’s Jonny Coca took school uniform looks and twisted them. Photograph: 
Alastair Grant/AP 
On the mood board for this show were party dresses from London’s iconic 1980s 
clubs, a scene in which clubwear borrowed the jewel colours and fitted shapes 
of cocktailwear but added a punk spin with extra leg and wet-look shine. 
Extreme side partings and giant earrings completed the look.


The subversive side of British style was designer Jonny Coca’s theme for his 
second season atMulberry <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/mulberry>. Coca 
took school uniform looks – striped blazers, pleated skirts, lunch boxes – and 
twisted them, with non-regulation hemlines and extracurricular accessories.

Floral dresses were made with the fabric inside out, so that the print had a 
thrift-store fade. A high-octane catwalk presentation – styled byLotta Volkova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/17/vetements-stylist-lotta-volkova>
, the industry’s of-the-moment creative – underscored Coca’s ambition to make 
Mulberry a force to be reckoned with again.

But Mulberry is fundamentally about handbags. The Cherwell – styled on a 
school lunch box, with a boxy shape and runaround zip – distilled the mood of 
the catwalk collection into a very appealing new bag with a distinctively 
Mulberry character.

Mulberry was not the only ambitious handbag brand at London fashion week, a 
fact made abundantly clear at this season’s epic Anya Hindmarch show. 
Hindmarch, who this week is moonlighting as a guest curator at Sotheby’s, 
having been selected as “an inspirational female British tastemaker”, staged a 
show that was almost Lagerfeld-esque in its elegant theatricality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc69d6b93de618a1b47dd4f0a378d234081b625cb%2F4_303_5477_3287%2F5477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topshop%20aligns%20with%20ordinary%20people%20as%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20stays%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topshop%20aligns%20with%20ordinary%20people%20as%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20stays%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Flondon-fashion-week-topshop-unique-mulberry-jonny-coca-anya-hindmarch-handbags%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc69d6b93de618a1b47dd4f0a378d234081b625cb%2F4_303_5477_3287%2F5477.jpg>
 Anya Hindmarch staged a show that was almost Lagerfeld-esque in its elegant 
theatricality. Photograph: James Gourley/Rex/Shutterstock 
The show began with the audience seated on cube benches, the kind installed in 
galleries for watching video art installations, surrounding a raised circular 
stage. But when the show began, the stage lifted and hovered like a spaceship – 
or an Olafur Eliasson installation – above a sunken amphitheatre revealed 
hidden beneath from which models ascended via a spiral walkway.

There was a strong commercial message to the artistry of the mechanics. 
Well-thought-out construction – the right size of pockets in the right place, 
user-friendly fastenings, comfortable straps – are at the core of the Anya 
Hindmarch brand. As a fusion of aesthetics and engineering, this was a strong 
mission statement for a handbag label.
 