
Mark Cavendish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/markcavendish> and Chris 
Froome <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> had reason to smile on 
viewing the 2017Tour de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> 
route owing to an increase in the number of sprint stages and a continuing 
emphasis on the shorter, steeper climbs that have favoured Froome, three times 
the winner and once the runner-up in the past five Tours.

The Tour organiser, Christian Prudhomme, said his objective was a “more open, 
less controlled race, with the aim of rediscovering a form of cycling in the 
spirit of thefive-time Tour winner Bernard Hinault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2014/nov/14/bernard-hinault-cycling-in-pictures>
, who will be absent from the race in either an official or competitive role 
for the first time inmore than 40 years as he has retired 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/sport/2016/oct/18/tour-de-france-2017-route-early-climbs-team-sky>
.

Chris Froome says questions remain over Bradley Wiggins’ use of TUEs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/chris-froome-questions-remain-bradley-wiggins-tues-use-cycling>
Whether the objective is reached remains to be seen. Prudhomme and his route 
finder, Thierry Gouvenou, have tried hard to free up the race in the past few 
years to no obvious effect, although Prudhomme also repeated his calls for the 
UCI to enable a reduction in the number of riders in each team from nine to 
eight, with the aim of making it harder for teams to shut down a race.

There is a reduction in “medium mountain stages”, which are often the hardest 
for teams to keep a grip on. That goes against the tendency in recent years, as 
does a reversion to longer mountain stages. Next year there is only one day in 
the mountains under 160km – the second Pyrenean stage to Foix at 100km – while 
most are around 180km.

With only 36km of time trials – the final one in Marseille is only 23km long – 
this will be another Tour for the climbers. Froome said: “It’s very light on 
time-trial kilometres but that’s all part of the race and that’s something I’m 
going to have to focus my training on, being the best I can be on the climbs. 
It’s going to be a race that is won or lost in the mountains.”

The 2017 Tour, which starts in Düsseldorf on 1 July, will have only four 
mountain-top finishes but they include the super-steep climb to La Planche des 
Belles Filles in the Vosges, where Froome won his first Tour stage in 2012. 
That comes on stage five, extremely early in the race, and the serious climbing 
starts only four days later with a stage through the Jura containing 4,600m of 
ascent and three steep climbs en route to Chambéry: the Mont du Chat, Grand 
Colombier and Col de la Biche, all around 10km long.

The major Pyrenean ascents such as the Aubisque and Tourmalet are absent, so 
too Mont Ventoux on the 50th anniversary ofTom Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/26/tour-de-france-tom-simpson-tributes>
’s death on its slopes, but there is a return to Alpine giants such as the Cols 
de Croix de Fer and Galibier, with the final summit finish on the closing 
Thursday on the Col d’Izoard, following the climb of the Col de Vars, “an 
absolute beast of a stage”, in Froome’s words.
Tour de France 2017 route 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/tour_de_france_2017/giv-1406lsCg9y7XuoWT/>
What is striking is the steepness of some of the climbs, beginning with an 11% 
ascent close to the finish of stage three at Longwy. As well as La Planche des 
Belles Filles and the climbs in the Jura, the stage to Peyragudes in the 
Pyrenees includes an ascent at 16%, the following day has the Mur de Péguère, 
stage 15 includes the Col de Peyra Taillade, at 14%, while even the final time 
trial takes in the 17% ascent to La Garde. These are leg-breakers but again 
recent history suggests they are not usually sufficient to split up the 
strongmen.

After two years when the quota of flat stages destined for a sprint finish has 
been low – seven in 2016, five in 2015 – there is a distinct increase, with at 
least nine stages suited to Cavendish and company, with a further two – Longwy 
and Rodez – including short climbs at or near the finish. Cavendish, with 30 
stage wins, has complained that sprint opportunities on the Tour are being 
curtailed but next year,if his form is the same as in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/mark-cavendish-four-timer-30-tour-de-france-stage-wins>
, he could close on Eddy Merckx’s record of 34.

Hints that the women’s race run alongside the Tour, La Course by the Tour de 
France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/chloe-hosking-sprints-la-tour-de-france>
, would be expanded to a multiday event were premature, as the race’s shift in 
date was to enable it to be held alongside the stage finishing on the Izoard, 
the first time that La Course has moved from its initial format of a criterium 
on the Champs Élysées. That will partly placate those calling for a tough road 
race but the distance of 67km is short for Lizzie Deignan, née Armitstead, and 
her ilk, and the finish will be 4km short of the top of the Izoard.

There are nods to history – a visit to Charles de Gaulle’s home village of 
Colombey-les-Deux-Églises on stage six, and a start in Montgeron, where the 
first Tour began in 1903 – and to the venues pitched as part of Paris’s bid for 
the 2024 Olympics, including Marseille and a passage right through Paris’s 
Grand Palais on the final stage.

Most amusing as the British agonise over Brexit – and surely an ironic nod to 
events by the organisers – is the visit to Luxembourg on stage four, which will 
pass through the town of Schengen, where the agreement paving the way for the 
elimination of border controls in most of the EU was signed in 1985.
 