
Given the weather that often seems to hit northern France when the Tour 
visits, and given thecrash on rain-hit roads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/09/chris-froome-out-of-tour-de-france-team-sky>
 that scuppered Chris Froome’s defence of his title in 2014, it should come as 
no surprise the Briton has been keeping an eye on what the heavens may throw at 
the race over the opening two stages. These will be held entirely in the Manche 
peninsula, best known to the British as the bit you drive through after getting 
off the ferry at Cherbourg.

Tour de France 2016: our interactive stage-by-stage guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2016/jun/30/tour-de-france-2016-our-interactive-stage-by-stage-guide>
He made clear his weather concerns at the end of his final pre-race press 
conference, along with his belief that in these parts the climatic conditions 
pretty much dictate the racing. Froome also pointed out he effectivelywon last 
year’s race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/chris-froome-tour-de-france-second-win-legends>
 thanks to Team Sky’s attack in crosswinds on the opening stage in the 
Netherlands, when he gained 90 seconds on Nairo Quintana, who finished only 
1min 12sec behind.

There is no rain forecast but there will be a decent breeze and exposed roads 
to take advantage of on both Saturday and Sunday. SirDave Brailsford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dave-brailsford> appears to be thinking 
along the lines of repeating last year’s opening day exploits: “This year you 
have to take every opportunity, you can’t just wait for the predictable 
moments.”

As he pointed out, Sky’s selection of one-day Classic specialists Luke Rowe, 
Ian Stannard andGeraint Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/geraint-thomas-chris-froome-tour-de-france-2016-team-sky-cycling>
 has been made with precisely this in mind. “Who better?” he said. “If you 
can’t do something with those guys, you’d have to look at yourself.”

While Sky will be looking for early openings, Froome has geared his season 
around finding form in the final week of the Tour, with a “personal goal” of 
performing more strongly in the closing stages, following his near-defeat last 
year at the hands of Quintana at l’Alpe d’Huez. In the last two mountain stages 
in 2015, Froome lost 1min 50sec to the Colombian; if Quintana and his Movistar 
team had been keener to press home their advantage when the yellow jersey and
Team Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> were vulnerable, the 
result might have been different.

Froome has rejigged his season – something he seems to concede felt like a 
gamble – with the plan being to hit his best form now and hold it until the 
Olympic Games road race and time trial in Rio on 6 and 10 August.

He said: “I’ve been delaying reaching that peak form. In previous seasons I’ve 
been in that shape a lot earlier in the spring and then trying to hang on to 
it. I feel as if I’ve only got there now. Hopefully because we’ve delayed 
everything I’ll be able to hang on for a bit longer this time, into Rio as well.

“My wife and I have just had our first son so it’s been good for me to spend a 
bit more time at home; it has been good for me to change it a bit, to trust in 
the training that I’ve been doing closely with [coach] Tim Kerrison, and 
believe that I would get to this point even if I wasn’t winning races in 
February. I’m ready.

“I’m glad we did take that approach; hopefully that will carry me into the 
third week of this race. That is something I’ve made a little personal goal for 
this Tour – to be stronger in the third week than I’ve been in the past.”

Geraint Thomas: Froome is keen for me to have personal Tour de France glory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/geraint-thomas-chris-froome-tour-de-france-2016-team-sky-cycling>
While Mont Ventoux on Bastille Day will be a high point, the key phase of the 
Tour comes after the rest day in Berne on 19 July, with four days of mountain 
climbing to close the race. “I imagine a lot of people will be looking at that 
last week. It’s so heavily loaded in mountains, stages 17 to 20,” Froome said.

“For anyone trying to make up time that’s a great opportunity; obviously for 
whoever’s leading it will be a tough hurdle, trying to defend for four days 
back to back.”

Winning this Tour is, says Froome, probably the toughest challenge he has 
faced in his career. That is partly because taking a third Tour is an honour 
reserved for so few. Louison Bobet, who came from a few miles away over the 
Norman-Breton border, Greg LeMond, and Philippe Thys are the only riders 
outside the magic circle of five-times Tour winners to have managed the feat.

It is also the case the opposition has grown in numbers and strength since 
Froomeran Bradley Wiggins close in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-cavendish>
, with Quintana, Fabio Aru, Thibaut Pinot and Romain Bardet all breaking 
through in recent years.

As the runner-up in both Froome’s victories, Quintana is the favourite, 
particularly on a course that includes so much climbing in the last nine days. 
Brailsford said: “The question is whether he’s stepped up; he’ll be asking 
himself that question as much as everyone else.

“He’ll come with confidence but with some questions too because he’s never 
done it. If you’ve never done something you will ask yourself questions and 
that’s potentially the opportunity for us. There are chinks in his armour that 
you can exploit.”

And depending on the weather, Sky will begin looking as early as Saturday.

• This article was amended on 1 July 2016 to include Philippe Thys in a list 
of riders to have won theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> three times.

 