
It’s a misty morning in March. I’ve got a stinking hangover and am being 
dragged round the block by the dog. Suddenly my friend Frank bounces out of the 
murk, part man, part Tigger. “Hey, Martin,” he says. “ I’ve had a great idea. 
Fancy cycling to my mum’s house?” Even by his zany standards this is bizarre. 
His mum only lives in Sydenham, about a mile from where we’re standing. “I 
mean, my mum’s house in Aix-en-Provence,” he adds. He’s half French, but is he 
half crazy, too? Aix is hundreds of miles away. But I know Frank and there is 
always a fearsome inevitability to his plans…

Three months later it’s another misty morning and Frank and I are about to 
cycle to his mum’s house. A vague feeling of disbelief grips me. Frank has 
persuaded two other misguided souls, Mark and Joan, to join us. The route Frank 
has plotted, from south London to the south of France, is a meandering 900-mile 
wiggle which will take us in a lazy curve across Kent and under the Channel 
before dropping the length of France. We’ll be cycling from La Manche to La 
Méd. To keep things interesting, Frank’s includedun petit détour up and over 
Mont Ventoux – a windblasted 6,273ft mountain known as the Beast of Provence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8b4dfe33288ea6e600d2784c76f4a6906069f77%2F31_296_1297_778%2F1297.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8b4dfe33288ea6e600d2784c76f4a6906069f77%2F31_296_1297_778%2F1297.jpg>
 Let’s go from here to here: Joan and Frank do some route planning in the 
Eurotunnel terminal 
Over the months, our pleasant five-day jaunt has expanded into a full-blown 
nine-day adventure. There have been meetings (in the pub), training rides (1) 
and we’ve been assigned areas of responsibility. Frank: route planning, 
accommodation, kit, logistics, nutrition. Mark: extra route planning, 
communication. Joan: nothing. Me: nothing.

We stop at Bancourt, final resting place of Frank’s great uncle. He was shot 
down by the Red Baron in 1916

We finally set off at 7:30am on a Saturday in June for stage 1: London to 
Dover. Riding as a group takes some getting used to. Joan, a handsome Catalan 
adding some much-needed flair to our micro peloton, doesn’t seem to realise 
it’s not anactual race. He instantly disappears over the first hill. When we 
catch him he looks baffled at our lack of speed and stamina. “Where have you 
been?” he asks. I begin to worry our single training ride may have been 
ambitious…

Hours later we roll into Dover. Kent in high summer has been as pretty as 
ever, but this time it was pockmarked with Vote Leave banners. We board the 
Eurotunnel train and slip beneath the Channel, feeling relieved to be back in 
Europe, at least for a week. Frank’s sister lives in the tiny hamlet of 
Nortbécourt (pop 449), about 20 miles from Calais. She gives us a bed for the 
night and fortifies us with pizza and local cider – which we later discover 
comes from Hereford. We watch England scrape a toothless draw against Russia, 
marvelling at the antics of the hooligans in Marseille. Just other boys on 
tour, we joke.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81e348a4589b7879a629ff472fce7302e431f66a%2F127_287_1812_1087%2F1812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81e348a4589b7879a629ff472fce7302e431f66a%2F127_287_1812_1087%2F1812.jpg>
 Aces high: the final resting place of Arthur James Fisher, shot down by the 
Red Baron 
Day two and our first proper taste of riding in France – and also of riding in 
heavy rain. Thank you, weather gods! We snake our way across the open pastures 
dotted with white cows, past old dairies and disused mines. “Where is 
everyone?” Mark asks. It’s a question we repeat over and over again in the 
coming days. Desolate roads skirt vast fields. We swoop through silent and 
shuttered villages as if we are the last people alive escaping a zombie 
apocalypse. The only signs of life are chained dogs. Fences are strung with 
dead crows – literal scarecrows. They work. We’re scared.

Then it’s on across the flat fields of Flanders. Poppies flutter everywhere. 
Arras is on the horizon, the Somme beyond that. We stop at the war grave near 
Bancourt. It’s the final resting place of Frank’s great uncle, Arthur James 
Fisher, sixth victim of Manfred von Richthofen – the infamous Red Baron. Arthur 
was killed at 21. Manfred went on to claim another 74 hits before being shot 
down himself and dying from his wounds at the age of 25. Arthur’s grave lies on 
its own at the edge of the cemetery. We stand around it in the drizzle, lost 
for words… at their courage, at the dazzling brevity of their lives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F080129b39fc6efff8da09a82f80fb067cf25e018%2F0_201_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F080129b39fc6efff8da09a82f80fb067cf25e018%2F0_201_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Another croissant?: Mark and Frank get the carbs in at the campsite at Bédoin, 
at the foot of Mont Ventoux 
We pedal on across Picardy and eventually arrive in Laon. It boasts an 
incredible five-spired, 12th-century cathedral which sits on a giant rock. 
Looming out of the mist, it hardly seems real – more like a princess’s palace. 
We check into an Ibis before heading back into the town’s beautiful square. It, 
too, is totally deserted. We are the only diners in the only open restaurant. 
We toast each other with pastis, and marvel at the cathedral. It’s covered in 
carved animals – dogs, horses, cows, donkeys and chickens. Mark discovers 
France has yet to open its arms to vegetarians when his asparagus arrives 
wrapped in bacon.

We’ve brought bumper tubs of chamois cream and shovel handfuls of it down our 
shorts. It’s cool and soothing

The following day we leave the battlefields and head for Champagne-Ardennes. 
The endless, immaculate vineyards are mesmerising, as if all the green slopes 
have been neatly combed. Past Reims and en route for Troyes the gentle hills 
peter out. The horizon is broken only by a phalanx of wind turbines. Their long 
arms turn elegantly like synchronised swimmers. It’s hedgeless, treeless, 
limitless… How can France be so big? How can it be so empty? It feels like 
we’re in the Prairies. We crank out a steady rhythm along rapier- straight 
roads that are 5km long without a kink. “Who’d have though you’d miss a bend,” 
Mark says, before trailing off, mesmerised by scale of the vastness.

We eat, we joke, we follow the wheel in front. It’s amazing how the hours 
spiral by, our minds set free to unspool. We become obsessed with spotting 
birds of prey. And goats. And ornamental wheelbarrows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8238f1e0a28edffee51bfbf9381c09c43c7d0b7d%2F0_265_5478_3285%2F5478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8238f1e0a28edffee51bfbf9381c09c43c7d0b7d%2F0_265_5478_3285%2F5478.jpg>
 Peak performance: the winding road to the summit of Mont Ventoux. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Day four brings proper sideways rain and wind so strong it fells a tree. We 
have to carry our bikes across it, Tarzan-style. It gives me a chance to 
practise my French. I flag down a motorist to warn her that: “Il y a un grand 
arbre à la route!” Mark tops this later by telling a pharmacist he needs 
decongestants: “Mon nez est fermé!” Frank, totally fluent, thinks it’s funnier 
not to help out at all.

Another day, another hotel, motel, campsite… they begin to blur. We try to 
remember what we’ve seen on which day. We start to get into a steady routine. 
Each morning we load up on croissants and coffee. Then there’s map chat. Then 
the creaming starts… Ride a bike for more than a day and everyone asks you 
about the state of your arse. Its wellbeing becomes a matter of intense 
scrutiny. We’ve brought bumper tubs of chamois cream and shovel handfuls of it 
down our shorts. It’s cool and soothing. We soon work out it’s best to do that
after we’ve eaten the croissants…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff757f3ba2338e0fa6b25771a972435b59357620%2F0_66_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff757f3ba2338e0fa6b25771a972435b59357620%2F0_66_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 How much further?: Joan takes a quick siesta by the road 
By now we are two-thirds of the way down the country, we’ve inched past 
Bourg-en-Bresse, skirted Lyons and traversed the Drôme. At last La Belle France 
is beginning to live up to her billing. Provence brings us oak-covered hills, 
farmhouses, cherry orchards and fields of lavender.

We head into Aix for a glass of champagne at Les Deux Garçons, the bar where 
Picasso and Cézanne used to drink

But up ahead we know we still have our biggest challenge… an ascent of Mont 
Ventoux – a massive, brooding presence that dominates the area. It’s also a 
cycling mecca and this year the Tour de France headed to its summit on Bastille 
Day. (Well, it tried to – strong winds resulted in the summit finish being 
moved down the mountain and the race resulted in the bizarre sight of Chris 
Froome, the race leader, running up the road.) On the day we arrive the lower 
slopes are busy with cyclists rather than fans and everywhere we look 
Lycra-clad pilgrims are beetling their way up its vertiginous flanks.

It’s a 22km slog up an 8% incline. Near the top the trees give way and you 
arrive in a waterless, lunar wasteland. The camaraderie among the riders is 
amazing – shouts of “Allez” and “Courage” keep us straining ever upwards. It’s 
an agonising, lung-popping, thigh-burning two hours. At the top there’s 
laughter and backslapping and a glorious feeling of awe. We take in the view 
for a moment before turning and speeding to the bottom like stones dropped down 
a well – 6,000ft in 20 minutes. I find it terrifying and arrive at the end a 
jibbering wreck. Joan looks at his speedo and is disappointed to see he’s only 
hit 83kmh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8a6eb1dbf45f86a8721af8570bd38c77bbf8e38%2F0_403_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20Farce%3A%20cycling%20from%20La%20Manche%20to%20Le%20Med%20%7C%20Martin%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftour-de-farce-cycling-from-la-manche-to-le-med-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8a6eb1dbf45f86a8721af8570bd38c77bbf8e38%2F0_403_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
 We made it: Martin, Mark, Frank and Joan at the summit of Mont Ventoux 
The final day takes us from Bédoin to Aix. We detour through Gorges de la 
Nesque, a spectacular limestone valley, and finally roll up to Frank’s mum’s 
house on Saturday evening: eight days and 900-odd miles after leaving London. 
We had one puncture (me), one fall (me) and one argument (me). The bike 
computer tells us we’ve burned calories equivalent to 17 pints of beer a day. 
So we head into Aix to put that right, starting with a bottle of champagne at 
Les Deux Garçons, the bar where Picasso and Cézanne also used to recharge their 
batteries. In keeping with the Tour, winners’ jerseys are awarded – for 
climbing and sprinting, but also for the most pee stops, rudest jokes and for 
the king of kit faffing…

After a week of perpetual motion, our wheels endlessly spinning, it’s so odd 
to come to a standstill. None of us can believe our journey is over. We look at 
each other across our champagne coupes. “Well,” says Mark, “my mum’s house is 
in Wales…”

Martin and friends were riding to raise money for the UN’s refugee charity. If 
you would like to donate, please go toJust Giving 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/FiveGoMadinFrance?utm_medium=email&utm_source=ExactTarget&utm_campaign=20160712_70371>
 