
Tourists enjoying the Greek sunshine while the country’s fate hangs in the 
balance in Brussels say they are having stock up on euros in cash before 
arriving and report some issues changing British pounds at banks.

Alan Seabury, from Sale, holidaying on Naxos, said the island’s bank had 
refused to exchange pounds for euros.

“We went to the main bank, Eurobank, to change our pounds into euros, but they 
refused to take the English pound. They said they were instructed not to change 
money,” he said, adding that he had experienced card payments becoming less 
widely accepted, though cash machines were still working.

“In all my years of travelling, I have never come across anyone refusing the 
English pound. It was a strange sensation.”

His partner, Janet Taylor, from Mossley in Greater Manchester, said the couple 
had flown to Athens before four weeks of island-hopping. “Some people report no 
problem with cards, some have had them refused,” she said. “Some ATMs are 
working. some empty. In reality, the picture is mixed.

“I have been travelling around the Little Cyclades so I am not sure if things 
are different on the larger islands.”

Seabury said the island’s residents did not appear to be unduly worried about 
the crisis: “They shrug their shoulders, smile and give a resigned, pained 
look.” But after having few problems for the past month, he said he had not 
been able to change any money when he arrived in Naxos.


Several tourists said on social media they had been advised to use small 
denomination notes to help locals who may have difficulties giving change. But 
others noted that ATMs in the capital were dispensing just €50 notes, not €20s, 
meaning locals were unable to take out their full €60 daily allowance.
Eleni Giokos (@EleniGiokos) 
Seems some ATMs in Greece have run out of 10 & 20 euro notes and dispensing 
50's - another unforeseen cut to the 60 euro daily limit#Greece 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Greece?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/EleniGiokos/status/616681443117371392> July 2, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/EleniGiokos/status/616681443117371392> Lanky Lamb 
(@lankylamb) 
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> cash machines reported to 
only have 50 Euro notes although citizens can withdraw 60. What are they going 
to do if they reduce to 20?
 <https://twitter.com/lankylamb/status/618000028716662784> July 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/lankylamb/status/618000028716662784> 
In the capital, tourists reported few difficulties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/11/greece-real-deal-what-locals-say-travel-tourism>
, apart from signs declaring all travel on the Athens Metro would be free until 
further notice.

Hotels, cafes and restaurants are still accepting credit card payments, with 
only a few queues outside cashpoints. Daily withdrawal limits imposed on Greeks
do not apply to tourists. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/29/greek-financial-crisis-holiday-plans-holidaymakers-difficulties>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftourists-in-greece-report-problems-changing-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0673b3d84e226f6335a6e7761c015c1f7ed963c0%2F89_48_3508_2104%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tourists%20in%20Greece%20report%20problems%20changing%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftourists-in-greece-report-problems-changing-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tourists%20in%20Greece%20report%20problems%20changing%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftourists-in-greece-report-problems-changing-cash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0673b3d84e226f6335a6e7761c015c1f7ed963c0%2F89_48_3508_2104%2F3508.jpg>
 Irene and Wayne Lovatt, from Pontypridd, brought plenty of cash to Naxos 
Photograph: Wesley Johnson/PA 
Wayne Lovatt, from Pontypridd, Mid Glamorgan, holidaying for a fortnight with 
his wife, Irene, said he had come prepared. “We knew about the problems and we 
brought enough [cash] out here. Before, we’ve always paid by credit card but 
outside the cities you can’t.”

Locals appreciate cash payments, his wife added: “They’ve got to pay their 
staff and keep everything going.”

But the advice to carry cash for the duration of the holidays has increased 
fears that tourists may be targets for mugging.

Travel industry body Abta said tourists should take appropriate security 
precautions against theft such as using their hotel safe or splitting cash up 
between their party.

Sunvil holidays, a Greece-speciality travel firm, said it had amended its 
insurance policy to increase the cover for personal cash to £500 per person for 
those travelling in July. The firm, which sends about 20,000 holidaymakers to 
Greece every summer, said it would have cash available at local offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/29/tourists-to-greece-cash-withdrawl>
, as did fellow travel firms Olympic Holidays and Ionian Holidays.

How the Greek financial crisis could affect your holiday plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/29/greek-financial-crisis-holiday-plans-holidaymakers-difficulties>
The Greek government has been keen to assure tourists that any reports of food 
or fuel shortages, or price rises will not affect them.

Economy minister, George Stathakis, said last week: “Hotels, restaurants, 
shops and supermarkets have adequate food supplies, the prices of which have 
remained stable if not reduced as in the case of fresh fruit and vegetables 
[and] this is also the case for fuel, as gas stations are adequately stocked 
and prices remain unchanged.

“Any reports stating the opposite are not reflecting the actual situation on 
the ground,” he added, pointing out that the government would ensure “demand is 
entirely covered not only for the Greek people but also for the numerous 
visitors who have chosen Greece for their holidays.”
 