
Capital transfer: a cycling trip from London to Amsterdam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/24/cycling-trip-london-amsterdam-beespoke>
The streets of Utrecht will be a sea of yellow jerseys and red-and-white 
polka-dot trees this weekend as a million visitors are expected to arrive to 
watch the Grand Départ of theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>. But cycling isn’t the only 
reason to visit the Netherlands’ fourth-largest city. Big plans are afoot in 
Utrecht. The Central Station area, with its hideous 1970s shopping centre, is 
being completely redeveloped. The masterplan will take until 2030 to complete, 
but the benefits are being felt already. There are pop-up stores and parties 
amid the renovations, and Tivolivredenburg, a state-of-the art concert hall, 
has opened next door.

The Catharinesingel canal, which was filled in during the 1970s, is being 
turned from a road back into a major waterway, with the first section due to 
open by the end of this year.

Utrecht has retained its medieval centre, with narrow streets, canals and 
squares. The canals have a unique “wharf cellar” structure, meaning the streets 
are split-level – with lots of bars and restaurants at water level. Gourmet 
burgers are 2015’s major food trend: with wine atFirma Pickles 
<http://www.firmapickles.nl/utrecht/>; with beer at Beers & Barrels 
<http://beersbarrels.nl/>; or to take away at Meneer Smakers 
<http://www.smakers.nl/>.
 The unique split-level Oudegracht (old canal) that runs through the centre of 
the city. Photograph: Alamy 
Instagram snapshots: the Netherlands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2014/nov/14/instagram-snapshots-the-netherlands>
Frietwinkel by Dapp <http://frietwinkel.nl/>, meanwhile, sells nothing but 
organic chips. As elsewhere in Holland, Indonesian food is fantastic, 
especially the modern take atBlauw <http://www.restaurantblauw.nl/>. Craft beer 
has taken off, with lots of microbreweries opening, such asMaximus 
<http://brouwerijmaximus.nl/>, whose taproom is open from Wednesday to Sunday.

One of the must-see sights, Dom Tower – the highest church tower in the 
Netherlands – has a new attraction.DOMunder 
<http://www.domunder.nl/en/content/information-visitors> is an archaeological 
tour under ancient Dom Square. After dark, the tower is now lit up as part of 
Trajectum Lumen, an artistic light installation project. Fifteen of the city’s 
landmarks are illuminated each night; maps can be downloaded at
trajectumlumen.com <http://www.trajectumlumen.com/en/>.

There are lots of great independent shops, including Puha 
<http://www.puhashop.nl/> – clothes and accessories; and Katoenfabriek 
<http://www.katoenfabriek.com/> – designer T-shirts. Boutique hotels are 
opening in historic buildings, such as the minimalistMother Goose 
<http://www.mothergoosehotel.com/en> (rooms from €105) in a former mattress 
factory (though the building dates back to 1302), and theEye Hotel 
<http://www.eyehotel.nl/en/>, which opens this summer in a 17th-century former 
hospital and has an introductory rate of €115 a night B&B.
 Dom Tower. Photograph: Frans Lemmens/Corbis 
It’s not all about the centre, though; Utrecht’s suburbs are thriving too. 
Sought-after Oudwijk, to the east of the centre, has beautiful Wilhelmina Park 
and lots of new places to eat and drink, such asBoulevard 
<http://www.cerveceriaboulevard.nl/>, a Basque bar serving pinxtos and good 
wines by the glass. Lombok, a lively multicultural area in the west, has bars 
and cafes in former industrial buildings, plus swimming spots and even ariver 
beach <http://soia.nl/> . Veilinghaven is a hip new neighbourhood on the site 
of the old fruit and vegetable auction south-west of the city centre.

Utrecht is often described as “Amsterdam-lite” – the same bikes, boats and 
bars, but on a much smaller scale. The Tour will help put this dynamic city on 
the map of weekend breaks.
 