
Ben's Beers

Ben Wheatley's new film, A Field in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155966/field-in-england>, is chalking 
up several firsts. It is the first to be released in cinemas, on Blu-ray and 
DVD, shown on TV and across on-demand platforms on the same day (5 July). 
Perhaps more interestingly, it is also the first film to have its own beer. 
Specially brewed byWeltons <http://www.weltonsbeer.co.uk/> in Horsham to mark 
the occasion, the limited edition ale will only be available in cinema foyers 
where the film is playing. The tagline on the bottle is "Open Up and Let the 
Devil In", chiming with the film's psychedelic theme, based as it is around 
civil war-era soldiers ingesting mushrooms in a field after a battle. The 
soldiers – inculding Michael Smiley and Reece Shearsmith Shearwater – also talk 
about heading to an "alehouse" which they never quite manage to do.A Field in 
England beer is bottled with the yeast, which means you have to pour it very 
slowly as "continuous secondary fermentation keeps the beer fresh". Members of 
the press were offered a bottle before early screenings. I bagged one "for 
later" and have still not opened it, though I think watching this most unusual 
film is an experience that could be improved by the beverage.

Running Battles

The Edinburgh film festival closes tonight, after rerunning its Best of the 
Fest selection. I was pleased to seeDesert Runners 
<http://www.desertrunnersmovie.com/> in there, a slickly made documentary about 
competitors who do marathons across four deserts – the Atacama, the Sahara, the 
Gobi and Antarctica – in one year. It's exhausting just thinking about such 
people but the doc is as inspiring as the races are gruelling. Another running 
movie is, however, still not out of the blocks. Despite a flurry of publicity 
around it this time last year – I guess it would have made a great Olympics 
tie-in – the story of Steve Ovett and Sebastian Coe has not yet found its cast. 
Oscar-winner Simon Beaufoy has completed the script based on Pat Butcher's book
The Perfect Distance but it does need two big stars to play the fierce rivals, 
who were both young men at the time of their epic duels at Moscow and LA. "All 
the British stars who might be cast are off in Hollywood, being super heroes," 
joked Christine Langan, head of BBC Films, when I interviewed her at the V&A 
last week. "At least they'll be fit and toned when we need them," she added. 
There might be another problem, too: no one seems to know what to call the 
film. Second Is Nowhere and The Perfect Distance have both been suggested but 
Langan revealed that currently it's called Gold. Supply your own Spandau Ballet 
intro music here…

Sweet française

Director Saul Dibb has begun shooting in Belgium on his hotly anticipated 
adaptation of Irène Némirovsky's second world war novelSuite française. It 
stars Michelle Williams andKristin Scott Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/29/kristin-scott-thomas-betrayal-interview>
 as well as Belgian actor Matthias Schoenaerts. Late additions to the cast, I 
hear, also include real-life husband and wife Sam Riley and Alexandra Maria 
Lara. The pair met during filming on Riley's extraordinary debut filmControl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/118797/control> and have been together 
ever since, with Riley moving to Berlin to live with the German star. I 
understand that Alexandra's part is a late addition to the script as she'll 
feature in a framing device that bookends the film. Harvey Weinstein has made 
this one of his pet projects, so very big things are expected and demanded. I'm 
particularly looking forward to costume designer Michael O'Connor's work on 
this – he last collaborated with Dibb onThe Duchess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125334/duchess> and won plenty of 
awards for his excellent work styling Keira Knightley for that film.
 