
Every night as Ram, Kamal and Krishna take off their boots outside their 
cramped rooms, they can see the shimmering silhouette of Qatar’s “Aspire” 
football complex.

Under its glowing domes, handpicked Qatari youths are drilled in preparation 
to play at the 2022 World Cup. The boys wear the latest £200 football boots and 
are trained by a former coach from Spain’s top league on a full-sized 
air-conditioned pitch sometimes used by Manchester United and Bayern Munich. In 
eight years’ time, these boys will carry the hopes of the richest per capita 
nation in the world in the opening match of football’s most prestigious event.


Aspire is just a couple of roads away from the lodgings where Ram and his 
friends live the other side of Qatar’s World Cup dream.


They came to Doha from impoverished parts of India, Nepal and Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/srilanka> to help fit out a luxurious 
skyscraper overlooking the Persian Gulf. The Al Bidda Tower is a twisting 
vortex of glass that has thrust up alongside the gas company HQs whose vast 
revenues are bankrolling Qatar’s $200bn pre-World Cup building bonanza.


Dubbed the “tower of football”, it is dominated by the headquarters of the 
Supreme Committee for Delivery and Legacy – the powerful but scandal-hit 
government body tasked with organising the 2022 World Cup.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405011553778%2F639c44c5-c891-4718-b838-f01122dd3fd8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405011553778%2F639c44c5-c891-4718-b838-f01122dd3fd8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The 38th floor of the Al Bidda Tower. Some of these offices are now occupied 
by the Supreme Committee for Delivery and Legacy; the body organising the 2022 
World Cup. Pete Pattisson for the Guardian 
The men built a sleek white interior for the 38th and 39th storeys, which are 
now occupied by some of the supreme committee’s executives. No expense was 
spared by the royal clients. They fitted handmade Italian furniture, bespoke 
etched glass panelling and a state-of-the-art toilet that washes, dries and has 
a heated seat. They were supposed to be on modest wages - about £150 a month 
according to the terms with their employer, Lee Trading and Contracting - but 
have not been paid for months of labour and in some cases more than a year. 
They are sliding ever deeper into poverty. Families back home have had to take 
out high-interest loans to survive.


Black-market jobs


At nightfall Ram and the others finish their current black-market 50p-per-hour 
jobs, but instead of returning to one of the labour camps where most of Qatar’s 
1.4 million migrant workers live, their minibus turns into a street of villas, 
an area where migrant workers are banned from living under Qatari law. This is 
their secret lodging house, where they have been trying to avoid detection by 
the Qatari police since Lee Trading collapsed and left them without vital 
permits.


Thirty-two men are squeezed into cockroach-infested bedrooms that are crammed 
with bunkbeds screened off only by towels. Food is kept in grout tubs on the 
floor, bathrooms are filthy and the tiles are ingrained with dirt. A stray cat 
toys with a piece of okra in the hall.


After they have washed and cooked they slump on to thin, dirty mattresses and 
explain how Qatar’s World Cup dream has turned them into victims of a kind of 
modern-day slavery.


Ram, 26, from Nepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> says he has been 
to the labour court about 15 times in a vain attempt to get their missing 
money. Each time it costs two days’ wages to get there and back but there has 
been no progress. He is intensely frustrated, cannot afford to travel to the 
court and is ready to give up.


“We are in very big trouble so I want to say to workers not to repeat our 
mistakes,” he says. “The government, the company: just provide the money. I am 
not angry with the spending of money byQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> to bring the World Cup but we just 
expect our salary.”


Krishna, also from Nepal, has not been paid for any work for more than a year 
on the Al Bidda project. “I feel very bad about it, but that’s obvious,” he 
says. “I was working very hard but at the end of the day I didn’t get anything. 
Now we work illegally. It is very dangerous. If the CID come and we have no ID 
then they put us in jail.”

This has already happened to five of his colleagues. He says some of the 
workers are owed 11 months’ salary, others 13 months’ and adds that there has 
been no official help for them.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405012023470%2F458cb9d2-8c5a-4e69-964f-8391d612a6e6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405012023470%2F458cb9d2-8c5a-4e69-964f-8391d612a6e6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Exhausted migrant workers at the end of the day in Qatar. Pete Pattisson for 
the Guardian 
Qatar’s prime minister was specifically told about their plight when Amnesty 
International complained about the Al Bidda workers back in December. But 
nothing has happened for these men.


“We don’t have any way to get justice,” says Sri Lankan builder Kamal Nathan, 
46. “Human rights groups came but still six months on there is no progress. It 
is a waste of our time, our health, our money.”


A statement from Qatar’s 2022 World Cup organising committee says it did not 
commission Lee Trading and has been using the offices temporarily. It says it 
is “heavily dismayed to learn of the behaviour of Lee Trading with regard to 
the timely payment of its workers” and “will continue to press for a speedy and 
fair conclusion to all cases”.


Unlike almost anywhere else in the world, the workers cannot legally take 
their labour anywhere else without permission from their employer. Making 
things worse, their passports have been taken from them and in any event under 
the Qatari system of labour sponsorship known as kafala, they can only leave 
the country with the permission of their employer or sponsor.

Expat attitudes towards migrant workers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2014/jul/Doha-box/index.html> 
This was not just any project. Contract documents obtained by the Guardian 
show the fit out was commissioned by Katara Projects, a Qatari state entity 
under the auspices of the then heir apparent, Sheikh Tamim, who is now emir. 
The project director was Hilal Jeham al-Kuwari, the president of the Aspire 
Zone Foundation, the royal family’s elite sports foundation and also chairman 
of Katara. A spokesman for Aspire said the offices were intended for Katara.


“I went on site once and they didn’t even have water and they were working in 
55C heat because there was no air conditioning,” the source says. “My pay was 
delayed at one point and they did something about it because I was a westerner.”


In November 2013, Amnesty International raised the case in person with the 
prime minister and interior minister of Qatar and later wrote to the ministry 
of labour asking officials to ensure the men received the salaries they were 
due, and to allow them to leave the country or find new jobs.


“It is deeply depressing that these men have still not received the wages they 
worked for and are living in appalling conditions many months after we brought 
their plight to the government’s and the client’s attention,” says James Lynch, 
researcher at Amnesty. “They have seemingly been abandoned. This case 
highlights the deep-rooted problems with Qatar’s sponsorship system and the 
inability of the court system to effectively deliver justice to migrant 
workers.”

Katara said it terminated the agreement with Lee Trading when it found out 
about the mistreatment of workers and it reported the managing director ,Lim Ah 
Lee, and his Qatari partner, Khalid Al Hail, to the labour ministry for 
non-payment of wages.
“Every effort was made to repatriate the workers involved on the Al Bidda 
Tower project or transfer them to new employers. If there are employees who 
were not repatriated, did not find employment or did not receive compensation, 
we would be happy to engage in any effort with the ministry of labour and 
ministry of interior to rectify the situation.”

Pattern of exploitation

The Al Bidda workers’ predicament is far from unique. Despite recent 
assurances by the government that it will reform its labour system and remove 
the power that employers have over their workers, the Gulf state’s 
extraordinary ambition is still being enabled by exploitation and forced labour 
of some of the world’s poorest people.


The story repeats itself. Men from the poorest countries of the world are 
offered jobs at low but acceptable wages only to find, on arrival in Qatar, 
their pay slashed and then stopped altogether. The excuses come: the 
subcontractor hasn’t been paid; the money will come by Monday, but the pay does 
not arrive. Employers seize the workers’ passports and the only body that can 
issue a permit for a worker to leave Qatar is the employer himself. Changing 
jobs is equally impossible: according to Qatari law employers must issue a 
“non-objection certificate”.


It is modern slavery enforced not through shackles and whips, but by fiddled 
contracts, missing permits and paperwork and the Guardian has found it 
happening just down the road from the desert palace of Qatar’s emir, Sheikh 
Tamim bin Khalifa al-Thani.

The turn off the eight-lane Dukhan highway, just 20 minutes west from the vast 
royal desert palace compound, into Shahaniyah camp is a transition to a scene 
redolent of one of the poorest parts of south Asia. The road becomes a rocky 
track, street lights disappear and men in lunghis weave through the shadows 
past rubbish-filled gullies.


This is where 25-year-old Nepalese father-of-two Ujjwal Bishwakarma lives in 
squalor with colleagues who work six or seven days a week building car 
showrooms, apartments and supermarkets. Inside the low-slung concrete blocks, 
eight men sleep to a room. They work for a theoretical wage of around £8 a day. 
But 65 of them say they have not been paid for any of the work they have done 
since January by their employer, Ibex Contracting and Trading.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405012573379%2F212c3d57-3228-4f12-bdd7-23664240367b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405012573379%2F212c3d57-3228-4f12-bdd7-23664240367b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An Ibex worker washes himself in salt water in toilets. Pete Pattisson for the 
Guardian 
There are no showers. Instead men wash in broken and filthy squat toilet 
cubicles. The cisterns are not even connected to the water supply, bins 
overflow, the washing water is salty and the drinking water filter is only 
changed once in five months, workers say, causing stomach upsets. They can’t 
afford medicine and their employer has not provided medical cards granting 
access to free care.


Ujjwal left the Sindhuli district of central Nepal last autumn shortly before 
the birth of his second child, Milo, whom he has never seen. Without his 
remittances, his family has been forced to take a £660 loan from a private 
lender charging 48% interest a year. Every day he remains unpaid, the debt is 
mounting. His employer has taken his passport and he cannot move jobs because 
of Qatar’s labour laws.


“There’s nobody else to look after my family so they had to take the loan,” he 
says. “We have questioned [the company] time and again. In the past two months 
the company keeps on extending the date of providing salaries. They have 
extended the date four times so far. It is not good. Because the country is 
economically rich, the workers should be paid their fixed salaries. I am 
regretting coming to Qatar.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F21%2F1405940481337%2F770c726b-9cad-4c0c-afc3-29170314571d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F21%2F1405940481337%2F770c726b-9cad-4c0c-afc3-29170314571d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ujjwal Bishwakarma holds a photo of his son, Ashish. Pete Pattisson for the 
Guardian 
The immigration document of another worker, Shanbu, which was stamped by the 
Nepalese government on 11 October 2013 before departure, shows he had agreed 
terms with Ibex to be employed as a foreman on a basic salary of £410 a month. 
But the contract signed with the employer on arrival was for £150 a month to 
work as a carpenter – a 64% cut. The men have been running up huge debts at the 
local grocery store.


“I am not happy,” Shanbu says. “My family members are asking me to come back 
if there is no good work [in Qatar] and apply for other countries. I am 
regretting [coming] now. The money I am earning here could have earned in 
Nepal.”


Reached by phone, the Ibex manager, Srikanth, explains: “My problem here is I 
signed a contract for 15m [rial, £2.4m] and I was supposed to receive my 
advances during March but it was delayed. I am expecting the payment at any 
moment.”


He says he will pay off their grocery debts and promises to pay the backdated 
wages within days, but when the Guardian checks, the money has not arrived.
“As far as my company is concerned I would never put people in this 
unfortunate situation but the market condition is like this,” he says. “I 
cannot escape from the market.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405012813090%2F10c1b506-1646-4370-a80e-ba7238697ee0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405012813090%2F10c1b506-1646-4370-a80e-ba7238697ee0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ledgers line a shopkeeper's counter in a labourers' camp in Shahaniyah, Qatar. 
Some workers in the camp are paid so irregularly that they can only survive on 
credit from the shop. Pete Pattisson for the Guardian 
In recent days the Guardian has contacted him again, to be told the workers 
were owed three months’ salary, not five, and that two months of that have now 
been cleared. But Ujjwal Bishwakarma, one of the workers, says their last 
payment was for April.


Srikanth says “the water for drinking and cooking has been addressed by 
regularly filling the water tank full of sweet water”, adding that new coolers 
have been provided with a double filter.


He says Ibex has started “regularising the medical card issues” and that in 
the meantime if anybody is unwell the firm provides treatment through a private 
clinic. He will not comment on the large discrepancy in wages on Shanbu’s 
contract signed in Nepal and the one signed in Qatar.

His recruitment agent in Kathmandu, Capital International Manpower, said 
Shanbu was “over-reacting” and that they sent him on a foreman’s contract 
because that is the permit that had been supplied by Qatar. “He is not [a] 
foreman, he is [a] mason,” the agency said. “He should think about his ability 
first and then only he can make [an] issue [out of the double contract].”

Death and injury


Old Tata buses rattle along Doha’s highways as the sun goes down, taking 
exhausted workers on the long drive back to their camps. On a bus pulling out 
of Lusail City, a new town north of Doha where a new stadium will be built to 
host the 2022 World Cup final, workers peel off headscarves and masks. Some 
rest their foreheads on their arms to sleep and let the evening air blow 
through the windows to cool them down. Others fish out mobile phones and click 
on to Facebook or text home to Chennai, Kathmandu, Fujian or Cebu.


Above the din of the engines, talk turns to how injury and sometimes death has 
become part of life on Qatar’s building sites.


Umesh Rai, a Nepalese plumber who has spent three years in Qatar, tells of 
several accidents even though he says his employer provided proper safety 
equipment.
“Six or seven months back there was an accident,” he says. “Some heavy object 
fell down and hit a person on the ground. And another case was four months back 
when scaffolding fell and hit a man’s head, smashing his helmet.”


There have been other confirmed accidents involving other contractors. Midmac, 
a major contractor working at Lusail, said a Filipino trainee driver was 
crushed to death by a truck in a stock area last year. “The truck went forward 
and ran over the guy,” says Clark White, the company’s health and safety 
manager. “From the finding of the client everything was in place safety-wise.”


The firm has also confirmed another incident where about 17 workers were 
injured when a huge steel cage moved unexpectedly and trapped workers. It says 
the injuries were not serious.


The packed trauma unit at Hamad hospital provides a snapshot of the routine 
problems workers face. It is a high-quality facility: the main entrance evokes 
a five-star hotel and migrant workers have free healthcare if they have a 
medical card. But there are 70 workers in the packed trauma waiting room, some 
having collapsed unconscious or vomiting because of the heat, others with head 
injuries. One grimacing worker is helped in bow-legged, clutching his groin.


Outside, construction workers shelter from the sun under trees waiting for 
their colleagues to be treated but are shooed away by a Qatari official.


One of the great mysteries is why so many young fit men are dying from what 
the hospital authorities describe as “sudden cardiac death”. In 2012 and 2013, 
500 men fromIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, Sri Lanka and 
Nepal died like this. Whether it is caused by exhaustion, heat or something 
else remains unclear because the Qatari health authorities do not routinely 
carry out autopsies.


Family's sorrow

One such case was Rishi Kumar Kandel, 42, who flew out to Qatar from Nepal in 
February. Within five months his coffin had arrived back at Kathmandu airport. 
He had died suddenly in his labour camp bed after a hot day’s work on 23 May.
Kandel had borrowed money at 24% a year to pay the £500 agent costs but by the 
time he died he had only managed to send £170 back home. The company that 
employed him says it won’t pay compensation because he died of natural causes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405013533679%2Fa1b5355e-d407-4051-abc8-0e0b1e71f745-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405013533679%2Fa1b5355e-d407-4051-abc8-0e0b1e71f745-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Saraswati Kandel, left, waits to collect the body of her husband, Rishi Ram 
Kandel, at Kathmandu airport, Nepal. Pete Pattisson for the Guardian 
Back in Nepal his wife, Saraswati, has to face up to the debt as well as her 
grief. “No one should go to Qatar,” she says. “I don’t want what has happened 
to me to happen to any of the other wives, sisters or mothers. Nepali workers 
go to Qatar to work – so [the Qatari government] should also do something for 
us; maybe pay back our loans and other necessary things”.

She says her husband was hardly ever paid by his employer, and didn’t get the 
job or salary he was promised. He had been complaining of heat and headaches 
before he died. His death certificate says he died from “acute heart failure 
due to natural causes”.

The Nepalese government says 366 Nepalese died of heart failure between 
mid-2006 and April 2014 in Qatar; in neighbouring Saudi Arabia in the same 
period only 28 died of heart failure. This anomaly was acknowledged in the 
recently published report on the condition of migrant workers in Qatar by the 
law firm DLA Piper. The report called for an independent study to investigate 
migrant workers’ deaths by cardiac arrest amid theories that heat and 
exhaustion may play a role.

The room where Kandel slept in a labour camp on the outskirts of Doha, has now 
been abandoned by his former roommates because they are scared of what happened 
to him. “There’s a fear factor,” says Jitendra Chaudhary, a worker in the camp. 
“We worry that others might die. We all slept together after having dinner at 
around 10.30pm, but he didn’t wake up in the morning. He came from duty, ate 
dinner and slept. Our work starts at 4.45am. At that time we tried to wake 
Rishi up … but, he didn’t wake up. He was not sick. He used to work perfectly 
and was healthy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405013706953%2Fefc6b28c-7ce5-4d7a-b055-e96e5a29a614-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F10%2F1405013706953%2Fefc6b28c-7ce5-4d7a-b055-e96e5a29a614-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Migrant workers attend prayers at a makeshift mosque in a vast labour camp in 
Qatar. Photograph: Pete Pattisson for the Guardian 
Secret trade union

Migrant workers’ punishing daily schedule is only broken on Friday afternoons 
when work stops, for most at least. In Saliya, the main industrial area, the 
temperature is in the mid 40s and the young men slip on their cleanest T-shirts 
and mill around the camps. Some carrying prayer mats dash to a makeshift mosque 
built from site huts. Others venture into central Doha where they gather on 
street corners to meet old friends from home. With migrant domestic workers 
also having the afternoon off, it is a rare chance to mix with women. It is 
also the moment a secret union meets.


Unions are banned in Qatar but in a room above a shabby Indian restaurant in 
Doha, 15 Nepalese workers rearranged the tables and chairs for a “totally 
illegal” support group meeting. At one end of the table are the veterans with 
eight years’ experience in Doha; at the other are fresh-faced new arrivals.


The men raise a closed fist salute, the international symbol of solidarity, 
and begin.
Topping the agenda is the recent announcement from the Qatari government of 
plans to reform the labour laws – an attempt by the authorities to address the 
appalling conditions workers face.


“We think they are only changing the terminology and not the sponsorship 
system, the agent system and the situation with passports and ID cards,” says 
one member. “Because if they really do change the rules it will slow down 
construction.”


Another says: “In fact it is getting worse than before because companies are 
anticipating the changes to the labour laws and so are making workers sign 
five-year instead of two-year agreements. Before, if we complete two years we 
can change companies; now we have to wait five years. Only yesterday they 
forced me to sign a five-year contract.”


One man says that during his spell in Qatar his wage has risen 7% while the 
cost of his food has doubled.

Imbalance of power

With 400,000 Nepalese, 500,000 Indians and 130,000 Bangladeshis toiling in 
Qatar, there are large blocks of workers on whom the emir relies to maintain 
his kingdom’s momentum. But the imbalance of power between workers and bosses 
is sometimes staggering.

Employers are supposed to pay compensation of around £40,000 to the families 
of dead workers but the Guardian was told of one case in which the workmates of 
a dead Nepalese labourer clubbed together to make a payment themselves because 
they feared their boss would sack them all if forced to pay up.

The governments of the migrants’ home countries also have to calculate the 
cost and benefit of lobbying for a better deal for workers. Qatar provides 
importance remittance income – migrant workers sent $13.5bn home from Qatar in 
2012, according to Qatar Central Bank.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405615066754%2F39491cc2-9769-4412-a5f9-7f33a3fbb031-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405615066754%2F39491cc2-9769-4412-a5f9-7f33a3fbb031-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nepalese migrant workers queue up at the Nepalese embassy in Doha to renew 
their passports. Pete Pattisson for the Guardian 
Sometimes the problem is a simple lack of diplomats. Nepal doesn’t even have 
an ambassador in place. Maya Kumari Sharma was recalled last September having
called Qatar an "open jail" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/sep/26/qatar-migrant-labour-abuse>
. The skeleton staff of five diplomats are overwhelmed by the problems of 
scores of labourers who turn up at its door each day. Qatari officials can be 
dismissive of complaints and often do not respond.

Everywhere you look workers appear trapped by the state’s contradictory 
attitude towards the role of the market in fuelling its development. The 
slovenly accommodation, low, late and missing pay, and unsafe workplaces all 
result in part from the freewheeling market economics Qatar encourages in the 
construction sector.

Contractors tussle to drive down prices and often must fight for payment 
themselves, even from fabulously rich Qatari clients. Yet workers are gripped 
in a vice of state control through the kafala system.


The ministry of labour said last month it had punished 200 companies in the 
first quarter of 2014 for labour law violations after inspections on 3,485 work 
sites targeting safety. It said it was launching a wage protection system 
involving workers being paid through trackable transactions to banks or 
exchange houses and is building hospitals exclusively for migrant workers.

But in the same month, Qatar abstained in an International Labour Organisation 
vote in favour of a protocol against forced labour that includes protection 
measures for migrant workers during recruitment and employment, including the 
obligation on employers to pay compensation and to face sanctions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405614921902%2F48840f5b-df32-44f2-9262-735d76d548e8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20'tower%20of%20football'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trapped%20in%20Qatar%3A%20the%20migrants%20who%20helped%20build%20the%20%27tower%20of%20football%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2F-sp-qatar-migrants-tower-football-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405614921902%2F48840f5b-df32-44f2-9262-735d76d548e8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A migrant worker from Nepal waits to be picked up by his employer in the 
arrivals hall of Hamad International Airport. Pete P 
Stranded at the airport

For many the trouble starts as soon as they find themselves in the sleek 
arrivals lounge of Hamad international airport – a stunning new building which 
“sets new global standards in passenger convenience and service”. Every day 
dozens of migrants are left stranded by employers who fail to collect them.

Mukhtar Bax, 32, has flown in from Nepal with three friends to start a new 
life as a labourer, expecting a wage of £7.70 a day. For 12 hours, from 10pm to 
10am he has been waiting to be picked up. “The driver for the company said he 
is going to have breakfast and them come and pick us up,” he says. “But we 
haven’t eaten anything.”

Further down the seating area are Haroon Ali and Nazhir Hussain Sheikh. Ali 
says he is “happy and excited”, but his friend is “tense and sad”. After many 
hours their company boss has still not arrived.


Another Nepalese man shows off his migration paperwork from his government. A 
footnote reads: “Best of luck for your bright future."

For some, the deal is working. Money is being saved and sent home. For others, 
it is hard not to conclude their lives have been reduced to expendable 
commodities in a building boom where site hoardings proclaim with no hint of 
irony: “Qatar deserves the best.”
 