
Amid the sleek new cafes, offbeat shops and modern art galleries of the buzzy 
Mitte district, one cultural icon looks much the way it did a century ago. 
Founded in 1913 by Fritz Bühler and his wife Clara, affectionately known as 
Clärchen, this two-storey ballroom has an air of gracefully faded grandeur.

Berlin dancehall revival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/interactive/2009/jan/29/berlin-dancehall-revival>
I’d heard about this peculiar urban timewarp long before I stumbled across it 
one afternoon while looking for a bite to eat. The attached beer garden, 
decorated with exposed bulbs and dense greenery, looked so intriguingly out of 
place that my friends and I stepped in without thinking. After brusque bow-tied 
waiters served us schnitzels that dwarfed the plates beneath them, we took a 
peek inside the building’s well-worn facade. There, under the neon lights and 
silver streamers, a group of maybe 20 people were enthusiastically tangoing 
away. It felt oddly like trespassing on a high school dance from decades past.

I’ve since been back to Clärchens Ballhaus as a participant rather than a 
voyeur, doing my best to cha-cha with two left feet. But as much as I love the 
nostalgic vibe on the ground floor, it is the chandelieredSpiegelsaal (mirror 
hall) upstairs, all towering ceiling, baroque detailing and huge mirrors, that 
draws gasps, and crowds. This hallowed hall has witnessed raucous 1920s 
nightlife, covert sword duels, allied bombing, balls for war widows and, more 
recently, a dramatic revival, thanks to David Regehr and Christian Schulz, who 
saved it from dereliction in 2005.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fclarchens-ballhaus-ballroom-mitte-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433329467697%2Ffa78a41e-c181-42a0-a790-e7ffa7e16cf6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cl%C3%A4rchens%20Ballhaus%20ballroom%2C%20Mitte%2C%20Berlin%3A%20a%20great%20little%20place%20I%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fclarchens-ballhaus-ballroom-mitte-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cl%C3%A4rchens%20Ballhaus%20ballroom%2C%20Mitte%2C%20Berlin%3A%20a%20great%20little%20place%20I%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Fclarchens-ballhaus-ballroom-mitte-berlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433329467697%2Ffa78a41e-c181-42a0-a790-e7ffa7e16cf6-1020x612.jpeg>
 Photograph: Bernd Schoenberger 
It now holds regular concerts, from Gypsy tunes to classical cello, as well as 
dances to rival anything held back in its heyday. Chipped paint and cracked 
mirrors have been deliberately left, but this is a living, breathing hub, not a 
museum – used equally by quickstepping septuagenarians and Berlin’s trendiest 
twentysomethings.

• Auguststraße 24, ballhaus.de <http://www.ballhaus.de/en/>
 