
Take me there: Bergen, the Netherlands 

Why go?
It's been described as "the Hamptons with clogs" thanks to its popularity with 
rich Dutch and German visitors who buy up beach-front holiday homes and hang 
out in the seaside bars and cafés. But this breezy resort on Holland's North 
Sea coast is better known as an artists' retreat, its moody seascapes, endless 
dunes and extraordinary light attracting painters, writers and architects who 
have been leaving their mark on this laid-back and likable village since the 
1900s.

What to do
Get on your bike (this is Holland, after all) and cycle De Brede Duinen 
<http://www.route.nl/fietsroutes/134423/> route, a 42km signposted loop which 
passes through Bergen, Alkmaar – famous for its historic cheese market – and 
the spectacular sand dunes at Schoorl and Camperduin. Admire the work of the 
"Bergen School" of painters at Museum Kranenburgh (kranenburgh.nl 
<http://kranenburgh.nl/>) or take a stroll among the distinctive thatched 
"Amsterdam School" villas of the Park Meerwijk neighbourhood.

Where to stay
In De Aap is a charming boutique B&B with just two stylish guest rooms and 
a sweet family cottage, all of which have kitchenettes that guests can use to 
prepare snacks or simple meals (from €130,indeaap.com 
<http://www.indeaap.com/nl/>).

Where to eat
All beach-hut chic and artfully mismatched furniture, Strandpaviljoen SB Noord 
is where Amsterdam's fashionable folk come to get a bit of sand between their 
toes while dining on Italian-inspired dishes (strandpaviljoennoord.nl 
<http://strandpaviljoennoord.nl/>). Don't miss the poffertjes (traditional 
Dutch pancakes) at Duinvermaak, a cosy café situated near the dunes (
duinvermaak.nl <http://www.duinvermaak.nl/>).

Insider tip
Emile van den Bergh, owner of In de Aap, recommends De Jongens, 
a Mediterranean-style beach club (dejongensbergenaanzee.nl 
<http://dejongensbergenaanzee.nl/>). "It's a cool place to hang out, there's a 
surf school and they have regular barbecues and beach parties." He also 
suggests a visit to the open-air art market which runs every Thursday evening 
in summer (beeldendekunstmarkt bergennh.webklik.nl 
<http://beeldendekunstmarktbergennh.webklik.nl/page/kunstmarkt-bergen-nh>).

Give me a break: deals of the week
 A camping pod at Sandy Balls holiday park 

Home: Camping in the New Forest 
Sandy Balls holiday park in the New Forest (stop sniggering) has introduced a 
cheaper alternative to its woodland lodges and mobile homes for this summer: 
camping pods. The wooden pods come with pull-out beds, TVs, kettles and 
fridges. Guests get full use of on-site facilities including the swimming pools 
and cycle centre. Four nights in July starts from £199 for four people (
sandyballs.co.uk <http://www.sandyballs.co.uk/>).
 The new Riad Sapphire in Marrakech 

Away: Marrakech riad break 
A new riad hotel has opened in the heart of Marrakech's medina offering 
bright, modern suites, a spa with hammam and a sun-trap roof terrace with views 
of the Atlas mountains. Riad Sapphire has a special 50% off introductory offer 
for stays of three nights or more, taken before 31 August, bringing the lead-in 
price this summer to £140 per night for a suite sleeping up to four (
riadsapphire.com <http://riadsapphire.com/>).

For more inside tips, advice and holiday ideas, go to theguardian.com/travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/travel>
 