
Take me there: Beyoglu, Istanbul

Why go?
It’s no surprise that Soho House has chosen Beyoglu as the location for its 
newest and biggest members’ club and hotel, due to open early next year. Since 
the 1800s, when foreign ambassadors and merchants built their grand houses on 
the steep hills north of the Bosphorus, it’s been one of Istanbul’s most 
cosmopolitan neighbourhoods. Today it’s home to some of the city’s best 
shopping and nightlife and an ever-expanding choice of cool places to stay.

What to do
Climb to the top of the Galata Tower, a medieval fortification, for 360-degree 
views of the city. Join the crowds thronging Istiklal Caddesi, Beyoglu’s main 
shopping street: the terrace of the House Café is a great spot for a coffee and 
people-watching (thehousecafe.com.tr <http://www.thehousecafe.com/>). The 
street is also where you’ll find Salt, a six-storey cultural centre with a 
cinema, contemporary art galleries, rooftop garden and fantastic bookshop (
saltonline.org <http://saltonline.org/>). From Istiklal catch the rickety red 
tram to Taksim Square, the heart of modern Istanbul and scene of last year’s 
anti-government protests.

Where to stay
Bunk hostel has the best budget digs in town but it gets booked up months 
ahead (bunkhostels.com <http://bunkhostels.com/>). Room Mate Hotels recently 
opened a stylish new base in Beyog˘lu with 60 rooms, a spa and Turkish bath 
(doubles from ¤70,room-matehotels.com <http://room-matehotels.com/>).

Where to eat
Yeni Lokanta opened last year and caused a stir with its contemporary spin on 
Turkish cuisine. Leave room for the dessert of custard fritters with smoked 
buffalo milk ice cream and honey (lokantayeni.com <http://lokantayeni.com/>).

Insider tip
“More than a shortcut down to the coastal road, the stairways of Cihangir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/dec/09/a-day-in-cihangir-istanbul-turkey>
, with their sweeping views of the Bosphorus and Old City, have long been a 
local gathering spot and a place to drink a beer al fresco,” says Ansel Mullins 
of Culinary Backstreets, which offers tailor-made food itineraries 
(“eatineraries”) and walks in Istanbul (culinarybackstreets.com/eatinerary 
<http://www.culinarybackstreets.com/eatinerary/>).

Give me a break
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftravel-tips-istanbul-london-budget-hotel-iceland-glacier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417525759114%2Fde22f495-030d-4bb3-9618-dc50867a9964-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20revel%20in%20Beyoglu%2C%20Istanbul%2C%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftravel-tips-istanbul-london-budget-hotel-iceland-glacier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20revel%20in%20Beyoglu%2C%20Istanbul%2C%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftravel-tips-istanbul-london-budget-hotel-iceland-glacier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417525759114%2Fde22f495-030d-4bb3-9618-dc50867a9964-1020x612.jpeg>
 A room in London’s new budget hotel, the modest Motel One 
Home: London bolthole Budget chain Motel One opens its first London property 
this month in Tower Hill, with rooms from £98 per night. The hotel will feature 
leather armchairs, Chesterfield sofas, contemporary chandeliers and an open 
fireplace. Rooms come with Egyptian cotton bed linen and monsoon rain showers. 
The hotel is a short walk from the Tower of London. Breakfast costs an 
additional £9.50 per head (motel-one.com 
<https://www.motel-one.com/en/hotels/london/>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftravel-tips-istanbul-london-budget-hotel-iceland-glacier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417526071464%2F8fa02493-04f1-43c3-837d-b105f7a8572b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20revel%20in%20Beyoglu%2C%20Istanbul%2C%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftravel-tips-istanbul-london-budget-hotel-iceland-glacier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20revel%20in%20Beyoglu%2C%20Istanbul%2C%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F07%2Ftravel-tips-istanbul-london-budget-hotel-iceland-glacier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417526071464%2F8fa02493-04f1-43c3-837d-b105f7a8572b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An ice explorer truck next to a sinkhole for meltwater – it’s used to take 
tourists on to the Langjokull ice cap. Photograph: globalwarmingimages.net 
Away: glacier adventure in Iceland Experience a thrilling new adventure in 
Iceland, which has just been votedGuardian readers’ favourite European country. 
The Ice Cave is a new attraction that allows visitors to explore deep inside a 
glacier. Excursions to the manmade caverns beneath the Langjökull ice cap are 
being offered by Discover the World with prices from £100pp for a round trip (
discover-the-world.co.uk/iceland 
<http://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/destinations/iceland-holidays/fly-drive>).
 