
Take me there: Utrecht


Why go?
On 4 July the eyes of the world will focus on the Dutch city of Utrecht as it 
hosts the Grand Départ of the Tour de France. For a cycle-mad nation this is 
cause for celebration, but it’s also a chance to show off one of their most 
charming and underrated cities. With its handsome medieval centre, gabled 
merchants’ houses, café-lined canals and cosmopolitan student population, 
Utrecht offers a laid-back and compact alternative to Amsterdam.

What to do
This is Holland, so a cycle tour is virtually obligatory. There are dozens of 
rental places in town, but if you’ve been inspired by the Tour de France you 
can cycle the first or second stages on a vintage racer with Vintage Bike Tours 
(vintagebiketours.nl <http://www.vintagebiketours.nl/?reload=true>). They also 
offer gentle city tours on classic Dutch bikes. Alternatively, get a duck’s-eye 
view of the city by renting a kayak (kanoverhuurutrecht.nl 
<http://kanoverhuurutrecht.nl/>). Utrecht’s canals are surprisingly peaceful 
and the chances of getting mown down by a motor-cruiser are pleasantly slim. 
Design aficionados should check out theRietveld Schröder House 
<http://centraalmuseum.nl/bezoeken/locaties/rietveld-schroederhuis/>, the 
modernist house built by Gerrit Rietveld, a luminary of the De Stijl movement 
in the 1920s. The excellent Centraal Museum has his furniture on display and 
can organise guided tours of the house (centraalmuseum.nl 
<http://centraalmuseum.nl/>).

Where to eat
Blauw is the best place in Utrecht for Indonesian food. Order the “rijsttafel” 
(literally, rice table) for a tasting menu of a dozen or so small dishes for 
€30 per head (restaurantblauw.nl <http://www.restaurantblauw.nl/>).

Where to stay
All rooms in the 18th century canal-side house The Mary K were designed by 
local artists and the welcome is warm (from €120,marykhotel.com 
<http://www.marykhotel.com/>).

Insider tip
The Dutch love a coffee-shop and Hayo van Dijk of Vintage Bike Tours says his 
favourite is Blackbird Coffee & Vintage (Oudegracht 222 ,blackbirdcoffee.nl 
<http://blackbirdcoffee.nl/>): “The couple who run the place are lovely, the 
coffee is great and their [juice] bar is awesome. Alongside the coffee they 
also sell vintage bikes. It’s a nice, tranquil place which you could easily 
pass, but should definitely visit.”

Give me a break

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Ftravel-tips-utrecht-holland-netherlands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435148331753%2F242ba7a3-de6c-4abb-8350-e05304ed0341-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20Utrecht%20%E2%80%93%20the%20laidback%20alternative%20to%20Amsterdam%2C%20plus%20deals%20of%20the%20week%20%7C%20Joanne%20O%E2%80%99Connor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Ftravel-tips-utrecht-holland-netherlands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20Utrecht%20%E2%80%93%20the%20laidback%20alternative%20to%20Amsterdam%2C%20plus%20deals%20of%20the%20week%20%7C%20Joanne%20O%E2%80%99Connor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Ftravel-tips-utrecht-holland-netherlands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435148331753%2F242ba7a3-de6c-4abb-8350-e05304ed0341-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Summer’s hottest address: Chapel House, Penzance. 
Home A quirky bolthole on the Cornish coast Cornwall has no shortage of 
gorgeous boltholes, but there’s always room for one more. Chapel House has just 
opened in Penzance in the building that used to house the quirky Penzance Arts 
Club. There are six airy rooms with sea views. With the option of kitchen 
suppers on weekend evenings and foraging excursions it looks set to become 
summer’s hottest address. B&B from £150 (chapelhousepz.co.uk 
<http://chapelhousepz.co.uk>).
 On a high: cycling in Spain’s Picos de Europa National Park. 
Away Active holidays in Spain Pura Aventura is inviting adventurous families 
to Spain’s Picos de Europa National Park this summer to enjoy a week’s activity 
holiday, with canoeing, canyoning, swimming, hiking and cycling. Combining 
guided excursions with independent activities, the trip departs on 23 July. 
From £750pp, including a week’s B&B in small, family-run hotels, car hire and 
guided trips. Flights extra (pura-aventura.com <http://pura-aventura.com>).
 