
Scott Morrison has said the UK’s vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> has had very little 
immediate impact on Australia’s economy, and the global financial system has 
withstood the shock well.

The treasurer said the economic impacts in the short and medium term would be 
concentrated on the UK economy, though some spillover negative effects would be 
felt in Europe.

He released a report 
<http://www.cfr.gov.au/publications/cfr-publications/2016/report-on-the-implications-of-brexit/pdf/report.pdf>
 from the Council of Financial Regulators explaining why Australia had escaped 
any serious negative shocks from the Brexit vote.

The Council of Financial Regulators 
<http://www.cfr.gov.au/about-cfr/members.html> comprises the heads of the 
Reserve Bank, the Treasury, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority and 
the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.

Australia eager to start free trade talks with Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/australia-eager-to-start-free-trade-talks-with-britain>
The report said “monetary and fiscal policy options remain available” if the 
Brexit vote sparked further economic shocks.

Morrison had asked the council, in the days before the 2 July federal 
election, to prepare a report for the incoming government on the likely 
consequences of the Brexit vote for Australia’s economy.

The report concentrated on the likely short-term impacts of the vote.


It said authorities would not have a clear idea of the long-term effects on 
the global economy until Britain officially left the EU and renegotiated new 
trade deals.

“The global financial system has withstood the event well,” the report said. 
“Council of Financial Regulators agencies, including through their overseas 
footprint and Australia’s diplomatic network, were quick to gather 
international intelligence and coordinate around the Brexit decision and will 
continue to monitor Brexit-related developments.

On Thursday the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, called on the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/21/chris-bowen-coalition-must-heed-disenfranchised-and-disillusioned-voters>
 to publish an update of its budget forecasts within the next three months to 
account for the recent falls in commodity prices and other negative changes in 
the global economy.

The council’s report warned that Australia’s economy might be affected by 
Brexit if the UK transition out of the EU was not orderly, and if uncertainty 
“remains heightened” for a significant period.

Bill Shorten: Coalition’s ‘trickle-down economics’ risks Brexit-style 
alienation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/bill-shorten-coalitions-trickle-down-economics-risks-brexit-style-alienation>
“This poses some downside risk to the domestic outlook, with negative wealth 
and confidence effects having the potential to affect household consumption and 
business investment,” the report said.

Morrison will attend the G20 finance ministers meeting in China on Friday, 
where he expects Brexit will be a key topic of discussion.


“I will have the opportunity to meet with many of my colleagues there, 
including the new chancellor of the exchequer, Philip Hammond, on the sidelines 
of those meetings, as well as with other members of the European Union, to get 
a better understanding of how they are responding and seeing how these events 
play out,” Morrison said.
 