
Dr Yunupingu was the unlikeliest of pop stars. An Aboriginal man in an 
Aboriginal band, singing in an Aboriginal language about the Aboriginal fight 
for land. Yet as the frontman of Yothu Yindi, he stormed the charts.

Before he was all over Video Hits and being named Australian of the Year, 
Yunupingu was a pioneering teacher who became the country’s first Aboriginal 
school principal. As part of his work, he developed a unique series of teaching 
methods that were culturally appropriate for north-east Arnhem Land.

“I see now that a lot of what motivated [my] white teachers was the view that 
it was only when Yolngu stop being Yolngu that we could become Australians,” he 
said in anABC interview 
<http://www.teachingheritage.nsw.edu.au/section01/mandawuy.php> about his own 
school days at Yirrkala, Northern Territory.

He was determined to foster Yolngu identity at home, and to share it with the 
world. And so Yothu Yindi was born.

“My good friend was very much into the notion that our culture is your 
culture,” the band’s American drummer, Allen Murphy, told Guardian Australia. 
“It’s not something that we are holding away from people, but something that we 
want people to understand and to share, and to take that into their own life.”

Yothu Yindi translates from the Indigenous language Yolngu Matha as 
Mother-Child, in a yin-yang kind of way. The Yolngu kinship system divides 
society into two halves, in which a child is always on the opposite side from 
their mother. The concept of yothu-yindi represents what Dr Yunupingu once 
called the “dynamic balance” of life.
 The cover of Yothu Yindi album Tribal Voice, featuring the song Treaty. 
Photograph: AAP Image/Supplied 
“We are a band with a philosophy,” he said. “[The] struggle to explain our 
laws and beliefs is what you hear in Yothu Yindi’s songs [and] yothu-yindi is 
the name of a fundamental concept in our Yolngu life.”

Samuel Curkpatrick, from the National Centre for Indigenous Studies at 
Australian National University, says yothu-yindi underpins the whole Yolngu 
world. Hecalls it 
<http://theconversation.com/yothu-yindi-and-the-yolngu-culture-dreaming-of-a-brighter-day-14904>
 “an expression of unity in diversity, a relationship of difference ... out of 
which stems good society”. It’s also about “the reciprocal responsibilities of 
caring for country and family”.

“[Dr Yunupingu] carried the notion of yothu-yindi into his tireless advocacy 
for a ‘two-ways’ bi-cultural approach.”


The band mixed western and Indigenous styles, languages and musicians. Treaty 
itself was written collaboratively with Peter Garrett and Paul Kelly, and as 
good as the original was, it was a dance remix that grabbed mainstream 
attention.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS7cbkxn4G8U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS7cbkxn4G8U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS7cbkxn4G8U&media=>
 Video of Dr Yunupingu usedwith permission from the family. 
<http://www.yothuyindi.com/> 
The remix de-politicised the song, or at least took off its harsh political 
edges. Great lines were lost, like “The planting of the Union Jack / Never 
changed our law at all”. The most direct dig at Bob Hawke’s failure to come 
good on the Barunga statement, “promises can disappear / just like writing in 
the sand” was swept aside. Not even the beautiful imagery of “the brighter day” 
when two separated rivers “will be one” made the cut.

And yet the remix was arguably the far more radical version. The song became a 
Trojan horse in the culture wars, and it landed a mighty (though as yet 
unrewarded) blow.

It accentuated the song’s Yolnguness, for a start. As well giving the 
didgeridoo and bilma (clapsticks) a more prominent role, it pointed the 
spotlight on the song’s Yolngu Matha lyrics. Dr Yunupingu spoke of language 
being the most important thing to his people, and suddenly people around the 
world were hearing it (and then, admittedly, butchering it) on their radios for 
the first time.

The few English words left in the remix are powerful enough to make up for 
those that were lost. “Treaty, yeah! Treaty, now!” Two lines, on repeat. 
Mainstream Australia might not have been aware of the song’s missing verses, 
but it was singing and dancing to this rallying cry. In that way, the Treaty 
remix was entirely different from the superficial, cultural plunderings ofDeep 
Forest <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lJHTuh5wXkU>.

“In reality, the success of Yothu Yindi was based on how local they were,” 
says Murphy. “They brought their local culture out.”

Treaty never achieved what it set out to, at least not in the lifetime of Dr 
Yunupingu. But it did do a huge amount for reconciliation, not least of which 
was giving it a great anthem.

• Photos and videos used in accordance with a family statement 
<http://www.yothuyindi.com/> allowing for photos and videos of Yunupingu to be 
published

 